THE Pennsylvania State Trials: CONTAINING THE IMPEACHMENT, TRIAL, AND
ACQUITTAL OF FRANCIS HOPKINSON, AND JOHN NICHOLSON, ESQUIRES. THE FORMER BEING
JUDGE OF THE COURT OF ADMIRALTY, AND THE LATTER, THE COMPTROLLER GENERAL OF THE
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA.

VOL. I

-- VIRESQUE ACQUIRIT EUNDO.

VIRG. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY FRANCIS BAILEY, AT YORICK'S HEAD, No. 116,
HIGH STREET, FOR EDMUND HOGAN M,DCC,XCIX.

No. 82.
District of Pennsylvania, to wit: --
L. S.


BE IT REMEMBERED that on the twentieth day of January in the nineteenth year of
the Independence of the United States of America, Edmund Hogan of the said
District has deposited in this Office the Title of a Book, the right whereof
he claims as Proprietor in the words following, to wit -- The Pennsylvania
State Trials; containing the Impeachment, Trial, and Acquittal of Francis
Hopkinson, and John Nicholson, Esquires, the former being Judge of the Court of
Admiralty, and the latter the Comptroller General of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. Vol. I. -- Viresque acquirit eundo. Virg. in conformity to the
Act of the Congress of the United States, entitled An Act for the
encouragement of learning by securing the copies of maps, charts, and books to
the authors and proprietors of such copies during the times therein mentioned.

SAMUEL CALDWELL, Clerk of the District of Pennsylvania.

Dedication.
To the only legitimate sovereign of the UNITED STATES, THE PEOPLE.
CITIZENS,
Inasmuch as all power originated with, and is inherent in the People, which
has been assumed for many ages by individuals commonly called kings, princes,
tetrarchs, etc. of which power these select beings have seldom failed to make a
bad use; and inasmuch as during the reigns, and particularly within the vortex
of the dominion of those persons, books of the same tendency with the following
had frequently been dedicated to them, or to some great personage who
occasionally gave liberal portions of the loaves and fishes to the writers, or
buoyed them up by their influence and patronage.

I have therefore thought proper to dedicate my work to you, in preference to
any single individual; not from the expectation of patronage, not from the
desire of reward, but from a sincere impression in your favor, from a
consciousness of your supremacy, excellence and majesty, and a wish to
contribute my little stock to the general good: I hope such of you as will
peruse the following sheets will judge for yourselves, and as in every other
case let facts and reason be your only authorities:

I am, Citizens, Your well-wisher, EDMUND HOGAN.
PHILADELPHIA, January, 1795.
PREFACE.
IT is commonly expected that the Author or Editor of every work would furnish
the public with some account of the performance in the Preface; this will not
be done here at length, as the work is before you and will answer for itself.
It may be remarked that the Preface would be a suitable place to give a sketch
of the lives of the two gentlemen, whose trials are here published, to this it
can be answered that the Editor never saw Mr. Hopkinson, now deceased; and it
would be very improper to write any thing respecting the life of the other
gentleman, who is yet on the stage: But the works of Mr. Hopkinson are
published, and his character is well known to be not inferior to any, and
having very few of equal merit among the literati of the present century. By
the present publication it will also appear, that he, like other people, had
political enemies, who were equally disappointed at his acquittal in the year
1780, as others have since been at the acquittal of Mr. Nicholson in the year
1794.

The documents herein published have been regularly compared with authentic
copies laid before the Senate, whose permission to copy them the Editor had
obtained during the interval from the 23d of March to the adjournment in April.

If any errors have crept into the work, let the reader be assured that great
pains have been taken to prevent them, and that a work of this size and
consequence cannot fail of being attended with many difficulties; that this was
a new field of argument, and that every error communicated to the Editor from
any of the Speakers, or from those concerned shall be duly attended to, and
rectified in the next edition.

From the difference in the length of the work in the two trials, the latter of
which the Editor attended throughout, and took down in short hand; and the
former be only collected and compiled from papers, some in the possession of
private gentlemen, and others with the public, the reader will judge how
necessary this work is to the establishment of a complete history of the
State-Trials of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, before the period passes when
it can only be gathered from partial writers on one side or the other: As an
evidence of the importance of this work, the Editor will be excused for
introducing the following judicious report to the Senate of Pennsylsylvania, by
their committee a few days before the adjournment in April 1794.

"The committee to whom was referred the petition of Edmund Hogan, report --

"That in their opinion the work in which the petitioner is engaged is entitled
to encouragement from the Legislature, to hand down to posterity the doings of
their forefathers, and to rescue from oblivion the most important transactions
of the day in which we live, unembarrassed with quotations from obsolete,
British or exotic statutes and corrupt precedents, will certainly command the
smiles of every enlightened Legislator, of every Patriot, and is worthy the
efforts of genius. In order therefore to further the designs of the petitioner,
to assist him in the execution of his laudable undertaking, and to promote the
diffusion of useful and important knowledge throughout (...) commonwealth,
recommend that the following resolution be adopted --

"Resolved, That the Governor of this commonwealth do subscribe in the name of
the state for (...) copies of Edmund Hogan's work, entitled "State Trials," to
be distributed throughout the different counties in such manner as the
Legislature may direct."

It is asserted in a note, at the bottom of page 209, that the oral testimony
given in the house, when the articles of impeachment were brought forward
against Mr. Nicholson, was not committed to writing; part of this testimony
appearing in pages 185 and 188, the Editor thinks it proper to state, how that
part of it had been preserved, although unknown to the managers: -- He was
employed by the proprietor of the Mail, a daily paper then published in the
city, to collect intelligence, and for that purpose had been permitted, as many
others had been before and since, to fit in a convenient place inside the bar
of the House of Representatives, where he collected the testimony alluded to in
Sept. 1793. About the same time he entertained some notions of publishing the
following trial, in which he was encouraged by a number of respectable
subscribers. The managers, in their letter to Mr. Nicholson, must mean, what
really was the case, that "the testimony was not committed to writing or
preserved" BY ORDER OE THE HOUSE.

Counsel engaged in Mr. HOPKINSON'S Trial.
For the commonw.
1. JAMES SMITH, Esquire a member of the House of Assembly, and one of the
Managers. And 2. WILLIAM BRADFORD, Esquire Attorney General.
Mr. Hopkinson.
1. JAMES WILSON, Esquire And 2. JARED INGERSOLL, Esquire
Counsel engaged in Mr. NICHOLSON'S Trial.
For the commonwealth.
1 BENJAMIN R. MORGAN, a Member of the House of Representatives, and one of the
Managers. 2 WILLIAM RAWLE, Attorney General of the U. S. for the state or
district of Pennsylvania. 3 SAMUEL DEXTER, junior, a representative in Congress
from Massachusetts. 4 ALEXANDER WILCOCKS, Recorder of the city of Philadelphia.
And 5 JARED INGERSOLL, Attorney General of Pennsylvania. Esqrs.
For Mr. Nicholson.
1 EDWARD TILGHMAN, 2 JAMES GIBSON, 3 N. C. HIGGINSON, 4 WILLIAM BRADFORD,
Attorney General of the U. S. And 5 WILLIAM LEWIS, Esqrs.
The NAMES of the SUBSCRIBERS. M. C.=Member of Congress. -- M. A.=Member of
Assembly. -- M. P. S.=Member of the Senate of Pennsylvania. -- H. R. U.
S.=House Representatives United States.
A.
GEORGE ASHBRIDGE, John Andrews, D. D. James Anderson, John Archer, Antoine
Asaudie. Joshua Ash,
B.
Thomas Bull, M. A. Thomas Bradford, William Blair, Peter Barriere, (2) George
Bickman, Samuel Benge, John Beckley, Clerk H. R. U. S. Peter Baynton, Clerk H.
R. P. Ebenezer Bowman, M. A. Robert Bicknell, Theodore Bailey, M. C. Benjamin
Bourne, M. C. Matthias Barton, M. A. Stephen Burrowes, George Booth, J. M.
Bartholemy, Benjamin Franklin Bache, Abraham Bachman, M. A. William Brady, John
Bratton, M. A. Clement Biddle, Thomas Biddle, Robert Brown, M. S. P. John
Beatty, M. C. Thomas Blount, M. C. Amos Brumfield, William Bingham, M. S. P.
Francis Bullus, Joseph Boggs, Henry Burrowes, James Burnside, James Booth, S.
R. Bradley, M. S. U. S. George A. Baker, Hilary Baker, William S. Budden,
Benjamin Smith Barton, (2) John Baker, Samuel Baird, Philip Boehm, Daniel
Boehm,
C.
John Curtis, J. Child's, Stewart Cummin, John Cornman, jun. William Coats, John
Cunningham M. A. Simpson Crosby, (2) Lindsay Coats, M. S. P John Cadwallader,
A. Carpenter, M. A. Thomas Campbell, M. A. John Canan, M. A. John Chapman, M.
A. Abraham Cable, M. A. Septimus Claypoole, Charles Cist, William Cavenaugh,
John Coil, Alexander Clay, James Carson, John Connelly, Gabriel Christie, M.
C. Anthony Cruthers, Isaac Coals, M. C. John Currie, John Campbell, Henry
Cordner.
D.
Jonathan Dayton, M. C. George Dent, M. C. Francis G. Deimling, David Dionbus,
Michael Duffey, Charles Dilworth, Benj. Davis, Samuel Dexter, jun. M. C.
Alexander James Dallas, Francis Donnelly, Baldwin Dade, (Virginia.) John
Dunlap, Benj. Davis, Simon Driesbach, M. A. Isaiah Davis, M. A. James Davidson,
M. A. James Duncan, David Dunbar, Henry Deforest.
E.
Charles Erdman, Cadwallader Evans, M. A. John Edie, M. S. P. G. Eddy, Jacob
Eyerly, junior, (2) Peter Early, Oliver Evans, Robert Erwin, Joseph Erwin, M.
A.
F.
William Findley, M. C. Thomas Fitzsimons, M. C. Dwight Foster, M. C. Thomas
Forest, M. A. Isaac Ferree, M. A. Hugh Ferguson, jun. Tench Francis, Casper
Fritz, Walter Franklin.
G.
Josiah W. Gibbs, James Gibson, William B. Giles, M. C. Andrew Gregg, M. C.
Ezekiel Gilbert, M. C. Christopher Greenup, M. C. Albert Gallatin, Philip
Gartner, M. A. George Graff, M. A. Andrew Geyer, William Galt, Robt. Gillesnie.
H.
John A. Hanna, M. S. P. Daniel Heister, M. C. James Hardy, Thomas Hartley, M.
C. George Hancock, M. C. Jacob Hiltzheimer, M. A. Jonathan Hoge, M. S. P.
Francis Higgins, J. T. Hamilton, Nath. C. Higginson, Henry K. Helmuth, John N.
Hagenau, Jonas Hartzell, M. A John Hanlon, Abraham Hendricks, M. A William
Hepburn, M. S. P. Isaac Hough, Robert Hare, William Hanks, John Heath, M. C.
Richard Humpton, Henry Hillegas. (2) Michael Hillegas,
I.
William Irvine, M. C. Jared Ingersoll, Israel Israel, William Jones, Hugh
Jenkins, Thomas Jenks, M. S. P.
K.
Robert Kidd, Patrick Kennedy, William King, (of Washington.) Roger Kean,
Michael Kitts, George Kitts, John W. Kittera, M. C. James Kerr, James Kelly, M.
A. Henry Kammerer, M. A. Anthony Kelker, M. A. Edward Kinsey, John Kean, Henry
Kuhl, Stephen Kingston, William King, Charles Kinny,
L.
George Latimer, Speaker H. R. P. Thomas Lilly, M. A. Benjamin Lodge, M. A. M.
Leib, Library Company, William Lyman, M. C. Amasa Learned, M. C. William Lewis,
Caleb Lownes, John Little, Richard Lake, Joseph Leedom, William Lambert, Peter
Legaux.
M.
Thomas Mifflin, Governor of Pennsylvania. F. A. Muhlenberg, Speaker H. R. U.
S. Peter Muhlenberg, M. C. William Montgomery, M. C. F. Malbane, M. C. William
Moulder, jun. John Mitchell, John Miller, J. D. Mulhallon, John Montgomery, M.
A. Jones Burges M'Coy, Jacob Morgan, M. A. Benjamin R. Morgan, M. A. John
Moore, M. A. Maurice Moynihan, George Meade, George Morton, Matthew M'Connell,
John Meyer, Abraham Morrow, Edward Moyston, Robert Morris, M. S. U. S. James
M'Lene, M. A. John M'Cormick, jun. John Muschert, John Mulry, Blair
M'Clenachan, (3) Solomon Marks, (2) Thomas M'Kee, James Morrison, M. A. Anthony
Morris, Speaker S. P.
N.
Heath Norbury, Anthony New, M. C. Andrew Norny, Nathaniel Newlin, M. A. John
Nicholson, (6) Henry Paul Nugent, Abraham Nelson, Rudt. Nagel, Nesmos and
Valliant.
O.
John Oldden, John Ormrod, (6)
P.
Francis Preston, M. C. Josiah Parker, M. C. Robert Porter, Joseph Pierce, John
Porter. John Parker, Andrew Pickens, M. C. William Power, Nephthali Philips,
Richard Peter's, Judge A. George Pennock, Thomas Proctor, Brig. Genesis Francis
Powell, Thomas Paul, M. A. William Pollard,
R.
Alexander Russell, William Rogers, D. D. Thomas Rees, T. Ross, John Ross, M. A
Philip Reilly, Robert Ro^^, John Nash Reynolds. Daniel Rees, H. and P. Rice,
Caesar Rodney, Edward Robinson, R. Rutherford, M. C William Rawle, James
Richman, Craig Ritchie, M. A. David Rittenhouse, J. Roberts, for Montgomery
library,
S.
John Swanwick, M. A. Abraham Smith, M. S. P. Samuel Sterett, Abraham Sheridan,
Abraham Stout, John Storey; jun. John Samuel Sherburne, M. C. Thomas Sprigg, M.
C. Thomas Stokely, M. A. William Smith, D. D. Arthur St. Clair, Gov. N. W.
Terri. William Summers, William Shannon, J. R. Smith, William L. Sonntag, James
Smith, Edward Scott, Joseph Skerret, William Peter Spragut, John Smith, jun.
Michael Schmyser, M. S. P. Jacob Shallus, John Sellers, M. S. P. John Specht,
Jacob Servoss, Philip Stein, J. E. Spencer, Samuel H. Smith, Ralph Stover, M.
A. John Shoemaker, jun. M. A. John Swain, William Stanley, Walter Sabin,
Alexander Scott, M. S. P. John Smilie, M. C. Thomas Scott, M. C. Joan Still,
Moses Spitzer, (Charleston.) William Sergeant, J. Stouch.
T.
Edward Tilghman, Thomas Tredwell, M. C. Alexander Turner, M. A. Joseph
Torrence, M. A. Richard Thomas, M. S. P Joseph Tyson, M. A. James Trimble,
George Tailor, jun. Robert Tailor, Uriah Tracy, M. C. Benjamin Tucker, John M.
Tailor, Jonathan Trumbull, M. C. Thomas W. Tallman.
V.
George Vogle, Mr. Van Berekel, resident from Hol. John Vochez, Peter
Vangasbeck, M. C. Abraham B. Venable, M. C. John Vannost.
W.
Dennis Whelen, M. A. William Williams, Isaac Wayne, William Will, Moses
Wallace, James William, Bernard Webb, (6) Ephraim Washington, Alexander
Wilcocks, James White, John Whitehill, M. A. Lewis Walker, Gerandus Wynkoop, M.
A. William West, M. A. (2) William Weed, Roswell Wells, Joseph Wheaton.
Y.
James Young, John Young.
AN ACCOUNT OF THE IMPEACHMENT AND TRIAL OF THE LATE FRANCIS HOPKINSON,
ESQUIRE, JUDGE OF THE COURT OF ADMIRALTY FOR THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY FRANCIS BAILEY, AT YORICK'S HEAD, No. 116,
HIGH STREET. M,DCC,XCIV.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE IMPEACHMENT AND TRIAL, etc.
On WEDNESDAY the 22d of November, A. D. 1780, and in the 4th year of the
Independence of the UNITED STATES, it appears from the minutes of the HOUSE OF
ASSEMBLY of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania, That a Paper was presented to the
Speaker, entitled, A general Sketch of charges to be exhibited against FRANCIS
HOPKINSON, Esquire, Judge of Admiralty; and a variety of depositions and other
papers, exhibited as proofs to support the said charges; which were by order
read, and laid on the table for consideration: and are as follow, being copies
from originals.
CHARGE 1.

THAT having a power by law to appoint an agent for unrepresented shares
belonging to absent seamen, and others, he offered and proposed to appoint Mr.
Blair M'Clenachan, agent for a number of such shares belonging to seamen, who
had sailed on board the privateer Holker, upon the condition, that he the said
Blair M'Clenachan would make a present of a suit of clothes; and, this
condition not being complied with, he appointed others in his stead. For proof
see papers No. 2 and 3, and evidence to be summoned. Declared to be supported
by the evidence.


2. Receiving presents from persons interested in the condemnation of prizes,
previous to their condemnation; particularly a cask of wine from on board the
prize brigantine Gloucester, presented to him by the captors before any
condemnation, sale or distribution. See papers No. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and (Z.)

N. B. The date of (Z) compared with those of No. 4 and 5, will show that the
wi^e was delivered before condemnation.

Not supported.




3. Conniving at, and encouraging the sale of prizes before condemnation,
contrary to law, and maliciously charging the Marshal with the crime of such
conduct before the honorable the Supreme Executive Council; in the instance of
the prize ship Charlotte. Evidences to be summoned in support of this charge;
and see paper (A) 3d article thereof.

Not supported.




4. Issuing a writ of sale, of the cargo of a prize, declaring in the same writ
that it was testified to him, that the same cargo was in danger of waste,
spoil, and damage, when in fact and in truth no such testimony or return was
ever given, or made to him; -- in the instance of the cargo of the prize ship
Allion. See papers 9, 10, 11, 12.

Supported.




N. B. In corroboration of the charges, several witnesses may be produced, who
will not appear without being called for, by authority.

For documents see page 8 to 21.

MONDAY, the 27th November.
THE paper entitled, A general sketch of charges to be exhibited against
Francis Hopkinson, Esquire Judge of the Admiralty; received the 22d instant, and
the several depositions, etc. accompanying the same, were read the second time,
and referred to a committee of three: the gentlemen appointed were Mr.
Campbell, Mr. J. Smith, and Mr. Gallraith, who are directed to request a
conference with the Supreme Executive Council thereon.

THURSDAY, November 30.
A LETTER from the Honorable Francis Hopkinson, Esquire Judge of the Court of
Admiralty of this State, was read, requesting to be furnished with a copy of
the charges exhibited against him on the 22d instant: Ordered that the clerk
furnish Mr. Hopkinson with a copy of the charges aforesaid.

Mr. Hopkinson received the following letter that evening. --

"SIR,
"YOUR letter of this day I laid before the Assembly, and the Clerk was ordered
immediately to furnish you with copies of all the papers relating to the
subject you mentioned. I have the honor to be, with sentiments of respect and
esteem,

Sir, Your most obedient, Humble servant, FREDERICK A. MUHLENBERG."
Thursday Evening, 30th November, 1780.
Honorable FRANCIS HOPKINSON, Esquire

FRIDAY, December 1.
A MEMORIAL from Francis Hopkinson, Esquire Judge of the Admiralty of this state,
was read, staring, that as certain charges have been exhibited against him for
misconduct in his office, he therefore prays that he may not be suffered to lie
long under censure, but that a hearing or a trial in the manner the House may
judge most eligible, may be directed as soon as possible.

Ordered, That it be referred to the committee appointed the 27th ult. to take
into consideration the charges exhibited against him, etc.

The committee appointed to confer with the Supreme Executive Council on the
charges exhibited against Francis Hopkinson, Esquire Judge of the court of
Admiralty of this state, reported their performance of that service, etc.

Whereupon,

Ordered, That the House will resolve itself into a committee of the whole
House, on Monday next, at four o'clock in the afternoon, to take into
consideration the charges aforesaid.

Ordered, That the parties be directed to attend at the time aforesaid, in the
Assembly room, with their respective evidences, when they will be heard on the
charges aforesaid.

MONDAY, December 4.
ON motion,

Resolved, That the House will tomorrow re-consider the order of Friday last,
assigning this afternoon for the consideration of the charges against Francis
Hopkinson, Esquire Judge of the Admiralty, etc.

TUESDAY, December 5.
UPON a re-consideration of the order of Friday last, relative to the
consideration of certain charges exhibited against Francis Hopkinson, Esquire Judge
of the Court of Admiralty of this State, for mal-administration in his office,
it was,

Resolved, That the witnesses in support of the charges aforesaid, be heard
before the House tomorrow morning at eleven o'clock, the order aforesaid to
the contrary notwithstanding.

Ordered, That the Clerk give notice to the witnesses to attend the House at
the time, and for the purpose above directed.

Same day Mr. Hopkinson received the following letter. --

"SIR,
"I BEG leave to inform you that the General Assembly have re-considered their
order of Friday last, and determined to hear the evidences only in support of
the charges exhibited against you. Eleven o'clock tomorrow morning is the time
appointed, when your presence will probably be necessary.

I am, Sir, Your humble servant, SAMUEL STERETT."

FRANCIS HOPKINSON, Esquire

WEDNESDAY, December 6.
THE order of the day was called for and read.

The House agreeably thereto, proceeded to hear the evidence in support of
certain charges exhibited against Francis Hopkinson, Esquire Judge of the Court of
Admiralty of this State, for mal-administration in his office.

On motion,

Ordered, That the doors be shut during the examination of witnesses on the
charges aforesaid,

Mr. Hopkinson appearing in the House, acknowledged the papers marked A, and
No. 12, to be his handwriting: They proceeded to hear the witnesses and to
read the depositions accordingly.

The Judge of Admiralty's Memorial against the Marshal. Read in Assembly 22d
November, 1780.

Marked (A.) To His Excellency the President and Honorable the Executive
Council for the State of Pennsylvania. --
The Memorial of Francis Hopkinson, Judge in the Court of Admiralty for the
State of Pennsylvania,
Humbly Shows,
THAT from a sense of duty to the public and regard to the station he has the
honor to fill, he finds himself under a necessity of preferring a complaint to
your honors against the conduct of the Marshal of the said Court.

He founds his complaint on the following charges, viz.

1. Neglect of duty, in that the said Marshal has made no returns of the writs
issued by the Court for these eighteen months past (two instances only
excepted) and has made no returns whatever of accounts -- sales; as by law and
custom he ought to do.

2. For contempt of the Court, in not giving his attendance at the sittings
thereof, as his duty requires.

3. In presuming to sell vessels and property before condemnation, not having
the authority of the Court, or consent of the Judge for so doing.

4. In refusing to obey a writ of the Court.

5. In not exhibiting to the Judge, although thereto required, the bills of
charges he brings against prizes, as by law he ought to do; in order that the
Judge may examine, and if occasion requires, tax the same for the avoiding
injustice and oppression.

As these seem to be breaches of duty in very important instances, your
memorialist prays that the said Marshall may be removed from his office, and
another appointed in his place.

FRANCIS HOPKINSON.
Philadelphia, October 30, 1780.

No. 9.
(L. S.) Port of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, ss.
Francis Hopkinson, Esquire Judge of the Court of Admiralty of the State of
Pennsylvania, to Matthew Clarkson, Esquire Marshal of the said State, Greeting.

WHEREAS it is testified unto me that the cargo on board the ship or vessel
called the Albion, lately sent into this port, and libelled against as prize,
by Samuel Walker, qui tam, etc. is in great danger of waste, spoil and damage.
These, therefore, are to authorize and command you forthwith to sell at public
vendue, all and singular the goods, wares and merchandise, laden and found on
board the said ship at the time of her capture; and you are to detain and keep
in your safe custody the moneys arising from the said sales, ready to abide the
further order of this court -- and how you shall have executed this writ, make
return to me at a Court of Admiralty to be held at my Chambers in Philadelphia,
the twenty-first day of August, instant, together with this writ. Given under
my hand, and the seal of the said Court, the seventh day of August, Anno
Domini, 1780.

FRANCIS HOPKINSON.


To Matthew Clarkson, Esquire Marshall, etc.
No. 12.
"SIR,
"SOME doubts having arisen as to the propriety of suffering prize-goods to be
sold by public vendue, unless the same shall on inspection be found in a
perishing condition, I have directed William Heysham and William Budden to
examine the situation of the cargo on board the prize-ship Albion, which cargo
you have advertised for sale this afternoon.

"Messrs. Heysham and Budden have made a report to me, that they have carefully
examined the said cargo, being Liverpool salt, and that they find the same in
good order and well conditioned, and in no immediate danger of suffering by
waste or otherwise.

"You are therefore hereby directed not to proceed in a public sale of the said
salt, but reserve the same to be disposed of, as the Court shall order after
trial of the said ship Albion and her cargo.

I am, sir, etc. FRANCIS HOPKINSON."
Aug. 11, 1780.

The paper marked Z, is an order from the Judge to sell and distribute the brig
Gloucester and cargo, dated the 30th August, 1780, under his hand and seal, and
directed to the Marshal. Enclosed is a bill of costs in the case of the
Recovery, amounting to L.34:8:0 specie, multiplied by 40, as the rate of
depreciation for paper-money at that period. Omitted here as immaterial.

No. 11.
Philadelphia, 9th August, 1780. "DEAR SIR,
"THE Marshal applies to me, in consequence of a letter from you, and some
conversation since, respecting the sale of the salt on board of the Albion.

"The law is clear in it is directions; and I have advised him to represent to
the Judge the indispensible necessity of having it returned upon oath that the
cargo is really perishable or damaged, so that it will not keep without further
injury; previous to any sale. This step I presume will be taken, and if the
facts will warrant a sale, it will go on; otherwise not.

I have the honor to be, Your Excellency's most obedient, Humble servant,
JONAT. D. SERGEANT."

His Excellency President REED.

No. 10.
"SIR,
"I OBSERVE an advertisement to sell by auction in your name.

"That others should make a mistake of this nature, would not be much wondered
at; but that an officer of the state should advertise a violation of it is laws,
must have a very odd appearance. You will do well to re-consider the Acts of
Assembly, and not proceed unless you are very clear in so doing.

I am in haste. But with due esteem, Sir, your obedient, Humble servant, JOS.
REED,"
Market-street, August 9, 1780.
MATTHEW CLARKSON, Esquire Marshal, etc. (Copy.)
SAMUEL STERETT, Clerk of the General Assembly.

No. 2.
Mr. M. Clarkson, sworn in support of the first charge, says,

That some time in the month of May last, Mr. H. brought Mr. M'C. to his house,
to talk over certain disputes that happened between him the said M'C. and the
officers of the Court of Admiralty. That we conferred fully on the subject --
and several explanations took place, concerning matters misconceived between
the said B. M'C. and Dep. The event was a reconciliation that appeared cordial
-- the Judge testified his assent to said reconciliation, having been before
offended with Mr. M'Clenachan.

Mr. M'C. went away, and the Judge remained. A conversation commenced between
Dep. and Judge; Dep. mentioned that a number of shares were unrepresented, that
the Judge by law might appoint agents for. That as Mr. M'C. had made
considerable advances to those people whose shares were unrepresented. Dep.
said it would be an act of kindness to appoint M'C. such agent, as it would put
it in his power to save the money advanced, -- and thought it would be a good
testimony of the aforesaid reconciliation being effected. The Judge consented,
and said he would appoint M'C. and gave me leave so to inform M'C. and added,
that such appointments were lucrative to the receivers -- and many had been
done by him (the Judge) to owners of privateers; for which he had received no
recompense. That Judge apprehended that on this occasion the profits to Mr.
M'C. would be a sufficient reason for him the said M'C. to make him the Judge,
a present of a suit of clothes, and Judge desired Dep. would mention it to Mr.
M'C. Dep. afterward saw M'C. and informed him, that the Judge had agreed to
appoint him agent as aforesaid. M'C. a few days after mentioned to Dep. that in
consequence of the promise of the Judge, he had paid some of the said seamen,
whose shares were unrepresented, more money. Dep. made no mention of the
Judge's expectations of a suit of clothes, considering it too delicate a matter.

Judge frequently asked deponent whether he said any thing about said clothes.
Dep. evaded the answer, by saying he had no convenient opportunity. Thus the
matter rested for two weeks or three, when being at the Coffee-house, I met the
Judge there; he informed me that the letters of agency were made out -- but
that Messrs. Meade and Fitzsimons were appointed instead of M'C. Dep. felt
surprised at the information, and remonstrated with the Judge having desired
me, and mentioned the promise he (the Judge) had made of appointing M'C. -- and
that Dep. said, he had informed M'Clenachan of his intended appointment.

Judge said he had a right to appoint whom he pleased -- and the matter had now
rested two or three weeks, and that he had never heard of the deponents
applying for the suit of clothes -- and thought himself neglected. Dep. felt
wounded at his (the Judge'^) conduct, and told him (the J.) that he treated him
ill, and left him.

A few days after, Judge came to Dep. house, and conversed on what had passed,
and attempted to vindicate himself, and said that one thing he was most sorry
for, viz. the request to apply for the suit of clothes, as by so doing he had
put himself in his the Dep. power. Dep. told him that it depended on himself,
that he was not disposed to do any injury to him. Dep. and Judge then parted.

Cross examined. Dep. rather thinks no person was present at the conversation
about suit of clothes.

Judge took the Dep. to one side on the conversation at the Coffee-house. Dep.
never told M'C. of the Judge's request. Dept. don't know that the Judge
received any reward from Meade and Fitzsimons.

Dept. told his brother of the Judge's request same day and Mr. Hazard, and
don't know that it is customary for the officers of the Court to receive
presents, as he never received any himself.


No. 3.
Philadelphia, ss.
"Gerardus Clarkson makes oath that he had seen the foregoing deposition, and
that he, the deponent, was informed of the transaction therein mentioned, soon
after it happened, by his brother Matthew Clarkson, that on conversing with the
Judge on the subject, a few days after, he, Judge Hopkinson, informed the
deponent that he, the Judge, had promised the Marshal that Blair M'Clenachan
should have the agency; but that as he had seen Blair M'Clenachan frequently
since, and he Mr. M'Clenachan had taken no notice of him, he saw no reason why
he Mr. M'Clenachan, should have his favors, and therefore gave them to somebody
else.

GERARDUS CLARKSON."
Sworn 16th November, 1780, before WILLIAM RUSH.

No. 4.
"SIR,
"THERE being an immediate call for a quarter cask of the wine in the
brigantine Gloucester for particular use, should esteem it a favor if an order
would be sent by the bearer to Capt. M'Pherson for the delivery of one cask;
for Blair M'Clenachan, Agent for the Holker,

CHARLES MILLER, Agent for the Fair American and crew.
To MATTHEW CLARKSON, Esquire Marshal. Philadelphia, August 12th, 1780.

No. 5.
August 15th, 1780. I do hereby acknowledge to have received the within
mentioned quarter cask of wine, Mr. Clarkson will please to charge the same to
the privateers Fair American and Holker according to their respective shares,
it being sent as a present to the honorable Francis Hopkinson, Esquire Judge of the
Admiralty by consent of the agents for said privateers.

CHARLES MILLER.


Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, ss.
William Watkin makes oath, that he, the deponent, was first prize master on
board the Fair American in her late cruize, that on her taking the prize brig
Gloucester some time in August, he the deponent was put on board of her as
prize master, and brought her up to Philadelphia soon after; that Mr. Charles
Miller, one of the owners and an agent for the concerned in the Fair American,
applied to the deponent at the upper part of Hamilton's wharf, and told him
that he would be glad he the deponent could get at a cask of wine of the first
quality; that they wanted it for a particular purpose, for the Judge of the
Admiralty; that Mr. Miller asked Dept. if he could get at it; Depont. said he
doubted it because Capt. M'Pherson was put on board by the Marshal, but he
would try: that Mr. Miller said the cask was for the Judge of the Admiralty;
for nothing could be done without it to procure dispatch; that Mr. Miller
desired Dept. to speak to Capt. M'Pherson, and see if he would not let it go
without an order from the Marshal. Dept. answered, that he (Mr. Miller) had
better try himself; Mr. Miller said he thought Capt. M'Pherson would not do it
for him, but would be more likely to do it for the deponent: That Capt. M
'Pherson refused to do it without the Marshal's order, though the deponent by
Mr. Miller's order, told Capt. M'Pherson that he Mr. Miller and Mr. Blair
M'Clenachan, would be accountable for it. That hereupon Dept. acquainted Mr.
Miller of Capt. M'Pherson's refusal, and he (Mr. Miller) wrote a note to the
Marshal, and that he believes a note now shown him, and signed Charles Miller,
agent for the Fair American and crew, to be the same; that an order came soon
after from the Marshal, and thereupon a cask of wine of the first quality was
taken from on board the brig Gloucester and delivered to a porter, with orders
to carry it to the Judge in Third street.

WILLIAM WATKIN.
Sworn 16th November, 1780, before me WILLIAM RUSH.

No. 7.
Philadelphia, ss.
Capt. Matthew Henderson makes oath that he was on Hamilton's wharf soon after
the before mentioned cask of wine was gone as he was told; that Dept. asked
Capt. William Watkin if he had broke bulk; that Capt. Watkin appeared angry,
and said no; only a quarter cask that we have taken and sent to the Judge of
the Admiralty, to expedite business, and prove that nothing could be done
without bribery; it was just like England.

MATTHEW. HENDERSON.
Sworn 16th November, 1780, before me WILLIAM RUSH.

No. 8.
Philadelphia, ss.
James Clarke makes oath that he (the Dept.) was employed by Capt. Watkin to
assist in the delivery of the cargo of the prize brig Gloucester; that he knows
of the sending the quarter cask of wine and saw it go; that he understood from
Mr. Charles Miller, that it was going as a compliment to the Judge of the
Admiralty; that the reason he gave was that they had a perishing cargo on
board, and wanted liberty from the Judge to discharge before the time limited
by law.

JAMES CLARKE.
Sworn 16th November, 1780, before me WILLIAM RUSH.

William Lewis being duly affirmed, says, That several months before the
removal of the Marshal of the Admiralty of Pennsylvania from his office, Mr.
Hopkinson, Judge of the said court mentioned to this affirmant, some disputes
which had arisen between them, and that there was one matter which perhaps the
Marshal might attempt to take advantage of, which was, that he had demanded a
suit of clothes for the appointment of Mr. Blair M'Clenachan, agent for the
unrepresented shares of seamen -- that the truth of the matter was, he had
proposed or intended appointing him agent; but as it was a very lucrative
office, which would put large sums of money into his pocket, and as he the
Judge was empowered by law to appoint whom he pleased, and as the appointment
was discretionary with him, he did not see why he should give Mr. M'Clenachan
such an appointment without some compliment in return; that he thought a suit
of clothes but reasonable, and had signified that he would appoint him, if he
had a suit of clothes, that some time elapsed without this being attended to,
or any assurance given of the said suit of clothes, and therefore he had
appointed others.

Mr. Sergeant sworn, -- does depose and say, that he knows the Judge charged
the Marshal before Council for selling prizes before condemnation, and without
order, that he (Dep.) had formerly frequently applied to have orders for the
sale of vessels before condemnation and procured them -- but under the present
law, the Judge refused to give any orders but referred him to the Marshal,
implying that he (Judge) would not take any notice thereof if made. That he
(Dep.) did not think that such application was wicked or unjust.

Acknowledges the paper No. 11 to be his, and understands the sale of the
Albion's cargo was stopped on that account.

B. M'Clenachan being sworn in support of the first charge, deposes and says,
that he understood from Mr. M. C. that he would be appointed an Agent for
certain unrepresented shares, but that he never solicited the appointment and
never heard any thing respecting a present of a suit of clothes. That he had
advanced considerable sums of money to persons owning unrepresented shares, and
settled the accounts with M. and F. the agents appointed by the Judge.

In support of the 2d.

That on the proposal of Mr. Miller he consented to make a present of a cask of
wine to the Judge aforesaid.

That the order for delivering the cask must have come from M. C. Judge never
applied for it. That he did not intend the said wine as a bribe, or to
influence the Judge in an undue manner. That the Judge ever conducted himself
in an upright manner to the best of Dep. knowledge -- always found Judge in his
duty, and thought rather too severe -- signed a paper requesting the indulgence
of the sale of the Charlotte -- no present, nor bribe given for the indulgence.

In support of the 3d.

That he with others petitioned as he thinks for the sale of the Charlotte
before condemnation, being suited for a privateer.

Andrew Robeson sworn says, that he is Register of the Court of Admiralty.
That about the time that the Marshal made return that certain shares of seamen
belonging to the privateer Holker were unrepresented, the Judge mentioned his
design to appoint such agents.

The Judge then informed the Dep. in the course of conversation, that the
Marshal shortly after applied to be agent -- To which the Judge objected, as he
(M.) was an officer of the Court, etc. -- Marshal urged it on the score of
friendship, etc. but the Judge still rejected his the M's application. The
matter laid so some time, when Ma. told Judge that it would answer as well to
appoint M'C. such agent. Judge consented to appoint M'C. agent. That he the
said Judge, afterward seeing M'C. and he M'C. saying nothing on the subject,
the Judge thought for several reasons, it would be best to appoint some one
else such agent -- for if such things were not worth asking for, they were not
receiving.

On question.

Dept. in course of conversation heard the Judge say that Gover. Morris had
declared that his (G. M.) father used to receive presents, and refused to
proceed against Act of Parliament without; this was introduced as mere matter
of chit-chat. After above conversation some time, Judge informed Dep. that M.
and F. were appointed the agents aforesaid, and desired him to prepare bonds
accordingly.

Dep. heard no more till the M's hearing before Council, when Marshal mentioned
the substance of the first charge. Judge told Dep. on conversing with him on
the subject, that M. agreed with him that there would be no impropriety in
receiving a suit of clothes for the exercise of a discretionary, and not a
judicial power, etc. -- But that afterward the Judge told the M. that M'C's
deportment and situation was such that we would not appoint him the agent
aforesaid. And he the Judge directed the M. not to mention the suit of clothes,
as he now viewed it rather in a different light. The Judge told him that M'C.
and Miller had in his absence had sent him (the Judge) a cask of wine, and
never knew any thing of it until Mrs. Hopkinson had informed him.

2d charge.

M. told Dep. that Judge had received a present as stated in 2d charge -- that
Judge knew nothing of it till delivery, and then imagined it was a mistake.
Gloucester's trial was tried after 14 days notice, the cargo was wine, he
showed from his minutes that the practice in this instance is not unusual, etc.

3d charge.

That in some cases of armed vessels, orders issued for appraisement, etc. that
in the case of the Charlotte, the Marshal advertised for sale and sold previous
to condemnation, but on the day the trial was to have been, which was deferred
by the neglect of the owners to procure proper testimony, the Judge attended to
forbid the sale, but too late.

She was condemned 27th October, and sold 2d September before.

4th charge.

In the case of the Albion, a writ of ap -- issued previous to the order of
sale, under a persuasion that the cargo was perishable in its nature and much
wanted. But the said order for sale was contradicted on the report of certain
inspectors that it was not in danger, etc.

Thinks the Judge to be a person of great integrity.

Miles Filborne being duly affirmed, said, that he was one of the inspectors of
the cargo of the Charlotte; and when they made their report, that the cargo was
in a perishing condition, some of the inspectors observed that it was a pity
the ship should be detained with forms, as she would be a good privateer, etc.
-- The Judge replied that she was so clearly a prize, that some of the forms
might be dispensed with to expedite her condemnation and sale.

Dep. was one of the inspectors of the Albion's cargo.

William Heysham being sworn, deposes and says, that he was one of three to
inspect the cargo of the ship Charlotte -- they (the inspectors) waited on the
Judge to report, one of them observed to the Judge that the ship was a good
fast failing vessel, and that several of the owners had expressed their desire
that she might be condemned as soon as possible, and that they intended to buy
and fit her out as a privateer.

The Judge answered it was a pity that such a ship should be delayed. It would
be serving the public to indulge them the owners, and that she should be
condemned as soon as possible -- but it could not be done without public
advertisement, and this is Saturday and it cannot be done till Tuesday, but I
will grant every indulgence in my power, where the matter is clear.

Dep. was one of the inspectors of the cargo of the Albion, and they reported
it well conditioned and in good order.

William Budden being sworn, says, that he was one of three, that inspected
the cargo of the Charlotte and reported it in a perishing condition -- that
some of the inspectors observed that the ship was a fast sailing vessel, and
that the Judge said the condemnation and sale should be expedited as soon as
possible, but it could not be done without public notice, etc.

Dep. was one of the inspectors of the Albion's cargo, and reported it in good
order.

Mr. Charles Miller being sworn, acknowledges the papers No. 4 and 5, to be his
hand writing -- Deponent -- acknowledges to have sent the cask of wine
mentioned in the second charge, as a present to the Judge on account of former
friendship, and not for the performance of any special purpose. Dep. never
mentioned to any person his design of sending the above present, consequently
the Judge could not know it, until the delivery.

On the files of the General Assembly there are two sets of depositions, given
in by the witnesses; the second copies have been omitted by the editor as
immaterial, except where they throw additional light on the subject --
therefore the following is given --

Charles Miller being duly sworn, deposes and says, that he acknowledges the
papers No. 4 and 5, to be his hand writing, he proposed making a present to the
Judge of a quarter cask of wine, with the consent of Mr. M'Clenachan. Mr.
Hopkinson knew nothing of the wine until it was sent, it was a present from
him, as Mr. M'Clenachan had sent a pipe to G. Washington, he never told his
intention of sending the wine to any person.

Progress being made in the business.

It was, on motion,

Ordered, That the further hearing of evidence be postponed till the afternoon.

Same Day, P. M.
The House met; and resumed the hearing of evidence in support of certain
charges exhibited against the Judge of the Court of Admiralty, for
mal-administration in his office, etc.

Resolved, That the 1st and 4th of the said charges against the said Judge
appear to be supported by legal evidence. (The 4th to be called the 2d.)

Resolved, That the two following charges exhibited in like manner against the
Judge aforesaid, are not supported by the evidence before the House, viz.

That he, the said Judge, received presents from persons interested in the
condemnation of prizes, previous to their condemnation; particularly a cask of
wine from on board the prize brigantine Gloucester, presented to him by the
captors before any condemnation, sale or distribution.

And, that he, the said Judge, connived at, and encouraged the sale of prizes
before condemnation, contrary to law, and maliciously charged the Marshal with
the crime of such conduct before the honorable Supreme Executive Council; in
the instance of the prize ship Charlotte.

On motion,

Ordered, That the charges, which appear to be supported by legal evidence, as
above declared, be referred to a committee of three: The gentlemen appointed
were Mr. J. Smith, Mr. Galbraith, and Mr. Montgomery.

FRIDAY, December 8.
THE committee to whom certain charges against Francis Hopkinson, Esquire Judge of
the Court of Admiralty of this state, for mal-administration in his office,
were referred on Wednesday last, made their report, which was, by order, read.

On motion and by special order, it was read a second time; whereupon,

The House resumed the consideration of the charges aforesaid, and came to the
following resolutions, viz.

Resolved, That Francis Hopkinson, Esquire Judge of the Court of Admiralty of this
state, be impeached for the crime and misdemeanor expressed and contained in
the first charge exhibited against him; and declared by a resolution of this
House of the 6th instant, to be supported by legal evidence.

The yeas and nays being required by Mr. Boyd, and Mr. P. Anderson, are as
follow, viz.

YEAS.
1 Robert Morris, 2 Sharp Delany, 3 John Steinmetz, 4 George Gray, 5 Samuel
Penrose, 6 Henry Hill, 7 Matthew Holdgate, 8 Benjamin Fell, 9 Joseph Savage, 10
William Scott, 11 James Morgan, 12 David Thomas, 13 Patrick Anderson, 14 Evan
Evans, 15 John Whitehill, 16 Christopher Kucher, 17 James Anderson, 18 Philip
Greenawalt, 19 Adam Reigart, 20 James Cowden, 21 Alexander Lowrey, 21 Matthias
Slough, 23 James Dixon, 24 Moses M'Clean, 25 Thomas Lilly, 26 Stephen Duncan,
27 William Brown, 28 Jonathan Hoge, 29 John Andrews, 30 John Harris, 31 John
Allison, 32 George Ege, 33 John Patton, 34 Baltzer Gehr, 35 Mark Burd, 36
Thomas Mifflin, 37 William M'Farren, 38 Robert Latimer, 39 John Burd.
NAYS.
1 George Campbell, 2 Joseph M'Clean, 3 George Smith, 4 Gerardus Wynkoop, 5
William Harris, 6 James Boyd, 7 John Culbertson, 8 Jacob Cook, 9 Robert
Galbraith, 10 James Smith, 11 William Mitchell, 12 James Ramsey, 13 Peter
Rhoads, 14 William Montgomery, 15 David M'Kinney, 16 John Kelley, 17 Joseph
Powell, 18 James Jacks.
Resolved, That the said Francis Hopkinson be also impeached for the crime and
misdemeanor expressed and contained in the second charge declared as above to
be supported by legal evidence.

The yeas and nays being required, stand as follows, viz.

YEAS.
1 Robert Morris, 2 Sharp Delany, 3 John Steinmetz, 4 George Gray, 5 George
Campbell, 6 Joseph M'Clean, 7 Samuel Penrose, 8 Henry Hill, 9 John Culbertson,
10 James Boyd, 11 Joseph Savage, 12 William Scott, 13 James Morgan, 14 David
Thomas, 15 Patrick Anderson, 16 Evan Evans, 17 John Whitehill, 18 Christopher
Kucher, 19 James Anderson, 20 Philip Greenawalt, 21 Adam Reigart, 22 James
Cowden, 23 Alexander Lowrey, 24 Matthias Slough, 25 James Jacks, 26 James
Dixon, 27 Moses M'Clean, 28 Robert Galbraith, 29 James Smith, 30 William
Mitchell, 31 James Ramsay, 32 Thomas Lilly, 33 Stephen Duncan, 34 Jonathan
Hoge, 35 John Andrews, 36 John Harris, 37 John Allison, 38 George Ege, 39 John
Patton, 40 Baltzer Gehr, 41 Mark Bird, 42 William M'Farren, 43 Robert Latimer,
44 Peter Rhoads, 45 David M'Kinney, 46 John Kelly, 47 John Burd.
NAYS.
1 Matthew Holdgate, 2 George Smith, 3 Benjamin Fell, 4 Gerardus Wynkoop, 5
William Harris, 6 Jacob Cook, 7 William Brown, 8 Thomas Mifflin, 9 William
Montgomery, 10 Joseph Powell.
Ordered, That Mr. Campbell, Mr. J. Smith, and Mr. Galbraith, prepare and
report to the House, proper articles of impeachment to be exhibited against the
said Francis Hopkinson, Esquire conformable to the above resolutions.

SATURDAY, December 9.
THE committee appointed yesterday to prepare articles of impeachment against
the Judge of the Court of Admiralty, for mal-administration in his office, made
their report, which was read, and ordered to lie on the table for consideration.

TUESDAY, December 12.
THE articles of impeachment against Francis Hopkinson, Esquire Judge of the Court
of Admiralty of this state, prepared and reported by a committee of the House,
were read the second time, and, on consideration, agreed to, as follows, viz.

ARTICLES of IMPEACHMENT for certain crimes and misdemeanors, against FRANCIS
HOPKINSON, Esquire Judge of the Court of Admiralty of the commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, by the Representatives of the Freemen of the said commonwealth,
in GENERAL ASSEMBLY met, in their own name, and in the name of all the Freemen
of the said commonwealth; exhibited to the Supreme Executive Council.

First. That having a power by law to appoint an agent for unrepresented shares
of prizes, belonging to absent seamen and others, he, the said Francis
Hopkinson, in a conversation with the late Marshal, Matthew Clarkson, offered
and proposed to appoint Blair M'Clenachan, agent for a number of such shares,
belonging to seamen who had sailed on board the privateer Holker, upon
condition, that he, the said Blair M'Clenachan, would make a present of a suit
of clothes; and, this condition not being complied with, he appointed others in
his stead.

Secondly. That he, the said Francis Hopkinson, issued a writ for the sale of
the cargo of a prize, declaring in the same writ, that it was testified to him,
that the same cargo was in great danger of waste, spoil and damage, when in
fact and in truth, no such testimony or return was ever given or made to him,
in the instance of the cargo of the prize ship Albion.

And the said Representatives of the Freemen of the commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, in General Assembly met, do demand, that the said Francis
Hopkinson, Esquire Judge of the Court of Admiralty, may be put to answer all and
every the premises, and that such proceedings, examinations, trials and
judgments may be upon him had and used, as is agreeable to law and justice, and
the directions of the Constitution of this commonwealth; and the said
Representatives of the Freemen aforesaid, are ready to offer proofs of the
premises, when and where the Supreme Executive Council of this state of
Pennsylvania shall appoint.

Ordered, That the foregoing articles of impeachment be engrossed and signed by
the Speaker; and that Mr. Campbell, Mr. J. Smith, and Mr. Galbraith, be a
committee to carry up the same to the Supreme Executive Council, and manage the
trial to be had thereon in behalf of the state.

Ordered, That the Attorney General be directed to give his attendance at the
trial aforesaid, and assist thereat on behalf of the commonwealth.

Same Day, P. M.
The articles of impeachment against Francis Hopkinson, Esquire were brought in
engrossed, and being signed by Speaker, were carried up to the Supreme
Executive Council by the committee appointed for that purpose.

MONDAY, December 18.
A MEMORIAL and representation from Jonathan Dickinson Sergeant, was received
and read.

On motion and by special order, it was read the second time.

Ordered, That it be inserted in the minutes.

The same is as follows, viz.

To the Honorable the REPRESENTATIVES of the FREEMEN of the commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, in GENERAL ASSEMBLY met,
The memorial and representation of JONATHAN DICKINSON SERGEANT,
Humbly Shows,
THAT finding an enquiry instituted into the conduct of the honorable Francis
Hopkinson, Esquire Judge of the Court of Admiralty, and your memorialist being of
opinion, that the said Judge has been guilty of receiving and exacting fees
beyond what are warranted by law, from the suitors in his court, he begs leave
to represent the same with all humility to this honorable House. That the Act
of Assembly of the twenty-seventh day of November, one thousand seven hundred
and seventy-nine, provides "That the fees of the Judge of Admiralty, including
his fee for a final decree, in the case of a ship or vessel under the burden
of one hundred tons, shall be twenty-five bushels of wheat, and in the case of
a ship or vessel above the burden of one hundred tons, shall be forty bushels
of such wheat, payable however in money, as in the case of the officers
aforenamed." That your memorialist believes it will appear, that by law no more
than five hundred pounds are due to the Judge in the case of a vessel under one
hundred tons, but that nevertheless more than double that sum are continually
charged and received, as the Judge's see in such cases. That your memorialist
herewith transmits an authentic copy of a bill of costs, which has been some
time since paid, as he is informed, and believes, in the case of the Recovery,
a small prize taken by Job Pray, in the employ of Andrew and Hugh Hodge, which
was of the burden of only eighty tons, and which was libelled by your
memorialist. That the charge of thirteen hundred pounds in this case has been
complained of by your memorialist's clients, and he believes to be
extortionate; yet the like charges will be found in a variety of other
instances, if recourse be had to the bills of costs on the files of the
Register, or in the hands of the late Marshal. That your memorialist begs leave
to instance particularly in the case or the Fame, which was also libelled by
your memorialist, and lately condemned, being a small vessel owned by Joseph
Carson and others, re-taken by the Fair American privateer. That if this
honorable House should find upon enquiry, as your memorialist is induced to
believe they will find, that the said Judge has been guilty of exacting more
than his due, in these and other instances, he humbly hopes the said Judge will
be called upon to answer for the same along with the other charges exhibited
against him. And your memorialist will pray, etc.

JONATHAN D. SERGEANT.


The bill of costs alluded to in the above memorial, is as follows, viz.

Job Pray, etc. v. Brigantine Recovery. Judge L.1,300 Advocate 256 Register
2,150 Marshal 450 L.4,456 Robert Morris, claimant. Libellant's part L. 3256
Claimant 1200 L. 4,456

A true copy from the original, MATTHEW CLARKSON.

Ordered, That the Clerk give notice to Matthew Clarkson, of the city of
Philadelphia, merchant, to attend this House immediately to give evidence on
the charge contained in the above memorial and representation, against Francis
Hopkinson, Esquire Judge of the Court of Admiralty of this state, for
mal-administration in his office.

The House were informed that Mr. Clarkson, who was directed to attend the
House, to give testimony on the charge exhibited this morning against Francis
Hopkinson, Esquire was confined to his chamber by sickness, and could not obey the
order of the House.

Ordered, That Mr. Steinmetz, and Mr. Penrose, taking to their assistance a
Justice of the Peace, be a committee to obtain the necessary information on the
charge aforesaid from the said Matthew Clarkson.

The committee appointed this morning, to obtain the necessary information from
Matthew Clarkson, respecting the charge exhibited against Francis Hopkinson, in
the memorial of Jonathan D. Sergeant, reported the following deposition,
indorsed on the bill of costs, alluded to in the said memorial, etc.

Philadelphia, ss.
Personally appeared Matthew Clarkson, before me, the subscriber, one of the
Justices of the Peace, etc. and makes oath, that the within writing is a true
copy of the original bill of costs, in the Court of Admiralty, in the case of
Job Pray, etc. v. brigantine Recovery, Robert Morris, claimant; that the
deponent settled with Francis Hopkinson, Judge of Admiralty, agreeable to the
said bill, and allowed and paid him in account the sum of thirteen hundred
pounds, as his part of the said bill of costs.

MATTHEW CLARKSON.
Philadelphia, December. 18, 1780.
Sworn before me, WM. RUSH,

TUESDAY, December 19.
THE House resumed the consideration of the memorial and representation of
Jonathan Dickinson Sergeant, and the deposition reported yesterday by a
committee of the House: Whereupon,

Resolved, That Francis Hopkinson, Esquire Judge of the Court of Admiralty of this
state, be impeached on the charge expressed and contained in the said memorial
and representation.

Ordered, That Mr. Campbell, Mr. J. Smith, and Mr. Galbraith, be a committee to
prepare a proper article of impeachment on the said charge, to be sent to
Council.

The committee appointed to prepare a proper article of impeachment against
Francis Hopkinson, Esquire Judge of the Court of Admiralty of this state, on the
charge expressed and contained in the memorial of Jonathan D. Sergeant,
presented yesterday, reported the same, which was read the first time.

On motion, and by special order, it was read the second time, and being
considered was agreed to, as follows, viz.

A further ARTICLE of IMPEACHMENT, for exacting and receiving illegal fees,
against Francis Hopkinson, Esquire, Judge of the court of Admiralty of this
state of PENNSYLVANIA, in addition to the former two exhibited to the Supreme
Executive Council the 12th instant, by the Representatives of the FREEMEN of
the commonwealth of PENNSYLVANIA, in General Assembly met.

WHEREAS by an Act of General Assembly of this commonwealth, passed the
twenty-seventh of November, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred
and seventy-nine, it is enacted, "That the fees of the Judge of Admiralty,
including his fee for a final decree, in the case of a ship or vessel under the
burden of one hundred tons, shall be twenty-five bushels of good merchantable
wheat; and in the case of a ship or vessel above the burden of one hundred
tons, shall be forty bushels of such wheat, payable however in money, as in the
case of other civil officers of this state." Nevertheless, he the said Francis
Hopkinson, Esquire Judge of the Court of Admiralty, in contempt of the Act of
Assembly aforesaid, did exact and receive, as and for his fees, as Judge of the
Court of Admiralty aforesaid, the sum of thirteen hundred pounds in the case of
the brigantine Recovery, Job Pray, libellant, and Robert Morris, claimant, of
the burden of about eighty tons, being a larger and greater sum than by law he
ought to have received.

And the said Representatives of the Freemen of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, in General Assembly met, do demand, that the said Francis
Hopkinson, Esquire Judge of the Admiralty, may be put to answer to the above charge
in like manner as to the former charges exhibited in the impeachment sent the
12th instant, they being in like manner ready to offer proofs of the premises,
when and where the Supreme Executive Council of this state of Pennsylvania
shall appoint.

Ordered, That the above article be engrossed.

WEDNESDAY, December 20.
THE additional article of impeachment against Francis Hopkinson, Esquire Judge of
the Court of Admiralty of this state, as agreed to yesterday, was brought in
engrossed, and being compared at the table, was signed by the Speaker by the
direction of the House.

Ordered, That the same be carried to the Supreme Executive Council, by the
committee appointed on the former articles of impeachment, who are hereby
directed to manage the trial to be had thereon, taking to their assistance the
Attorney General of this state, as before ordered.

The Editor will now give a view of this subject as managed before the Supreme
Executive Council, from the time of its first introduction until the decree was
pronounced. It is presumed that reasonable indulgence will be allowed for the
unavoidable deficiencies which are obvious in the foregoing and following
pages, because no regular narrative of the proceedings had been collected in
proper season.

In COUNCIL, TUESDAY, December 12.
Present, His Excellency JOSEPH REED, President, the honorable WILLIAM MOORE,
Vice President, Mr. LACEY, Mr. GARDNER, Mr. JAMES READ, Mr. POTTER, and Mr.
PIPER.

Mr. Smith and Mr. Galbraith from the House of Assembly, laid before the Board,
articles of impeachment against Francis Hopkinson, Esquire Judge of the Court of
Admiralty, which being read;

Ordered, That Saturday next at eleven in the forenoon be appointed to proceed
thereupon.

That in the mean time, the Secretary do furnish the said Francis Hopkinson,
Esquire with a copy of this order, and the said articles, that he may give in his
written answer thereto before the said day.

This was made known to Mr. H. the same day.

MONDAY, December 18.
PRESENT as above.

Mr. Hopkinson put in the following answer to the aforesaid articles.

The answer of Francis Hopkinson, Judge of the Court of Admiralty of the
commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to the articles of impeachment exhibited against
him, by the Representatives of the Freemen of the said commonwealth, in General
Assembly met, in their own name, and in the name of all the Freemen of the
commonwealth aforesaid.

TO the first article the said Francis Hopkinson says, that Matthew Clarkson,
Esquire, late Marshal, made a return to him the said Francis Hopkinson, as
Judge of the Court of Admiralty; of certain unrepresented shares in prizes
taken by the privateer called the Holker, soon after which the said Matthew
Clarkson came to him the said Judge, and desired he might be appointed agent
for the said unrepresented shares (the said Francis Hopkinson then being in
intimate friendship with the said Matthew Clarkson) but the said Judge
cautiously declined giving him the said Clarkson the agency requested;
observing to him that the offices of agent and marshal appeared to be
incompatible, and requesting the said Marshal not to urge a compliance with his
desire, as such an appointment would probably bring censure on both.

Nevertheless the said Matthew Clarkson continued to urge the appointment for
two or three days, pleading the poverty of his office, declaring the profits
thereof did not pay his Clerk, and alleging that the Judge ought from motives
of friendship to throw any little advantage in his way that might occur from
the rights of his office.

But the Judge still declined the request from a sense of impropriety and
apprehension of censure. At length the said Marshal told the Judge that finding
him so very nice and difficult, he had been with Mr. Blair M'Clenachan, and
made up matters with him; so that if the Judge would give the agency to Mr.
M'Clenachan, of the shares in question, it would answer his (the Marshal's)
purpose and interest just as well.

The Judge, happy to be rid of the embarrassments he was under on the score of
friendship, gave the said Matthew, then Marshal, reason to believe (but no
absolute promise) that Mr. M'Clenachan should be appointed agent.

Thus matters rested for some days, after which the Judge being at the
Marshal's, and they alone in friendly conference; the Judge informed the
Marshal, that a thought had just occurred which he would in confidence mention,
requesting his opinion thereupon, and declaring he would be bound by it. And
then observed to the Marshal that he was about to throw into Mr. M'Clenachan's
hands, many thousand pounds, by giving him the agency.

That Mr. M'Clenachan had wrought him much trouble in his office, had never
shown civility of any kind, and even neglected the common compliment of his
hat, when they met. That he heard much of Mr. M'Clenachan's politeness and
generosity to other persons and submitted it, whether it would not be as
proper, if Mr. M'Clenachan should make him a present of a suit of clothes, as
well as to other persons who had not been as beneficent to him or done him such
substantial favors, and finally observed that this was a matter of delicacy
and doubt. To which the Marshal replied, that in common justice Mr. M'Clenachan
ought to make some acknowledgment for so considerable a favor -- that there
was no impropriety or indelicacy in the Judge's receiving such a present,
should it be offered; the appointment to an agency not being a judicial act,
but a voluntary favor of the Court; no more conversation of any importance
passed at that time on the subject.

Some days after, the Judge asked the Marshal whether he had ever mentioned any
thing of this affair to Mr. M'Clenachan, who replied that he had not had a
favorable opportunity, and these were the only times in which the matter was
touched upon; excepting that some short time after the Judge thinking on
further consideration that the thing was improper, declared his better
sentiments to the Marshal, and absolutely forbid him proceeding in it. But told
the Marshal he should expect Mr. M'Clenachan would at least ask the Judge for
the agency, a ceremony he never dispensed with -- as he thought the favor
worth asking for, if worth possessing; and declared he would never make the
favors of his office so cheap as to force them on persons who would not
condescend to request them.

Mr. M'Clenachan however neglecting to ask for the agency in question, the
Judge frequently urged this sentiment to the Marshal, which circumstance the
said Marshal has in his deposition falsely and maliciously applied to the suit
of clothes, all ideas of which had long since been totally discarded by the
Judge. After this, above a fortnight passed, in all which time Mr. M'Clenachan
never called upon the Judge, or gave the least intimation that the agency would
be acceptable to him. The matter was also dropped by the Marshal, who seemed
rather to avoid any conversation on the subject. In the interim, other reasons
occurred to the Judge for not appointing Mr. M'Clenochan agent, one of which
was, that he was a principal owner of the Holker, and another, because the
Marshal having had great good fortune in the arrival of a valuable prize (the
Needham) taken by one of his privateers, the Judge thought the agency was no
longer an object with him: And lastly, because the Judge on reflection thought
himself right in refusing to make the Marshal agent, but found it would be
continuing the substance, only altering the form, in appointing Mr. M'Clenachan
agent, knowing that it was to serve the purpose and interest of the Marshal.

For all these reasons, and to relieve himself at once from surrounding
difficulties, he finally gave the agency to Messrs. Meade and Fitzsimons.

It is not to be wondered at that Mr. M'Clenachan did not apply for the agency.
As it appears since, that he was totally ignorant of the whole affair; Mr.
Clarkson having never mentioned the matter to him at all, till after the
appointment of Messrs. Meade and Fitzsimons, having imposed a falsehood on the
Judge to serve his own avaricious purposes.

As to the second charge, the said Francis Hopkinson says, that the ship
Albion was captured in the North seas by two vessels belonging to Robert
Morris, Esquire and others, sent into this port and libelled here. It appeared from
her papers exhibited to the Judge that her cargo was altogether salt, being
eight or nine thousand bushels. A claim was also filed on behalf of her Majesty
the Empress of Russia; as salt was scarce at that time, the Judge hoping to do
a public service without injury to any individual, waited on Mr. Morris, and
observed to him, that as a claim was filed, the decision might be dilatory,
that if the cargo waited till condemnation, it would be distributed in kind,
and so fall into the hands of a few. That he thought salt water-born, and after
so long a voyage might properly be considered as a perishable article, and sold
by vendue before condemnation under the Act of Assembly; and that it would be
very popular and a public good, if this salt should be sold in small lots, so
that the housekeepers might have an opportunity of supplying themselves
reasonably.

To this Mr. Morris after a day's interval consented, and a writ of sale in the
common form was issued, and the salt advertised to be sold. His Excellency the
President seeing the advertisment, took offense and wrote to the Marshal on the
subject. The Judge on seeing this letter waited on the President and declared
his motives.

The President observed that if the law was inconvenient, methods might be
taken to have it amended; but that whilst it was the law, it ought to be held
sacred; and that salt could not be considered as a perishable article within
the meaning of the Act. The Judge, in deference to the President's opinion,
immediately ordered a survey; and on the report of the Surveyors, that the
cargo was not in a perishable condition, countermanded the sale, and the cargo
remained untouched 'till after condemnation.

And the said Francis Hopkinson, by and under protestation, that the said
articles, and the matter in the same contained are not sufficient in law to
maintain the aforesaid impeachment against him; and saving to himself (and
which he prays may be saved to him) both now and at all times hereafter, all
and all manner of benefit and advantage of exception to the insufficiency of
the said articles in point of law: Nevertheless for plea thereto he says, that
he is in no wise guilty of all or any the crimes, offenses or misdemeanors, of
what nature, kind or quality soever, by the said articles of impeachment
charged upon him, in manner and form, as in and by the said articles is
supposed.

Wherefore he submits himself, and (...) justice of his cause, to this
honorable Court, and prays to be discharged of the premises, and to be hence
dismissed and acquitted of all the matters, crimes, misdemeanors and offenses,
in and by the said articles of impeachment charged upon him.

FRANCIS HOPKINSON.

Philadelphia, Dec. 18, 1780.

Messrs. Smith and Campbell from the honorable House of Assembly, having
informed this Board, that a new charge had been this day presented against the
Hon. F. Hopkinson, Esquire which was now under the consideration of the House, and
submitting to the Board, the propriety of deferring the trial on the former
articles.

Resolved, That the hearing be deferred until Thursday next at eleven o'clock
in the Council chamber.

This order was notified to Mr. Hopkinson by the Secretary of Council on the
same day.

WEDNESDAY, December 20.
PRESENT as above.

Mr. Galbraith from the Hon. House of Assembly laid before the Board a further
article of Impeachment against F. Hopkinson, Esquire Judge of the Court of
Admiralty for exactnig and receiving illegal foes; which being read,

Resolved, That the said Francis Hopkinson, Esquire be furnished with a copy
thereof, and that he be desired to give in his answer thereto as soon as
possible.

This was accordingly made known to the defendant on the same day.

THURSDAY, December 21.
PRESENT as before.

A letter from Francis Hopkinson, Esquire Judge of the Court of Admiralty styled,
An Answer to the third article of impeachment exhibited against him by the
House of General Assembly, was read, as follows, viz.

And the said Francis Hopkinson in answer to the third article of impeachment
brought against him, says: --

That it has been the stated custom for the Register of the Court of Admiralty
to draw out and deliver to the Marshal, the bills of costs, in every cause, and
for the Marshal to collect and account with the Judge for the sum total of his
the Judge's fees. That during his being in office he has never seen a bill of
costs in any cause whatever, or ever heard any complaints made of his fees
being illegal or oppressive.

That he has never conversed on the subject with any person whatever, one
instance only excepted, viz. When early in office a cause of a personal nature,
where no vessel was concerned, coming before him, he asked the Register, How
the fees were to be adjusted in such a case, as the Act of Assembly seemed to
refer to vessels of certain tons burden. To which the Register replied, That
for services not referred to in the Act, the custom was to charge the fees
according to the ancient rates, allowing 40 for one for depreciation. To which
system the Judge gave his assent, and acquiescence as reasonable and right:
That the Judge never undertook to determine, what might be services included in
the Act, and what not. That as no complaints were ever made, he thought all was
right and no injury done. That in the case exhibited by the honorable House of
Assembly of the brig Recovery, neither the captors or any person concerned,
ever applied to the Judge to have the bill of costs scrutinized, or suggested
to the Judge, or to any other person to his knowledge, that they thought
themselves aggrieved. That in the case of the said brig Recovery, many courts
were held by adjournment, and arguments had of a complex and difficult nature;
that besides the prosecution of the libel by the captors, a claim was filed by
Robert Morris, Esquire on principles entirely new, and which had nothing to do with
the simple capture and condemnation of the prize; and that in the said cause
also two or more courts were held and depositions taken, etc. on the trial of
two negroes for freedom or slavery, and also on agency appointed, for all which
services, the Register has, as the Judge is informed and believes, charged the
former customary fees and the moderate exchange of 40 for one. That the Judge
can and will produce undoubted testimony that he has never been covetous of
his fees, or made any efforts to enlarge and increase them beyond the bounds of
justice and moderation: On the contrary has always shown a ready disposition
to save expense to parties by shortening the time for condemnation in clear
cases; by remitting his fees in cases of poverty and small property, and in one
instance by suffering eight vessels (of small value) to be included in one
libel; for the avoiding of expense; where he might legally and rightfully have
insisted on eight separate libels, to his great emolument.

And finally that this third article of impeachment is grounded on an opinion
as to the construction of an Act of Assembly; for which the Judge is not
impeachable; and that the Judge has all probable reason to suppose that his
opinion was right; as no person, during the whole of his business in office
has ever made any complaint on this head.

And the said Francis Hopkinson prays that this his answer to the third article
of impeachment, may be annexed to, and incorporated with his answer to the two
former articles, and to have reference to his former pleas of not guilty, and
demurrer to the charges brought against him.

FRANCIS HOPKINSON. Philadelphia, 20th December, 1780.
Ordered, That the same be sent to the committee of the honorable House of
Assembly, appointed to support the said impeachment.

Ordered, That the committee of the honorable House of Assembly, appointed to
prosecute the charges exhibited against the honorable Francis Hopkinson, Esquire
Judge of the Admiralty, and the said Francis Hopkinson be informed that the
Council is now ready to hear the said charge and defense.

The honorable James Smith, Esquire and Robert Galbraith, Esquire the committee of the
honorable House of General Assembly, appointed to prosecute, etc. and the
aforesaid Francis Hopkinson, together with the Attorney General of the state,
attended in the Council Chamger, and the doors of the Council Chamger remained
open.

His Excellency presented to the said committee of Assembly, the answer of the
said Judge, abovementioned, to the last charge exhibited against him.

The said committee informed the Council, that Mr. Matthew Clarkson, a
principal witness in the cause depending, was ill in bed, being afflicted with
the gout, and prayed that an order may be made for taking his deposition in the
presence of the committee and the attorneys of the defendant.

It was moved by James Wilson, Esquire Attorney for the defendant, that the charges
against the said Francis Hopkinson, Esquire be now read; and thereupon Mr. James
Smith, one of the committee read the charges, as follows, viz. Here the
articles were repeated.

(Signed) F. A. MUHLENBERG, Speaker of the General Assembly.
(Attest) SAMUEL STERETT, Clerk of the General Assembly.


The Attorney General read two several replies of the said Francis Hopkinson to
the said charges.

Mr. Ingersoll, counsel for the defendant in his behalf, declared his consent
that the deposition of Matthew Clarkson should be taken agreeable to the motion
by Mr. Smith: and thereupon,

Ordered, That the deposition of Matthew Clarkson, touching the cause now in
hearing before the Council, be taken this afternoon, at 4 o'clock at the house
of the said Clarkson, in the presence of the committee of the House or either
of them, and of the counsel of the said Hopkinson or one of them, and that a
committee of Council do also attend.

Ordered, That the Vice President, Mr. Read and Doctor Gardner be a committee
for the said purpose.

Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, ss.
Matthew Clarkson, Esquire being sworn, and cross-examined, deposes and says,
that on being asked, Whether the conversation concerning the suit of clothes
happened at the same time the reconciliation took place, he answered, that I
think it was not, but very soon after, within the space of forty-eight hours.

Ques. Did you, Mr. Clarkson, apply for the agency of these unrepresented
shares?

Ans. A considerable time before this interview I did apply to the Judge for
the agency aforesaid, and I am confident it was before the interview with the
Judge and Mr. M'Clenachan.

Ques. When this conversation happened, Mr. Clarkson was there any present but
the Judge and yourself?

Ans. No person.

Ques. When this conversation was introduced between the Judge and you
concerning the suit of clothes, did he propose it to you as a friend for your
advice and opinion?

Ans. I did not consider it in that light, but had daily reason to believe it
proceeded from a desire of having the clothes, as the Judge spoke to me almost
every time he met me upon the subject.

Ques. Did the Judge ever ask you your sentiments of the propriety or
impropriety of receiving a suit of clothes?

Ans. I do not recollect that he ever did.

Ques. Did you ever mention to the Judge, that you thought there was no
impropriety in the thing, as it was not a judicial office?

Ans. I do not recollect any such idea.

Ques. Did you ever mention to the Judge, that the appointment of Mr.
M'Clenachan as agent for the unrepresented shares, would serve and answer your
interest and purpose as well as if you were appointed yourself?

Ans. After the Judge had agreed to appoint Mr. M'Clenachan agent, I told him,
it would be relieving me of a great deal of difficulty in settling for those
shares, as Mr. M'Clenachan had already advanced considerable sums to most or
all of them.

Ques. Did the Judge ever desire you not to mention the suit of clothes to Mr.
M'Clenachan, for that he (the Judge) had upon consideration discarded the idea?

Ans. Never, to my recollection; I believe not, because the Judge speaking at
the Coffee-house on the subject referred to in the deposition, seemed to assign
his being neglected as to the suit of clothes, as one reason why he had
appointed other agents.

Ques. Did the Judge ever assign Mr. M'Clenachan not asking the agency, as the
reason why t^^ Judge did not give it to him?

Ans. He never did, unless he may have ^^ntioned it at the time, when he
informed me of his ^^ing made another appointment, and even then, I do^^^t
recollect that he did, as I always, until that mom^^^ believed, that Mr.
M'Clenachan would be appointe^*

Ques. At what time were the fees of (...) Judge, in the cause of the
brigantine Recovery, paid (...) him?

Ans They were settled in an account w^^^ the Judge, which I drew out, and sent
to him, about the 30th of October.

Ques. put by the Attorney General. In the account rendered by you to the
Judge, was it specified that thirteen hundred pounds were the fees you had
received on the condemnation of the brigantine Recovery, in behalf of the said
judge?

Ans. Yes.

Ques. Was the balance of that account paid to the Judge?

Ans. Yes.


Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, ss.
ON the 21st day December Anno Domini, 1780, before me the subscriber,
personally appeared, Matthew Clarkson, Esquire late Marshal of the Admiralty, and
being duly sworn, says, that the within answers to the questions in the within
pages, numbered 1, 2, etc. are true, to the best of his knowledge and
remembrance.

JAMES READ.


On motion of Mr. Wilson, that the deposition of Robt. Morris, Esquire a material
witness in the case now in hearing, and whose state of health rendered his
attendance in court very uncertain may be taken in like manner as is ordered in
the case of Mr. Clarkson, and the committee of the House assenting to the same.
It was agreed to by the Council, and the same committee directed to attend the
taking of the said deposition.

The Court adjourned to ten o'clock tomorrow morning.

FRIDAY, December 22.
PRESENT as above.

The committee of the honorable House of General Assembly, Francis Hopkinson,
Esquire and the Attorney General of the state attended in the Council Chamger, the
doors of the Council Chamger remaining open.

Mr. Smith moved that the deposition and cross-examination of Matthew Clarkson
be now read; and the same was read by Mr. Galbraith.

Mr. Smith moved that testimony be taken as to the first article separately, to
which no objection was made. And thereupon Mr. Gerardus Clarkson, was called
in, sworn, and examined.

William Lewis, Esquire Mr. Thomas Fitzsimons, Andrew Robeson, Esquire Blair
M'Clenachan, Robert Morris, Esqr. and Mr. Wm. Heysham, were called in and sworn
in like manner, and gave an account of what they knew respecting the case now
before the Council. The following questions and answers were put and written
the same day.

QUESTIONS and ANSWERS.

Mr. Robeson (sworn.)

Some time early in last May, the Marshal, Mr. Clarkson, made a return that
there were certain shares for whom there were no agents, of some of the
Holker's crew. Within a few days after I saw the Judge, who told me the Marshal
had applied to him for the agency of these shares. He had told Mr. Clarkson he
thought such appointment would be improper, as he was a principal officer of
the Court, in case of any improper conduct there was no officer to serve
process, that he saw the Judge again who told him that Clarkson had again
applied to him, and urged the request on the score of friendship, that he had
repeated his objections, to which Clarkson replied, that the situation of his
accounts with B. M'C. rendered it very convenient -- that the Judge declined
it. That some time after he Cl: proposed to the Judge to appoint Mr. M'C. that
that perhaps would answer as well. The Judge mentioned he had given him
(Clarkson) great expectations that B. M'C. should be appointed. He afterward
mentioned that he had thought further on the question. That he had met B. M'C.
frequently, that he (B. M'C.) had not mentioned the subject to him, and that
Mr. M'C. had never asked the appointment, that when he met him in the street,
he had taken no notice of him, not paying him the ceremony of the hat, that if
the favor was worth his receiving it was worth asking. That besides it
appeared to him to be improper, that an owner should be appointed, that it
appeared to be the design of the law those agencies should be thrown into other
hands. Those conversations happened within about a fortnight. That about the
20th May Mr. Fitzsimons applied for the necessary papers. Meade and Fitzsimons
being appointed to the agency. That the Judge soon after informed him, that he
had now relieved his mind from the embarrasment respecting the agency by having
given it to unexceptionable persons. That although M'C. was offended.

Mr. Clarkson said,

That he had given to Mr. M'C. expectations of being appointed agent, that he
had taken steps accordingly and had been made to appear little by it, that he
thought it a very extra step.

Nothing passed between M'C. and him respecting C's applications but on B.
M'C's account -- That he had never heard any thing of a suit of clothes
proposed until the charges were exhibited. When he heard what the Marshal
urged, and the Judge's representations in justification of himself.

Question by Attorney. Did the Judge ever mention to you his expectation of a
suit of clothes?

Ans. Not until the evening of the day on which the Judge complained to the
Council against the Marshal. There were frequent conversations concerning the
motives of the Judge, but I never heard any thing of the suit of clothes.

Ques. Did you ever hear any thing concerning a Judge's receiving presents?

Ans. I have heard the case of a Judge in New York.

Ques. Did the Judge approve, or disapprove of this?

Ans. I do not recollect the manner, but he seemed to disapprove it.

Ques. When was it that this conversation passed, before or after this affair?

Ans. I cannot recollect but believe long before; I think the Judge disapproved
of such conduct.

By J. Smith.

Ques. Did the Judge ever inform you that he had warned and forbid the Marshal
of the Court of Admiralty to offer the clothes?

Ans. I never heard of the matter until the time already mentioned, when it was
mentioned by both parties.

Mr. M'Clenachan (sworn.)

In the beginning of the privateering my agency was verbal, but after some
inconveniency arising, written ones were taken -- some were omitted, it was
referred to the Judge. -- Some time after the Marshal told me he thought the
Judge would appoint me, and I advanced money to the people to keep them quiet
-- he was however informed that Meade and Fitzsimons were appointed, that it
made no difference to him, he therefore made up his accounts and sent them the
balance -- That as to the suit of clothes he had never at that time heard of
any thing of the kind from any one.

Question by J. W. You have done a great deal of business with the Judge, did
he ever intimate to you that he expected a present from you?

Ans. No.

Question by Mr. Ingersol to Mr. G. Clarkson.

Whether you have ever heard the late Marshal say, "it would be a particular
gratification to him, or do his heart good, if Mr. Hopkinson were discharged
from his office?"

Objected to -- argued -- and put.

Ans. I have not the least idea of it. -- I have said it myself; but never
heard an expression of the kind from my brother.

Attorney for defendant, rests the testimony on the first charge, so far as
testimony goes, particularly to this point, reserving some testimony which goes
to the whole of the charges to be given at the close of the trial.

Mr. Smith then read the second charge, and the Attorney General read the
allegation of defendant and his plea of non cul.

Mr. Galbraith read the warrant for selling the cargo of the ship consisting of
salt, No. 9, page 9.

Obj. No return thereof made to the Judge by the Marshal of the Admiralty.

J. D. Sergeant adduced.

Mr. Smith opened the testimony -- that the evidence is to prove, that there
had been no writ of appraisement, or of view previous to the writ of sale.

The writ for inspection dated 11th August, and return dated the 17th, were
read -- the publication for sale previously being admitted as stated in the
answer to the charge by the Judge. -- The witness therefore is unnecessary.

Mr. Wilson read the writ of countermand dated the 11th August forbidding the
sale, and stating the cause of forbidding.

Robert Morris, Esquire (sworn.)

I was part owner of the Genesis Washington, which with took the prize in question.

It was thought necessary to put in a claim on the part of the Empress of
Russia which had the ap: of delay, was informed that it was a sentiment which
had escaped the Judge, that the cargo might be sold as being perishable in its
own nature -- that salt was exceedingly wanted and would be of public utility
to sell it as soon as possible -- and he called on me and mentioned. One of the
owners of the W. being in the city consented to the sale, and being of opinion
with the Judge respecting it, requested J. W. Esqr. to apply for the warrant of
sale, which was at his request, granted as has been read; after this the Judge
called at my house, and told me the proceedings was not approved by the
President. That he thought improper, and asked if the owners were materially
affected by the delay. I replied, that if the proceedings were judged improper,
I begged that the sale might be stopped, and the proceedings had as in the
usual form. That it had been considered by merchants that sugar and salt
water-born were in their nature perishable.

Question by Mr. W. Have yo^ been appointed by the Judge to be agent in any
case?;

Ans. I was in the case of this ship Albion because the owners were not here,
and the vessel belonged to Virginia (for a variety of reasons not material.)

Ques. Did the Judge ever demand or receive from you any present in this or any
case of this kind?

Ans. No; never!

The letter from his excellency to the Marshal dated August 9, 1780, and the
letter from the Attorney to the Marshal containing his advice and opinion of
the warrant for sale, were read.

Here it was remarked by Mr. Wilson, That this letter was never communicated to
the Judge until the charge was laid before the House.

Question to Mr. Morris by Mr. Willson.

Is there not a loss on the cargoes of salt?

Ans. There was a deficiency of about 130 bushels below what the cocket
mentions.

By the Attorney General. Was not the price of salt lower at the time of
advertisement than later in the fall?

Ans. Not in the present case.

Ques. Is it not generally so?

Ans. It is when the trade is open.

Question by attorney for plaintiff. Was salt much wanted at that time?

Ans. It was much wanted.

Ques. to Mr. Robeson. At what time was the sale of the Albion's cargo?

Ans. It was not sold, it was divided about the 5th of September.

Adjourned to 4 o'clock, afternoon.

Same day, 4 o'clock, P. M.
The Council met; present as in the forenoon.

Mr. Smith then read the third charge; Mr. Attorney General read the reply of
the said Francis Hopkinson to the said charge.

Mr. Smith read the bill of costs in the case of the brig Recovery, signed by
Mr. Clarkson, Judge's fee L. 1300.

The deposition of Matthew Clarkson, late Marshal, was read by Mr. Galbraith.

Register of the brigantine Recovery, to show her tonnage. 40 tons or
thereabouts.

Ques. Was this register among the papers in your office?

Ans. Yes.

Ques. Did the Judge see this register?

Ans. As it was handed to him, no doubt he saw it.

Ques. Are there any other papers which show the vessel's tonnage in your
office?

Ans. Yes, there are.

Mr. Smith admitted that the tonnage of the brigantine is 80 tons.

Attorney for the defendant observed that the tonnage of the brig was not
material in this defense, but that as a British register had been brought to
show that she was a small trifling vessel, it became a duty to remove the
impressions made by it; -- That the case of the brig was unprovided for by the
law which refers to the tonnage and rests on the former law, and will be
defended on that ground.

Answered by Mr. Smith. -- Who read the 26th article of the Constitution.

Mr. Robeson was adduced to prove the former custom of fees in like cases.

Mr. Smith objects to the evidence as being improper to produce proof of former
customs in opposition to a law.

Mr. Ingersoll. The witness is produced to show upon what principles the bill
was made out; and the question of the propriety or legality of those principles
is to be argued, and to be judged of by the President and Council.

Mr. Wilson read the 26th section of the Constitution, and claimed moderate and
adequate fees. (See page 60.)

Mr. Smith replied, but his objections were overruled as being out of time.

Mr. Robeson, some short time after the Act of Assembly now read, was passed,
Mr. Hopkinson, the Judge, mentioned, that there were many cases not mentioned
in the Act and desired to know how the fees ought to be made out. I told him
that in such cases, I supposed, they must be made out according to the old Act
and usage, and desired to know whether it would be reasonable to allow for
extra services, and that it would not be objected to.

That in case of parties not attending at the day, or by repeated delays, that
in such case the former sees might lawfully be charged.

In the present case of the brig Recovery, there was a claim put in, that there
were adjournments in this case, that the determination of the case of the
negroes was not determined 'till within a few days -- That the fees were made
out with a view to the final decision of the case, which would have made but
little alteration whether they should be condemned or acquitted.

Ques. Were the charges for appointing of agents for unrepresented shares,
charged in the accounts of the vessels?

Ans. It ought not to be; but whether it was ascertained in the bill delivered
to Mr. Clarkson or not, I cannot ascertain.

Ques. I find charged, sees for holding of court, one pound four shillings. Is
it customary to charge for holding a court?

Ans. Mr. Ross always charged for holding a court, twenty shillings, and four
shillings for --

Ques. Whenever the party appeared before the court, is it customary, to charge
for holding a court?

Ans. Yes -- and he assigned the reason.

Ques. Did you ever communicate to the Judge the estimate of the fees?

Ans. Yes.

Ques. You say the charge for deciding the cause of the negroes, was not due
when you made out the account?

Ans. It was not then due.

Ques. You say then, that those are the fees customarily charged?

Ans. Yes, it is according to the practice by Mr. Ross and Mr. Shippen, as far
back as I know any thing of it.

Ques. Was this conversation after passing the wheat bill?

Ans. It was.

The witness acknowledges his neglect in not remarking at the bottom of the
account, the sum to be charged to the unrepresented shares.

Ques. In what did this case differ from the usual or common cases?

Ans. There was a third vessel in sight which filed a claim, but was not able
to support their claim not having a commission. The part of the charges arising
from this claim, was noted in the account to be paid by them. Here the witness
offered a sketch of a bill of costs upon the extent of the fees due in the case
which exceeded the bill delivered, by several hundred pounds.

Ques. Have you ever had any particular directions from the Judge as to the
manner of making out the charges?

Ans. He directed in general, that in such cases the bill should be made out
upon the former usage.

Ques. Respecting the claims of a negro for his freedom?

Ans. The claims of negroes for their freedom are never charged.

Ques. You have mentioned, that bills of expenses are frequently made out
before they really become due, has those fees ever been demanded before the
service was performed?

Ans. I don't know what may be meant by demanded; I understand, that the
Marshal pays the fees to the Judge as the Judge's necessity may require, or as
the Marshal may be in cash.

Ques. Do you show the bills of cost to the Judge before you deliver them?

Ans. No.

Ques. In cases where bills are made out before the services are done, is it
done by the request of the parties or not?

Ans. It is always done at the request of the parties, and for the expedition
of their business.

Ques. What was the fee under the former Act for holding a court?

Ans. There are three articles only taken notice of, -- etc.

Mr. Ross frequently looked at the bills, and where a charge for holding a
court was omitted, he directed me to make it.

Ques. by Mr. Wilson. Do you recollect any instance where eight small vessels
were contained in one libel?

Ans. Yes, in the case of Kemp, in which Mr. Bankson was Attorney, and either
at his request or the --

Ques. You have been intimately acquainted with the Judge. Have you ever
observed him to be disposed to exact with severity the fees to the utmost?

Ans. I never observed any thing of this sort. The question respecting the mode
of charging the fees --

Ques. Do you know of any instance of a stipulation being demanded, where the
party was too poor to pay?

Ans. By several cases to show that in the case of persons being too poor to
pay, the fees were not demanded, but where claims have been made by seamen --

Ques. Did you ever know of any instance of the Judge's hinting to any person
that he expected a present?

Ans. I know nothing of the kind, or of any presents that were made him, except
a small chicken turtle sent him by some captain, whether by a claimant in the
court or not, I cannot tell, and of the wine which has been talked of; I
recollect that a captain who had a cause depending, sending a cheese to the
Judge, which he refused to accept and sent it back.

Mr. Fitzsimons, sworn.
In June last Mr. Hopkinson called at our counting house, and offered the house
of Meade and Fitzsimons the agency of the unrepresented shares, which they
agreed to accept and entered on the business. Afterward applied to the Marshal
for the moneys due them, and had a list amounting to 26 on one vessel, and 23
on another. On applying to the Marshal he seemed dissatisfied, said the agency
had been disposed of or promised, and measurs taken in consequence of that
promise and money paid thereupon. Upon receiving this answer I informed the
Judge, he said there had been some such promise, but that Mr. M'Clenachan never
had applied regularly for an appointment, and on further consideration he did
not think it proper to appoint one who was so largely concerned in privateers,
that witness offered to resign the agency, if the Judge, Marshal etc. could
agree among themselves. The Judge declined this proposition, that Mr. M'C. was
improper and could not have it, that if they decline some other persons must
have it, they might therefore as well keep it. We wrote a letter to the
Marshal, informing him that the appointment was unsolicited, but as it was
given they would wish to proceed in the business. The Marshal still objected --
many conversations ensued on the subject.

They afterward met at the Judge's house on the business, when a compromise
was agreed to, which was, that all the moneys M'C. could show he had paid on
the unrepresented shares should be paid to him, and the balances to be paid to
Messrs. M. and Fitzsimons.

Judge never intimated to him that he expected any present either directly or
indirectly.

Nothing passed in the conversations from which the witness knew that any
gratuity was expected by the Judge for appointing M'Clenachan.

Capt. William Heysham, Sworn, being called by the committee.
Ques. Do you know the brig Recovery?

Ans. I do.

Ques. What Is her tonnage?

Ans. About seventy-five or eighty tons, not exceeding ninety.

Here he explained himself by remarking the different tonnage, the merchant's
tonnage being less than the carpenter's tonnage, of carpenter's tonnage about
eighty or ninety tons.

Ques. You're clear she does not exceed 100 tons?

Ans. Yes in my judgment.

Mr. Lewis called up, and asked.

Ques. What do you know of the Judge (Hopkinson) admitting eight vessels in one
libel?

Ans. Mr. Hopkinson applied to me to know what was my opinion of admitting
eight small vessels in one libel, expressing an earnest desire that it might be
done to save charges, if it was consistent with law to do it. I knew of but one
instance in point, and in that the Judge (Mr. Ross) ordered separate libels to
be filed, but that I knew of no rule of law, in the case, and that therefore I
thought it might be admitted. And I think it my duty to observe that Mr.
Hopkinson had not insisted on the fees, where the claimants were too poor to
pay them.

The Court adjourned 'till ten o'clock tomorrow morning.

SATURDAY, December 23.
PRESENT as before.

The honorable committee of the General Assembly, honorable Francis Hopkinson,
Esquire the Attorney General of the state, and the Attorneys for the defendant
attended in the Council Chamger.

Mr. Smith adduced cases to support the charges.

Mr. Wilson replied.

At the request of the honorable committee of the Assembly the court was
adjourned till three o'clock in the afternoon.

Same day in the afternoon, 3 o'clock.
Present his excellency the President, honorable the Vice President, General
Lacey, Mr. Read, General Potter, Colonel Piper and Doctor Gardner.

Mr. Smith, one of the honorable committee of the General Assembly, F.
Hopkinson, Esquire the Attorney of the state, and the Attorneys for the defendant
attended in the Council Chamger.

The Attorney General of the state opened the argument, in behalf of the state.

Mr. Ingersoll and Mr. Wilson, Attorneys for the defendant -- replied.

Mr. Smith on behalf of the state replied to the Attorneys on the part of the
defendant.

The Attorney of the state closed the argument.

The court adjourned till next Tuesday morning at ten o'clock.

TUESDAY, December 26.
PRESENT his exellency the President, the honorable the Vice President, Mr.
Lacey, Mr. Potter, Mr. Piper and Mr. Read.

The Council having met agreeable to adjournment. Mr. Smith of the committee of
the General Assembly attending, and Francis Hopkinson, Esquire also attending, the
President read the following DECREE.

IT is not usual to enter into the reasons of the judgment upon occasions of
this kind, but the importance of the present prosecution makes it necessary.

In the first place it is observable, that the commission of the Judge is
during good behavior; crimes only are causes of removal -- the cause is of
great importance as it respects the officer, and as it comes from the
Representatives of the people.

It certainly is of the greatest consequence, that the streams of justice be
kept pure -- We act in the double capacity of Judges and Jury -- It therefore
became our duty, and we have examined minutely into the evidence -- It is
immaterial from what motives the prosecution has originated, any farther than
to determine how far it may affect the credibility of the witnesses -- perhaps
few public prosecutions have taken their rise from pure regard to the public
good, nor is it of any consequence with what views the Assembly forwarded the
impeachment -- Whether it is supported, is the only object of our enquiry --
The cause has been ably argued on both sides. --

The President then read the first article.

The late Marshal, Mr. Clarkson, swears, that in a conversation he had with Mr.
Hopkinson, (testimony of Mr. Clarkson read) the stress of the prosecution must
depend on this testimony of Mr. Clarkson, he himself does not state the suit of
clothes as a condition, or sine qua non, without which Mr. M'Clenachan was not
to have the agency; several circumstances seem to confirm what the Judge says,
that he mentioned this matter as a thought that had occurred to him, and by way
of taking the opinion of his friend upon it -- The Judge and Mr. Clarkson were
at that time intimate friends -- he took no notice of it, until after the Judge
had complained against him. He was exceedingly disgusted at the agency not
being given to Mr. M'Clenachan -- it seems strange if he thought this had been
made a condition that he made no mention of it in his complaints. Either the
Marshal approved the prosecution or he did not -- if he did not, why not say
so. If he did, why not mention it to Mr. M'Clenachan, if he thought it a
condition not countermanded -- the story of want of opportunity could not have
been the reason, for he mentioned the agency -- it would have required but a
few words more to have mentioned the condition had there been one.

In the next place, though Mr. M'Clenachan does not recollect any countermand,
yet as the Judge gave the agency to Messrs. Meade and Fitzsimons, not only
without receiving any compliment, but as no hint or suggestion was made that
any such was expected, this looks like confirmatory of the representation made
by the Judge. Mr. Clarkson in one part of his testimony is very positive, in
another very cautious, so far as respects the mention of the suit of clothes,
he is entirely clear -- as to any explanatory circumstances he does not
remember -- He is asked, did the Judge request your opinion and advice upon the
point? he does not recollect -- If he is cautious in determining the complexion
of the business, surely we ought to be in founding our opinion. -- Indeed we
should have had very little difficulty had it not been for the testimony of Mr.
Lewis -- but the conversation between him and the Judge happened a good while
ago -- a few words make a great difference -- a gentleman cannot be supposed to
recollect with an entire exactness -- we cannot but consider Mr. Lewis as a
secondary witness, and therefore cannot overrule the presumption arising in
favor of the Judge upon Mr. Clarkson's testimony from the circumstances that
have been mentioned -- but here another question arises, quo animo? with what
mind was this done -- for a great deal depends upon the intent -- every killing
is not murder -- on a dispassionate consideration of the character of the
Judge, his general conduct in office, and all the circumstances we do not think
there is any proof of corruption -- we could have left this charge without any
further animadversion had it not been for some doctrines advanced by the
counsel for the Judge, which we think proper to make some observations upon. --
In an instant State it is of the highest importance, as we said before, that
the streams of justice should be kept pure, and that the people should have a
confidence in the integrity of the Judges. -- Not only the taking a bribe, but
even soliciting it, though not falling perhaps strictly within the definition of
bribery would draw down the vengeance of the State -- Whether for a Judicial
officer or one that did not concern the administration of justice, whether by a
Judge sitting on the seat of Justice or this Council in their capacity as such;
the office of a Vendue-Master is not a judicial office, but we should esteem it
criminal for any member of this Council to accept a compensation for his vote
to an appointment in that office. -- The man who can best serve the public is
the proper object of choice, it is enough that the office is an office of
trust, whether judicial or not makes no difference -- and we think the
observation of the Attorney General that the appointment of an agent is done by
the Judge, as such, is well founded, and if we had been satisfied of the fact,
that the Judge had either received or solicited a compensation in this
consideration we should have been at no loss to have declared him guilty -- and
we take this opportunity to mention that we conceive it indelicate for a Judge
to accept presents from persons who frequently have business before him, though
no cause be then depending, such as owners of privateers. -- In short the
present should appear to be made to the MAN, and not to the OFFICER.

The President then read the second article.

The Judge acknowledges that he did make a mistake in the issuing the writ, and
upon being informed of the error rectified it -- to make a Judge answerable for
the veracity of every assertion contained in the forms of process would be very
unreasonable -- I will not say how far a Judge may be answerable in a criminal
prosecution for giving a judgment contrary to a plain law; but then it must
appear that he acted wilfully wrong, and not from honest, though ill judged
designs -- but here was a point of some doubt. -- The Judge supposed, and there
was some color for the idea that the law was merely directory; that he was to
have recourse to the intervention of a survey only in case of uncertainty, and
to inform his conscience -- but that where he was at no loss for the very
nature of the article to determine it perishable, of course, that the step was
unnecessary. -- Salt is thus considered sometimes. -- If for instance,
insurance is made on it at sea, it is treated as a perishable article. -- If a
mere error of judgment was to be turned into a subject for criminal
prosecution, we must, as was observed by one of the learned counsel for the
Judge, get infallible Judges. We are therefore at no loss to pronounce an
acquittal upon this article, more especially as the mistake was rectified as
soon as discovered.

The President then read the third article.

This charge has been considered by many to be more likely to endanger the
Judge, and to occasion a sentence to his disadvantage, than the others.

The Judge answers that he took fees according to the former tables, and the
practice established at his coming into office. Now, although the degree of
punishment ought not to make any difference, nor enter into consideration where
the matter is plainly proved, yet more caution becomes necessary in proportion
to the consequences of conviction -- in this case the penalty by the
Constitution is very great. 26th section of the Constitution of the state of
Pennsylvania, established in 1776.

Court of Sessions, Common Pleas and Orphans' Courts shall be held quarterly in
each city and county; and the Legislature shall have power to establish all
such other courts as they may judge for the good of the inhabitants of the
State. All courts shall be open, and justice shall be impartially administered
without corruption, or unnecessary delay: All their officers shall be paid an
adequate but moderate compensation for their services: And if any officer shall
take greater or other fees than the laws allow him, either directly or
indirectly, it shall ever after disqualify him from holding any office in this
State.




There are in almost all offices compensatory as well as specific fees. -- In
fee laws, laws made for the regulating the fees of officers, it is very
difficult to enumerate all the services. In such cases compensatory fees must
be allowed, or the necessary business will not be done. There is a great
difference between exacting more than the specific fees, and asking fees for
services where nothing is provided. -- But it is said that the law on which
this charge is founded, intended to have excluded all other fees except the
wheat. But every part of this law was not attended to. In a preceding paragraph
it is said, that the fees of the said officers shall be estimated and paid
according to the price of good merchantable wheat in the manner following, that
is to say, the said fees as they were regulated by law or practice under the
late government of Pennsylvania before the first day of July one thousand seven
hundred and seventy-six, shall from and after the publication of this Act be
satisfied in good merchantable wheat; accounting and allowing that a bushel of
such wheat, weighing at least sixty pounds, sold formerly in times of war and
difficulty for ten Shillings. The fifth paragraph mentions that this former one
shall extend to the Judge, Register and Marshal of the Court of Admiralty.

It appears therefore in this very law, the principle of making a difference
between specific and compensatory fees was adopted -- formerly by an Act of
Parliament, the Judges of the court of Admiralty in the then province of
Pennsylvania, were allowed L. 15 sterling for every vessel above 100 tons, and
L 10 for every vessel below that burden -- as the same number of tons is
mentioned in this Act of Assembly, as applied to the twenty-five bushels of
wheat and the forty, it seems probable that this was intended in lieu of those
sums. On this construction the law is consistent and complete, and the law and
practice agree, and it must appear that the L 1300 taken by the Judge exceeds
what he was entitled to by this mode of computation -- here were three causes;
the first, libel to decide prize or no prize -- that is the object of the law
-- then the claim by Mr. Morris -- then the negroes; these are three as
distinct causes as if they related to different vessels. At this rate the fees
would have amounted to L 1320 -- but suppose the matter had not stood entirely
on this ground, and that it had appeared the L 1300 was a sum beyond what the
Judge was entitled to, still the charge is not, that he received too much, but
that he exacted too much. We do not say, that the Judge ought not to take care
of his officers -- But an inadvertence of this kind would not be a ground for
rendering a man infamous for life. On looking into the authorities we found
they all run in this style -- that the Judges exacted -- that business was kept
back and delays affected until the money was paid -- suppose the court wrong,
they ought not to be immediately prosecuted in a criminal way, but complaint
should be made, and if they will not rectify the mistake, then it will be
proper to pursue in a course of justice -- at the same time we take this
opportunity to say, that the fees of the court of Admiralty have increased
lately extremely, not in the time of the present Judge; indeed, he took things
as he found them; as to the agency I do not conceive it to be the spirit and
meaning of the act of Assembly, that one should be appointed to every vessel
where there are unrepresented shares -- the holding of courts for ministerial
purposes is wrong also -- this practice has taken rise within four or five
years -- it is distressing to trade -- all the ministerial business should be
done at the holding of some court, or at chambers -- the other mode is a
strained construction of the meaning of holding a court -- it is a matter that
I am desired to mention, that the Judge direct the Register to prepare a book
in which he is to enter all the items of the bills of costs -- that people may
always know whether they pay unreasonably -- the Judge it seems trusted to the
Register, and the bill must have been made out in the lump, as it agrees
exactly with no rule. When this is done, if on complaint made, errors are not
rectified, there will be a proper ground for criminal prosecution. UPON THE
WHOLE, WE ARE UNANIMOUSLY OF OPINION THAT THE JUDGE OUGHT TO BE ACQUITTED UPON
ALL THE THREE CHARGES.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE IMPEACHMENT, TRIAL, AND ACQUITTAL OF JOHN NICHOLSON,
ESQUIRE, COMPTROLLER GENERAL OF THE STATE OF PENNSYLVANIA.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY FRANCIS BAILEY, AT YORICK'S HEAD, No. 116,
HIGH STREET. M,DCC,XCIV.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE IMPEACHMENT, TRIAL, AND ACQUITTAL etc.
On Tuesday the 4th day of December, in the year of our Lord, 1792, and
sixteenth of the Independence of the United States, the Representatives of the
Freemen of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania, met at the State-house in
Philadelphia, and proceeded to business.
ON the 7th they appointed John Swanwick, Thomas Forest, John Chapman, John
Hannum, Samuel Boyd, John Stewart, James Power, Nicholas Lutz, Jacob Eyerly,
jun. George Woods, jun. John White, Abraham Hendricks, David Bradford, Albert
Gallatin, James Johnston, Cadwallader Evans, Simon Spalding, Stacy Potts,
Thomas Morton and William West, Esqrs. a committee to devise ways and means for
the supplies of the current year.

On the next day John Canan of Huntingdon county was added to the same
committee.

On the 4th of January following, a letter was received from the
State-Treasurer, from which the following is an extract.

"FULLY convinced in my own mind, indeed I may say from my positive knowledge,
that it never was the intention of the Legislature to embrace within the
redemption the so called New-Loan certificates, which in fact never were a
state debt.

"I was much surprised (when after observing among the list of purchasers the
name of John Nicholson for 65,000 dols. all paid for in redeemable debt without
any money) to see in the hands of Mr. Morris's Clerk, warrants amounting in the
whole to 63,093 35/100 dols. exclusive of an order on me for 4621 60/100 dols.
due Mr. Nicholson for Dollar-money redeemed, which he presented to me as
payment for stock in lieu of money.

"The warrants were properly signed and countersigned, I could not refuse
payment; I asked him if he knew how they originated, he said he did not, but
that Mr. Morris had borrowed them that morning from Mr. Nicholson. Having
previously heard that one or more hawkers employed by, and even the
Comptroller General himself were running about town purchasing up New-Loans,
and that they were so eager in the pursuit that they had raised the market
price on themselves from 20 to 216, I got alarmed.

"I sent a confidential Clerk to the office of the Commissioner of Loans, he
returned and told me, that he saw Mr. Nicholson's name in the subscription
book, but no sum annexed to it. The next morning I went down to Mr. Smith and
asked him if Mr. Nicholson or any body else had subscribed New-Loans, he
answered they had, put his hand in a drawer beside him, and pulled out a bundle
of New-Loans and said, the Comptroller General subscribed these and certified
them to be genuine and assumable state debt and when he did, he left the
subscription blank, and said, he had more to bring.

"I waited on his Excellency the Governor, the Secretary of the commonwealth,
and the Register-General, and an immediate stop was put to this, in my
conception, unwarrantable career of speculation, a few more warrants of less
moment than the Comptroller's having been previously paid.

"The honorable Legislature will pardon me for being thus lengthy, when I
declare, that viewing the subject as I do, it is not only a direct violation of
law, but a glaring imposition on the public.

"I have made several calculations; the most moderate and exact of which is a
nett profit to the speculator of near 25 per cent. If the original entries of
those transactions are had recourse to in the offices of accounts, they will
show that my calculations are not exaggerated.

"Be pleased Sir to present to the honorable House enclosure B. being a
memorial soliciting to be re-appointed Treasurer for the ensuing year.

"I have, etc. CHRISTIAN FEBIGER."
Treasury office, January 1, 1793.
Hon. GERARDUS WYNKOOP, Speaker of the House of Representatives.

On the motion of Mr. Gallatin, seconded by Mr. Evans, the above letter was
referred to the committee on ways and means to report thereon.

On the 8th the following letters from Mr. Nicholson, were presented to the
Speakers of both Houses, read, and ordered to lie for consideration.

"SIR,
"I UNDERSTAND a communication from Christian Febiger, Esquire Treasurer, was
yesterday read in the Legislature, containing reflections against me; knowing
my own conduct, I feel myself perfectly secure from injury by any assault he
may make, and I defy and despise the attempts, he or any other enemy I have,
may make against me.

"But without regarding the character of the man, it is proper that I should
take some notice thereof, I do not wish that the motives of malice which
actuate him, may operate to relax from the strictest scrutiny into my conduct.
I have this morning applied for and just now obtained from the assistant clerk
of the House of Representatives, a copy of the representation alluded to, and
was referred to the Printer, where I saw the statement therein referred to.

"On examination I find nothing therein but what has already been stated in
the joint report of the Register-General and myself on the revenues to the
Governor, and which has been heretofore laid before you, except the positive
opinion (for they merit not the name of reasons) of Mr. Febiger, and some
deductions therefrom which are worthy of himself.

"The facts being stated and before the Legislature, I should suppose they
needed not the aid of Mr. Febiger's opinion on the subject: If any members of
the present House regret the parting with the stock in the manner which was
done, or the mode of the redemption of the debt, whether that, on which an
interest had been payable half yearly, the unfunded depreciation debt, or the
New-Loan debt (the two latter of which were only redeemable through the
intervention of the Loan of the United States). They will find the causes
thereof in the Redemption Act of last year; and while they lament the adoption
of such a system, when a more advantageous one was within their reach, they
have also to be thankful to Congress that it was no worse, for had the
Legislature of the United States thought proper to have adopted the system of
loaning State debts in the extent and manner in which it was first brought
before Congress, this law would also have obligated the state to have
immediately paid for all the old Bills of Credit emitted by the state to carry
on the war, and which might have been subscribed to the Loan of the Union.

"I foresaw, the effects that bill if passed, would have when it was before the
Legislature, and did not fail, to members of both Houses, to deprecate the
consequences of enacting it, both as it regarded the parting with stock and the
redemption of the debt, and also mentioned its operation with respect to the
several classes of debt aforesaid.

"When it became a law, I availed myself of the advantage it presented as well
as others, the proceedings are regular, the invitation for stock was public,
all might apply, and the proposals by Mr. Febiger, either by himself or his
"confidential Clerk" were as welcome as any other. With respect to the debt
redeemed and for whom, it also stands on record, and has been already laid
before you, and in my purchases or application for redemption, I never used the
name of another, not even a "confidential Clerk," had I thought it wrong I
should not have done it, and it generally argues a conviction of impropriety to
use the cover of another name, but this will be remembered that my purchases
were not with the public money.

"As to the rates at which I purchased, they were such as afforded a profit, or
I would not have made them, although as he observes, and I suppose found, a
competition of prices, soon brought up their value in the market, but it is
none of his business what these profits were.

"There are I suppose mistakes in the copy given me, where it reads, 365,000;
863,093 55/100 and 84,621 60/100 arising from his mode of prefixing his
figures, the first 8 in the three cases I presume were not originally so
designed, taking this to be the case, or otherwise I cannot see what he has to
do with the business; whether payment of my warrant was made to Mr. Morris,
myself, or any other person, to whom I chose to give an order, nor do I see why
he should trouble the Legislature with the story of my giving Mr. Morris an
order for the principal and interest of the Dollar-money also redeemable.

"The Dollar-money however was not mine, it belonged to a person who I believe
thought himself degraded in finding Mr. Febiger appointed to succeed him in an
office he resigned and had once filled.

"From the style of his letter one would think he had the merit, if there were
any merit in it, of effecting every thing as well in the department of the
Governor, as in that of the Register-General and Secretary of the commonwealth,
and that he had put a stop to it; the fact is the limited period put a stop to
further subscriptions, but those few subscribed, assigned and not paid, will
yet be done, the parties are legally entitled thereto, but as a doubt arose
with the Governor, I paid Judge Addison the cash for the amount of his second
subscription for which he was waiting that he might not he delayed as he was
from a remote part of the State; the others were of this city and they have not
since been brought forward till every objection be removed, but then the
parties claim payment as their legal right. There remains but one thing more in
Mr. Febiger's letter to notice, and that is the information from Mr. Smith's
office by his confidential Clerk and himself. They are both mistaken or worse,
I never delayed an account at that office for subscription till more should be
added. The first I took with the certificates, I made two copies of, to
expedite my business, I left one of them with the Loan-officer, the other I got
him to certify immediately, and it was transferred before I left the office,
the next was a few days after and contained what I had purchased in the
interim, I sent them down by a messenger, and by him also they were brought
back without remaining for any additional certificates to be added.

"On enquiry of Mr. Smith I find (as I expected) that Mr. Febiger got no such
information from him.

I have, etc. JOHN NICHOLSON."
January 5, 1793.
The hon. SAMUEL POWELL, Esquire Speaker of the Senate of Penna.

"SIR,
"AS the accounts of Christian Febiger, Esquire as Treasurer has been laid before
you with his late representation and they also come under my consideration, it
may be proper to remark thereon, that the payments of interest of the New-Loan
debt in bills of credit as appears in said accounts is in violation of the Act
of the Legislature of the 7th April, 1791, which excepted those bills from
re-issue or payment, and I was astonished on the exchange of the New-Loan
certificates lately for Joseph Pennel, Esquire to be informed by him that he had
just been paid in those bills and was unable to get any other, and wanted to
know what he could do to get the money, I observe it is only to some persons
this interest has been so paid therein.

"In his letter and in his accounts, he expresses a desire that the Legislature
would direct what is to be done with the old continental money and equivalents
in his hands, they have already directed them to lie in the Treasury, which in
my opinion is the best thing that could yet be done with them. But has he
observed these directions? no; if you look at his accounts No. 13, you will
find that he has been disposing thereof of his own authority, and in a former
account he has disposed of far the greater part of the whole continental money
on like authority, and he had even the confidence to declare to me that he
knew, at the time he did it that it was not authorized by the Legislature. The
Assembly will please to observe that at the same time an offer was made the
Legislature of ten per cent. advance upon what they would get if they chose to
loan it to the United States. As I will never pass these sums to his credit in
violation of law and as in my estimation, they will be of more value than he
ever will be able to pay, I think it necessary also to inform the Legislature
that he has neglected to give and record the surety required of him in the
manner directed by law. The House need not be informed that his former sureties
will not be bound for him under another appointment. There is one thing more
which has in some measure delayed the settlement of his accounts,
notwithstanding the Clerk of the late Treasurer (who was at first employed by
him, and so cruelly treated afterward) must have informed him as well of the
business generally, as that receipts had always been taken for the interest
paid or allowed on the redemption of the dollar-money, yet he neglected to do
it, or if he did, to exhibit them as vouchers for the money so paid, this was
the more necessary as by an interpretation of law acted on, a great difference
was made in the allowance between that emission coming in by taxes and by other
means; it is true he has at last adopted that measure but is was toward the
close of the time.

I have the honor to be with great respect, Sir, your most obt. servant, JOHN
NICHOLSON."
January 7th, 1793.
The honorable the Speaker of the Senate of Pennsylvania.

The following letters were written on this subject soon after --

"SIR,
"I HAVE read with attention the letter of the Secretary of the Treasury of the
U. S. dated 21 December, 1791, and the two letters of the Comptroller General
dated 24th December, 1791, and 29th of February, 1792, relative to the
construction of the 18th section of the Act of Congress making provision for
the debt of the U. S. It appears to me that the word "those" in the enacting
part of the clause can only apply to the certificates issued by the State, but
as that never could be the meaning of the Act of Congress, I agree that the
construction given by the Secretary is the only rational one. Be that as it
may, it is very certain that neither the New-Loan certificates of Pennsylvania,
remaining in circulation, nor the Continental certificates in exchange for
which these New-Loans had been issued, have been surrendered to the U. S. -- It
is not less certain that the payment of interest, whether to the state or to
individuals has not been suspended, the present suspension to the state is but
temporary, and arises merely from the extension of the former law of Congress
by their Act of last May, and will of course cease on the first of March next,
(if the former objections are not revived) and of course it must have appeared
to the satisfaction of the Secretary of the Treasury that all the New-Loan
certificates have been re-exchanged or redeemed. To have considered them as
such is I suppose, what the Comptroller means by the "equitable decision" of
the Secretary. It is however of importance to us to know what were the real
grounds of that decision, as it is possible that the subscription made lately
in New-Loan certificates to the loan of the U. S. may affect it materially. For
if the Secretary considered the whole of the New-Loan certificates as actually
re-exchanged or redeemed, it must have been, because the state law which
entitled the holders to such an exchange might been supposed to have been
altogether carried into effect, since not a single of those certificates had
been offered for subscription to the loan of the U. S. But as some have been
offered since the extension of the loan took place, that circumstance may
induce him to alter his opinion, and indeed I cannot well understand how he may
suppose himself justifiable in looking upon the whole amount as being actually
re-exchanged, whilst he has got it in proof, that some of them are not so. Upon
the first impression I should be led to think that the Secretary having once
declared (by his allowing the interest not to be suspended) that the whole
amount was re-exchanged (and that upon the information of the state officer)
will now look upon them in the same light and return them as not assumable, an
opinion which I think, may also be supported on different ground both from the
nature of the certificates themselves and from the state law of 1789, which
declared the state not to be liable for the payment of the principal.

"However as the whole of this reasoning is mostly conjectural, as the decision
of the Secretary may, under the present circumstances, lead him to suspend the
payment of interest to the subscribers to the loan (since it was extended at
least) unless some legislative measures can prevent that inconvenience, permit
me to suggest to you the propriety of procuring as soon as possible the
necessary information on that subject, as I have no doubt the House or the
committee of ways and means will soon apply to you in an official manner for
the same. The questions which appear to me the most necessary to be solved are
the following --

"1st. What were the grounds of the decision of the Secretary of the Treasury
relative to the intended suspension of interest in Feb. 1791, and what
construction did he give to the 18th section of the funding Act of Congress?

"2d. Does he look now on the New-Loan certificates offered for subscription to
the loan of the U. S. as assumable, if so, upon what ground? if not, upon what
grounds also? and will he return them soon to the subscribers?

"3d. Will his decision relative to the suspension of interest be the same now
as last winter, and if it is not, what measures on the side of the Legislature
of Pennsylvania, will remove the difficulties that may in his opinion now
prevent the payment of interest?

"I have chosen to communicate to you my ideas on that subject as an
individual, rather than to wait for the formalities of official application
taking place, in order to prevent delays; which I hope will be a sufficient
apology for this letter.

With sincere esteem, etc. ALBERT GALLATIN."
Philadelphia, Jan. 14, 1793.
A. J. Dallas, Esquire

"Treasury Department, Feb. 8th, 1793. "SIR,
"IT is regretted that the pressing business of this department has not till
this time permitted a reply to the questions stated in Mr. Gallatin's letter of
the 14th of January, respecting the New-Loan certificates of the state of
Pennsylvania.

"It has been the uniform construction of the Act making provision for the debt
of the United States, that to render any certificates receivable on the loan it
was not only necessary that they should have been issued for services or
supplies toward the prosecution of the late war, but also that they should at
the time of being subscribed be recognized by the existing laws of the States
as evidences of debts by them respectively owing.

"It was not, till lately understood, that any doubts were entertained whether
the New-Loan certificates were in fact debts due by the state of Pennsylvania
in every sense necessary to bring them within the meaning of the Act of
Congress; it is certain, that no such doubts were suggested to the Treasury.

"The commissioner of loans was accordingly advised in June 1791 that the
certificates which had been received of the State in lieu of certificates of
the U. S. were receivable on loan, though at the same time he was instructed
with a view to future convenience to use his endeavors with the holders to
exchange them with the State.

"In consequence of an explanation which was rendered necessary by the
provisions contained in the 18th section of the Act making provision for the
debt of the U. S. it appeared that none of the New-Loan certificates of
Pennsylvania had been subscribed to the loan of the U. S. That only the sum of
about forty thousand pounds of said certificates remained to be exchanged, and
that adequate and final arrangements had been made for exchanging the remainder
by the State.

"This being the state of the case it became necessary to determine whether the
payment of interest on the assumed debt of Pennsylvania was to remain suspended
until a sum in certificates of the United States, equal to the amount of
New-Loan Certificates remaining un-exchanged, was surrendered to the Treasury.

"As the provision in the law was expressly designed to prevent interest from
being twice paid on what originally constituted one debt; an event which could
not in this case happen; as it appeared inconsistent with equity, that the
state should be required to surrender the certificates which were the sole
consideration for which they had become indebted to their citizens when no
equivalent had been stipulated therefore by the United States; as such a
surrender would defeat the arrangements made by the state for effecting a
re-exchange of the outstanding certificates, and a just settlement with their
creditors, as a suspension of the payment of interest on the assumed debt of
Pennsylvania would prove highly injurious to the rights of individuals; and
lastly, as it appeared to me that the terms and intent of the law could be
satisfied without assuming a construction liable to the strong objections
before stated, I could not hesitate to determine, that a surrender on the part
of the state was not necessary.

"I have been the more explicit in my reply to the first question proposed by
Mr. Gallalin, as it appears to be the most important, and for the purpose of
evincing that as the case was then presented, no doubt was or could be
entertained, that the New-Loan certificates might have been subscribed to the
loan of the United States. If however the New-Loan certificates are not by the
laws of Pennsylvania, considered as debts, but merely as receipts for
certificates of the United States, which may be demanded at pleasure -- then
according to the general rule of construction, the New-Loan certificates of the
state will not be considered as receivable on loan to the United States, and
will be restored to the subscribers.

"As the engagements of the United States appear to be somewhat implicated in a
right decision of this question, I shall take measures to have the case stated
to the Attorney General of the United States for his opinion. At the same time
I suggest the expediency of some measures being taken on the part of the
government of the state, for expressing their sense respecting the certificates
in question.

With great consideration and esteem, I am, etc. ALEXANDER HAMILTON."

A. J. DALLAS, Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvannia.

"DEAR SIR,
"IN order to obtain the best information, in answer to your letter of the 14th
ultimo, I consulted the Secretary of the Treasury; and I now enclose you a copy
of this communication on the subject to which you refer.

"If you think I can be of any further service to your enquiries, I beg you to
suggest the points, and to rely on a prompt and cheerful attendance. In the
mean time, permit me to request, that you will pay particular attention to that
part of Mr. Hamilton's letter, which invites a declaration of the sentiments of
the government, respecting the New-Loan Certificates.

I am, etc. A. J. DALLAS, Secretary."
Secretary's Office, Philad. 11th Feb. 1793.
ALBERT GALLATIN, Esquire

"GENTLEMEN,
"AGREEABLY to the desire of the Committee of Ways and Means, I submit the
following state of facts, relative to the redeeming certain abstracts of
New-Loan Certificates, as stated in my report to the Honorable Legislature on
the 14th January last, and contained in Book A, Article No. 3.

"It having been previously arranged with the Secretary of the Treasury, that
the abstracts with receipts assigned to the Commonwealth, should be sufficient
to authorize the proper officers of the United States to issue the certificates
to be granted thereon, direct to the commonwealth. The subscribing state
creditors presented a list, together with the certificates, to the
Comptroller General, who examined and certified their assumable and genuine
quality, without describing the kind of debt; on which certificate the officer
of loans granted the party a receipt on an abstract, which abstract and receipt
were generally presented to this office, and assigned to the commonwealth. An
examination with respect to the casting and interest took place, and submitted
to the Comptroller for his examination and approbation, when, if approved by
him, a certificate to the Governor from his office, was sent to this office, of
the amount of the redeemable debt and interest, which was countersigned by the
Register, and sent to the Secretary, on which a warrant issued on the Treasury.

"Of the abstracts in question, No. 264-5-6-8, and one in favor of David
Rittenhouse, Esquire were assigned, and sent from the Comptroller General to this
office, examined and entered as before stated, and returned to the
Comptroller General on the 7th July, and warrants issued the 9th, and were
entered in this office on the 10th.

Abstract, No. 262, was sent in the same manner from the Comptroller's office,
entered in this the 9th July, and a warrant issued on the 12th, and was entered
the 14th in this office.

"Abstract, No. 272, was presented by Mr. Addison on the 17th July, which was
the first time I knew of any New-Loans being subscribed to the Loan of the
United States, and not before. A conference took place between Comptroller and
Register, in which it was stated by the Comptroller, that they were within the
Act of the United States, and were certainly redeemable. In this I concurred,
provided the conditions stipulated by the Act of the United States, could be
complied with: This he observed was a matter of the United States, and that he
had or would consult the Secretary of the Treasury on the business.

"About this time, I had a conference with the Secretary, Mr. Dallas, who
informed me that he had heard much of this business, and that it was wrong, in
which the Attorney General agreed with him -- That he would put the question in
writing to him, and transmit official directions for my government.

"In consequence of the communications with Mr. Dallas and the Treasurer, there
was a stop put to the business until the Attorney-General's opinion should be
obtained in writing, which the Secretary applied for on the 23d July, and
received an answer the 28th, and transmitted the same to this office on the
31st July.

"No payments were made for any abstracts containing New-Loan Certificates,
after the communications with the Secretary, Treasurer and Comptroller, save
the one in favor of Mr. Addison, No. 272, for 217 dollars and 69 cents.

I have the honor to be, etc. JOHN DONNALDSON." Register-General's Office,
March 30, 1793.
To the Committee of Ways and Means.

Philadelphia, March 30, 1793. "SIR,
"THE question which I had the honor of receiving in your letter of the 20th of
March instant, is, Whether certain certificates of the commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, originally issued in lieu of Continental certificates, and lately
offered to be subscribed to the Loan in State debt, according to the Act
supplementary to the Act, making provision for the debt of the United States,
can be legally received upon loan, as contended for by the holders?

"What may be the result of a contest between the holders of those
certificates, and the state of Pennsylvania, I presume, not to determine -- But
between the United States and that state I have no great difficulty in deciding
-- I am of opinion that the Acts of the Pennsylvania Assembly of the 27th
March, 1789, and of the 30th March, and 1st of April 1790, abolished these
certificates as debts of the State, except for the purpose of being
re-exchanged for continental certificates, and therefore that the former, as
wanting the due recognition from that state, cannot be legally received upon
loan.

I have the honor to be, etc. EDMUND RANDOLPH."

The Secretary of the Treasury.

April 1, 1793. "SIR,
"I HAVE understood that the committee are this day again to meet on the
business upon which I addressed them on the 27th ultimo; if the doubt still
exists with the committee, I would propose, that it should be made a question
to be argued before the Supreme Court, Whether the debt in question was
redeemable under the Act mentioned?

"I am so well established in my opinion, that if the decision should be in the
negative, I will go as far as to hold myself responsible to the state for the
recovery and re-payment of all money paid by the state to the several creditors
of that description.

I am with great respect, etc. JOHN NICHOLSON."

TO JOHN SWANWICK, Esquire Chairman of the committee on ways and means.

Register-General's Office, April 3, 1793. "GENTLEMEN,
"AGREEABLY to your desire, I have re-stated the abstract, No. 262, subscribed
and assigned by John Nicholson, Esquire from which I have deducted the amount of
funded and depreciation debt, included in the former report, as New-Loan, and
since corrected.

No. 262. Principal. Int. Jan. 92 Int. July, 92 Total. 47156 29 12842 04 1414
68 61413 01 Deduct the amount of depreciation and funded debt. 1771 71 397 55
35 43 2204 69 45384 58 12444 49 1379 25 59208 32

I am, with respect, etc. JOHN DONNALDSON."

To the Committee of Ways and Means.

The business progressed in this manner until the 3d of April, when the
committee on ways and means made the following report, viz.

The committee on Ways and Means to whom were referred sundry letters and
documents relative to the subscription to the Loan proposed by the United
States, and the subsequent redemption of sundry certificates, formerly issued
under the authority of Pennsylvania, and commonly called New-Loan, report on
that subject --

That by a law passed on the 10th day of April 1792, amongst other provision
made for the redemption and final discharge of sundry debts due by the
commonwealth; in the sixth section, it is enacted, That if Congress shall on or
before the first day of July next, renew and again open the subscription to the
loan heretofore proposed to the state creditors, or shall in any other manner
or upon any other terms, provide for the assumption of the non-subscribed debts
owing to such state creditors, the holder or holders of any certificate or
certificates, subscribable to the subscription so renewed, or entitled to the
benefit of such other provision, shall be entitled to have and receive the
nominal value of the said certificate or certificates from the State-Treasurer,
upon this condition and not otherwise: that they shall and do subscribe to the
loan so renewed, or acquiesce in the terms of such other provision, and
thereupon, on or before the first day of July next, transfer to the
State-Treasurer, for the use of the commonwealth, each and every the
certificate and certificates which they shall receive from the United States,
in consequence of such subscription, or all and singular the interests and
benefits to be derived from such other provision, together with the proper
evidences thereof.

That by the arrangements taken in consequence of the law of Congress,
extending the terms of their former loan, no certificates could issue in favor
of the subscribers, prior to the 1st day of May 1793; whereupon, it having been
agreed that the receipts given by the commissioner of loan, to the subscribing
state creditors, should be assigned to the commonwealth, and that the
certificates from the Loan-office, should issue directly to the commonwealth;
the business was conducted under the following regulations: When the holder of
any state-certificate or certificates, wished to subscribe the same to the loan
proposed by Congress, and to avail himself of the benefit of the
abovementioned law of the commonwealth, passed in April 1792, he presented
such certificate or certificates, with an abstract of the same, specifying the
number, date, by whom and to whom issued, and the amount of the principal and
interest, to the Comptroller- General, who after examination certified on the
face of the abstract, that the certificates were genuine and assumable. The
abstract being then presented to the commissioner of loan, and the certificates
themselves deposited with him, the commissioner gave to the party a receitps
for the same on the abstract. The abstract and receipt were then assigned to
the commonwealth, and presented to the Register-General and Comptroller General
for examination, and if approved, a certificate signed by the two officers, was
sent to the Governor, stating the amount due to the party, and a warrant for
the same, thereupon issued according to law.

That amongst other abstracts thus declared to be assumable by the Comptroller,
which passed the several offices, and the nominal amount of which (including
both principal and interest,) was consequently paid to the respective holders
out of the State-Treasury, there were sundry certificates of that description
commonly called New-Loan, and which were issued by virtue of an Act, entitled
An Act for the further relief of the public creditors, who are citizens of this
state, by receiving on loan certain debts of the United States of America, and
for funding the same, and for paying the annual interest of such loans, and the
interest of certain debts of this state, every six months, passed on the first
day of March 1786; part of which Act was repealed by the Act, entitled An Act
to repeal so much of any Act or Acts of Assembly of this commonwealth, as
directs the payment of the New-Loan debt, or the interest thereof, beyond the
1st day of April next, and for other purposes therein mentioned, passed on the
27th day of March 1789, wherein it is enacted that the continental certificates
received by the state by virtue of the former Act, shall be returned to the
holders of New-Loan certificates, upon their delivering the same, and that "so
much of every Act or Acts of General Assembly as directs or secures the payment
of the principal sum or sums, in the said certificates or any of them
mentioned, or of the interest thereof, beyond the term of four years, shall be,
and the same is hereby repealed and made null and void."

That the total amount of the New-Loan certificates thus redeemed by the state,
at their nominal value, including the interest, amounts to 63,075 dollars and
37 cents; 60,220 dollars and 41 cents of which, were subscribed in the name,
and of course appear to be the property of John Nicholson.

The committee are of opinion that the Comptroller General, in the
abovementioned transactions, has been guilty of a high misdemeanor: --

First. By certifying the assumable quantity of the New-Loan certificates; the
greater part of the same being his own property.

Second, By passing and certifying the same to the Executive in the usual forms
of office; thereby causing them to be redeemed.

The opinion of the committee on the first point, is founded upon the following
considerations --

1st. They conceive, that since the Act of March 1789, above mentioned, the
New-Loan certificates ceased to be a state debt; were not, therefore, within
the assumption of, and could not be subscribed to the loan proposed by Congress.

2. Whatever the decision of the officers of the Treasury of the United States
might be on the preceding position, as it was not, by law, the official duty of
the Comptroller General to decide on it, he ought not to have done so, when a
decision given under the color of office operated in his own favor, at the
expense of the state.

3d. In certifying the New-Loan certificates to be assumable, he neither
consulted the Register-General, nor communicated the transaction to the
Governor; and as neither the abstracts on the face of which the assumable
quantity was certified, nor the official certificates on which warrants were
issued, did discriminate the kind of debt that was redeemed; the checks
provided by law were thereby destroyed, and the other officers of the state
deluded into error.

4th. The Comptroller General knew, by a former decision of the Secretary of
the Treasury of the United States, that at all events the New-Loan certificates
could not be recognized as assumable, unless an equal amount of continental
certificates was delivered to the Secretary aforesaid; which no law authorized
the Comptroller to do: and he was apprised that the payment of the interest to
the subscribing state creditors and to the state, on account of the assumption,
would have been suspended, when the time limited for receiving subscriptions to
the former loan of Congress expired, had it not, upon investigation, appeared
that no New-Loan certificates had been subscribed.

The opinion of the committee on the second point, arises from considering
that, independent of the qu^stion, Whether the New-Loan certificates were
within the assumption of the United States, they were not redeemable by the Act
of April 1792? and this appears from the following considerations --

1st. No funds were provided by the Act for the redemption of those
certificates.

2d. The sixth section of the Act can only be regarded as a proviso and
exception to the preceding sections by which the redemption of certain
descriptions of debts, which do not include the New-Loan certificates, were
exclusively and solely contemplated.

3d. Even the sixth section, supposing it to stand alone, cannot admit of the
construction given by the Comptroller General, as it designates only
state-creditors, and by the existing laws of the commonwealth, the holders of
New-Loan certificates are declared not to be such.

Having stated this ge^^ral view of the subject, the committee deem it their
duty to present the following resolutions to the consideration of the House.

Resolved, That John Nicholson, Comptroller General of this commonwealth, be
impeached for a high misdemeanor in his office.

Resolved, That the Attorney General be directed to institute a suit against
the said John Nicholson, to recover, for the use of the commonwealth, the
amount of the New-Loan certificates, which have been redeemed and paid at the
Treasury of this state.

The committee in the course of their enquiries upon this occasion, have found
reason to lament, that in the execution of the various, important and
confidential duties, (embracing the emission of certificates and the care and
management of other public property to an immense amount) which have from time
to time been assigned to the Comptroller General, an adequate check has in few
cases been provided, and, in fewer still, enforced. They conceive, therefore,
that the honor and interest of the state, require an early and effectual
investigation of the Comptroller's official transactions; and they would be
wanting in their duty to the public and to themselves, were they not to offer
an earnest recommendation that the following resolution should be adopted.

Resolved, That a committee be appointed to examine, during the recess of the
House, all the accounts and official transactions of the Comptroller General of
this commonwealth, and to report thereon at the next session of the Legislature.

APRIL 4.
A LETTER from Mr. Nicholson, was presented to the chair, and read, requesting
that an investigation of his conduct may take place during the present session
of the Legislature.

APRIL 5.
AGREEABLY to the order of the day, the report of the committee on ways and
means, read the third instant, was read the second time.

The first resolution being under consideration, to wit.

Resolved, That John Nicholson, Comptroller General of this commonwealth, be
impeached for a high misdemeanor in his office.

On the question, "Will the House agree to the same?"

The yeas and nays being called by Mr. Gallatin and Mr. Torrence, were as
follow, viz.

YEAS.
1 Jacob Hiltzheimer, 2 Henry Kammerer, 3 George Latimer, 4 John Swanwick, 5
Thomas Britton, 6 Thomas Paul, 7 John Chapman, 8 Ralph Stover, 9 James Bryan,
10 Dennis Whelen, 11 Charles Dilworth, 12 John Hannum, 13 Samuel Sharp, 14
Joseph Work, 15 Abraham Carpenter, 16 John Breckbill, 17 John Stewart, 18
Alexander Turner, 19 Thomas Lilly, 20 William M'Pherson, 21 Philip Gartner, 22
James Power, 23 George Cover, 24 Runnel Blair, 25 Paul Groscop, 26 Nicholas
Lutz, 27 Peter Burkhalter, 28 Jacob Eyerly, jun. 29 Thomas Hariman, 30 Abraham
Cable, 31 George Woods, jun. 32 Samuel Dale, 33 John White, 34 Christopher
Labengeier, 35 Abraham Hendricks, 36 Daniel Leet, 37 Albert Gallatin, 38 Joseph
Torrence, 39 James Johnston, 40 John Rea, 41 Isaiah Davis, 42 Joseph Tyson, 43
Cadwallader Evans, 44 John Shoemaker, 45 Stacy Potts, 46 Jacob Miley, 47
Christian King, 48 Simon Spalding, 49 John Canan, (Hunt.) 50 Thomas Morton, 51
John Oliver, 52 Joseph Gibbons, 53 William West.
NAYS.
1 Robert Hare, 2 Thomas Forest, 3 John Lardner, 4 Samuel Boyd.
So it was determined in the affirmative.

And the second resolution being under consideration, viz.

2. Resolved, That the Attorney General be directed to institute a suit against
the said John Nicholson, to recover for the use of the commonwealth, the amount
of the New-Loan certificates, which have been redeemed and paid at the Treasury
of this State.

On the question, "Will the House agree to the same?"

It was determined in the affirmative.

In the afternoon of the same day the following proceedings are recorded: --

Agreeably to the order of the day, the House resumed the consideration of the
report of the committee on Ways and Means, read this forenoon.

And the following resolution being under consideration, viz.

3. Resolved, That a committee be appointed to examine, during the recess of
the House, all the accounts and official transactions of the
Comptroller General of this commonwealth, and to report thereon at the next
session of the Legislature.

A motion was made by Mr. Evans, seconded by Mr. Tyson,

To postpone the consideration of the said resolution for the present.

On the question, "Will the House agree to the same?"

The yeas and nays being called by Mr. Swanwick and Mr. Hannum, were as follow,
viz.

YEAS.
1 Thomas Lilly, 2 George Woods, jun. 3 Joseph Tyson, 4 Cadwallader Evans.
NAYS.
1 Jacob Hiltzheimer, 2 Benjamin R. Morgan, 3 Henry Kammerer, 4 George Latimer,
5 John Swanwick, 6 Robert Hare, 7 Thomas Forest, 8 Thomas Britton, 9 Thomas
Paul, 10 John Lardner, 11 John Chapman, 12 James Bryan, 13 Dennis Whelen, 14
Charles Dilworth, 15 John Hannum, 16 Samuel Sharp, 17 Samuel Boyd, 18 Joseph
Work, 19 Abraham Carpent^^, 20 John Breckbill, 21 John Stewart, 22 Alexander
Turner, 23 William M'Pherson, 24 Philip Gartner, 25 James Power, 26 George
Cover, 27 Paul Groscop, 28 Nicholas Lutz, 29 Jacob Eyerly, jun. 30 Thomas
Hartman, 31 Abraham Cable, 32 Samuel Dale, 33 John White, 34 Christopher
Labengeier, 35 Abraham Hendricks, 36 Thomas Stokely, 37 Daniel Leet, 38 Albert
Gallatin, 39 Joseph Torrence, 40 James Johnston, 41 John Rea, 42 Isaiah Davis,
43 John Shoemaker, 44 Stacy Potts, 45 Jacob Miley, 46 Christian King, 47 Simon
Spalding, 48 John Canan, (Hunt.) 49 Thomas Morton, 50 John Oliver, 51 William
West.
So it was determined in the negative.

A motion was then made by Mr. Hare, seconded by Mr. Morgan,

To amend the said resolution so as to read as follows, viz.

Resolved, That (...) Commissioners be appointed by law to examine all the
official accounts and transactions of the Comptroller General of this
commonwealth, and to report thereon at the next session of the Legislature.

On the question, "Will the House agree to the same?"

The yeas and nays being called by Mr. Swanwick and Mr. Eyerly, were as follow,
viz.

YEAS.
1 Benjamin R. Morgan, 2 Robert Hare, 3 Thomas Forest, 4 John Lardner, 5
Abraham Carpenter, 6 John Breckbill, 7 John Stewart, 8 Alexander Turner, 9
Thomas Lilly, 10 William M'Pherson, 11 Philip Gartner, 12 George Woods, jun, 13
Joseph Tyson, 14 Cadwallader Evans, 15 John Shoemaker, 16 John Canan, (Hunt.)
NAYS.
1 Jacob Hiltzheimer, 2 Henry Kammerer, 3 George Latimer, 4 John Swanwick, 5
Thomas Britton, 6 Thomas Paul, 7 John Chapman, 8 James Bryan, 9 Dennis Whelen,
10 Charles Dilworth, 11 John Hannum, 12 Samuel Sharp, 13 Samuel Boyd, 14 Joseph
Work, 15 James Power, 16 George Cover, 17 Paul Groscop, 18 Nicholas Lutz, 19
Jacob Eyerly, jun. 20 Thomas Hartman, 21 Abraham Cable, 22 Samuel Dale, 23 John
White, 24 Christopher Labengeier, 25 Abraham Hendricks, 26 Thomas Stokely, 27
Daniel Leet, 28 Albert Gallatin, 29 Joseph Torrence, 30 James Johnston, 31 John
Rea, 32 Stacy Potts, 33 Jacob Miley, 34 Christian King, 35 Simon Spalding, 36
Thomas Morton, 37 John Oliver, 38 William West.
So it was determined in the negative.

And the original resolution recurring.

On the question, "Will the House agree to the same?"

The yeas and nays being called by Mr. Gallatin and Mr. Swanwick, were as
follow, viz.

YEAS.
1 Jacob Hiltzheimer, 2 Benjamin R. Morgan, 3 Henry Kammerer, 4 George Latimer,
5 John Swanwick, 6 Robert Hare, 7 Thomas Forest, 8 Thomas Britton, 9 Thomas
Paul, 10 John Lardner, 11 John Chapman, 12 James Bryan, 13 Dennis Whelen, 14
Charles Dilworth, 15 John Hannum, 16 Samuel Sharp, 17 Samuel Boyd, 18 Joseph
Work, 19 Abraham Carpenter, 20 John Breckbill, 21 John Stewart, 22 Alexander
Turner, 23 Thomas Lilly, 24 William M'Pherson, 25 Philip Gartner, 26 James
Power, 27 George Cover, 28 Paul Groscop, 29 Nicholas Lutz, 30 Jacob Eyerly,
jun. 31 Thomas Hartman, 32 Abraham Cable, 33 George Woods, jun. 34 Samuel Dale,
35 John White, 36 Christopher Labengeier, 37 Abraham Hendricks, 38 Thomas
Stokely, 39 Daniel Leet, 40 Albert Gallatin, 41 Joseph Torrence, 42 James
Johnston, 43 John Rea, 44 Joseph Tyson, 45 Cadwaller Evans, 46 John Shoemaker,
47 Stacy Potts, 48 Jacob Miley, 49 Christian King, 50 Simon Spalding, 51 Thomas
Morton, 52 John Oliver, 53 William West.
So it was unanimously determined in the affirmative.

Whereupon,

Ordered, That Mr. Morgan, Mr. Gallatin and Mr. Evans, be a committee for the
purposes contained in the said third resolution.

It was then, on motion,

Ordered, That Mr. Swanwick, Mr. Morgan, Mr. Gallatin, Mr. Johnston and Mr.
Evans, be a committee to draft articles of impeachment against John Nicholson,
Comptroller General, for a high misdemeanor in his office, and to report the
same to this House.

On the 6th Mr. Nicholson wrote the two following letters --

"Comptroller-General's Office, April 6, 1793. "SIR,
"I AM under the necessity of writing to you as Chairman of the Committee on
Ways and Means, to request copies of the sundry letters and documents relative
to the subscription of the Loan proposed by the United States, and the
subsequent redemption of sundry certificates, formerly issued under the
authority of Pennsylvania, commonly called New-Loans, on which the report on
that subject was founded.

I am, etc. JOHN NICHOLSON."

JOHN SWANWICK, Esquire Chairman Committee en Ways and Means.

"April 6, 1793, "SIR,
"I HAVE the honor to enclose a copy of a letter addressed to the Chairman of
the Committee on Ways and Means, and also a copy of his letter in answer, both
of this date. As it is my wish, and should be that of the government, as well
for the sake of justice to the public, as to an individual, to have an early
investigation of the business therein referred to. Permit me to request I may
be furnished with the papers referred to, as soon as possible. If a list is
made of what they consist, perhaps I have the most of them already, and I will,
myself, to save time, have the remainder copied, under the direction of the
Clerk of the House of Representatives, as soon as I am permitted.

I am, with, etc. JOHN NICHOLSON."

Speaker House Representatives of Pennsylvania.

On the 8th he wrote the following letters --

"April 8. "SIR,
"IF I am not obliged by the favorable decision, I acknowledge myself so by
the expeditious one which has been made of my business in your honorable
House, having been gone through in one day. -- I have since waited with
impatience for the article of impeachment to be reported, this is now the
fourth day since it was referred, and it is not yet done.

"I am anxious to have an opportunity of being heard before the Senate, my
Judges, that justice may be done both to the public and myself, and am sorry
again to mention the same kind of procrastination here, and with the same
persons generally, which I lamented in the former report. Permit me to pray for
the sake of justice, that this report be called for, which I suppose taking the
resolution for their guide cannot be the work of many minutes.

I have the honor, etc. JOHN NICHOLSON."

The SPEAKER of the House of Representatives of Pennsylvania.

"April 8, 1793. "SIR,
"IT has been represented to me that in the course of debate, on my business
before the House of Representatives -- Albert Gallatin a member from the county
of Fayette, has stated to the House of Representatives, that it would have
saved millions to the state, under the pressure of which the good people of
Pennsylvania will long groan, if a different mode had been pursued by the,
Legislature in our accounts with the United States, which was lost by mine.

"This is a heavy and important charge, I pledge myself that it is without
foundation, and I call upon the House to require a specification of what he
refers to, that an enquiry therein may take place and justice be rendered.

I am, etc. JOHN NICHOLSON."

The HON. SPEAKER of the House of Representatives of Pennsylvania.

On motion,

Ordered, That the Clerk of this House be directed to present to the Senate a
copy of the third resolution contained in the report of the committee on ways
and means, and adopted by this House April 5th instant, on the subject of
appointing a committee to examine, during the recess of the House, all the
accounts and official transactions of the Comptroller General of this
commonwealth, and to report thereon at the next session of the Legislature.

APRIL 9.
THE committee reported the first five articles of impeachment, they are
omitted here, as they were considerably altered by subsequent revisions, I will
give them as they were read before the Senate on the opening of the trial. --
The following resolves were reported at the same time, being attached to the
articles, to wit.

Resolved, That the foregoing articles of impeachment be engrossed and signed
by the Speaker, and that Mr. Morgan, Mr. Swanwick, Mr. Gallatin, Mr. Johnston
and Mr. Evans be a committee to exhibit the same to the Senate, and on the part
of the House of Representatives to manage the trial thereof.

Resolved, That the Attorney General and such other counsel as the managers may
think proper, be requested to give their attendance at the trial aforesaid, and
assist thereat on behalf of the House of Representatives.

One of Mr. Nicholson's letters which had been presented to the Speaker, and
laid for consideration, was read a second time, whereupon it was resolved that
he should be furnished with copies of the following letters and documents.

"Philadelphia, June 23, 1792. "SIR,
"BY a late Act of the General Assembly of Pennsylvania, provision is made,
among other things, for paying the nominal amount of the state certificates
which are subscribable to the Loan proposed by Congress to the state creditors,
"upon this condition and not otherwise", that "the state creditors, subscribe
to that loan and thereupon, on or before the first day of July next; transfer
to the State-Treasurer for the use of the commonwealth, the certificates which
they shall receive from the United States in consequence of such subscription."

"The Comptroller General and Register-General of the state, have stated to me
that a difficulty occurs in the execution of this Act; as according to their
information, the certificates of the United States, for the amount of the
respective subscriptions of the state, will not be issued until the first of
March 1793, and of course cannot be transferred to the State-Treasure for the
use of the commonwealth, at the period which the Legislature of Pennsylvania
had prescribed, previously to the passing of the Act of Congress that extends
the time for subscribing to the Loan.

"Under these circumstances, I am induced to request, that you will, as far as
you can with propriety, enter into an arrangement to accommodate the state; and
either direct the certificates to be immediately issued (since there is no
reasonable ground to suppose that the subscription in Pennsylvania will exceed
the amount of the assumption) or give your sanction to a transfer of the
receipts which the Loan-officer issues in the first instance to the parties
subscribing, so that at the regular period, the certificates may be obtained in
the name and for the use of the commonwealth.

"The readiness which you have shown on every occasion, to facilitate our
fiscal operations, as far as they are connected with the federal establishment,
assures me, that no apology is necessary for this application, and increases
the sincere respect with which

I am, Sir, etc. THOMAS MIFFLIN."

To ALEXANDER HAMILTON, Esquire. Secretary of the Treasury of the U.S.

"Treasury Department, June 25, 1792. "SIR,
"I HAD this morning the honor of receiving your letter of the 23d instant.

"I would with pleasure concur in removing the difficulty you suggest, by
anticipating the issuing of certificates for the debt of the commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, subscribed to the depending loan, were I not apprehensive of
embarrassment in other cases, in which a similar anticipation might be urged on
probable ground, but could not be complied with equal safety.

"But I shall with pleasure cooperate in the alternative which you suggest; by
giving a sanction to a transfer of the receipts which the Loan-officer issues
to the parties subscribing, so that after the first day of March next, the
certificates to be granted in lieu of those receipts, may issue in the name and
for the use of the commonwealth. To this it will be only necessary, that the
receipts be lodged with the proper officer of the state, accompanied by
competent transfers or assignments, and that notice be given of those which
shall have been so deposited, prior to the first of March next.

With very sincere, etc. ALEXANDER HAMILTON."

His Excellency THOMAS MIFFLIN, Esquire

"Secretary's Office, Philad. 23d July, 1792. "DEAR SIR,
"THE Governor directs me to request your opinion on the following statement.

"By an Act of the General Assembly, passed on the first day of March 1786, a
loan was proposed, for the relief of the citizens of Pennsylvania, to receive
certain continental certificates, in exchange for state certificates, then
directed to be issued, and usually called New-Loan certificates: By an Act
passed the 27th of March 1789, it is declared, "that so much of every Act or
Acts of General Assembly, as directs or secures the payment of the principal
sum or sums in the said certificates or any of them mentioned, or of the
interest thereof, beyond the term of four years, shall be, and the same is
hereby repealed, and made null and void." And the re-exchange of the New-Loan
for continental certificates, was directed and regulated by the same Act, and
in subsequent Acts, passed on the thirtieth of March and first of April 1790:
and by an Act of the 10th of April 1792, provision is made for the redemption
of certain state debts, and particularly, in the sixth section, for paying the
nominal amount of those certificates, which are subscribable to the loan
proposed to the state creditors, by the Act of Congress, which was passed on
the 4th of April 1790, and extended in it is operation by an Act of Congress
passed on the eighth day of May 1792.

"Having considered these laws, the following are submitted to your decision.

"1st. Whether, after the passing of the Act of Assembly of the twenty-seventh
of March 1789, and the other Acts on the subject, the New-Loan certificates
could be recognized, by the officers of the federal or state government, for
any other purpose than re-exchanging them for continental certificates?

"2d. Whether the New-Loan certificates, after the passing of the above Act, by
which all Acts securing the payment of either principal or interest thereof,
are declared void, can be included within the description of the state debts,
directed to be redeemed and paid by the Act of the 10th of April 1792?

"3d. Whether the New-Loan certificates, being issued after the war, and, as
the preamble of the Act of the first of March 1786, states, for the relief of
the patriotic citizens of Pennsylvania are excluded from the loan proposed by
Congress, by the words or spirit of the proviso annexed to the 13th section of
the Act of Congress of the fourth of August 1790?

"As it is of great importance speedily to ascertain the points here submitted
to your consideration, the Governor directs me to request the favor of an early
answer.

I am, etc. A. J. DALLAS, Secretary."

To JARED INGERSOLL, Esquire Attorney General of Pennsylvania.

"DEAR SIR, Philad. July 28, 1792.
"ENGAGEMENTS at court have prevented me from returning an earlier answer to
your favor of the 23d instant.

"I am of opinion that after the passing the Act of Assembly of the 27th March,
1789, and the other Acts on the subject, the New-Loan certificates ceased to be
a state debt within the view of the Legislature, and could not consistently
with those laws, be recognized by the officers of the Federal or State
government, for any other purpose than re-exchanging them for continental
certificates.

"I am also clearly and decidedly of opinion, that after the passing the above
Act, the New-Loan certificates cannot be included within the description of the
State debts directed to be redeemed and paid by the Act of the 10th April, 1792.

"The amount of Continental debt assumed by the State of Pennsylvania, and for
which New-Loan certificates were given was about five millions of dollars.

"Part of this was redeemed by payments made at the Land-office and other
payments in the State-Treasury in the New-Loan certificates.

"But the sum remaining of this class of certificates, was much more than the
amount of the sum 2,200,000 dollars, which the United States agreed to assume
of State debt for Pennsylvania.

"The State debt what was originally and properly so called, and which the
Legislature could only have had in contemplation when they made provision for
such deficiency, as they considered to be left unprovided for by the
continental rule of assumption was about one million, or say 1,200,000 dollars.

"Suppose this sum to be, interest included 1,200,000 the United States would
give certificates as follows, viz.

At 3 per cent, per annum 400,000 Deferred debt 266,666 67 At 6 per cent. per
annum 533,333 33 Dollars 1,200,000

"So far as 6 per cents extend, the state considered this as a full provision,
in satisfaction of the debt. But for the 400,000 dollars, 3 per cent. stock,
the state considered it as only payment of one half, they therefore issued
other 3 per cent. stock payable by the state to an equal amount, and for the
deferred stock on which the United States pay no interest, 'till the year 1801.
The state agrees to pay interest annually at 6 per cent. per annum 'till that
time.

"By the Act of April last, the state agrees to redeem these assumptions from
the holders of the debt, by paying 10 in the pound for the 3 per cents, and L.
39 per cent. for the deferred part, being the estimated value of the annuity of
6 per cent. per annum for the time limited.

"This recapitulation of facts appears to me to suggest the solution of your
second question.

"If the New-Loan certificates are brought in assumable by the United States,
the sum may exceed the whole that Congress have agreed to assume, and our
Assembly will have encouraged measures for the exclusion of the whole of our
State debt from being assumed.

"Two motives may be supposed to have actuated our Legislature.

"First -- To free the state from debt that in case of necessity they might
anticipate their resources by credit.

"Secondly -- Selling the 3 per cent. stock of the United States at 12 and
paying off their 3 per cent. stock at 10 affords an obvious advantage; in the
deferred no less was suffered, and therefore the balance in their favor
remained.

"On the New-Loan certificates they were paying no interest, the continental
certificates furnished the means of redemption at any moment, without expense,
the reason of the law determines it is extent, neither of those motives apply to
the New-Loan certificates, it is impossible that the state could have intended,
that they should be assumed by the United States, or that they were in
contemplation in the provision made by the Act of April last.

"To the third question I am not ready at present to give an answer, it
requires some information which I do not possess, but will endeavor to obtain.

I am, etc. J. INGERSOLL."

A. J. DALLAS, Esquire

"SIR, Treasury Dept. Dec. 21, 1791.
"IT appearing to me, that the attention of the Legislature of Pennsylvania may
be necessary to the removal of an inconvenience under which the subscribers of
the debt of the state now lie, I do myself the honor to make the requisite
communication to your Excellency.

"The 18th section of the Act, making provision for the debt of the United
States, suspends the payment of interest in respect to the debt of any state
which shall have issued its own certificates in exchange for those of the
United States, until it shall be satisfactorily made to appear, that the
certificates issued for that purpose by such states* have been re-exchanged, or
redeemed, or until those which shall not have been re-exchanged or redeemed,
shall be surrendered to the United States.

"It is understood that the measure contemplated in this section, was adopted
by the state of Pennsylvania; that is, that a sum of state certificates was
issued in exchange for an equal sum of certificates of the federal debt, and
that although a part of those certificates has been redeemed, others to a
considerable amount, have not been re-exchanged or redeemed, it will conduce as
well to the order of the finances, as to the convenience of the public
creditors, the payment of interest to whom must be otherwise suspended, if
measures can be taken by the government of Pennsylvania, to make the balance
unredeemed and unexchanged to appear, and if they should direct the surrender
of the amount of such balance in certificates of federal debt in their old
form, should the surrender of them in that form be impracticable from the
circumstance of the subscription of federal debt, which was directed by the
Legislature, an equal sum, of six per cent. deferred, and three per cent.
stock, in such proportions as the balance or deficiency would produce on
subscription, may be paid in lieu of certificates in their old form. This will
be at the election of the state, and can be affected by no circumstance but
their own convenience, as there can be no pecuniary advantage or disadvantage
in either mode. I have, etc.

ALEX. HAMILTON."

His Excellency THOMAS MIFFLIN, Governor of Pennsylvania.

"Report of the Sales of Stock made for the Redemption of the State Debts, in
Pursuance of an Act of the General Assembly of Pennsylvania, passed on the 10th
Day of April, 1792.
The date of sale. To whom sold. Kind of stock. The price, Amount of each sale.
1792, May 1st. John Nicholson, in trust, 3 per cent. 120 46,000 Isaac Brunson,
and Com. do. 120 20,000 Griffith Evans, do. 120 3,000 John Nicholson, do. 120
7,000 James and William Miller, do. 120 5,000 Phillip Reilly, do. do. 10,000
Thomas M. Willing, do. do. 10,000 Isaac Brunson and Com. do. do. 20,000 John
Donnaldson, A. do. do. 10,000 Ditto and Com. do. do. 30,000 John Donnaldson,
do. do. 10,000 Joseph Webb, do. do. 2,000 N. G. Phillips, do. 121 20,000 John
Lynch, do. do. 10,000 Robert Morris, do. 120 200,000 Geogre Eddy, do. 121
30,000 George Meade, do. do. 15,000 Isaac Bruns^^ (...) Com. do. 120 20,000
James Gr^^ford, do. do. 10,000 John Nicholson, do. 120 6,000 Le Roy and ^ayard,
do. 120 159,000 Walter Stewart, do. do. 30,000 Thomas M. Willing* do. do. 5,000
Robert Morris, do. 120 250,000 John Nicholson, do. do. 6,000 William Bi^gh do.
120 6,000 John Donaldson, do. 120 6,000 Walter Stewart, do. 120 20,000 Clement
Biddle, do. do 20,000 Dols. 986,000

"With the proceeds of the above sales of stock, the amount respectively in the
following debts have been redeemed, the particulars of which redemption is set
forth in the report of the Register-General.

Funded debt. Funded Depreciation debt. State 3 per cts. purpart certificates.
State 6 per cts. purpart certificates. Debts subscribed to the United States
and transferred to Pennsylvania. L. s. d. L. s. d. Dols. Cts. Dols. Cts. Dols.
Cts. 26,909 15 0 8,022 4 130,439 76 66,325 14 120,080 15

"In the amount of the debts subscribed to the United States and transferred to
Pennsylvania, is included a sum of (...) in the New-Loan certificates of this
state; which according to the opinion of the Attorney General, were not
contemplated by the Legislature as objects of redemption in the mode prescribed
by Act of the 10th of April, 1792; and the particular statement of which is
therefore subjoined.

"An account of New-Loan certificates subscribed to the loan of the United
States, transferred to and paid by the state of Pennsylvania.
Names of the subscribers. Amount of interest up to January 1st 1792. Amount of
interest up to July 1st, 1792. Amount of Principal. Total amount of principal
and interest. 262 John Nicholson, 842 04 1,414 68 47,156 29 61,413 01 268
Ditto, 437 83 16 72 557 54 1,012 09 272 Alexander Addison, 88 80 3 77 125 12
217 69 266 David Rittenhouse, 23 03 3 84 128 154 87 266 Joseph Honeycomb, 17 90
4 13 137 74 159 77 265 James Duncan, 185 73 15 55 518 67 719 95 264 Jonathan
Mifflin, 340 61 36 75 1,225 32 1,602 68 13,935 94 1,495 44 49,848 68 65,280 06

"Subscribed as above said, but not paid.

282 Thomas Hale, 37 32 2 77 92 50 132 59 277 Ditto, 161 67 12 07 402 50 576 24
279 William Porter, 104 44 7 84 261 45 373 73 276 George Booth, 50 22 4 48 149
50 204 20 353 65 27 16 905 95 1,287 76

THOMAS MIFFLIN."
Tuesday, 4th December, 1792.

Together with a Report of the Register-General to the Legislature, Book A,
which contains the different species of public debt, which had been redeemed by
the state, and for whom.

Although the House had passed the resolution that Mr. Nicholson should be
furnished with copies of the foregoing letters and documents, from page 96,
inclusively, he was nevertheless neglected, and had been under the necessity of
renewing his application on the 25th February 1794, as I will show in its
proper place.

The Cerk of the Senate being introduced, presented to the chair, an extract
from the Journal of that House; and having withdrawn, the same was read, as
follows, viz.

"In SENATE, TUESDAY, April 9, 1793.
"Mr. Hoge called for the resolution of the House of Representatives respecting
the adjournment of the Legislature, read yesterday; whereupon the same was
again read, as follows, viz.


"In the HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, Monday, April 8, 1794, A. M.
"Resolved, That the Legislature will adjourn on Thursday the 11th day of April
instant, to meet again on the fourth Tuesday in August next."

"After debate,

"It was moved by Mr. Hoge, seconded by Mr. Morris,

"That the word "adjourn" be struck out, and the word "rise" be inserted in
place thereof, and that from the word "instant" to the end of the resolution be
struck out, and the words "sine die" be inserted in place thereof.

The question on the amendment being put, was carried in the affirmative.

The resolution as amended was agreed to.

Extract from the Journal, T. MATLACK, Clerk of the Senate."


Mr. John Oldden appeared agreeable to summons for that purpose served on him,
and being duly affirmed, answered some interrogatories, and had liberty to
withdraw.

He attended the same afternoon, and had been requested to give his attendance
the next day for the same purpose.

APRIL 10.
THE same witness attended again, answered certain interrogatories, and was
finally discharged.

The Articles of Impeachment were read the second time.

The Clerk of the Senate being introduced, presented to the chair, an extract
from the Journal of that House; and having withdrawn, the same was read, as
follows, viz.

"In SENATE, WEDNESDAY, April 10, 1793.
"On motion, and by special order, the Resolution of the House of
Representatives respecting the adjournment of the Legislature, this day
presented by the Clerk of the House of Representatives, was again read;

"Whereupon, it was

Moved by Mr. Smilie, seconded by Mr. Hanna, and

"Resolved, That the Senate recede from their amendments on the said
resolution, and concur the resolution as sent from the House of
Representatives, to wit --

"Resolved, That the Legislature will adjourn on Thursday the 11th day of April
instant, to meet again on the fourth Tuesday in August next.

Extract from the Journal, T. MATLACK, Clerk of the Senate."


A motion was made by Mr. Hare, seconded by Mr. Lardner, to postpone the
consideration of the Articles of Impeachment, to introduce the following
resolutions in lieu thereof, viz.

Resolved, That this House does not confide in the administration of John
Nicholson, Comptroller General of this commonwealth.

Resolved, That the Governor be requested to remove John Nicholson from the
office of Comptroller General of this commonwealth, and that this resolution be
sent to the Senate for their concurrence.

Mr. Gallatin observed on this question, that he would have moved for the
removal of Mr. Nicholson before that time, were it not for the existing
settlement of accounts between the United States and the individual states,
that he well knew that there was no man in the commonwealth so capable of doing
that business as Mr. Nicholson; therefore he would vote against the above
resolutions. After which the question for postponement was put, and determined
in the negative.

The articles then recurring, after sundry alterations and amendments, they
were adopted, and it was ordered, that they should be engrossed for a third
reading.

APRIL 11.
THE articles being engrossed, were read the third time, signed by the Speaker,
and sent by five gentlemen to the Senate.

"In SENATE, April 11, 1793.
"The committee being introduced, Mr. Gallatin said;

"Mr. SPEAKER,

"The managers, duly appointed, do, by the direction, and in the name of the
House of Representatives of the General Assembly; and of all the People of
Pennsylvania, impeach John Nicholson, the Comptroller General of this
commonwealth, for high misdemeanors in his office, the specification whereof is
contained in the accusation and articles which we now present, and which the
House of Representatives are ready to prove and maintain, at such time as the
Senate shall appoint.

"Whereupon,

"The committee presented the articles of accusation and impeachment, and the
same were read, etc."

Mr. Nicholson sent the following letters to the Senate and House of
Representatives the same day --

"SIR, April 11th, 1793.
"I WAS much pleased yesterday with the latter part of the report of the
committee on the articles of my impeachment, wherein it is stated that the
House of Representatives are ready to proceed in the promises, when the Senate
shall appoint; but afterward felt differently when I heard that before the
articles were presented to the Senate, they had concurred in the Resolution of
the House of Representatives to adjourn on this day.

"I have applied to that House to be heard, and pray that the House of
Representatives may wait a few days before they adjourn, that an opportunity
may be given for an immediate investigation of this business.

I am, etc. JOHN NICHOLSON."

The Hon. the SPEAKER of the House of Representatives of Pennsylvania.

"SIR, April 11, 1793.
"ARTICLES of impeachment against me have been prepared and agreed to in the
House of Representatives yesterday, in which they say, they are ready to
proceed in the business, when your honorable House may appoint; I am also
ready, and pray that the Senate may rescind their vote for adjournment this
day, and that this business may be taken up and investigated.

I have the honor to be, etc. JOHN NICHOLSON."

The Honorable the SPEAKER of the Senate of Pennsylvania.

"SIR, April 11th, 1793.
"IF it be not improper I would beg leave to solicit the attention of the
honorable House to my letter of the 8th instant requesting a specification from
Mr. Gallatin of his assertion respecting my official conduct in the business of
our accounts with the United States. I am, with great respect,

Your most obedient servant, JOHN NICHOLSON."

The Honorable the SPEAKER of the House of Representatives.

One entry in the minutes of this day, and another of the eighth, respecting
Mr. Nicholson's letters, are worthy of observation. It is customary for letters
and documents, presented to the Speaker, to be noted on the minutes, so as to
inform the reader of the purport and contents of such letters or documents, but
in the instances here alluded to, no intimation is given of their contents,
purport, request or any of the usual formalities, but, "A letter from John
Nicholson was read, and ordered to lie on the table."

A motion was made by Mr. Gallatin, seconded by Mr. Evans, and agreed to, That
the committee appointed the 5th to examine the accounts and official
transactions of the Comptroller General, or any member of the said committee
that shall have power to examine, at all seasonable hours, all the books,
accounts, vouchers, certificates and official documents whatsoever, which may
be in the custody of either the Comptroller General, Register-General or the
State-Treasurer, to take copies of the same, or any part thereof, and to
require any explanations concerning the same.

That the said committee, or a majority of them, shall have power to send for
persons and papers, and to summon any person or persons before them, for the
purpose of giving testimony upon oath or affirmation, on the subject of the
enquiries of the said committee.

That the said committee shall have power to employ such clerks to assist them,
as they shall think necessary.

The committee of accounts reported eight hundred dollars in favor of the
Chairman, Mr. Morgan, on account of the expenses attending the investigation of
the official transactions of the Comptroller General during the recess, he to
be accountable.

Messrs. Swanwick and Gallatin were appointed to inform the Senate that the
House of Representatives were ready to close the present session. After Mr.
Swanwick had reported his performance of that service, he observed, that the
impeachment against the Comptroller was of very great importance, and that
probably some of the committee might fall sick, and thereby the business of the
investigation might be retarded; he therefore moved that another member might
be added to the committee; this motion, not being seconded, was lost.

Adjourned to the 27th August following.

AUGUST 27, 1793.
THE Legislature met pursuant to adjournment.

AUGUST, 29.
THE committee appointed for the purpose, April 5th last, reported additional
articles of impeachment against John Nicholson, Comptroller General of the
commonwealth of Pennsylvania, which were read;

Whereupon, on motion,

Ordered, That Tuesday next, the 3d of September, be assigned for the second
reading of the said articles, that they be the order for that day, and that a
sufficient number of copies be printed in the mean time, for the use of the
members.

It was then, on motion,

Resolved, That the Speaker issue his summons, commanding the attendance of
Blair M'Clenachan, and Matthew M'Connell, to appear at the bar of the House on
Tuesday next, to give testimony on the subject of the articles of impeachment
against John Nicholson, Comptroller General of this commonwealth.

The summons were accordingly issued.

SEPTEMBER 2
THE committee appointed to examine, during the recess of the House, all the
accounts and official transactions of the Comptroller General, made report in
part; which was read,

Whereupon, on motion,

Ordered, That a sufficient number of copies be printed for the use of the
members, and that it be annexed as an appendix to the Journal of this House.

It may be proper to observe, that the reading was dispensed with, and the
Report sent to the printers, where it remained for a considerable time, say 2
months at least, before it was finished. It is as follows, together with Mr.
Nicholson's answer to the objectionable parts. Read in the House of
Representatives January 9, 1794 -- and ordered to lie on the table, as usual.

"Comptroller-General's Office, Jan. 8, 1794.
"SIR,
"THE late House of Representatives of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania
appointed a committee of their body, on the 5th day of April 1793, to examine
the accounts and official transactions of the Comptroller General. That
committee proceeded to business by instituting, as I was informed a kind of
inquisition; in which privately or without my knowledge, they sent for and
examined ex part, such persons as by reports or otherwise, they supposed might
be able to testify something against me, and to this every one who had ought to
say against the Comptroller General, were invited to come and cast in their
mite; my office was also opened to them and all the books and papers exhibited
and exposed to their scrutiny. About the beginning of September following, they
reported the result of their labors and enquiries to the late House; their
reports consisted, 1st of two additional articles of impeachment, to which I
shall have an opportunity to answer in a proper place, and it would be improper
to say any thing of their merits here.

"And 2d of a voluminous statement on the business of their appointment, which
was ordered to be printed, and which is annexed as an appendix to the Journals
of the last House; this paper having been brought before the present House, and
referred to a special committee, and being in many parts of such a nature as to
require my, I sit down to made some remarks thereon, accompanied with documents
to support the leading facts, that so you may have the matter more fully before
you.

"I believe it will be fair, considering the circumstances and appointment of
the said committee of the late House, at least to infer in my favor, in all
parts of my official conduct where they have not otherwise reported; if
therefore I shall remove prejudices where they are therein attempted to be
raised, or establish facts to be the reverse of what they assert; I shall in
all other parts of my official conduct (except what is still pending before the
Senate) have profited by my fiery ordeal.

Committee's report.
"THAT from an examination of the powers vested in, and the duties enjoined on
the Comptroller General, by the laws of the commonwealth, they were led to
arrange the objects of the investigation committed to their care, under the
following heads, to wit.

"First. New-Loan certificates issued or received by the Comptroller, and
Continental certificates or interest arising upon the same, received by him.

"Second. Settlement of accounts, and paying the depreciation of the pay of the
army.

"Third. Settlement of accounts of persons having claims against the
commonwealth, and issuing certificates for the same commonly called "Funded
debt."

"Fourth. Settlement of accounts of persons indebted to the commonwealth, and
recovering balances due by them.

"FIRST HEAD.
"BY the Act of Assembly, of the 1st of March 1786, it was provided, that a
competent number of blank certificates should be prepared and signed by the
State-Treasurer, and by him delivered to the Comptroller General to be filled
up, numbered, registered and countersigned. That the said Comptroller General,
should receive on loan on behalf of the state, certain certificates of the
debts of the United States, in the Act described By the Act of the 28th March
1787, some other descriptions of certificates were admitted on loan.


-- and should issue and deliver in lieu thereof, to the persons making such
loans, certificates to the amount of the principal of the certificates loaned;
that he should keep regular regi^^^ies respectively of the certificates thus
received on loan and of those issued to the loaners -- the said registries and
certificates to be subject to the examination of the Supreme Executive Council
-- that the Treasurer should pay interest on the certificates thus issued half
yearly -- that the Comptroller should receive from the United States, the
interest accruing or due on the certificates received on loan -- should note
every such payment, whether made in money or in certificates, on the proper
registry and pay the same to the Treasurer, to be paid by him to the United
States, on account of the State. A part of the requisitions of Congress was
payable in those indents or facilities issued by the United States in payment
of the interest of their domestic debt.
.

"By the Act of the 27th March 1789, so much of the preceding Act, as secured
the payment of the principal of the certificates thus issued, and commonly
called New-Loan, or of the interest thereof, beyond the term of four years was
repealed, and it was further enacted, that the certificates of the United
States, received on loan by the state, or others of the same amount, should be
returned to the holders of New-Loan certificates, applying for the same at the
Comptroller's office; and that the exchange should take place under such
regulations as Council should direct, provided that no certificates of the
United States should be delivered to the parties, until the overplus of
interest, if any, paid by the state, upon the New-Loan certificates returned by
the parties, beyond the interest received from the United States by the State
upon the continental certificates applied for should have been paid in indents
to the Comptroller. It was also enacted, that if on the other hand a balance of
interest appeared due to the parties, the Comptroller should pay it in indents
-- By an Act of the 30th of September 1791, the Comptroller was authorized to
receive, or to make payment as the case might be of such balance in 3 per cent.
stock of the United States.
.

"A copy of the regulations of Council is hereunto annexed by which it appears,
that the Comptroller was authorized to give the holders of the New-Loan
certificates, either the original Continental certificate, corresponding to the
New-Loan presented, or a like sum in Continental certificates, either of those
received on loan or redeemed by the Land-office, and in cases where the exact
amount could not be made, to issue for the balance a new certificate; that he
was directed to keep in a set of proper books, accounts of all certificates
received, delivered or issued, with their No., principal sums and dates of
interest, and also of all indents, received or paid; (and if he considered it
necessary for his own security, or for the regularity of his proceedings,) to
demand receipts from all persons to whom certificates or indents were delivered.

"By an Act of the 1st of April 1784, the Receiver-General of the Land-office,
was directed to deliver, at the time of settling his accounts, to the
Comptroller General, all certificates by him received, (entering on each
certificate, the time of his receiving the same, and the interest due at such
time*) By the same Act, the certificates which the said Receiver-General was
authorized to receive in payment for lands are described, amongst which the
Continental certificates of certain descriptions are enumerated. By the Act of
the 1st of March 1786, the New Loan certificates were also made receivable in
the Land-office, which provision was repealed by the Act of the 27th March
1789, and the Continental certificates, were likewise declared to be no longer
receivable, by an Act of the 27th of November 1789.

"By the Act of the 1st of April 1790, the Comptroller was directed to deliver
to the Treasurer all the Continental certificates, and all indents the property
of this state, after the same had been examined by himself, the said Treasurer
and the Register-General, in presence of two members of Council, and to cancel
and deliver to the Register-General, after a similar examination, all the
certificates, issued by the state, and received by the Comptroller General for
the use of the state, The same Act repealed a provision made by the Act of the
30th of September 1789, whereby all accounts of exchange of New-Loan and
Continental certificates, were to be submitted to the Register-General. It does
not appear that that clause, which was but six months in force, was ever
carried into operation. 1.


Mr. Nicholson's Answer.
1. "The fact is otherwise as may be testified by the books thereof kept by the
Register-General until the repeal as aforesaid took place."

Report continued.
-- The provision which rendered the presence of two members of Council
necessary in the examination of either kind of certificates, was repealed by an
Act of the 30th of March 1791, and the provision which rendered the presence of
the Treasurer necessary, in the examination of the certificates directed to be
cancelled and delivered to the Register-General, was repealed by an Act of the
4th of April 1792.

"The committee examined the transactions of the Comptroller General, in
pursuance of the abovementioned laws, in the following order --

"I. Receiving Continental certificates on loan, and issuing New-Loan
certificates. Two sets of books were opened for that purpose by the
Comptroller. The first of certificates received on loan, contains in distinct
colums the No. of the certificate received from No. 3443 to 21,331, which No.
is not the original one of such certificate, but put upon it by the Comptroller
at the time of receiving the same. 2d. The No. of the New-Loan certificate
issued in exchange. 3d. The sum in dollars Continental money, when the
principal of the certificate loaned was expressed in that currency. 4th. The
rate of depreciation, at which such sums in Continental money were to be
calculated. 5th. The sum in dollars specie. 6th. The date of interest
commencing.

"The second of New-Loan certificates issued, contain also in separate columns
the No. of the certificate from No. 1 to 19,281, the name of the grantee, the
sum in pounds, shillings and pence, distinguishing the original from the
renewed certificates, the date of interest commencing, and the number of years,
interest paid by the state upon each certificate.

"Separate books were kept for the New-Loan certificates issued in exchange for
certain Continental certificates, dated between the 1st day of September, 1777,
and the 1st day of March, 1778, which were subject to a depreciation whenever
redeemed, although the interest till that period, was to be paid upon the
nominal amount. The numbers of these are from No. 1 to No. 436. A committee of
Council examined those books, and the Continental (...) with the Comptroller.
They discovered and rectified several errors, 2

Mr. Nicholson's Answer.
2 "When it is considered that in the short space of time allowed to do it in,
I had by myself alone without being even allowed the assistance of a clerk to
check my calculations, to receive the applications and certificates from the
holders of such a number as together amounted to upwards of 5 million dollars
and a sixth: To reduce many of those to specie, by a difficult table which
progressed daily in its depreciation; to convert the sums respectively from
dollars to pounds; to file them regularly, to draw other certificates for the
like amount, in many cases to consolidate and ascertain the average, or mean
time of interest on the respective certificates, and insert the same, and to
deliver to the parties the respective certificates of state debt. I say when
this business is considered, it will not be wondered that some mistakes and
errors should have been committed; for my own part, on reflection, I wonder
they were so inconsiderable in their amount. In transacting this business,
every individual was his own advocate, to see that he had the amount to which
he was entitled; whereas there was not the same motives of interest to discover
mistakes made the other way. It is to be remembered that whatever these
mistakes amount to, I have rectified them with the state at my own expense, and
so far as I cannot rectify them with the individuals, as well as in one case
where the Continental certificates themselves, were either mislaid or stolen, I
sustain the loss myself."

Report continued.
-- and it appears from their report, that the total nominal amount of
continental certificates dated between the 1st day of September, 1777, and the
1st day of March, 1778, received upon loan, was 735,700 dollars, and the amount
reduced to specie of all other continental certificates, was 4,437,181 50/90
dollars, making altogether 5,172,881 50/90 dollars, that the tolal amount of
original New Loan certificates issued in exchange for continental certificates
of the first description, was L. 275,887:10, and the total amount of all other
original New-Loan certificates, was L. 1,661,998:5:3, A mistake of L. 60 has
been discovered in that sum, so that the amount is L. 1,662,058:5:3 -- equal to
dollars 4,432,155 33/90. That sum is by dollars 5026 17/90 less than the amount
of continental certificates received, which arises, as the committee were
informed by the Comptroller, from sundry continental certificates being
included in those books, which were received by the Comptroller for the use of
the state; but not upon loan. The list is not yet furnished, but the principal
amount arises from certificates for part of the commutation of pay, granted by
Congress, to sundry officers who relinquished them to the state.
-- making altogether L. 1,937,885:15:3.

"Two enquiries might be necessary on the preceding transactions -- First,
Whether no continental certificates were received on loan, except such as were
admissable by law? As almost the total amount of those certificates have been
returned to the parties, or subscribed to the loan of the United States, it is
not possible at present to investigate that point; but as the committee of
Council examined all those certificates, it amounts nearly to a proof that they
were within the description authorized by law to be received. -- Second,
Whether no New-Loan certificates have been issued, except for the continental
certificates received on loan? From the examination of the committee of
Council, it is known that the registry of certificates corresponded with the
certificates themselves that were received on loan, therefore by comparing the
New-Loan certificates, cancelled and delivered to the Register-General, with
the registry of certificates issued, it will be easy to see whether they agree;
should there appear any certificates which are not entered in the registry, the
Comptroller must be accountable for them; but as the delivery of those
certificates has but just now been completed, it is necessary in order to have
complete satisfaction on that head, to wait until the Register-General shall
have arranged them in numerical order.

"It has been mentioned that there is in the registry of New-Loan certificates
issued, a column of certificates renewed. It appears that those of that
description, issued in exchange for continental certificates, dated between the
1st of September, 1777, and the 1st of March, 1778, amount to L. 18,314:8:9;
and all others of the same description to L. 458,917:6:5 There is an auxiliary
book of New-Loan certificates, issued upon renewals, showing the numbers of the
original certificate or certificates delivered to the Comptroller; and of the
renewed certificate or certificates granted therefore; the name of the grantee;
the amount of the principal of the certificate, and the number of years of
interest paid thereon, at the time of making the renewal. By that book it
should appear, that the number of renewed certificates, issued for continental
certificates, other than those dated between the 1st day of September, 1777,
and the 1st day of March, 1778, was L. 460,035:7:2; this amount is the one
adopted by the committee, as the certificates themselves to that amount have
been delivered to the Register. The difference is L. 1,118:0:9.
amounting altogether to L. 477,231:15:2. That custom, which extended to all
the different descriptions of certificates, though publicly known, does not
appear to have been authorized by law. The reasons alleged to justify it, are,
that the interest of the state was promoted thereby, inasmuch as it facilitated
the payments in the Land-Office; and that it accommodated individuals very
much, not only on account of such payments, but also in order to enable
original or other holders, who were obliged to sell a part of their
certificates, to dispose of only a part, and to keep what they did not wish to
sell. It produced, however, at last, one very great disadvantage, which was
taking up too great a proportion of the time of an officer, whose duties were,
perhaps, already too numerous. At all events it would have been better to have
applied to the Legislature, in order to receive their sanction. It must also be
observed, that that practice had taken place in some instances, before the
appointment of the Comptroller; the Auditors appointed to settle the accounts,
and issue the certificates for the depreciation of pay, having renewed some of
the certificates they had granted.

"II. Re-exchanging the continental certificates received on loan for the
New-Loan certificates.

"Two setts of books were also opened for that purpose, by the Comptroller; one
of New-loan certificates received on exchange, the other of continental
certificates returned to the parties.

"In order fully to understand how they were kept, it is necessary first to
know in what manner the exchange was proceeded upon. An account of the New-Loan
certificates he offered to be exchanged, was prepared, including the numbers of
the same, and names of the grantees; the principal sum of each certificate, the
number of years, interest paid by the state, and the date from which each began
to bear interest, together with the amount of interest, either due on the face
of the certificates upon the 31st day of December, 1787, or paid by the state
beyond the same date. To those calculations were added, on the same account,
the numbers and amount of the continental certificates returned by him in
exchange, together with the date of interest commencing, and the amount of
interest due on each, respectively, on the 31st day of December, 1787. This
last amount, together with the amount of interest paid by the state, upon the
New-Loan certificates offered to be exchanged beyond the 31st day of December,
1787, was charged to the party applying for the exchange; and the amount of
interest due on the face of the New-Loan certificate thus offered for exchange
on the said 31st day of December, 1787, was carried to the credit of the said
party; and the difference between the two amounts, was the sum to be paid in
indents, or 3 per cent, stock, either by, or to the party, in order to equalize
the interest. All the accounts were numbered and filed; at the same time were
entered, in distinct columns, in the book of continental certificates returned,
the number of continental certificates returned to, and of New-Loan
certificates received from each party; the amount of principal in specie
dollars of the continental certificates: the date of interest commencing on
each; the amount of interest due on each on the 31st day of December, 1787; and
the amount of indents or 3 per cent. stock, paid to or by the parties,
respectively. In the last column of each entry, the number of the account
presented was inserted, and the party signed his name, acknowledging the
receipt or payment of indents.

In the book of New-Loan certificates received on exchange, which was filed
afterward by the help of the numbered accounts, were entered the number of
each certificate received; the names of the grantees; the sums of principal of
each certificate; the years of interest paid by the state as endorsed on the
back of each certificate; the date at which interest commenced on the face of
each certificate; and the amount of interest either due on the certificate on
the 31st of December, 1787, or overpaid by the state beyond the same date. In
distinct columns were entered the numbers and amount of the New-Loan
certificates, called Surplus Certificates, which were at first issued by virtue
of the resolutions of Council abovementioned, in those cases where the exact
amount of the New-Loan offered for exchange, could not be paid in Continental
certificates. After the public offices of the United States had been removed to
Philadelphia, that mode was no longer pursued, but the difference which might
be due to the parties, was, by the Comptroller, assigned to them in 6 per cent.
and deferred stock, or registered debt upon the books of the Treasury of the
United States. It is also proper here to observe, that although the
above-described mode of exchange was the common one, yet in some instances it
was not followed, but the Comptroller assigned on the said books of the
Treasury, to the parties, an amount of 6 per cent. deferred, and 3 per cent.
stock. equal to the amount of New-Loans offered by them for exchange. Whether
this was done by the Comptroller's going and subscribing himself for the
parties, the Continental certificates due to them, or whether he had previously
subscribed for that purpose a number of Continental certificates deposited with
him, your committee cannot pretend positively to decide. If the last, however
convenient it might be, it was altogether unauthorised, either by law, or by
any resolutions of Council that have come to the knowledge of the committee.
The books of Continental certificates delivered so far as they are receipted,
are a complete proof of their being delivered, and at all events, that
transaction will be checked by the examination of the New-Loan certificates
delivered to the Register.

III. Receiving Continental and New-Loan certificates for the use of the state.

The bulk of those certificates were received from the Receiver-General of the
Land-Office, and sets of books were opened by the Comptroller, formed from the
accounts delivered by the Receiver-General, containing the principal sums of
the certificates, the date to which interest had been paid upon each
certificate, and the interest calculated upon each from that date to the 1st of
January, 1791. The amount of the New-Loan certificates thus redeemed, is
L.118,470:6:6 Those books do not contain the numbers of the certificates; but
so far as relates to the New-Loan certificates there is another auxiliary book
containing the numbers of the certificates; the names of the grantees, the
amount of principal, and the number of years; of interest paid at the time the
Comptroller received the certificates. That book was formed by the Comptroller,
from the certificates themselves; but as the amount of those books, to wit, L.
118,179:10:6, did not agree with the amount of the other book, the committee
adopted the result of this, it being checked by the Receiver-General's
accounts, and having been compared therewith by the Register-General.
.

The amount of Continental certificates is, L.328,924:6:3. The calculations of
interest are designed (by being checked by similar calculations made by the
Register upon the certificates as delivered by the Comptroller) to show that no
interest was drawn upon the same by the Comptroller since he received the
certificates. The same has been done in regard to certificates of all
descriptions whatever, received by the Comptroller. In addition to the
foregoing certificates, the Comptroller must be charged with the Continental
certificates mentioned in the note (f); with one in the name of Scott, and one
in the name of Thompson, as mentioned by preceding reports of the Comptroller;
and with another one of 5782 21/90 dollars, received of Wade, in payment of a
debt, and subscribed to the loan of the United States. He must likewise be
charged with a New-Loan certificate, received of George Woods, as mentioned in
former reports; and one of L. equal to 533 77/90 dollars, received in balance
of account from Atlee.

"The annexed accounts marked A, B, C, D, E, F, will fully explain the accounts
of the Comptroller, as to this first head.

"The account A, is introductory to the others, and exhibits the general
account of the New-Loan debt. By that account it appears that the amount of
New-Loan certificates yet in circulation, is L. 33,722:3, which amount includes
those offered for subscription to the loan of the United States. The
Comptroller has prepared from his books a list of the identical certificates
thus outstanding; but it is not perfectly checked; as soon as the
Register-General shall have arranged the certificates delivered to him in
numerical order, he will be able to form an accurate list of the same.

"The Comptroller should have in his possession an amount of Continental
certificates equal to that balance of New-Loan outstanding. From the
examination made by the committee of the certificates of that description in
his possession, it appears that he has only 81,384 11/90. dollars, equal to
L.30,519:0:11, leaving a deficiency of L.3,203:2:1, equal to 8,541 55/90
dollars, for which he must account. The same result will appear from the
account of the Comptroller with the Continental certificates received upon
loan, marked C, and from his account with the Continental certificates received
for the state, marked D, it appears that he is indebted for a balance of 3,914
41/100 dollars; these two balances together make a sum of 12,456 2/90 dollars,
3.

Mr. Nicholson's Answer.
3. "That there will be some balance deficient, I am certain, for the same
reasons mentioned in page 117 and, that the errors committed in re-exchanging,
may perhaps exceed those committed in the first loaning is also possible,
inasmuch as the business was more complex and difficult; however I hope for my
own interest, that on settlement of these accounts, it will be found the
committee were mistaken in the amount. Whenever that settlement shall have been
completed, as the committee in the 20th line of this page require, whatever
balance may remain, shall "be replaced by the Comptroller immediately."

Report continued.
-- and although it may happen from some mistakes, that each of the two
separate balances be wrong, yet the aggregate must be right, unless either the
sum of Continental certificates received on loan, as returned by the committee
of Council, or the sum of New-Loan certificates delivered to the Regist^^ as
returned by the Comptroller, be wrong. That sum should be replaced by the
Comptroller immediately.

"The account B, which is the Comptroller's account, with New-Loan certificates
received by him, requires no observation, except that the whole amount of the
certificates of that description delivered by him to the Register, except only
a sum of L. were so delivered since the appointment of the committee. 4

Mr. Nicholson's Answer.
4. "This might give the thing an appearance that such an appointment was
necessary to hasten their delivery; the fact was, that pending the examining
and advocating the accounts of Pennsylvania, under adjustment with the Union,
every other business that could be suspended, was put off; this was of that
class, and delayed until it was done after the committee's appointment and for
that reason."

Report continued.

-- But in order more fully to understand the account of indents and interest
accruing upon New-Loan and Continental certificates, the property of the state,
marked E, it is necessary to observe that the sources from whence the state
drew those indents, were, 1st. A sum equal to the interest paid by the state
upon the New-Loan debt. 2d. The interest accrued upon the New-Loan and
Continental certificates redeemed by the Land-Office, or that had in any other
way become the property of the commonwealth from the time to which interest had
been paid upon the same when thus redeemed, until the 31st of December, 1790,
when the arrearages of interest were funded by the United States.

"But upon an examination of the subject, it appeared that a great deficiency
had arisen under the first head beyond the balance for which the Comptroller
was accountable. The account F, states that deficiency, by which it appears
that the State-Treasurers have been credited by a sum of L 11,598:9:9, over and
above the sums which from the endorsements on the certificates appear to have
been paid. This must have arisen either from the State-Treasurers, having
through some mistake, been credited for a larger amount than they had
disbursed, or from the whole amount of interest paid, having not been endorsed
on the certificates. In either case the balance must be repaid to the state by
the officers who have been guilty of the neglect; but it will require a very
long examination, and a comparison of the endorsements on each certificate,
with the corresponding payments at the Treasury, before it will be possible to
discover exactly where the mistake or the fault lies. 5.

Mr. Nicholson's Answer.
5. "As the last paragraph refers to the State-Treasurers and not to me, I pass
over without observation, save that the method they mention, has long before
their appointment been adopted and proceeded in by me, and that it requires, as
they say, a very long examination, etc. to insert in the books opposite the
certificates respectively, every successive payment of interest made thereon,
and that however great the work, it is now nearly finished."

Report continued.
"In the mean while, in order to ascertain the balance which, exclusively of
that deficiency, might be due to the state, the committee charged the
Comptroller, as will appear by the account E, with the amount of interest which
appeared to have been paid upon the face of the certificate re-exchanged or
redeemed by the Land-Office. But as the Register has not yet furnished the
committee with the total amount which, from the examination of the certificates
themselves, will appear to have been paid upon the certificate re-exchanged;
the committee have been obliged to rest, for the present, satisfied with a
rough calculation made by themselves from the books of New-Loan certificates
received on exchange. They have also charged the Comptroller with the indents
he had drawn upon the continental certificates yet in his possession, and with
four years interest upon the two balances, amounting together to 12,456 2/90
dollars, which appear to be due by him in continental certificates, from the
accounts, C, and D.

"It will appear by the credit side of the same account E, that 27,473 28/100
dollars, in indents and 3 per cent. stock, which should have been paid long
before, were delivered or transferred to the Treasurer only in June last. The
committee thought themselves obliged to write to the Governor on that subject,
in order to hasten the delivery. By the same account it appears that the the
Comptroller is accountable for a balance of 47,544 33/90 dollars, a great part
of which, should, in the opinion of your committee have been paid before this
time. It is however, proper to observe, 1stly, That about 20,000 dollars, part
of the said balance, arise from indents due by parties (upon equalizing the
interest on the exchanges of New-Loan and continental certificates) which they
had not paid, by the information of the Comptroller, in June last, but for
which he is accountable as by the resolutions of Council abovementioned, he
was not to deliver any continental certificates until he had received the full
amount of interest due. -- 2ndly, That the Comptroller has mentioned that he
would transfer to the state whatever balance might appear to be due by him, as
soon as the same was ascertained. 6

Mr. Nicholson's Answer.
6. "It is not necessary for me to make any remark on the balance of indents,
represented by them in the 10th line from the bottom of the 126th page, to be
also due from me, as they have stated themselves in the 15th line preceding,
that it grew out of a "rough calculation" they had made, and as they have also
herein done me the justice, in the 3d, 4th, and 5th lines of this page, to
mention what I had said that if any balance might appear due from me, I would
transfer it to the state as soon as the same was ascertained.

"As the committee there also observe in the six last lines of the 126th page,
and two first lines of the present one, I know that I am not to expect from the
state, a credit for indents due by individuals. It is a debt due from them to
me, and if lost, or such part thereof as may, it must be sustained by myself.
The exchanges required by law could not be deemed to be made, until those
indents were previously paid, as it is thereby expressly directed.

"In the beginning of the sentence, and at the 17th to the 14th line from the
bottom of the last page, the committee again mention the late delivery of about
27,000 dollars in indents, to the Treasurer; the fact is, the quantity not
funded, was small in itself, and consisted of a great number of small and
broken indents which it required time to count, and which time was then, I
thought better employed at our accounts with the United States. It was
therefore delayed as well as much other business until that throng was over,
after which they were attended to; they would have been delivered then, had no
steps been taken by that committee, who I conceived had nothing to do with it.
It is further observable, that a considerable part of the said 27,473 dollars
28 cents, was already funded and stood to the credit of the state, so that the
interest came as regularly into the Treasury, as if the stock had been in the
Treasurer's hands."

Report continued. "SECOND HEAD. "Depreciation Debt.
"BY an Act passed on 18th day of December, 1780, Council were directed to
appoint three Auditors, with powers to settle the accounts of the officers and
soldiers of the Pennsylvania line, in the Act described for the depreciation of
their pay, and to issue certificates for the same. By an Act passed on the 10th
of April, 1781, Council were empowered to appoint additional Auditors for the
purpose of carrying into operation the last mentioned Act; they were also
directed to draw upon the State-Treasurer for such sums of state-money as they
thought convenient, and to place the same in the hands of commissioners to be
appointed for that purpose, who should, before the first day of May following,
repair to the several rendezvous of the regiments, and pay to such of the
officers and soldiers who should apply for the same, one third part of the sums
specified in the Depreciation certificates, issued to them by the Auditors; and
after receiving the old certificates, should transmit them to the Treasurer,
and issue new ones for the balance. By the same Act it was provided that such
persons as should not apply to the commissioners, might at any time afterward
apply to the Treasurer, who was directed likewise to pay one third of the
original certificates in state-money, and to issue new ones for the balance. In
conformity to those two laws, James Stevenson and John Nicholson were appointed
auditors and commissioners, together with several other persons, but the
presence of one of them was declared to be necessary in transacting the
business of commissioners, and they were directed to collect all the papers and
vouchers relative to those transactions. Receipts were also directed by
Council, to be taken for the payments in shilling-money, and all the
commissioners have accordingly settled their accounts with the former Auditors
of accounts.

"By an Act of the 13th of April, 1782, the Comptroller General (whose office
had been instituted by another Act of the same date) was directed to settle the
accounts of the depreciation of the pay of several officers and others in the
Act described, and Council were authorized to draw on the Treasurer, for such
sums of state-money as might, from time to time appear, by the report of the
Comptroller General to be necessary, and to place the same in the hands of the
said Comptroller, who should pay to such persons as might apply for the same,
one third part of the sums found due on settlement in bills aforesaid, and for
the remaining two thirds, they should receive certificates in like manner as
the other troops of the state. Although, by the Act instituting the office of
Comptroller General, the office of Auditors to settle the accounts of
depreciation, had been virtually abolished, yet neither by the same nor by the
last mentioned Act, was any provision made for settling any original
depreciation accounts, except of those in the Act specially defined, nor for
issuing of course any original certificates except for them, and, indeed, from
the general tenor and expressions of the last Act, the power to pay one third
in money, and to issue certificates for the two thirds remaining, seems
confined to the same description of persons The expression such persons, in the
9th section of the law, general as it may, on first view, appear, can only
apply to the persons in the Act mentioned, as there is not in the section a
single word about depreciation accounts, nor any other expression to define who
the persons are. 7.
.

Mr. Nicholson's Answer.
-- "Here the committee are at some pains to define the import of a section of
the law of 13th April, 1782, which I was thereby required to execute; the words
directed me to pay in state-money of 1781, to "such persons" as should apply
therefore, one third of the depreciation allowed at settlement -- this I did;
but had the words been "to such of the persons aforesaid" as should apply, I
should then have conformed my conduct to what they thought it ought to have
been under the law as it stands. To me it appears plain; I never had a doubt of
its meaning, nor should I have supposed a doubt would have existed with any,
had it not been for this of the committee.

"I do not indeed find that they suggest any articles of impeachment against me
for this violation of their construction of the law; had the advantages which
were gained by the state, in the saving of interest, on the third part thus
paid by me, lay on the other side, so as to have formed a debit of account, and
charge against me, no doubt it would have had a different turn with them."

Report continued.
-- By the Act of the 20th of September, 1782, all the powers formerly
exercised by the abovementioned Auditors, were vested in the Comptroller,
whereby he became authorized to settle all depreciation accounts, and to issue
original certificates for the same -- a power which he seems however to have
exercised from the time of his appointment. 8.

Mr. Nicholson's Answer.
8. "Had this committee been desirous of a candid investigation, and enquired,
I could have shown them that the very reverse of this was true; that in no one
instance was this power exercised until it was legally given, and that in fact
it appears from the minutes and files of the Assembly, the next law alluded to
was founded on my representation, that I had not power to adjust and certify
those claims, the settlement of which it provided for."

Report continued.
-- He also exercised all the powers vested formerly in the abovementioned
commissioners, who were authorized to pay a third in money, and to issue
certificates for the two thirds remaining, although they were not farther
vested in him than by the abovementioned 9th section of the Act of the 13th of
April, 1782, For the different descriptions of persons entitled to
depreciation, see the Acts of 18th December, 1780, 10th of April, and 1st of
October, 1781, 13th of April, 1782, 8th of April and 22d of September, 1785,
and 8th of March, 1786.
. 9.

Mr. Nicholson's Answer.
9 "Here also they misrepresent the matter, no such thing happened. I exercised
none of the powers of those commissioners after I ceased to be one of them
myself. The payments therein referred to, were made by me, in consequence of
directions and authority to the Comptroller General; and the payments thereof
from the Treasury, were on express warrants of the Supreme Executive Council,
founded on the reports of the Comptroller General, as by a reference to the law
and those drafts and reports will appear."

Report continued.
"By an Act of the 25th of March 1786, it was enacted that, in order to prevent
frauds, no depreciation certificates should be delivered except to the parties
themselves, their attorneys in fact or executors, or to their administrators
legally entitled to the same, or a share thereof, by succession ab intestato;
and that all depreciation certificates unclaimed on the 1st of April 1787,
should escheat to the commonwealth; the Comptroller General was further
directed, within two months after the said day, to transmit a list of all such
unclaimed certificates remaining in his hands, and of all that might have been
claimed, if any, together with the certificates, to Council, that the same
might be endorsed and rendered useless.

"By the Act of the 18th of December 1780, confiscated estates were directed to
be sold at public vendue for depreciation certificates, which were to be
delivered to the State-Treasurer, and by him cancelled, in such manner as the
Assembly should direct. All the certificates thus received by the late
Treasurer, Mr. Rittenhouse, were delivered to the Compttoller-General.

"By an Act of the 12th of March, 1783, a certain tract of land, lying
north-west of the Ohio and Allegheny rivers, and in the Act described, was
directed to be sold at public vendue, for depreciation certificates, to be paid
to the Receiver-General of the Land-Office.

"By the Acts of the 1st of April, 1784, and 8th of April, 1786, depreciation
certificates were made receivable in payment for lands, and city lots, and
payable for both to the Receiver-General, who was directed to deliver the same
to the Comptroller General.

"Provision was made for the final redemption of those certificates, and those
commonly called Funded Debt, by the Acts of the 9th of April, 1791, 10th of
April, 1792, and 9th of February, 1793.

"Previous to the appointment of the Comptroller General, the Auditors and
Commissioners vested with the power of issuing depreciation certificates, went,
according to the orders of Council, to several posts, and there settled the
accounts; issued the certificates, and made the payments in shilling money. The
Comptroller is in possession of the books they kept of their transactions; of
the counter parts of the certificates issued by them, and other vouchers. The
certificates received by them upon renewals, were also delivered to him. The
books of those transactions are not all of them equally correct and perfect.
From them, however, and the counter parts, the Comptroller has formed books of
depreciation certificates, issued before his appointment; and has continued
them in the same form for those issued by him. Those books contain the numbers
of the certificates; the names and rank of the grantees, and the amount of each
certificate, distinguishing the original from the renewed, but do not
distinguish in the column of original, those which were granted in full, from
those which were issued only for two-thirds (the other third being paid on
settlement) nor in the column of renewed, those which were granted for the
accommodation of the parties in exchange for, and to an equal amount of other
certificates, from those which were issued for two-thirds only of the original
certificate; the other third having been paid in shilling-money. Those books,
therefore, are not, alone, sufficient to settle either the general account of
depreciation debt, or the account of the Comptroller with the depreciation
certificates by him received. For in order to know the total amount of the
depreciation debt paid by the state, it is necessary to add to the amount of
the original certificates issued, the amount of shilling-money paid upon
settlement, exclusively of those certificates; and the Comptroller, exclusively
of all the certificates he may stand charged with for renewals, must also he
charged with the whole amount of the shilling-money paid in part of original
certificates, as the amount of those original certificates delivered by the
parties, upon receiving one-third thereof in said money, and the remainder in
new certificates, exceeds the amount of those renewed certificates exactly by
the amount of shilling-money, thus paid the parties in part.

"The Comptroller, at the request of the committee, furnished them with copies
of the accounts of the several Commissioners appointed to pay that
shilling-money, as settled by the former Auditors of accounts, and as those
accounts did not in all cases distinguish between the money paid upon
settlement, and the money paid in part of certificates, he, by sundry letters
and memorandums, informed the committee of the sums respectively paid. The
accounts of the Comptroller himself in shilling money, have been settled by the
Assembly as far as the 11th day of November, 1782; his accounts from that day
to the 19th of November, 1783, were exhibited to the committee, and he
furnished to them an abstract of his accounts from the 19th of November, 1783,
to the year 1787. Those last accounts were sent, since the appointment of the
committee, to the Register-General, to be examined and settled by him according
to law. Some of those accounts may have been entered in the general books, of
which mention will be made hereafter, under the fourth head, but all of them
were not, and such as were, were not so digested as to distinguish between the
money paid on settlement, from the money paid in part; and of course would (had
it not been for the explanations of the Comptroller) have been insufficient for
settling either the accounts of depreciation debt, or of the Comptroller.

"The account G is the general account of the state with the depreciation debt.
The debit side is left blank, as no accurate calculation has been procured of
the same, and it is now useless. The credit side consists of the shilling money
paid upon settlement of the total amount of original certificates issued,
(distinguishing in each case the amount paid, or issued by the Comptroller, or
by the respective Commissioners or Auditors) and of the escheats as returned to
the Secretary of the Commonwealth, per list annexed. The Comptroller had always
returned those escheats as amounting to L. 57,540 -- an amount estimated, but
not grounded upon any exact calculations. The Act of the 25th March 1786, is
grounded upon an idea that all the certificates were made out, as it orders the
Comptroller to return to Council, all the unclaimed ones by the 1st of June
1787. It appears, however, by the letter of the Comptroller to the Governor,
dated the 22d day of June 1792, that he made out the certificates only upon the
application of the parties, and of course that the claims, and not the
certificates unapplied for, escheated to the commonwealth by virtue of the Act
abovementioned. The amount of escheats as returned at the same time by the
Comptroller, is only L. 42,293:4:4. 10.


Mr. Nicholson's Answer.
10. "I had, on estimation, returned them, at L.57540."

Report continued.

-- The letter and return were sent in pur^^^nce of a request of the Governor
of the 29th of May 1792. According to the law, whose intention was clearly to
prevent any certificates issuing after the 1st of April 1787, he should have
made that return five years ^^ner than he did. 11.

Mr. Nicholson's Answer.
11. "It will not appear strange, that in an estimation, where, as the
committee observed, no exact calculations thereof were made, there should be a
difference as great as the above, from the true amount: but it is to be also
considered, that the first amount was lessened by certificates granted after
April, 1787, as appears by the books and receipts for accounts settled after
the same date; but which had been rendered before it; and owing to the want of
testimony, and additional proof, were postponed till afterward; so that here,
also, if the committees intention of the law was right, "that it clearly
prevented any certificates issuing after the 1st April, 1787" -- that law was
violated by the Register-General and myself, for several of those accounts were
not settled till after he came into office in 1789; but the law admits no such
construction as may appear therefrom.

"Having made out the depreciation certificates only as they were applied for,
I had no return of any to make as I informed the Council at the time, except
some I had stopped, on the presumption that though they were delivered by the
Auditors, they had never come to the possession of the parties in whose favor
they were granted. These certificates with a list thereof I took up to the
Council chamber, but there was a controversy and suit then depending respecting
them, and therefore they could not be cancelled. This being what the law
required of me, I did not delay it as the committee say, for five years; the
fact is the list furnished the Governor at his request in 1792, whatever
purposes it might serve, was not the one required by law; it was however
furnished when asked, and had it been requested by the Executive Council they
should then have had it."

Report continued.
"Three enquiries arise on the subject of the issuing depreciation certificates
-- 1st. Have no other certificates been issued than those entered upon the
books of issue? 2d. Have no certificates been issued in the name of persons
who, by the terms of the laws, were not entitled to the same, 3d. Have the
certificates always been delivered to the persons in whose name they had
issued, or to their legal representatives? The answer to the first query may be
obtained, from a comparison of the books, with the certificates delivered to
the Register, after the same shall have been numerically arranged, and with the
list of those subscribed to the loan of the United States. Should any
certificates appear, upon such examination, to have been issued by the
Comptroller, and not have been entered, he must account for the same. The
second enquiry will require a minute comparison of every certificate, with the
number, rolls and other vouchers upon which the certificates issued. As to the
third, it will be very difficult fully to ascertain it, because prior to the
law of the 25th March, 1786, no receipts were taken for certificates either
issued by the Auditors or the Comptroller. There is however a kind of indirect
proof, by which a great part of those certificates are discovered to have been
issued to the parties themselves. Many of the certificates were assigned, and
receipts were taken on the back of those which were discharged in part, in
shilling money for the same. The committee were furnished by the
Register-General with the depreciation certificates delivered to him by the
Comptroller; they examined them, set aside all those which appeared to them,
upon the face of the same, to bear evidence of their having been delivered to
the parties; and formed a list of the others, a copy of which they are to
transmit to the Comptroller, as he thinks he may collect some other indirect
proofs respecting many certificates upon which no receipt nor assignment appear
Most of the receipts and assignments are irregular for want of witnesses.
.

-- A similar examination should take place in regard to the certificates
delivered by the Treasurer to the Register, and to those subscribed to the loan
of the United States, if they can be obtained for that purpose. It will be also
necessary to examine the letters of administration, and receipts given by
administrators for all certificates issued to the estate of any deceased person
The reasons why the committee did not make that examination, nor the comparison
of the muster rolls with the certificates, was, because the muster rolls,
letters of administration, and other vouchers, were lodged with the
commissioners appointed to settle the accounts of the United States with the
individual States.
.

-- The frauds committed by individuals, in procuring through the means of such
letters, certificates they had no claims to; and the committee are of opinion
suits should be instituted against the parties where they can be discovered,
and where there is any probability of recovering any part of the same. 12.

Mr. Nicholson's Answer.
12. "Here the committee represent that they went into an investigation of the
depreciation books and certificates, and they report the progress they made
therein. The examination of these accounts has been proceeded in some length
by the Register-General, and I am in hopes will soon be finally closed and
settled by him. But ho^^ the committee could (if the papers had not been in the
possession of the United States), or how the person who examines the letters of
administration granted for estates of persons deceased, can, as the committee
say, at settlement discover the frauds which have been committed by
individuals, so as to institute suits against the parties, exceeds my
comprehension. I will allow that the gentlemen of that committee possessed a
great deal of wisdom, some of them a great deal indeed! but it must require
more knowledge than heaven has imparted to us mortals to determine from an
inspection of a letter of administration regularly granted, whether the person
on whose estate it was granted, was dead or alive, without some other knowledge
of the fact, or whether even before the Register of Wills there might not have
been an assumption of false names. If these frauds are discernable from such
examination, I was certainly to blame in not detecting them before I delivered
any estate upon them."

Report continued.
"Beside the books abovementioned, there are books kept in the Comptroller's
office of the certificates redeemed by the Land-office, perfectly similar to
those mentioned under the New-Loan head There are also similar books for the
Funded debt.
;

-- but there are none of certificates received and renewed, nor is it possible
to ascertain in every case of renewals, for what number each renewed
certificate was issued.

"By the account H, which is the general account of the depreciation
certificates issued, it appears that there is yet a balance outstanding, not
redeemed, amounting to L. 3,710:4:3. Two of the items require some explanation;
the first, of certificates stopped or delivered, includes the certificates of
Christie and Ryan, (from which the letters of the Comptroller to the Governor,
dated the 22d of June, 1792, and the letter of the same to Council, dated April
the 7th, 1788, will account) a certificate in the name of (...) upon which Col.
Forest administered, in order to prevent its being taken fraudulently, by
virtue of some letters of administration, and which he left with the
Comptroller, in order that it should be delivered to the proper party, who has
never applied for the same; and another one in the name of Hardy, stopped by the
Comptroller. The second item of errors discovered, amounting to L. 5,051:12:1,
arises from errors made by the auditors in the settlement of the accounts for
the depreciation of the pay, discovered by the Comptroller, and recovered by
stopping the certificates and issuing new ones to a less amount. This amount
was not entered in the books, (although both this account, and the account of
the Comptroller with depreciation certificates, could not be settled without
knowing it,) and has been furnished as a separate account, by the Comptroller.

"The account I, is the account of the Comptroller with depreciation
certificates by him received. He is credited in that account for a sum of L.
2833:14:4, for certificates renewed (with which he is charged on the debit
side) the original of which had been lost, but were renewed by special
resolutions of the Assembly, and for which, of course, he should not be
charged, as he never received the original corresponding thereto. That amount
has been furnished by the Comptroller, but not compared with the resolutions by
the committee. It appears by that account, that there is a balance of
L.5,551:2:10 in favor of the Comptroller, 13.

Mr. Nicholson's Answer.
13. "This with the interest thereon from April, 1781, exceeds the balances in
other certificates which they found against me; they however balance this by
supposing it to arise from some mistake; candor and equal justice would have
called for the same conclusion in those accounts where the balances were by
them stated against me, until both were liquidated and settled, which is now
proceeding in, and I hope will soon be done; but in the former case, what say
the committee? He should pay these balances immediately!"

Report continued.
-- which must arise from some mistake not yet discovered, probably from a
greater number of certificates having been issued or renewed by the Auditors,
than are entered in the books of issue, or from some mistake in the accounts of
shilling money, or from some error in the amount of certificates delivered to
the Register, which is taken from the Comptroller's books; the addition on the
Register's own books not being yet completed and compared.

"THIRD HEAD.
"BY an Act passed the first of April, 1784, the Comptroller was directed, upon
liquidation of the several accounts of the officers, soldiers and citizens of
the state, to grant certificates to them, for the balances due to them
respectively, and by an Act passed the 30th of March, 1785, which provided for
similar certificat^^ being issued for claims against forfeited estates, it was
also enacted, that all persons who had balances due by the state, upon the
settlement of their several accounts, should be entitled to receive
certificates as citizens of the state, See also acts of the 25th March, 1785,
of the 3d and 27th March, 1790, and resolutions of the Assembly of the 25th
March, and 22d December, 1784.
.

-- Those certificates were by the same acts, mentioned under the foregoing
heads, made receivable in payment for lands, and their redemption was provided
for by the same laws and in the same manner as depreciation certificates.

"Books of those certificates, issued, redeemed by the Land-Office, and
renewed, have been kept by the Comptroller, which are similar to those kept for
other kind of certificates, as mentioned under the foregoing heads. The
committee were anxious to investigate whether those certificates had always
issued upon proper principles, and for debts justly due, and whether they had
always been granted to the parties thereto entitled. But as all the vouchers
and receipts relative thereto, were, (as the Comptroller informed the
committee) lodged with the commissioners appointed to settle the accounts of
the individual states with the United States, it was thought better to defer
the investigation, till after the 1st day of July, at which time the
appointment of the commissioners expired. When that day came, however, the
Comptroller informed the committee, that those papers were kept in the
possession of the United States, both as vouchers of the claims of
Pennsylvania, and as checks against future demands that might hereafter be made
by individuals. The committee applied a few days after to the Secretary of the
Treasury of the United States, for leave of having access to those vouchers --
This was granted by the Secretary, (as will appear by his letter of the 17th of
July) provided the examination was confined to the papers of the commonwealth,
and not extended to any statements or remarks of the late commissioners; but it
was at the same time requested that the inspection should be deferred till the
return of Mr. Farrel, late clerk of the commissioners, who alone knew the
disposition of the papers, and was then absent. Upon being informed of the
return of Mr. Farrel, the committee wrote a second letter to the Secretary on
the 5th of August. Orders were accordingly given to Mr. Farrel to attend the
committee at any hour they thought convenient, and from the 13th of August,
they had free access to all the papers they wanted; but the time being so
short, prevented them from entering into the full investigation they intended
The same reason prevented the committee from examining the muster rolls and
other vouchers relative to depreciation certificates.
, -- and they examined only different parcels of accounts, taken from different
species of debts, in order to form a general idea of the manner in which the
business was transacted. As far as they examined, they found vouchers along
with every account, and receipts for all the certificates issued, given either
by the parties, their assignees, or attorneys (and then the assignments or
powers of attorney are filed with the account) There is an exception as to the
clothing accounts for which no receipts, assignments, or powers, are filed with
the accounts in the possession of the United States.
-- or by certain persons to whom the certificates were given to be by them
delivered to the proper parties. This last mode (to wit, to deliver
certificates to some persons who gave receipts for the same, and promised to
distribute them to the parties) was adopted chiefly to facilitate the payment
of militia companies. The total amount thus delivered is as per an annexed list
L.91,987:8:2; books have been kept of the certificates delivered in that
manner, in which each individual stands charged with the certificates by him
received, and he is to be credited either by producing the receipt of the
party, or by returning the certificates. The amount thus returned, and which on
the 11th day of June past was in the possession of the Comptroller, is
L.2,317:0:8. The Comptroller stands charged in the same books with an amount of
L. 5,544:4:7, for which he made the certificates out, but has never issued
them. Two lists including the numbers and sums of those certificates, and the
names of the grantees, as given to the committee by the Comptroller, are
hereunto annexed; and he is charged in his account with funded debt
certificates, marked L, with the aggregate of those two sums (as having never
been issued) amounting to L.7,861:5:3. Some measures should be taken to have
those certificates dispos^d of; but whether they should be cancelled, or a
limited time given to the parties to apply for the same, the committee will not
pretend to say; in their opinion, the Comptroller should have rendered an
account of them before this time. The balance of the above mentioned account L
is not struck, the amount of the certificates delivered to the Register not
being yet added, although the whole is delivered. By the general account of the
state with the certificates of funded debt, marked K, it appears that the
balance now outstanding, including the above mentioned sum of L.7,861:5:3, not
yet issued is L.16,713:3:8.

"Besides the above mentioned books, there is a book of accounts of clothing,
an abstract whereof is hereunto annexed. In those books each party is credited
for the number of years, months and days he staid in the army, from the 1st of
January, 1780, at the rate of L. 37:15 a year, for clothing due to him; and is
charged with the articles of clothing received by him at the same average
prices by which the rate of L.37:15 is computed.

"From an investigation of the transactions relative to that subject, it
appears, That by a law passed the 1st day of March, 1780, certain officers by
the Act specified, were promised during their continuance in actual service,
one complete suit of clothes each, once in every year, and Council directed,
from time to time, to purchase the same; that by the same law Council were also
directed to purchase, for the use of the army, rum, sugar, coffee, and certain
other enumerated articles, to be distributed amongst the officers and soldiers
in certain proportions, and at certain prices by the Act prescribed; that in
conformity to that law, large quantities of clothing and of the enumerated
articles (then known by the name of "Army refreshments,") were purchased by
Council and distributed amongst the troops by commissaries for that purpose
appointed; that after the law, by which the depreciation of pay of the troops
of the state was made up to them, had passed, the two provisions above
mentioned were supposed to be virtually repealed, 14,

Mr. Nicholson's answer.
14. "This appears about as reasonable as that a law allowing mileage to
members of Assembly should repeal the law allowing their daily wages."

Report continued.
-- and Council ceased to purchase the clothing, and refreshments, and that in
December, 1790, after the law had been dormant for ten years, 15,

Mr. Nicholson's answer.
15. "If the law had slept a century, still it was a law, and as such entitled
to the same degree of respect with any other law; but the fact here is just the
reverse of what is stated by the committee. In 1784 a number of officers'
claims under this Act was presented to my office, and on the 1st of March,
1784, I reported in favor of their claim to the late Council. Instead of acting
upon these claims, upon which the fate of a number similar was to depend: they
are endorsed in the hand writing of John Dickinson, Esquire then President of the
Supreme Executive Council "postponed."

Report continued.
-- some speculators who from the manner in which they made their purchases,
seem to have received the best possible information on the subject, 16,

Mr. Nicholson's answer.
16. "The inuendo in this part of their report and the observations in another
paragraph afterward "that there were strong reasons to believe that one of the
speculators had at least received his information from the Comptroller's
office," -- at the same time that it excited my contempt for those of the
committee who made it, called for some notice from me; in order therefore to
understand what was meant thereby, I wrote the letter contained in the schedule
marked (A.)

(A.)
"SIR, Nov. 28, 1793.
"IN a printed copy of a report to the late House of Representatives, from a
committee of whom you were one, is the following paragraph -- For those
reasons, and because there is strong reasons to believe, that one of the
speculators had at least received his information from the Comptrollers'
office, the committee are of opinion -- etc.

"You will oblige me by informing, by a line, the name of the person above
referred to -- one of the speculators.

With great respect, etc. JOHN NICHOLSON."

BENJ. R. MORGAN, Esquire
-- and received the answer marked (B.)

(B.)
"SIR, Dec. 1, 1793.
"I CAN have no hesitation in informing you, that the person alluded to in that
part of the report of the committee of investigation, to which your letter
refers, is Mr. Samuel Baird, formerly of Norris-town, in Montgomery county.

With great respect, etc. B. R. MORGAN."

JOHN NICHOLSON, Esquire
-- Finding in this answer that Samuel Baird, Esquire was the person alluded to, I
think it proper first to declare that this gentleman is one for whom I have
long had a friendship, and of whose integrity I have an high estimation; some
things are alleged against him in some of these purchases, and a suit is
depending in which I shall be sorry if I shall be found to have been mistaken
in his character. -- After this I proceed to take a view of the situation of
his purchases, and of this subject generally, first, I find that the number of
claims of this class rendered amount to 366.

"Second, I find that of these, 66 were rendered by said Baird, of which two
were for General and D. St. Clair, and were not claimed by him, but received by
themselves respectively.

"Third, Although it required no official information to distinguish those
gentlemen in the country, who had served as officers in the late army, so as to
apply only to those who were entitled; yet we find, and the committee, from the
books laid before them, had an opportunity to observe that of the 64 claims
rendered by Saml. Baird, there were two, Christopher Gettig and Casper Wetzel's
estate, who were not entitled to any emoluments from the said law. Had he been
instructed in his purchases by me, I would have informed him of this; instead
of which he gave them as much I believe as any others.

"Fourth. Another question whether he obtained previous information from me of
the clothing received by the different officers, so as to ascertain the
balances due, can best be refuted by a view of the facts. Of the 62 claims
remaining as aforesaid, presented by him, the following persons had received
such a quantity of clothing as to leave a balance due by them to the State on
said account, viz. Capt. James Vaugh, L. 4 5 2 due by him. Capt. Sam. Miller,
19 8 9 do. Capt. Wm. Gray, 2 0 2 do Of the officers some had more and some less
due to them; yet I have been informed he gave a like sum for the risque of
each; and that for the above who had nothing to receive, he gave as much as any
-- Does this look like the best possible information? does it look like any
proper information at all?

"Fifth. Besides the above there is another proof in the account of Capt.
Symonds, that I did not at least favor the claims of said Baird; this will
appear from the proceedings on that account, which are detailed in the papers
marked (C) in the schedule.

(C.)
March 19th, 1791.
"EXAMINED and settled the account of arrears of clothing of Capt. Jonas
Simonds, and allowed L. 145:0:5.

"The above was also allowed by the Register-General, and sent to be approved
by the Governor; before the latter had decided thereon.

"The same was re-settled as follows, viz.


"April 19th, 1791.
"WHEREAS a claim was made, and account in due time rendered, by Samuel Baird,
Esquire attorney, for arrearages due to Capt. Jonas Simonds, as an officer of the
late Pennsylvania line; which account has been settled, and allowed to amount
of L. 145:0:5; and whereas, on a revision and re-examination of the same, and
an investigation of the War-Office of the United States, into the date and
nature of the commission of the said Jonas Simonds, it appears that he was in
the army at the time, although he received no share of the clothing, when
clothing was furnished to each Pennsylvania officer in 1779. That he was an
officer in Col. Lamb's regiment of New York artillery, and as such
commissioned; that he was only draughted into the Pennsylvania regiment of
artillery, where he did duty from the year 1781; and that in fact he was not a
Pennsylvania officer: Therefore, in virtue of the powers and authorities in me
vested by law, I do hereby review and re-settle the said account of the said
Jonas Simonds, rendered by the said Baird, and settled as aforesaid, and the
claim wrongfully so awarded do hereby annul, and the said claim of the said
Baird is rejected, not being within the provisions of the Act allowing clothing
by the state to certain officers."

"Of this adjudication, I informed Samuel Baird, the person by whom this claim
had been exhibited.


"On the 2d of June, I received a letter from the Governor, in the following
words:

"SIR, Philadelphia, 2d June, 1791."
"IN consequence of your representation of the 23d of April last, I think it is
proper, that the claim of Capt. Jonas Simonds, to the gratuitous allowance of
clothing from Pennsylvania, should be re-considered: I have, therefore,
transmitted to the Register-General, and to yourself, copies of the documents
which Capt. Simonds has laid before me on the subject.

I am, etc. THOMAS MIFFLIN."

TO JOHN NICHOLSON, Comptroller General.

"The enclosures were as follows, viz.

"SIR, "Philadelphia, June 2d, 1791.
"I FIND, that after my account for arrearages of clothing had been made out by
Mr. John Nicholson, examined by the Register, and approved of by his excellency
the Governor -- that a re-examination has taken place, by Mr. Nicholson, in
which he states as an objection, that I was not a Pennsylvania officer, and
therefore not entitled to any emolument from the state as such.

"In order to prove that my claim on the state is well founded, I beg leave to
refer you to the act of Congress, bearing date the third day of October, 1780,
the arrangement of the Pennsylvania line, a copy of which I have enclosed; also
the different muster rolls, and returns of the artillery, belonging to this
state.

"These are objects of a continental nature, and how far they are binding on
the state, I submit.

"However, I was received into the regiment of artillery belonging to this
state, in consequence of the above recited Act of Congress, and have been
settled with as such, in every instance, except the clothing account. --
Perhaps it will not be amiss to mention, that I commanded a company of
artillery, in Col. John Lamb's regiment, that was raised in this state in
seventy-nine, and received the stores given by the state of Pennsylvania, to
the troops of her line, when in that regiment.

"I received the five months and a half pay from the state, when her line was
dismissed the service; also my proportion of land, and my continental
certificates, funded by this state -- in fact, not a single demur has ever
taken place, until the present.

"I beg you will lay my claim before the Governor.

I am, with respect, Your most obedt. humble servant, (Signed) J. SIMONDS."
"The above is a true extract from a letter addressed to the Secretary of the
commonwealth, by Capt. Jonas Simonds.

(Signed) A. J. DALLAS, Secretary.
Secretary's-Office, Philadelphia, 2d June. 1791.



"IT appears from the records of the War-Office of the United States, that by
the arrangement of the Pennsylvania line, dated Philadelphia, December 22d,
1782, signed by Arthur St. Clair, major general, and which arrangement was to
take place on the 1st day of January, 1783, that Jonas Simonds was arranged the
fourth captain in the corpse of artillery, of which Andrew Porter was
lieutenant colonel commandant -- That six captains of the same corpse, to wit,
Robert Coltman, Worsely Emes, James M'Clure, William Power, Thomas Douglas, and
William Martin, were returned as officers who were to retire from service, upon
the 1st of January, 1783, in consequence of the reform then to take place.

Given at the War-office of the United States, the 5th of May, 1791. JOHN
STAGG, Junior, Chief Clerk."


"On the seventh of June I received another letter from the Governor, and
enclosure as follows:

"SIR, Philadelphia, 7th June, 1791.
"I THINK it proper to transmit to you a copy of the Register-General's report,
on a revision of the claim of Capt. Jonas Simonds; and as the last section of
the Act, on which the claim is founded, refers the determination of any
difficulty or doubt, concerning the persons entitled to the benefits and
advantages granted by the legislature, to the executive authority, you will be
pleased to furnish me with your report, as soon as you conveniently can, that I
may be enabled, with full information, to decide on the present case. I am, etc.

THOMAS MIFFLIN."

TO JOHN NICHOLSON, Comptroller General of Pennsylvania.

"SIR, Register-General's Office, June 4th, 1791.
"IN obedience to your excellency's commands, I have revised Capt. Jonas
Simonds' account for clothing, granted by virtue of an Act of the first of
March, 1780, and find, that Capt. Jonas Simonds was commissioned by Congress,
in September, 1778, as a Capt. of artillery, and attached to Col. Lamb's
regiment. -- That he commanded two of the four companies raised in
Pennsylvania, late Lee and Jones' -- that, by the arrangement that took place
the first of January, 1781, under the Act of Congress of the third of October,
1780, he was called, with his company, to join the 4th Pennsylvania regiment of
artillery, under the command of Col. Proctor -- that he was mustered and
returned as an officer of the Pennsylvania line, with Capt. Proctor, who
commanded his own and Coran's company -- that he received his pay from, and
settled his accounts with the play master of said regiment -- also received part
of the stores, granted by the state to the officers belonging to her line;
received his donation lands from, and funded his certificates with the state --
that the 7th section of the Act, 1st March, 1780, directs, "That the offi^^^
belonging to the troops of Pennsylvania, etc. shall be furnished with o^^
complete suit of regimental uniform clothes, etc." and in the twentieth
section, in describing the troops entitled to the benefit of the Act, includes
the companies late commanded by Lee and Jones. -- And further, alluding to the
officers and soldiers "who are, or shall be considered by the honorable
Congress, as part of the quota of this state, etc." I also find, that the Act
of Congress of the third of October, 1780, provides, that the regiments of
artillery, as they now stand, be considered as belonging to the states
respectively, to which they are, or may be assigned; which states shall
complete them to the full complement, supply them with necessaries, and in
every respect treat them as if raised therein.

"I am, therefore, of opinion, that Capt. Simonds is entitled to the benefit of
the Act of the first of March, 1780; and that his account for arrearages of
clothing should be allowed, as stated, amounting to one hundred and forty-five
pounds and five pence.

JOHN DONALDSON."

To his excellency THOMAS MIFFLIN.

"Whereupon I wrote to the Governor, on the 7th of June, as follows, viz.

"SIR, Comptroller-General's office, June 7, 1791.
"I WAS honored with your excellency's letter of the 2d instant, covering an
extract of a letter from Capt. Jonas Simonds; and I have also received yours of
this date, with the enclosure on the subject of the claim for the arrearages of
clothing of the said Jonas Simonds, and, in obedience, I have reconsidered the
said claim, and the reasons urged in support of it.

"If a recommendatory act of Congress was obligatory on the several states,
unless adopted by those states, then would there be doubt the claim made for
the arrearages of captain Simonds' clothing should be allowed, under the Act of
Congress of October, 1780, as well as the claim of sundry officers in the
regiment of cavalry, belonging to the line of this state, and others, in
similar situation, whose accounts have been rejected; as well as many other
claims, which this state have not agreed to, although recommended by Congress.

"If the having received state stores, as they were called, from this state,
were the rule to determine the persons entitled to the benefits of the Act of
March 1st, 1780, then would commissaries, forage masters, conductors of
military stores, waggon-masters, and even the auditors of the main army have
been entitled to arrearages of clothing, for each of these have received
stores, as may be seen by the accounts thereof; indeed, there is one account
raised by the officers who issued stores of this state, for detached artillery
belonging to the state of New York.

"I^ to have been on the musters in the regiment to which he was annexed, and
where he served, would substantiate this claim, the claims to clothing of the
officers from Connecticut, Jersey, and Virginia, in the Pennsylvania regiment
of cavalry, before mentioned, would have been well founded also. Indeed, I
cannot conceive of his commanding a company in this regiment, to which he was
attached, and being mustered at all, without being mustered where he served;
these musters do not specify the state to which the officers respectively
belonged. He was not commissioned as an officer of the Pennsylvania line, by
his being attached to the Pennsylvania line; the Act of Congress aforesaid,
(not of the state) allowed him to be treated in the same manner, etc. -- to be
like another, and to be that other, are different.

"If the having had his certificates funded with the state, would support the
claim in question, then would generals Muhlenbergh and Neville, of the Virginia
line; major James Moore, of the Delaware line; and other officers of the lines
of different states, who had become citizens of Pennsylvania, and had their
certificates loaned -- been also entitled to arrears of clothing. Captain
Simonds was a citizen of Pennsylvania, and as such entitled to have his
certificates loaned.

"The observations, that he received a donation of land, and an advance of 5
months pay, from the state, lose their force, where it is considered that was
done through mistake; when I made the returns to Council, upon which these
benefits were granted, I did not know capt. Simonds' situation; and the same
mistake, at first, induced me to pass the account in question, where it would
probably have remained, had not another officer represented it, who saw and
complained that he could not get what was granted to another in a similar case.
-- The five and a half months pay is credited to Pennsylvania by the United
States, and it has been already stopped from captain Simonds. -- Respecting
the donation land, I have already addressed your excellency, in order that it
may be recovered to the state.

"Although the state stores were issued without due regularity at first, yet
after the Act of March 1st, 1780, I have examined, and do not find that any was
issued from this state to captain Simonds: I have enclosed a number of weekly
returns of that company, from which you will see, that the Pennsylvania
officers only are included, and that this is left out; the one dated December
25th, 1780, after having been made out for the others, your excellency will
observe, has had captain Simonds' name added in colonel Porter's hand, on the
31st of December, 1780, and his proportion of rations also carried out, and
added to the other officers; but you will also observe, that although all this
was done at the time to procure these stores for him, yet they could not be
obtained, Why! he was not a Pennsylvania officer; and they were delivered only,
as appears by the receipt on the back, to the other officers.

"And further, he did not receive his depreciation of pay from this state, but
that to which he belonged.

"Moreover, when, according to the very act on which arrearages are now
claimed, clothing was provided at the time, by the Council, for each person
entitled, they directed a suit for each of the other officers of this company,
and none for captain Simonds. If he was not entitled to clothing then, he could
not be entitled to arrears therefore afterward.

"On the whole, the further I have examined into, the more clearly I am of
opinion that this claim is not agreeable to law.

I have the honor to be, Sir, etc. JOHN NICHOLSON."

His excellency THOMAS MIFFLIN, Governor of Pennsylvania.

"On the 17th of June I received a letter, and enclosure, from the Governor, as
follows -- by which this claim was admitted, contrary to my judgment -- viz.

"GENTLEMEN, Philad. 17th June, 1791.
"AS a doubt has arisen, upon the validity of the claim of captain Jonas
Simonds, to the benefits and advantages granted to certain persons, in and by
the eighth section of an Act of the General Assembly, entitled "An Act for the
more effectual supply and honorable reward of the Pennsylvania troops, in the
service of the United States of America," passed on the first day of March,
1780; I have required the opinion of the Attorney General upon the subject; and
in consideration thereof, and of the circumstances of the case, I am induced to
believe, that the claimant was an officer within the meaning of the
Legislature. In pursuance, therefore, of the authority to me by law given, I do
adjudge and finally determine, that captain Jonas Simonds is entitled to all
the benefits and advantages intended to be granted by the eighth section of the
above recited Act; and you will proceed in the premises accordingly.

I am, Gentlemen, etc. THOMAS MIFFLIN."

TO JOHN NICHOLSON, Esquire Comptroller General; and JOHN DONALDSON, Esquire
Register-General of Pennsylvania.

"SIR, June 15th, 1791, Arch-street.
"IN obedience to your commands, I have carefully examined the various
documents transmitted to me, respecting the claim of captain Jonas Simonds; and
upon comparing the facts therein stated, with various resolutions of Congress,
and the Act of Assembly upon which his claim is founded, I am of opinion, that
the claimant was an officer within the meaning of the said Act, and that he is
entitled to all the benefits intended to be granted by the 8th section, to the
officers of the Pennsylvania line, in the federal army.

I have the honor to be, etc. WM. BRADFORD."

His excellency THOMAS MIFFLIN, Esquire Governor.

"Sixth. There remains another incontrovertible proof that I did not, "at
least" favor Mr. Baird's claims. On an appeal to the Supreme court by a number
of officers whose clothing accounts were settled on the same principles exactly
as those brought forward by said Baird, in which they complained of my mode of
settlement being unfavorable to them. They obtained by the decision of the
Supreme court per schedule (D), (D.)
Capt. Isaac Roach, v. The commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Appeal from the settlement of accounts by the Comptroller and Register-General
of Pennsylvania, to the Supreme Court.

"I Certify, that at a Supreme court held at Philadelphia, for the state of
Pennsylvania, on the eleventh day of January last, before the honorable Thomas
M'Kean, Esquire doctor of laws, Chief Justice, and his associate justices, of the
Supreme Court aforesaid, the above appeal was tried, and a verdict given, by a
jury of the country, in favor of the the said Isaac Roach, for the sum of two
hundred and ninety-eight pounds eight shillings and one penny, with interest
from the first day of July, 1783, and six pence costs; subject however to the
opinion of the court, in a case stated; and that at a Supreme Court held at
Philadelphia, on the thirteenth day of April, instant, after the argument, the
said court were of opinion, and gave their judgment accordingly -- First, that
the sum with which the plaintiff is charged, for the clothing he received, is
to be considered as continental money, and that the specie value thereof, is
all that is at present chargeable against him; and that a balance is due to the
said Isaac Roach from the commonwealth, on the said thirteenth day of April, of
principal and interest, on the said clothing account, of forty-seven pounds
sixteen shillings and five pence halfpenny -- Secondly, that the said
plaintiff is not entitled to any arrears of half pay; but that the certificate
for five years full pay, ought to have been dated, and to bear interest from
the 22d March, 1783; and that the plaintiff is therefore entitled to charge
against the commonwealth the interest on the said certificate, from the 22d
March, 1783, till the 1st July following, which, with interest thereon to this
day, amounts to the further sum of twenty-eight pounds and eleven pence, making
in the whole, the sum of seventy-five pounds seventeen shillings and four pence
halfpenny, in specie; and that the commonwealth pay the costs of the appeal,
amounting to eleven pounds eleven shillings and six pence.

Witness my hand, this 24th day of April, 1793. EDWARD BURD, Prothon. Supreme
Court."

To his excellency THOMAS MIFFLIN, Esquire Governor of Pennsylvania.
Capt. Nathan Boys, v. The commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Similar appeal to the appeal of Isaac Roach.

"I Certify, that on a case stated similar to that of Isaac Roach aforesaid,
the Supreme Court aforesaid were of opinion, and did adjudge, on the said
thirteenth day of April, that there was due, on the same day, to the said
Nathan Boys, on his clothing account, including interest, the sum of fifty-two
pounds nineteen shillings and nine pence halfpenny; and also a further sum of
twenty-eight pounds and eleven pence, in specie, including interest, for his
arrears of interest on his commutation money, from the 22d March, 1783, to the
1st July, 1783, and for the interest thereon, from that day to the said 13th
day of April, 1793, amounting, in the whole, to the sum of eighty-one pounds
and eight pence halfpenny, in specie; and that the commonwealth pay the costs
of said appeal, amounting to ten pounds three shillings and six pence.

Witness my hand, this 24th day of April, 1793. EDWARD BURD. Prothon. Supreme
Court."

To his excellency THOMAS MIFFLIN, Esquire Governor of Pennsylvania.
Dr. James Hutchinson v. The commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Similar appeal to the appeal of Isaac Roach.

"I Certify, that on a case stated, similar to that of Isaac Roach aforesaid,
the Supreme Court aforesaid, were of opinion, and did adjudge, on the said 13th
day of April, that there was due, on the same day, to the said Dr. James
Hutchinson, on his clothing account, the sum of sixty-seven pounds sixteen
shillings and one penny three farthings, in specie, including interest; and
also a further sum of fifty-one pounds ten shillings and one penny farthing, in
specie, for his arrears of interest on his commutation money, from the 22d
March, 1783, to the first day of July, 1783, and for the interest thereon, from
that day to the 13th day of April, 1793, amounting in the whole, to the sum of
one hundred and nineteen pounds six shillings and three pence; and that the
commonwealth pay the costs of said appeal, amounting to ten pounds three
shillings and six pence. Witness my hand, this 24th day of April, 1793

EDWARD BURD. Prothon. Supreme Court."

To his excellency THOMAS MIFFLIN, Esquire Governor of Pennsylvania.
Capt. Stephen Beasly, v. The commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Similar appeal to the appeal of Isaac Roach.

"I Certify, that on a case stated, similar to that of Isaac Roach aforesaid,
the Supreme court aforesaid were of opinion, and did adjudge on the said
thirteenth day of April, that there was due, on the same day, to the said Capt.
Stephen Beasly, on his clothing account, the balance of forty-seven pounds four
shillings and seven pence half penny, in specie, including interest, and also a
further sum of twenty-eight pounds and eleven pence, in specie, for his arrears
of interest on his commutation money, from the 22d March, 1783, to the first
day of July, 1783; and for interest thereon, from that day to the thirteenth
day of April, 1793, amounting in the whole, to the sum of seventy-five pounds
five shillings and six pence halfpenny; and that the commonwealth pay the
costs of said appeal, amounting to eight pounds six shillings.

Witness my hand, the 24th day of April, 1793. EDWARD BURD. Prothon. Supreme
Court."

To his excellency THOMAS MIFFLIN, Esquire Governor of Pennsylvania.
Capt. Henry Martin, v. The commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Similar appeal to the appeal of Isaac Roach.

"I Certify, that on a case stated, similar to that of Isaac Roach aforesaid,
the Supreme Court aforesaid were of opinion, and did adjudge, on the thirteenth
day of April, 1793, that there was due, on that day, to captain Henry Martin,
on his clothing account, a balance of forty-seven pounds four shillings and
seven pence half penny, in specie, including interest; and also a further sum
of twenty-eight pounds and eleven pence, in specie, for his arrears of interest
on his commutation money, from the 22d March, 1783, to the 1st July, 1783, and
for the interest thereon, from that day to the said ^^^ day of April, 1793;
amounting in the whole, to the sum of sev^a^^^ive pounds five shillings and six
pence halfpenny; and further, that the commonwealth pay the costs of said
appeal, amounting to eight pounds six shillings. Witness my hand, this 24th day
of April, 1793.

EDWARD BURD, Prothon. Supreme Court."

To his excellenc^ THOMAS MIFFIN, Esquire (...)
Dr. James Hutchinson, Administrator of Nicholas Fitzsimmons, v. The
commonwealth of Pennsylv.
Similar appeal to the appeal of Isaac Roach.

"I Certify, that on a case stated, similar to that of Isaac Roach aforesaid,
the Supreme Court aforesaid were of opinion, and did adjudge, on the thirteenth
day of April, 1793, that there was due, on that day, to Dr. James Hutchinson,
administrator of Nicholas Fitzsimmons, on the clothing account of the same
Nicholas Fitzsimmons, a balance of fifty-four pounds six shillings and five
pence halfpenny, in specie, including interest; and also a further sum of
seventeen pounds two shillings one penny farthing, in specie, so the arrears of
interest on the commutation money of the said Nicholas Fitzsimmons, dece^sed,
from the 22d March, 1783, to the 1st July, 1783, and for the interest thereon,
from that day, to the said thirteenth of April, 1793; amounting in the whole,
to the sum of seventy-one pounds eighteen shillings and six pence three
farthings; and further, that the commonwealth pay the cost of said appeal,
amounting to the sum of ten pounds three shillings and six pence.

Witness my hand, this 24th day of April, 1793. (Signed) EDWARD BURD, Prothon.
Supreme Court."

To his excellency THOMAS MIFFLIN, Esquire Governor of Pennsylvania.
about L, 50, each on an average more than they were allowed by my settlement.
This sum multiplied by 59 claims of said Baird would have given him L. 2950
more than I allowed him, and the interest thereon from July 1st, 1783. The
proof that no information of these accounts could have been obtained is farther
contained in facts certified by Jonathan Smith,, son of colonel Robert Smith,
as follows, viz. "I Certify, that the book of accounts of the officers'
clothing, containing the articles by them received, and charged to them
respectively, was made out partly by George Walton, and partly by myself, under
the direction of the Comptroller General, in whose office we then acted as
Clerks: That the same was composed and taken generally from the receipts of the
officers, respectively, to the various persons from whom they received
clothing. And I do further certify, that none of those accounts were opened or
stated in said office, before the expiration of the time limited for receiving
such claims had expired, in January, 1791.

Witness my hand, Feb. 10th, 1794, JONATHAN SMITH."




Report continued.
-- presented claims as attorneys and assignees of certain officers for the
clothing due to them, that other officers, thereupon presented similar claims,
whereupon certificates issued in their favor to the amount of L. 18,736:7:6
principal, with seven years and a half interest due upon the same.

"The committee are of opinion that the issuing of those certificates was
unauthorised by law: 17.

Mr. Nicholson's Answer.
17. "To this I answer in general terms, that the Governor, the
Register-General, and Comptroller General all concurred in a contrary opinion.
They all by their respective decisions on those several and respective
accounts, on which they were by law called to act, declare the contrary -- but
the committee offer two reasons in support of their opinion. --

"1st. That the claim for clothing would range under none of the heads which
the law gives those officers power to adjust. Whoever reads the law instituting
the Comptroller-General's office, will need no other reply to this reason.

"2d. As to the mode of settlement, that is allowing these claims to be
adjusted by the proper officers, yet they were not properly adjusted, they
should have therein been charged with the army refreshments -- here also the
committee were unfortunate. On this account of army refreshments allowed at
stipulated prices, but not received, almost every officer would also have had a
balance to claim from the state, had they not been inhibited by a clause in the
Act granting them, which declares, that no claim shall be made for back rations
therein. Both these reasons are perfectly obviated by the decisions of the
Supreme Court in the cases see schedule (D) aforesaid; for

"First, By the decisions of the same court, see Dallas's Reports, page 263,
they determine that, "where the Comptroller General has no jurisdiction
originally, the Supreme Court on appeal from his decision can have none; but in
the case of these clothing accounts they have had jurisdiction; therefore in
those clothing accounts I had jurisdiction originally.

"Second, On the appeal, in the Supreme Court from my mode of settlement, which
the committee say they suppose granted too much instead of lessening the
balance due to the party it is augmented; and more is allowed by the Court
where the committee would take away part of what I had already allowed.

"The opinion of the committee in favor of instituting a suit against me on
the premises aforesaid, as expressed in the 3d, 4th and 5th lines of the 157th
page, I pass over for the present, I shall take occasion to remark thereon when
we come to the same idea again in their report, for it seems to have been a
favorite idea, and is reiterated."

Report continued.
"1stly. Because although the officers might be entitled to clothing, it was only
a claim which no officer of the commonwealth had a power to settle; for the law
appointing the Comptroller, which by the 1st section thereof, gives him power
to liquidate all claims against the commonwealth, and to judge of prices and
charges in cases where the same have not been ascertained, expressly confines
that power of liquidating and settling, and, of course, of judging of prices,
to claims for services performed, moneys advanced, or articles furnished by
order of the legislative or executive powers; and under none of those heads
could the claim for clothing be ranged.

"2dly. Because supposing the officers were entitled to clothing, and the power
of liquidating their claims vested in any officers of government, yet they
should have been charged not only with such articles of clothing as they had
received, but also with the articles commonly called "Army refreshment," for
which they had not paid; with which articles, it was in the power of the
Comptroller to charge them, as the vouchers, receipts and books relative to
them, and containing the account of the deliveries of the said articles were
then in his possession, and are now with the other papers furnished by him, in
support of the claims of Pennsylvania, to the late commissioners.

"For those reasons, and because there are strong reasons to believe that one
of the speculators had, at least, received his information from the
Comptroller's office, the committee are of opinion that a suit should be
instituted against him for the recovery of the amount of the said certificates.

"FOURTH HEAD.
"Settlement of accounts generally.
"FROM the 13th April 1782, to the 28th of March 1789, the Comptroller had the
sole power to settle all accounts either of persons having claims against, or
indebted, to the commonwealth (the county treasurers. and collectors of taxes
excepted till the 24th of March, 1786) and to recover all balances due by any
persons; and he was also to keep clear and distinct accounts of the revenues
and expenditures of the commonwealth. From the 28th of March, 1789, to this
date the power of settling accounts has been in the hands of the Comptroller
and Register although under different modifications, but the power of settling
with the county treasurers and other revenue officers, was taken from the
Comptroller by the Act of the 1st of April, 1790, and restored to him by the
Act of the (...) 1791.

"So far as relates to the settlement of accounts of the revenue officers, the
committee have not been furnished, although they applied for the same, with any
accounts settled later than those printed in the second volume of public
accounts published by the Comptroller. 18.

Mr. Nicholson's Answer.
18. "To this I answer, that all the accounts in the office settled, numbered
and filed, were shown to the committee, and submitted for their making such
inspection of them as they chose; true they were not taken down out of the
order in which they were placed, but this order was shown them, and an
alphabetical register thereof delivered to the committee, by which they might
find the number and place on the files of any account they wanted -- add to
this at their request to have the accounts of the County Treasurers, selected,
they were taken from those files, brought together and laid before them as far
as I had settled them."

Report continued.
-- But the Register-General has promised to furnish them with an account of
the settlements made with, and the payments made by the several county
treasurers since his appointment to office, which will also furnish the account
of taxes due by the several counties, an account, however, which never can be
finally settled and the arrearages recovered under the existing laws; owing
chiefly to the exonerations not having been settled according to law, 19.

Mr. Nicholson's Answer.
19. "To this I answer that they have been made and and returned by the
commissioners; they have been credited the counties regularly as returned."

Report continued.
-- to the divisions of counties since the assessments of taxes, 20.

Mr. Nicholson's Answer.
20. "This, indeed, creates some difficulty, but it is readily surmounted, as
must be generally known."

Report continued.
-- to the want of knowledge of the persons, or townships that are indebted, 21.

Mr. Nicholson's Answer.
21. "The amount due from each township is regularly stated, as may be seen on
an inspection of the accounts of taxes, and the name of the collector is also
known." I think they are mistaken in the three last matters.

Report continued.
-- and to the impossibility, unless those are previously settled and known, of
striking the balance due by each county.

"By the Acts of the 30th of September, 1789, the Comptroller was directed to
furnish the Register with all the balances which on the 28th of March, 1789,
were due to or from any person, between whom and the commonwealth accounts were
depending. As all the accounts are not yet entered on the waste book, and the
journal and ledger are not even carried so far as the waste books, that part of
the law has not been carried into effect, for which the committee conceive that
no proper excuse can be made as Clerks have these two years been allowed to
that officer to any extent he pleased, 22.

Mr. Nicholson's Answer.
22. "The committee, perhaps, did not consider, or they would have added, that
this unlimited permission extended not to Clerks, for the purposes of the
office, generally, but only for one particular object thereof -- and although I
have employed twenty Clerks on our accounts with the United States, yet they
were not allowed for other purposes; and the attention requisite from me to
them, left the less for other duties."

Report continued.
-- and his duties, chiefly since the exchange of New-Loan and Continental
certificates has been nearly completed, have been greatly diminished. 23.

Mr. Nicholson's Answer.
23. "I expected, that from October, 1791, the duties of the office would be
less oppressive, and reduced to a moderate attention; and from that time, on
that account, I voluntarily relinquished a portion of my salary to the state.
But whoever will take the trouble to look at the volumes of my diary, for a
course of 12 months, will, I think, say that I have still, at least,
sufficient."

Report continued.
-- It is true that with most of the accounts and vouchers filed in the office,
there is an abstract of the account digested in debit and credit, which is by
itself a kind of waste book, and may be copied by any Clerk. From what has been
said, it follows that none of those general books are kept in regard to time;
but the accounts are numbered, filed, and entered, generally according to their
number in the books.

"In many instances, the committee conceived the books of the office might have
been kept in better order, and that a clearer general mode might have been
adopted. The books relative to the depreciation debt are the most irregular;
but upon the whole, the committee do not think themselves perfectly competent
judges on that subject, 24.

Mr. Nicholson's Answer.
24. "Here at last, is a matter of opinion, in which we are perfectly agreed."

Report continued.
-- and when it is considered that the business grew from time to time upon the
officer as his duties increased, the want of a more perfect system that would
have connected all his different transactions, and rendered a reference from
the one to the other more easy, will not appear surprising, to which
consideration the committee will add that if all the duties of the Comptroller
have not been equally well performed, the fault perhaps laid most with the
Legislature, who had increased both his duties and his powers, farther than any
man was able to perform, and farther than any man should have been entrusted
with.

"The committee mean in a few days to make an additional report relative to the
business of Doctor Joseph Thompson, which has already been before the
Legislature (but the papers relative to which they received only since the
House met) and of a few other points of less importance, to which they will add
sundry balances of accounts which the Register is to furnish them with, and
which will rectify any mistakes that may be found in the annexed accounts; but
before they conclude this report, they must give a short account of what has
passed concerning the certificates and books of the late agents of the
Pennsylvania line, an access to which the committee were refused by the
Comptroller.

"By a resolution of Congress passed the 3d of November, 1783, it was,
Resolved, That the Paymaster-General deposit in the hands of regimental Agents,
the certificates for the arrears of pay due to the officers and soldiers of the
respective lines, to be by them delivered to the individuals to whom they
belong, or deposited for their benefit as the supreme executive of the state to
which the respective Agents belong shall direct.

"By an arrangement which was rendered necessary on account of the dispersed
situation of the Pennsylvania line, two agents for the whole line, (instead of
regimental agents) to wit, Messrs. Bowen and Beatty were recommended by the
officers of the line, approved of by Council, and their appointment confirmed
by Congress. Those two agents proceeded to distribute the certificates
according to the directions and under the regulations of Council, as by the
annexed correspondence will appear. They, upon an occasion, sent their
resignation to Council, and always conceived themselves to be officers
responsible to the executive, and received L. 280:3:5 from the state for their
expenses.

"On the 8th of April, 1785, they wrote to Council, that having nearly
completed that business they were ready to deposit the remaining certificates
(together with their books and vouchers) as the supreme executive might direct,
agreeable to the Resolve of Congress of November 3, 1783; Whereupon Council, on
the same day ordered that they should be instructed to deliver the same to the
Comptroller General of the accounts of this commonwealth.

"The committee, by letter dated 24th June, 1793, requested the Comptroller to
examine the books of the agents deposited with him, also the certificates still
in his possession and to have an account of the amount delivered by him -- To
this the Comptroller answered on the 27th of the same month, that he considered
himself as being accountable only to the United States, from whom he expected
to receive a distinct compensation for these servic^^.

"The supposition of the Comptroller General being at the same time an officer
of the United States and of the State, was too absurd and unconstitutional to
be admitted, and the committee rested satisfied with laying the fact before the
Governor, mentioning at the same time that as the papers had been delivered
according to resolutions of Congress, to such officer as the Executive of the
State might direct, and without any intervention of the Legislature, it might
be perhaps suggested that the officer then chosen was accountable only to the
Executive and not to the Legislature; they concluded by saying that they had no
doubt of the Governor taking effectual measures to compel the officer to render
a full account of that transaction -- But although the Governor gave him
peremptory orders to submit those books, vouchers and certificates to the
committee, and transmitted to him a copy of the opinion of the Attorney General
dated June 20th, 1793, (in which he gives his official opinion, that those
books, certificates and vouchers were subject to the direction and control of
the Governor, and that he had a competent power to order the Comptroller to
deliver them to whoever he pleased, and of course to direct that they should be
submitted to the inspection of the committee) the Comptroller has persisted in
his refusal -- As it must be evident that the officers of the United States
have no control or power whatever over our own officers, and that these of
course must account only to our own Executive who then will render an account
of the same to the proper officers of the United States whenever required; no
proper motive can be suggested that can justify the refusal of the Comptroller;
and if every thing has been fairly transacted by him in that business,
obstinacy must with him, on that occasion, have prevailed over a sense of his
own interest and reputation. 25.

Mr. Nicholson's Answer.
25 "First. This part of the report does not class with any of the heads under
which they have, at the beginning of it, arranged the objects of their
investigation. From this I wonder it did not occur to themselves, that they
were traveling out of their road.

"Second, My reasons for not exhibiting them to the said committee, were, 1st,
That they had nothing to do with them. 2d. That although the contrary was
expected, I designed, and I think I have not been mistaken, that the
examination even of that committee, should operate to my public advantage. To
do this it was necessary that all the time remaining (for I did not see them
until a good deal of it had elapsed) should be devoted to the objects of their
appointment. 3d. I was then in hopes to have been able to have those accounts
examined and fully settled, before the time of my trial, so as to have been
able, publicly, to exhibit my quietus on those accounts, from those authorized
to give it -- to have submitted them elsewhere, would have interfered
therewith, and put it out of my power. True it is, that although they were
principally prepared, and a part rendered to and examined, and passed by the
United States, yet the disease that put many of us to flight, interrupted and
prevented the business. 4th. I will confess I had another motive for refusal,
which was this, I found in some of these men a disposition to convert to the
uses of this state, at the expense of the United States, property which did not
belong to them: before the loan of the United States for state debt, closed,
under the specious pretense of examining certain certificates, to find whether
all was right, those who were most forward in this business, were in that, and
cloaked under that resolution, from the view of the Legislature of this state,
who, I think, would have spurned the idea, as well as from the knowledge of the
United States, who would, if exposed, have, as they did in the instance of a
similar attempt in another state, prevented it -- actually subscribed to that
loan open to individual creditors of states, only, certificates of state debt
already redeemed by the state From this it will not be wondered at, that
Pennsylvania is a debtor, instead of a creditor state, in account with the
Union.
.

-- I did not think the attempt would be more unjustifiable, to have seized on
this property of the United States, than the other, nor much more unlikely.

"I subjoin in the schedules, the paper marked (E.) which contains a copy of my
letter of 27th June, 1793, to the committee; (E.)
"Count. General's office, June 27th, 1793. "GENTLEMEN,
"HAVING yesterday completed all that appeared wanting on my part at our
accounts with the U. States, before the commissioners, I have now more time to
devote to your examinations according to your appointment. I have your letters
of the 24th and 26th instant before me: and

"1st. That it was my wish to divest myself previous to the close of this
examination, of all future responsibility as far as possible, that there may be
no attempts to excite suspicions against me hereafter, and therefore have
preferred delivering over to the Register-General, in case of the state
certificates, and taking a credit for the amount receipted for, to your
examining them and leaving them in my possession.

"2d. It was my wish also, not only to settle my accounts of the certificates
of the army, and money which I have received from various persons for their
pay; but to divest myself of the trouble and responsibility thereof in future:
but it is proper I should settle with those empowered to do it, and quiet me.
These I conceive to be the proper officers of the United States; and as the
officers of the Treasury of the United States are now as convenient, the party
may as well apply there in future, with all their claims, as with a part: and I
therefore determined to deliver over to the United States, to whom they belong
all the remaining property as aforesaid, not delivered out, on which I
consulted and had the approbation of the Governor, and am now making up these
accounts, and preparing accordingly, and they will be completed as soon as I
can.

"3d. I cannot conceive how the delivery of these certificates could be deemed
any part of my duty as Comptroller General, it has no connection with any of
the duties of that office. I have so considered it, I always designed and shall
obtain a distinct compensation allowed by the United States.

"4th. I have been desired by the Secretary of the Treasury of the United
States to account and settle as above, who represents that most of the agents
have already so accounted, and is desirous that it should be done by all. I
have informed him it shall be done, and that acting for Bowen and Beatty, I
shall also settle all their said accounts in like manner with my own.

"5th. I have considered the enclosures of your letter of the 24th inst. none
of which I had before seen, except so far as the Acts of Congress were recited,
they rather confirm than alter my ideas on the subject. It appears that
although the late Supreme Executive of this state were applied to for
confirming the choice of the agents made by a meeting of Pennsylvania officers,
they refused so to do, and not conceiving themselves authorized, they referred
it to Congress either to confirm the appointment of those agents, or to appoint
such other persons as they thought proper; and Congress, by their Act of the
4th May, 1784, did approve and confirm the choice of those agents made by the
officers, whereby they were authorized to act.

I am, etc. JOHN NICHOLSON."

The Committee of the House of Representatives.
-- that marked (F.) which contains a copy of my letter of 28th June, to the
Governor; (F.)
"SIR, Count. General's office, June 28th, 1793.
"YOUR excellency not having contemplated it as a subject in which any
controversy would be involved, and having since more fully before you the
question of the disposition of the unclaimed continental certificates in my
hands, for the pay of the late army. I am desirous that in your consideration
of this subject, no embarrassment should arise from the conversation which was
had between us thereon, and therefore consider the case to be in the same
situation, as though no such conversation had ever passed.

"Having thus premised, I observe,

"First. That I deem myself accountable to the United States, for the delivery
of such certificates of this kind as I have issued, and for the balance which
they may find unissued, that I am desired by them so to account, and that I am
desirous to account without delay in such manner.

"2d. That if I even were accountable to the state, the subject does not come
within the appointment of the present committee of the House of
Representatives, it is certainly no part of my official duty as Count. General,
for the examination of which transactions they were appointed, and in the
forwarding of which, I will afford them every aid in my power.

"I have taken advice on the subject, and have determined,

"1st. As to the balance of unclaimed certificates, situated as they are, I
will hold them without depositing them with or accounting therefore to either
the United States or this state, until a judicial determination shall decide to
whom they ought to be delivered.

"2d. That I will as soon as I can, settle with the United States, for all the
certificates and money I received of them, so as to fix what the balance
aforesaid amounts to.

"3d. I will enter into an amicable suit for the purpose of deciding the first
question, on this point I have the agreement of the United States by their
proper officer, and I also request the concurrence of your excellency in behalf
of the state.

I have the honor to be, etc. JOHN NICHOLSON."

His excellency THOMAS MIFFLIN, Esquire Governor of Pennsylvania.
-- that marked (G.) which contains a copy of another letter from me to the
Governor, in answer to one from him, enclosing the Attorney-General's opinion.
(G.)
SIR, Count. General's office, July 9th, 1793.
"ON the 3d inst. I received your excellency's letter of the 1st, covering the
opinion of the Attorney General of the 25th of June last; on this I have to
observe,

"1st That this opinion is founded much on matters stated as a fact, which are
not so, and which I should have been able to prove, had the matter been put on
the issue I proposed.

"2d. That admitting the certificates deposited with Bowen and Beatty, or with
Bowen and Rush, who acted for Beatty; or with myself who acted for them both,
were to be considered in the same view as those deposited with regimental
agents, and therefore within the Act of Congress of Nov. 3d, 1783, subjecting
them to the order of the Supreme Executive of the state, that power extends
only to enable the Supreme Executive to order them out of the hands of one
person or persons, to be deposited in the hands of another person or persons,
and declares for what purpose they shall be so deposited, that is to be
delivered out by them to the party. But as to the settlement of the accounts,
the thing I am anxious to have done, it gives no such power to the executives
of the state.

"3d. All the books I received from major Bowen in behalf of the agents,
together with the papers other than the certificates, consist of two large
receipt books, orders and vouchers for the delivery of certificates. These are
yet unsettled, and will until adjusted by the United States, to whom in their
behalf I render them for that purpose, as they have desired, whereby the said
account will be closed; the papers I have in this business are also vouchers,
such as orders, and receipts for delivery of certificates, which receipts I
have generally taken in the said agent's name, and which must (unless I settle
with the agents) be adjusted also with the United States, before the same
accounts can be closed, the latter I intend to have done; the other papers
respecting the delivery of certificates received from Mr. Pierce, are of the
same kind, and to be settled in the same way with the United States.

"4th. I have been desired by the United States so to settle, and a part of
these accounts, with the certificates were rendered, and are now under the
examination in the offices, and I presume my duty and honor both will be better
pursued and preserved in this way, than in submitting them to those who have
nothing to do with them, more than other persons, and by that means be
prevented from obtaining a settlement in due time from those legally authorized
to do it.

"5th. If the (...) examination of the accounts and settlement had been also
committed to the Supreme Executives by the Acts of Congress of November 1783,
(which was not done) yet still as in all that business, the said executives
were merely constituted trustees, the agents would nevertheless be accountable
to the United States, the principal at their pleasure. But the organization of
the department of the accounts of the United States, by subsequent Acts of
Congress, directs the channel in which all such accounts shall be rendered and
settled; which will be observed by Sir,

Your excellency's, etc. JOHN NICHOLSON."

His excellency THOMAS MIFFLIN, Esquire Governor of Pennsylvania.
The paper marked (H.) is an extract from a letter of 25th September, 1793,
from Thomas B. Bowen, addressed to me on this subject.

(H.)
Dated Sept. 25th, 1793.
"I REMEMBER, that when I deposited with you the remaining certificates,
together with my vouchers for those I had delivered, I considered the latter as
entrusted to your care on my behalf, as I by no means looked on you as
authorized to give me a full discharge for continental property for which I had
receipted to the commissioners of army accounts under Congress. I took from
you, not a dischage of my agency -- your authority under the state, nor even
the state itself, having no such power -- but merely an acknowledgment that I
had deposited with you all the certificates for which I had not produced
receipts for the delivery to the parties to whom they belonged. -- How I
considered these remaining certificates, which could not in idea be separated
from the light in which I considered you, as my agent for settling the accounts
of my agency must naturally appear."

Report continued.
"The committee submit the following resolutions: --

"Resolved, That the Attorney General be directed to institute a suit against
John Nicholson, Comptroller General for the whole amount of the certificates
issued to satisfy certain claims of clothing made in the name of sundry
officers, including both the principal and the interest paid by the State. 26.

Mr. Nicholson's Answer.
26. "To this my answer on the first impulse would be, let the suit be
instituted and welcome; but on more mature reflection, I would observe, 1st.
That I am not desirous on my own account of attending a suit, and supporting
the expenses of it. 2d. I do not wish that the state should be at unnecessary
expense in maintaining one, especially as the cause has been decided already,
in the same court where this cause was proposed by the committee of the late
House of Representatives to be brought -- For as to jurisdiction, the Supreme
Court have, as already mentioned, allowed it to have been in me, by assuming it
themselves, in the cases of appeal which have been cited; and as to principles
adopted at settlement, they have, at least, sanctioned mine, in favor of the
state, by themselves, allowing more. One observation it is natural to make
here: These accounts were acted on, and approved both by the Governor and
Register-General. If the thing was wrong, the blame should be participated to
them, respectively: yet we hear of no resolutions, for a suit against either
the Governor or the Register-General. On this I leave candor itself to make
reflection.

Report continued.
"Resolved, That a committee be appointed to prepare and bring in a bill to
provide for the effectual and final settlement of the accounts of John
Nicholson, Comptroller and Escheator General. 27.

Mr. Nicholson's Answer.
27. "The resolution to provide by a law for the settlement of my accounts, so
far as respects Escheator-General, is nugatory; as such I am not an officer of
account; no public money can pass through my hands, either for real or personal
estates, escheated or otherwise. I have, therefore, no account as
Escheator-General, to settle: As it intends my accounts as Comptroller General,
its design is either to create another office, or it is there also nugatory. By
law, the Register-General, as directed by the Executive, has the power to
settle all the accounts of the Comptroller General; and progress has been, by
him, made therein -- However if it is designed to create an additional office,
I have no objections to whoever may examine and settle my accounts; and no
other to that plan, than, as it may increase the public expense, which, as a
citizen, I must contribute to pay.

Report continued.
"Resolved, That a committee be appointed to prepare and bring in a bill to
provide for the settlement of the arrearages of taxes due by the several
counties and to enforce the collection of the same. 28.

Mr. Nicholson's Answer.
28. "This third resolution, not applying, in any wise, to my case, I make no
observation upon it.

"It only remains, therefore, for me to assure yourself, and the members of
your honorable House, that I am, etc.

JOHN NICHOLSON."

The Honorable GEORGE LATIMER, Speaker of the House of Representatives of
Pennsylvania.
Report continued.
ACCOUNT A. DR. The State of Pennsylvania in account with New-Loan debt. CR.
1st. To amount of original certificates issued as examined by committee of
Council L.1,937,885 15 3 1st. By amount redeemed by Land-office L. 118,470 6 6
2d. To error discovered since 60 0 0 2d. By amount re-exchanged as taken from
the books of New-Loan certificates received back from the parties This amount
includes L. (...) which have been received by the Comptroller, and by him
delivered to the Register, but had not been entered on the books.
1,784,635 5 0 3d. By the difference between the amount of renewed certificates
as reported by the committee of Council, and the true amount as rectified from
the certificates themselves See the note (g) of the report -- the amount of
renewed certificates being greater than committee of Council had reported, and
the total amount being thought right, the amount of original is so much less.
1,118 0 9 Balance outstanding not yet re-exchanged L. (...): part of this sum
are the certificates offered for subscription by John Nicholson and others to
the loan of the United States.
33,722 3 0 L.1,937,945 15 3 L. 1,937,945 15 3

B. DR. John Nicholson in account with New-Loan certificates received by him.
CR.
To amount of certificates renewed for which he received at the time of
renewals an equal amount of original certificates as taken from books of
certificates renewed L. 478,349 15 11 By total amount of certificates cancelled
and delivered to the Register-General, the far greater part of which were
delivered in the present month of August. L. 2,381,910 9 6 To amount of
certificates redeemed by the Land-Office and delivered him by the
Receiver-General 118,470 6 6 To amount of certificates re-exchanged and by him
received of parties in exchange for continental certificates returned to them,
as taken from books of New-Loan certificates returned (See Account A.)
1,784,635 5 0 Balance arising from some mistakes not yet discovered 455 2 1
L.2,381,910 9 6 L.2,381,910 9 6

C. DR. John Nicholson his account with Continental certificates received upon
loan. CR.
Dolls. 90ths. Dolls. 99ths. To amount of Continental certificates received as
rectified by the committee of Council 5,172,881 50 By differences between the
amount of Continental certificates received on loan and the amount of original
New-Loan certificates issued, arising, in part, from a number of Continental
certificates received on sundry accounts by the Comptroller for the state, and
entered on the books of Continental certificates received on loan, to wit -- By
account A the amount of original New-Loan certificates issued as reported by
Council and the error of 60l. rectified 1,937,945 15 3 From which deduct the
difference mentioned in the said account, head 3d, of credit 1,118 0 9 Total
amount of original New-Loan certificates L.1,936,827 14 6 Equal to dollars
5,164,873 84 Which deducted from amount of Continental certificates received as
per contra 5,172,881 50 8,007 56 For which dolls. 8,007 56/90 he is charged in
his account D. By New-Loan certificates redeemed by the Land-office, an amount
equal to which he is charged in his account D, 118,470l. 6s. 6d. equal to
315,920 78 By amount of certificates returned to parties, to wit -- Amount of
books of Continental certificates returned Dr. Difference between the same and
the books of New-Loan certificates received, and for which he must be credited,
having delivered the same to the Register-General 4,759,027 30 By amount of
certificates yet in his possession and not exchanged 81,384 11 Balance due by
him 8,541 55 Dolls. 5,172,881 50 Dolls. 5,172,881 50

D. DR. John Nicholson his account with Continental certificates received for
the State. CR.
Dolls. 90ths. Dolls. Cts. To Continental certificates redeemed by Land-Office
877,131 45 By certificates delivered the Treasurer 1,093,183 67 To New-Loan do.
redeemed by do. 315,920 78 By error discovered on above 49 12 To difference
between the amount of books of Continental certificates received on loan and
the amount of books of New-Loan certificates issued, for which difference he is
credited in his account of Continental certificates received on loan (See
Account C) 8,007 56 By stock transferred to do. to wit -- Six per cent. stock
73,772 61 Deferred do. 36,886 32 110,658 93 To certificates of Woods, Dollars.
Scott and Thompson 430 5 To certificates of Wade 5782 21 To do. of Atlee 533 77
6,746 13 Balance due by him 3,914 41 Dolls. 1,207,806 12/90 -- 13/100 Dolls.
1,207,806 13

E. DR. John Nicholson his account with interest upon New-Loan and Continental
certificates. CR.
Dolls, Cts, To the interest paid upon certificates of New-Loan debt, for which
he has received an equal amount in Indents or 3 per cent. stock as taken from
the indorsements on the same, viz. By amount of indents paid the United States
in part of requisitions L. 82,678:0:6 equal 220,474 75 1st. 4 year's interest
on certificates returned on exchange amounting to l.1,784,635 5 as per account
B. L. 428,312 9 1 By amount of interest due upon the certificates paid to the
United States in payment of the Lake Erie tract 59,762 1 Deduct so much which
appears to be wanting to complete the 4 years -- about 2,000 0 0 By amount of
interest due upon the certificates delivered to the State Treasurer 460,925 63
426,312 9 1 By Indents delivered to do. 843,851 33 2d. Interest paid on L.
118,470:6:6 redeemed by Land-Office as calculated by Register 15,725 15 0 By
Three per cent. Stock transferred to do. by Comptroller 68,487 9 L 442,038 4 1
By do. do. transferred by parties, in lieu of indents due by them upon exchange
of New-Loan certificates 35,641 75 Dolls. 1,178,768 49 By do. do. do. till
February, 1793 1,868 80 By do. do. arising from the subscription in trust for
Sarah Caldwell and others 2,051 49 All the above sums were paid before the
appointment of the committee. To interest by him received on the Continental
certificates corresponding with that part of the New-Loan debt yet outstanding,
to wit: -- 1793, June 10. By three per cent. stock and indents paid the
Treasurer 27,473 28 1st. Indents received by him on Continental certificates in
his possession as examined by committee Dolls. 5,032 75 By three per cent.
stock bearing interest from 1793, assigned by parties in lieu of indents 1,563
63 2d. 4 year's interest he is accountable to the states on the balance of
8,541 55 deficient in his account of Continental certificates received on loan
2,049 86 Balance for which the Comptroller must account 47,544 33/90 7,082 71
To interest accrued upon the Continental and New-Loan certificates redeemed by
Land-office till 31st of December, 1790 575,670 3 To interest upon sundry other
certificates, to wit -- Woods, Thompson and Scott's D. 212 22 Atlee's 232 43
Wade's 3,781 69 Sundries given by officers as per account 2,077 29 6,303 73 To
arrearages of interest given up by parties upon the exchange of New-Loan
certificates 879 34 To interest upon the balance of D. 3,914 37 deficient in
his account of continental certificates received for state -- say 4 years 939
51 Dolls. 1,769,644 11 Dolls. 1,769,644 11/90

F. DR. Accounts of State-Treasurers in account with interest endorsed as paid
on New-Loan certificates. CR.
1793, January 1st. To so much charged in their accounts as having been paid to
this date L. 461,730 0 11 By so much paid upon New-Loan certificates
re-exchanged as taken from endorsements L.426,312 9 10 By do. upon do. redeemed
by Land-office 15,725 15 0 By four years interest supposed to have been paid on
L. 33,722 3 balance of New-Loan certificates outstanding 8,093 6 4 Balance
deficient, either overcharged in the Treasurer's accounts or actually paid, but
neglected to be endorsed on the certificates 11,598 9 9 L.461,730 0 11
L.461,730 0 11

G. DR. State of Pennsylvania in account with the late Pennsylvania line, etc.
for depreciation of their pay. CR.
To total amount of depreciation of the pay of the Pennsylvania line and others
entitled to the same by laws or resolutions of the state -- Amount unknown. By
shilling money paid upon re^^^ement of accounts by the Commissioners appointed
for that purpose and others, to wit -- Paid by David Rittenhouse L.1,457 10 0
Do. by Dean, Morris, and others 14,278 7 6 Do. by Fowler and Amberson 5,514 13
8 Do. by J. Stevenson 1,683 15 0 Do. by John Nicholson, as Auditor 16,829 3 11
Do. by John Nicholson, as Comptroller, to wit, To 11th Nov. 1782, L. 13,312 12
8 To 19th do. 1783, 8,287 10 0 To -- 1787, 6,669 4 1 28,299 6 9 68,062 16 10 By
certificates granted upon settlement, to wit, Issued by Auditors previous to
the Comptroller's appointment to that office 380,952 18 7 Do. by John
Nicholson, as Comptroller 122,717 7 8 503,670 6 3 By escheated to the
commonwealth as per list annexed, furnished the Secretary of the commonwealth
42,293 4 4 L. 614,026 7 6

H. DR. State of Pennsylvania in account with Depreciation certificates. CR.
To total amount of original certificates issued L.503,670 6 3 By so much paid
in shilling money in part of the certificates, new ones having issued for the
remainder, to wit -- Paid by Jas. Stephenson L. 29,379 14 2 Do. by Fowler and
Amberson 803 17 8 Do. by John Nicholson, as Auditor 31,410 15 4 Do. by John
Nicholson, as Comptroller, to wit -- To 11th Nov. 1782, 5,308 15 0 To 19th Nov.
1783, 4,184 12 10 To Nov. 1787, 5,232 13 4 14,726 1 2 76,320 8 4 By following
certificates stopped by, or delivered to, the Comptroller -- Christie's 697 3 3 *
Ryan's 545 12 6 Forest administ. for 102 0 5 Hardy 261 2 0 1,605 18 2 The
certificate marked thus * may possibly be inducted under the next head. By
errors discovered and recovered by the Comptroller by taking the original
certificates and issuing new ones to a less amount 5,051 12 1 By certificates
redeemed by the Land-office and delivered the Comptroller 116,916 0 10 By do.
do. for forfeited estates and delivered do. 51,600 8 11 By do. do. for do. do.
297 19 0 By do. redeemed by Land-office delivered to Treasurer 28,309 9 1 By
do. do. for forfeited estates do. do. 298 3 4 By do. subscribed to the loan of
the United States for the funded part of which additional purparts were issued
175,495 16 5 By do. subscribed to do. and redeemed under Act of 10th April,
1792 17,698 15 8 By do. do. to do. and do. under Act of 9th Feb. 1793 1,810 3 4
By do. redeemed (being unassumable) under Act of 10th April, 1792 22,239 14 8
By do. do. (do.) under Act of 9th Feb. 1793 315 12 0 1793, March 1st. Balance
outstanding 5,710 4 3 L. 503,670 6 3 L. 503,670 6 3

The real balance is probably something larger on account of Ryan's certificate
above mentioned, and of a sum of L. (...) which possibly has been credited
twice in the account. The whole difference would be L.

I. DR. John Nicholson in account with Depreciation certificates by him
received. CR.
To amount of certificates renewed The amount of certificates renewed by
Auditors and Commissioners or Treasurer prior to the appointment of the
Comptroller General is 149,042 3 11 The amount issued since by him is 471,823 7
1 L. 620,865 11 1
L.620,865 11 1 By certificates renewed and charged to him per contra the
original of which being lost and renewed by special resolutions were not
received by him L. 2,833 14 4 To amount of shilling money paid in part of
Depreciation certificates 76,320 8 4 By amount cancelled and delivered the
Register 875,375 7 0 To certificates stopped or delivered 1,605 18 2 To errors
discovered in settlement by Auditors 5,051 12 1 To certificates redeemed by
Land-office 116,916 0 10 To do. do. for forfeited estates 51,898 7 11 Balance
in favor of John Nicholson 5,551 2 10 L. 878,209 1 4 L. 878,209 1 4

K. DR. State of Pennsylvania in account with certificates commonly called
"Funded debt." CR.
1792, April 4. To total amount issued L. 229,638 7 8 By certificates redeemed
by Land-office and delivered the Comptroller L. 24,394 9 6 By do. received for
militia fines by the Comptroller 868 13 8 1793, March 4. By certificates
redeemed by Land-office and delivered the Treasurer 31,540 17 1 1791, October. 1.
By do. subscribed to loan of United States, for which additional certificates
called purparts were issued by State 71,108 17 6 1792, Aug. 1. By do.
subscribed to do. and redeemed under Act of April 10th, 1792 10,136 10 10 1793,
March 1. By do. do. to do. and redeemed under the Act of Feb. 9th, 1793 2,577 6
0 1793, Jan. 1. By do. redeemed (being unassumable) under Act of April 10th,
1792 71,284 8 8 March 1. By do. do. (do.) under Act of Feb, 9th 1793 1,014 0 9
Balance unredeemed 16,713 3 8 L.229,638 7 8 L.229,638 7 8 Balance per contra
16,713 3 8 By certificates in the possession of the Comptroller, to wit --
1793, June 10. Certificates never delivered out 5,544 4 7 Do. given to
individuals to be by them delivered to the proper parties and by them returned
2,317 0 8 7,861 5 3 Balance actually in circulation 8,851 18 5 L 16,713 3 8 L
16,713 3 8

Part of the above L. 8,851:18:5 (being issued for clothing and cavea^ed) are
still in the hands of the Register-General.

L. DR. John Nicholson his account with certificates commonly called "Funded
debt." CR.
To certificates renewed L. 143,031 12 9 By amount delivered to the Register
not yet added, but the whole said to be delivered. To do. redeemed by
Land-office 24,394 9 6 To do. paid for militia fines 868 13 8 To certificates
not yet issued and in his possession 7,861 5 3 L. 176,156 1 2

Report concluded.

SEPTEMBER 3.
THE additional articles of impeachment were read the second time -- Major
M'Connell appeared at the bar of the House, and being duly sworn, answered the
following interrogatories.

Question by Mr. Gallatin. Have you been possessed of any New-Loan certificates
in the year 1788?

Answer. I had a quantity of New-Loan certificates about that time, but at
present cannot ascertain their amount or numbers.

By the same. Did you sell a certificate of that description amounting to L.
3275:19:4 to Blair M'Clenachan, if yea, please to tell at what time?

Ans. It appears from my book, that I delivered such a certificate to Mr.
M'Clenachan, the 23d day April, 1788, which had been issued in my own name. I
delivered him many New-Loan certificates about that time.

Ques. by Do. Do you know what he did with that certificate whose amount was L.
3275:19; 4, did he sell it, or did he exchange it?

Ans. Impossible for me to tell what Mr. M'Clenachan had done with it, the
certificate was his own after he got it from me. I believe an exchange took
place between him and the Comptroller General, but in this I am not positive.

Question by Mr. Evans. Have you a list of the names of the persons to whom the
certificates which you then had, were originally granted?

Ans. I have a book at home, in which I have entered their amounts, etc. but at
this time I cannot be particular.

Ques. by Mr. Gallatin. Had you any other New-Loan certificate of the same
amount issued in your name, about that time, before that time, or since that
period?

Ans. Not likely that I should have another of the same amount in my own name,
it is impossible for me to ascertain.

Question by Mr. Evans. Can you tell the number of that certificate, for L.
3275:19:4?

Ans. I cannot ascertain it, not having the No. of that one in my book.

Ques. by Mr. Gallatin. Can you ascertain the time when this certificate was
issued, and whether it was an original one, or issued for a number of
certificates, commonly called consolidating?

Ans. I am inclined to think it had been issued in exchange for others by the
means last mentioned: but I am not certain as to that, nor to the time when
issued.

Mr. Gallatin observed he had no more questions to ask, and that the witness
might retire.

Ques. by Mr. Evans. Can you furnish us with a list of the names of the persons
to whom issued, numbers, dates and amounts of the certificates which you
delivered to Blair M'Clenachan about the time alluded to?

Ans. I have a book, from which I will extract such dates, numbers, and amount
as far as I have entered them, and will transmit a list to the House as soon as
possible.

After which the witness retired.

Whereupon it was resolved that the further consideration of the said
additional articles of impeachment be postponed till the next day.

And the Speaker issued his summons to accelerate the attendance of Blair
M,Clenachan to give testimony on these articles against Mr. Nicholson.

It was on motion, Ordered that Messrs. Morgan, Evans and Gallatin, the three
managers, should procure attested documents from Mr. Thomas Smith, Commissioner
of Loans, to answer the purposes of evidence on these articles against the
Comptroller.

The committee got no documents from him, at that time, he was in the country
for fear of the yellow fever which then raged in the city, and carried off
about 18 persons per day.

Three gentlemen, were appointed a committee by the Senate on the 2d to confer
with a committee from the House of Representatives on the expediency of an
adjournment of the Legislature.

The House of Representatives appointed five members to join the committee of
the Senate.

SEPTEMBER 4.
THE committee appointed to confer with a committee of the Senate on the
expediency of an adjournment of the Legislature, made report; which was read,
as follows, viz.

That in the conference held by your committee with the committee of the
Senate, they declared that they did not conceive that the House of
Representatives would be ready to take a question upon the expediency of an
adjournment until they knew what time was fixed by the Senate for the trial of
the charges brought by the House against John Nicholson, Comptroller General --
Your committee thought it their duty also to mention, that although the House
could not control the decision of the Senate on that point, yet, they knew,
they were ready at any time to support the charges and desirous that the trial
should come on immediately, to which they added several reasons to urge the
propriety of a decision on that business taking place at this session of the
Legislature.

Your committee submit the following resolution --

Resolved, That the Senate be requsted to fix the time at which they mean to
try the charges brought by the House of Representatives against John Nicholson,
Comptroller General, and to give notice thereof to the House.

Ordered to lie on the table.

Mr. Edie, a committee from the Senate, being introduced, presented to the
chair an Extract from the Journal of that House; and having withdrawn, the same
was read, as follows, viz.

"In SENATE, TUESDAY, September 3, 1793.
"On motion of Mr. Morris, seconded by Mr. Thomas,

"Resolved, That the Legislature will rise tomorrow. And

"Ordered, That Mr. Edie be a committee to present the foregoing Resolution to
the House of Representatives for concurrence.

Extract from the Journal, TIMOTHY MATLACK, Clerk of the Senate."


The committee of accounts reported, a resolution, that a warrant be drawn in
favor of Benjamin R. Morgan for 492 dollars and 75 cents, being a balance due
the committee of investigation for their services and expenses.

Agreeably to the order of the day the additional articles were read the third
time and adopted, and it was ordered that they should be engrossed and signed
by the Speaker.

Mr. Blair M'Clenachan having been summoned previous to the third instant, when
Mr. M'Connell gave his evidence, and not appearing, a motion had been made to
compel his attendance by an attachment, whereupon some argument had ensued, and
it was conceded, that he did not absent himself through contumacy, but through a
belief and expectation that the General Assembly had adjourned on account of
the disorder, consequently no further notice had been taken of his
non-attendance.

He appeared this day, and had been sworn.

Question by Mr. Evans. Did you purchase or receive any New-Loan certificates
from Matthew M'Connell?

Answer. I did, to a great amount.

Ques. by ditto. To what amount were any of these certificates, or do you
recollect any New-Loan certificate received from him to be for the sum of 3^^^
19s. 4d.?

Ans. I remember to have had several.

Ques. Has there been any such in your name, or in the name of Mr. M'Connell?

Ans. My name! Mr. M'Connell's name!

Here the witness appeared somewhat embarrassed, not knowing the drift of the
question.

Mr. Gallatin rose, and said he would put the witness right, saying, "I will
mention a circumstance, Do you remember that a large New-Loan certificate had
been issued about the time alluded to, for the sum of L. 5000 or thereabouts;
that the said certificate had been cancelled the next day, and two certificates
issued in lieu thereof, the aggregate amount of which was L. 5000, as
aforesaid; that one of these certificates had been for L. 3275:19:4, and the
other for the balance, do you remember any of these circumstances?"

Ans. I perfectly recollect that circumstance, and that I purchased the larger
certificate, which was for 3275l. 19s. 4d, I believe.

Question by Mr. Evans. Did you at any time sell that certificate, or any other
of the same kind?

Ans. Not to my knowledge, I do not remember.

Question by Mr. Gallatin. Do you remember to have sold that large certificate
at any time, or to have exchanged it; if you have, please to tell to whom, and
what did you receive for the same?

Ans. I delivered it to the Comptroller General to get an equivalent in
continental certificates, as well as I can remember; --

Question by Mr. Hare. At what time did this transaction take place?

Before the witness had time to answer this question, Mr. Gallatin said he
would mention a circumstance which probably would put the witness right, and
observed by saying, "Do you recollect having certificates which were issued
between the 1st of Sept. 1777 and 1st March, 1778, and that the holders were
displeased at parting from these certificates on the same terms, and conditions
as they parted from the New-Loan certificates?"

Ans. I perfectly recollect that circumstance, and that I did not part from
those certificates, of which I had been possessed, when I exchanged my
New-Loans.

Ques. by Mr. Gallatin. When Mr. M'Clenachan had subscribed the New-Loan
certificates, did he, or did he not subscribe those which had been issued
between the 1st September 1777, and the 1st of March 1778?

Ans. No, I kept them to the last.

Ques. by ditto. Did Mr. M'Clenachan receive an equivalent in continental
certificates from the Comptroller for the last described certificate for L.
3275:19:4, or did he (Mr. M'Clenachan) subscribe it in his own name to the Loan
of the United States?

Ans. I received an equivalent in continental certificates, as well as I can
recollect, for all that I brought to the Comptroller's office.

Ques. by Mr. Hare. Can Mr. M'Clenachan ascertain the time when this
transaction happened?

Ans. A short time before the Loan was closed.

Ques. by Mr. Forest. Did Mr. M'Clenachan sell any certificates to the
Comptroller General, or to any other person?

Ans. I never sold any, I delivered all that I had to the Comptroller General,
and received continental certificates in lieu of of them.

Retired.

After the foregoing ceremony of adopting the two additional articles, the
report of the joint committee on the subject of adjournment was read the second
time, and Resolved, that the Senate be requested to fix the time at which they
mean to try the charges brought by the House of Representatives against the
Comptroller, and to give notice thereof to the House.

A letter from Mr. Matthew M'Connell was presented to the chair, the reading of
its enclosure dispensed with, and it was referred to the committee appointed to
manage the trial against Mr. Nicholson.

The enclosure was a list of New-Loan certificates delivered by him to Mr.
M'Clenachan, in the years 1788 and 1789, amounting in the whole to L.
16035:11:5.

An improper statement of Mr. M'Connell's evidence appearing in one of the
daily papers, he wrote the following letter to the printer which was published
in the same paper.

Philadelphia, Sept. 4, 1793. "MR. DUNLAP,
"I AM sorry to find myself under the necessity of contradicting a statement in
your paper of this morning of the evidence said to be given by me before the
House of Representatives yesterday on "the subject of the Comptroller-General's
accounts." The statement says, That my Testimony went to prove, that I had sold
a certificate for upwards of ten thousand dollars, to Mr. Blair M'Clenachan,
which afterward appeared to have been negociated by the Comptroller General in
some manner that was not strictly agreeable to the literal meaning of the law."

"A regard for truth obliges me to say, that my evidence went no farther, than
that I had delivered certain New-Loan certificates to Mr. M'Clenachan, in the
year 1788.

MATTHEW M'CONNELL."


The two additional articles were brought in engrossed, were compared at the
table, signed by the Speaker, and sent to the Senate by five members; one of
this committee addressed the Senate in the same words as those published page
108.

Captain Duncan, the chief Clerk in Mr. Nicholson's office wrote the following
letter.

Sept. 4, 1793. "SIR,
"HAVING been present in your honorable House when the late resolution passed,
respecting the Comptroller General, citing him to appear (...) etc. I beg leave
to inform the House that Mr. Nicholson is out of town with his family, but
should there be a necessity for his appearance to take trial, I will undertake
to to say, that an express shall bring him here in a few hours. I am, etc.

JAMES DUNCAN."

The Hon. SAMUEL POWELL, Esquire Speaker of the Senate.

SEPTEMBER 5.
THE Speaker drew a warrant for 300 dollars in favor of Mr. Morgan, to be paid
as retaining fees to Messrs. Wilcocks, Rawle, and Ingersoll, as Counsel for the
State on the impeachment of the Comptroller General.

The Clerk of the Senate being introduced, presented to the chair certain
extracts from the Journal of that House; and having withdrawn, the same were
read, as follow, viz.

"In SENATE. WEDNESDAY, September 4, 1793.
"On motion of Mr. Morris, seconded by Mr. Hanna,

"Resolved, That John Nicholson, Comptroller General of the commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, do appear at the bar of the Senate forthwith, to make answer to
certain articles of accusation and impeachment, exhibited against him by the
House of Representives.

"Ordered, That the Sergeant-at-Arms do forthwith serve John Nicholson,
Comptroller General of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania, with a certified copy
of the foregoing resolution.

"Frederick Snider, Sergeant-at-arms, on the resolution given in charge to him
as aforesaid makes return in the words following, to wit --

"A Copy of the within resolution of the Senate I have delivered to Eleanor
Baltzner, servant, at the house of John Nicholson, Comptroller General of the
commonwealth of Pennsylvania, this afternoon, he the said John Nicholson, not
being to be found.

So answers, FREDERICK SNIDER, Sergeant-at-Arms"
Wednesday, September 4, 1793.

"Moved by Mr. Morris, seconded by Mr. Thomas,

"Whereas it appears from the return of the Serjeant-at-Arms of the Senate to
their order, for the appearance of John Nicholson, at the bar of the Senate,
that the said John Nicholson, is not to be found -- And whereas the absence and
indisposition of many of the members of the Senate, and the anxiety and alarm
occasioned by the existence of a malignant and infectious fever in this city,
render it inexpedient to use any further process on the articles of impeachment
exhibited against John Nicholson, Comptroller General of the commonwealth,
during the present session; therefore,

"Resolved, That any further process or proceeding therein be postponed to the
next session of the Legislature.

The question being put, was carried in the affirmative.

Extract from the Journal, T. MATLACK, Clerk of the Senate."

The Legislature adjourned sine die.

DECEMBER 3, 1793.
THE Legislature met according to the provision for that purpose in the
Constitution.

DECEMBER 5.
MR. Nicholson wrote the following letter to the Senate: --

"SIR, December. 5 th, 1793.
"I LEFT the city with my family on the 31st August last on account of the late
malignant disease in Philadelphia, and returned to the neighborhood of it
without venturing in, but had employed an Express to be sent out to me, that I
might attend if wanted to appear before your honorable House. Mr. Duncan's
letter on this subject read in Senate the 4th Sept. and the postponement of the
business on the same day, prevented my being sent for, and appearing as
directed by the resolution of that date -- I beg leave to inform the honorable
House, that I am now ready to appear and answer to the Articles of Impeachment
when it may please the Senate. I am, etc.

JOHN NICHOLSON.

The Hon. ANTHONY MORRIS, Esquire Speaker of the Senate of Pennsylvania.

DECEMBER 14.
THE lower House resolved to take into consideration the state in which the
Impeachment of John Nicholson, was left at the close of the late session.

DECEMBER 20.
AGREEABLY to the order of the day, the House resolved itself into a committee
of the whole, in order to take into consideration the Resolution proposed by
Mr. Evans, seconded by Mr. Tyson, relative to the impeachment of John
Nicholson, Comptroller General, by the late House of Representatives.

Mr. Speaker left the chair, and Mr. Wynkoop was placed therein.

After some time spent in the business,

The Chairman left the chair and the Speaker resumed it.

The Chairman then reported a Resolution, which was read,

And on motion, and by special order, the same was read the second time, and
adopted, as follows, viz.

Resolved, That it appears that the impeachment by, and in the name of the
House of Representatives, and in the name of the People of Pennsylvania, for
sundry High Misdemeanors, is now depending against John Nicholson,
Comptroller General of this commonwealth.

On motion of Mr. Swanwick, seconded by Mr. Evans,

Resolved, That managers be appointed on the part of this House to conduct the
prosecution of the impeachment of John Nicholson, Comptroller General of this
commonwealth.

Ordered, That Mr. Swanwick, Mr. B. Morgan, Mr. M'Lene, Mr. Evans, and Mr.
Bowman be a committee for that purpose.

On motion of Mr. Evans, seconded by Mr. J. Shoemaker,

Resolved, That the Attorney General and such other counsel as the managers may
think proper, be requested to give their attendance at the trial aforesaid, and
assist thereat on behalf of the House of Representatives.

DECEMBER 24.
THE committee appointed to manage the trial were authorized to send for
persons and papers, and to examine witnesses upon oath or affirmation.

JANUARY 9, 1794.
MR. Nicholson's long letter was presented to the Speaker of the House of
Representatives -- which see from page 111 to page 169, mixed with the Report of
the Committee of Investigation.

Agreeably to notice given him, he came to the Senate at a quarter of an hour
before noon, the Speaker informed the Senate that the hour was approaching when
it should be necessary for him to direct the Sergeant-at-Arms to acquaint John
Nicholson, Esquire Comptroller General of the commonwealth that he should appear
before the Senate to answer the charges or articles of impeachment exhibited
against him by the late House of Representatives.

A motion was made by Mr. Hoge, seconded by Mr. Kennedy, that the Senate should
adjourn their Legislative business, in order to assume their judicial capacity,
some authorities were cited to establish this on the same footing as the
British house of lords adjourn from the Parliament House to Westminster hall to
sit in their judicial capacities on similar occasions. Messrs. Bingham and
Smith were against that mode, the latter said he hoped the Senate would not
adjourn, for he observed that if they should adjourn, there would be no Senate:
Mr. Hoge's motion was put and negatived.

Mr. Bingham then moved that the Sergeant-at-Arms be directed to notify Mr.
Nicholson to walk in. The motion was agreed to, the Comptroller walked in,
being unattended by any person, bowing to the chair, and then to the persons on
the right hand, and on the left.

A table covered with green cloth, and a chair was placed in the middle of the
Senate-chamber opposite the Speaker's chair, to which Mr. Nicholson was shown
by one of the gentlemen of that body, and he was desired by Mr. Bingham to sit
down; the Clerk of the Senate read the articles of impeachment together with a
resolution of the House of Representatives respecting an error in the said
articles -- The ceremony of reading these documents, being over, Mr. Nicholson
rose from his seat, and the Speaker asked him "what he had to say." Mr.
Nicholson answered, "that he wanted a copy of the articles, and time to put in
his answer to them." Mr. Nicholson was requested to repeat his demand, for the
Speaker and other Members did not hear him, a sudden motion of feet in the
gallery preventing them: Mr. Nicholson in ^ voice considerably raised, repeated
his request.

Whereupon the Speaker desired him to mention his time.

Mr. Nicholson answered, and said, "that to indulge his own feelings he should
mention a very short day, but unfortunately for him his counsel were engaged in
the Supreme Court, now in session; that the Attorneys on the opposite side were
likewise engaged in the same court, but that he required only till Wednesday
(the fifteenth) next to put in his answer."

Mr. Bingham moved that Mr. Nicholson be permitted to withdraw whilst the
Senate were deliberating on the question. The motion was agreed to Mr.
Nicholson withdrew on being told by the Speaker that he might do so.

Mr. Kennedy remarked, that although he was for the adjournment, he was against
mentioning any thing respecting the last vote, i. e. granting Mr. Nicholson
permission to withdraw, for he looked upon that as very improper, inasmuch as
that officer enjoyed every privilege of going where, and of doing what he
pleased, he therefore hoped that no mention would be made of it on the Journal
of the House; a suspension from office being all that the Sena^e had their
power.

Mr. Speaker put the question whether the Senate were agreed to allow Mr.
Nicholson his request; and they were unanimous in their assent.

Mr. Bingham moved that the Sergeant-at-Arms be directed to request him to walk
in, and to hear the determination of the Senate. This motion was agreed to, Mr.
Nicholson appeared, and the Speaker informed him that his request was granted
by the Senate.

After which Mr. Nicholson withdrew. The whole time occupied in this ceremony
did not exceed 45 minutes, during the time that officer stood this sudden, and
novel shock with firmness and propriety.

JANUARY 15.
MR. Nicholson, attended by two of his Counsel, at the hour of twelve, went to
the Senate, put in his answer to the articles of impeachment, and named his
Attorneys; whereupon Wednesday the 19th February, was appointed by the Senate
for trying the charges.

On motion of Mr. Evans, of the House of Representatives, seconded by Mr.
Tyson, and read, as follows, viz.

Resolved, That the committee, or any member thereof, to whom was referred the
report of the committee appointed to examine during the recess of the late
House of Representatives, the accounts and official transactions of the
Comptroller General, shall have power to examine at all seasonable hours, all
the books, accounts, vouchers, certificates, and official documents whatever,
which may be in the custody of the said Comptroller General, the
Register-General, or the State-Treasurer; to take copies of the same or any
part thereof, and to require any explanation concerning the same.

FEBRUARY 5.
THE House of Representatives agreed to a replication to the answer of the
Comptroller, to the articles of impeachment, and appointed a committee of five
members to present the same to the Senate.

FEBRUARY 15.
The committee of accounts of the House of Representatives, reported 100
dollars to be due to the Doorkeeper of the committee of investigation for
attending on them during the recess, a small sum for their newspapers,
stationary, etc.

Six hundred dollars were voted to be given to the three Attorneys concerned in
managing the prosecution against the Comptroller General.

FEBRUARY 19.
THIS being the day appointed for the trial of the Comptroller. The same came
on in the Senate-chamber, and was postponed to the 26th; in consequence of a
letter signed by William Lewis and Jared Ingersoll, Esqrs. and directed to the
Speaker of the Senate, requesting a postponement of the trial on account of
court business.

The House of Representatives appointed a committee of five members to prepare
and report such rules, as in their opinion, ought to be observed, in conducting
the trial of the articles of impeachment against the Comptroller General, and
then depending before the Senate.

FEBRUARY 20.
THEY resolved to hire an additional Attorney.

FEBRUARY 25.
THE committee appointed to manage on the part of this House the prosecution of
the trial of the articles of impeachment against John Nicholson, reported, That
the Senate postponed the trial of the said articles from Wednesday the
nineteenth instant until Wednesday the twenty-sixth instant.

The committee appointed for the purpose, February 19th instant, made report;
which was read,

And on motion and by special order, the same was read the second time, and
adopted, as follows, viz.

The committee appointed to prepare and report rules to be observed on the part
of this House, on the trial of the articles of impeachment against John
Nicholson, now depending before the Senate, do agree to the following
resolutions for consideration and adoption of the House.

Resolved, That the House of Representatives will set at such time and times as
the Senate may fix, for proceeding upon the trial of the articles of the
impeachment of John Nicholson, resolve itself into a committee of the whole
House, and in that capacity attend in the Senate-chamber during the said trial.

Resolved, That the committee appointed to manage the said trial on the part of
this House, do report from time to time the progress that shall be made
therein, and the final determination of the Senate thereon.

IN the morning of Wednesday the 26th February, the House of Representatives of
the commonwealth of Pennsylvania met pursuant to adjournment: the following
letter was presented to the Speaker.

"Comptroller-General's Office, Feb. 25, 1794. "SIR,
"BY a resolution of the late House of Representatives of Pennsylvania, of the
9th of April 1793, it was agreed, that I should at my request be furnished with
copies of such of the papers therein referred to as I should desire; a part
then requested and which has been since repeated, have not yet been furnished.
I pray that the present House would direct that it should be done.

"Also that I be furnished with a copy of the depositions or interrogatories of
John Oldden, Matthew M'Connell, and Blair M'Clenachan, who, I find gave
testimony before the late House on the subject of my impeachment. With great
respect, etc.

JOHN NICHOLSON."

The Hon. GEO. LATIMER, Esquire Speaker of the House of Representatives of
Pennsylvania.

The Clerk then informed the House that he had furnished the
Comptroller General with copies of such papers as were in his possession, and
some of those papers alluded to in the Comptroller-General's letter, were
presented to the committee appointed to manage his trial before the Senate, and
consequently were not in the power of the Clerk of this House.

A motion was made by Mr. Bowman, seconded by Mr. Kelly, and adopted, as
follows, viz.

Resolved, That the Speaker be authorized to draw a warrant for three hundred
dollars in favor of Samuel Dexter, Esquire, employed as Counsel on behalf of
the commonwealth, to assist in the prosecution and trial of the impeachment of
John Nicholson, Comptroller General of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania, now
depending before the Senate; whereupon,

The Speaker signed a warrant for three hundred dollars in favor of the said
Samuel Dexter, Esquire, MEMBER OF CONGRESS FROM MASSACHUSETTS.

At a quarter before 12 o'clock the Senate ordered their Sergeant to call the
court, which he did by reading the following words --

"O yes! O yes! O yes! Whereas charges of high misdemeanors have been exhibited
by the House of Representatives of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in the
name of themselves, and of the people of Pennsylvania, against John Nicholson,
Comptroller General of said commonwealth; all persons concerned may give their
attendance and they shall be heard."

The members of the House of Representatives attended; Mr. Nicholson and his
Counsel, Messrs. Lewis, Bradford, Tilghman, Higginson and Gibson were seated on
the west side of a great table which was placed in the middle of the hall. The
managers and their Counsel, Messrs. Wilcocks, Rawle, Ingersoll and Dexter took
the east side of the said table.

The Speaker and members of the Senate were seated on the south side of the
room, and looked to the north, their seats having been raised and brought into
a narrower compass for the purpose of making room for the members of the lower
House, and for spectators of respectability who might attend.

The Speaker addressed Mr. Nicholson, and informed him, that every indulgence
in the power of the Senate should be granted to him, and to his Counsel, that
the Secretary should issue subpoenas for witnesses, give him copies of any
papers in possession of the Senate, and allow him any other privilege not
incompatible with the nature of the misdemeanors wherewith he stood charged.

Mr. Nicholson bowed to him, and sat down to write.

The Secretary of the Senate read the following

"Articles of accusation and impeachment for high misdemeanors against John
Nicholson, Comptroller General of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania, by the
House of Representatives of the said commonwealth, in their name, and in the
name of the People of Pennsylvania, exhibited to the Senate thereof.
"Article I. THAT, by an Act of the General Assembly of this commonwealth,
passed on the twenty-seventh day of March, in the year 1789, entitled "An Act
to repeal so much of any Act or Acts of Assembly of this commonwealth, as
directs the payment of the New-Loan debt, or the interest thereof, beyond the
first day of April next, and for other purposes therein mentioned," it was,
among other things declared and enacted, That so much of every Act or Acts of
General Assembly as directed or secured the payment of the principal sum or
sums mentioned in certain certificates, commonly called New-Loan certificates
(which had been issued in pursuance of a preceding Act, passed on the first day
of March, 1786) or the interest thereof, beyond the term of four years, should
be thenceforth repealed and made null and void; thereby rendering the said
certificates no longer a debt, or evidence of a debt, due and owing from the
state of Pennsylvania: But, nevertheless, John Nicholson, the
Comptroller General of this commonwealth, to promote and procure his own
emolument, under the color of his office, pretending as well to facilitate the
execution of certain Acts of Congress hereinafter mentioned, touching a loan
proposed by the United States to the creditors of the respective states, as to
carry into effect a certain Act of the General Assembly of this commonwealth,
hereinafter also mentioned, touching the redemption of certain debts due and
owing from state of Pennsylvania, did, at various times, after the passing of
the said Act of the sixth day of March, 1789, to wit, between the tenth day of
April, 1792, and the first day of August, 1792, recognize, certify, and declare
the said certificates, commonly called New-Loan certificates, to be
subscribable, as debts due and owing by the state of Pennsylvania, to a certain
loan, opened and proposed, on the part of the United States, to the creditors
of the respective states, in and by two several Acts of Congress, passed,
respectively, on the fourth day of August, 1790, and on the eighth day of May,
1792; thereby committing a high misdemeanor, contrary to the intent and meaning
of the said law, passed on the twenty-seventh day of March, 1789, in violation
of the confidenc^ ^^rposed in him as a public officer, and manifestly, a^ ^e
said John Nicholson well knew, to the risque and injury of the commonwealth.

"Article II. That, by an Act of the General Assembly, entitled "An Act to
provide for paying and redeeming certain public debts, and for defraying the
expenses of government," passed on the tenth day of April, 1792, provision was
made, among other things, for redeeming certain debts then due and owing by
this commonwealth; in the specification of which debts the said certificates,
commonly called New-Loan certificates, were not included, nor could they, in
any wise, be contemplated to be objects of the said redemption; but,
nevertheless, the said John Nicholson, the Comptroller General of this
commonwealth, with a view to promote and procure his own emolument, and under
color of his office, did recognize, certify, and declare the said
certificates, commonly called New-Loan certificates, to be redeemable; thereby
committing a high misdemeanor, contrary to the terms, intent, and meaning of
the said Act of the General Assembly, passed on the tenth day of April, 1792,
in violation of the confidence reposed in him as a public officer, and to the
manifest loss and injury of this commonwealth.

"Article III. That the said John Nicholson, the Comptroller General of this
commonwealth, with intent to promote and procure his own emolument, and in
order to avoid discovery and detection in so doing, until such emolument was
actually reduced into his own possession, did not consult the Register-General
touching the above transactions, nor communicate the same to the Governor; nor
did he discriminate, in the certification entered upon the face of the
abstracts of debts respectively, by which certification he recognized and
declared the said certificates, commonly called New-Loan certificates, to be
subscribable to the said loan opened and proposed on the part of the United
States, to the creditors of the respective states, nor in the certification by
which he recognized and declared the same to be redeemable under the said Act
of the tenth day of April, 1792, between the said certificates, commonly called
New-Loan certificates, and other certificates which were properly debts, or
evidences of debts, due and and owing from this state, and as such might
lawfully be subscribed to the said loan, and redeemed by virtue of the said Act
of the tenth of April, 1792: in which conduct the said Comptroller General
committed a high misdemeanor, in as much as, thereby, all the checks of office,
provided by law, were destroyed, the other officers of government were deluded
into error, and the commonwealth suffered manifest loss and injury,

"Article IV. That, by the Constitution of this commonwealth, it is declared,
that no money shall be drawn from the Treasury, but in consequence of a
previous appropriation by law; yet the said John Nicholson with a view to
promote and precure his own emolument, did, under color of his office, and in
the above mentioned delusive manner, certify to the Governor that certain
debts, including the said certificates, commonly called New-Loan certificates,
but not naming or describing the same, were redeemable and payable, when no
fund was, by law, provided for paying the same; thereby committing a high
misdemeanor, misleading the other officers of government, and causing money,
without a previous appropriation, to be drawn from the Treasury in violation of
the constitution.

"Article V. That the said John Nicholson, Comptroller General of the
commonwealth, with intent to promote and procure his own emolument, and having
formed a plan to cause, under color of his office, the said certificates,
commonly called New-Loan certificates, to be redeemed, did, by himself or his
agents, between the tenth day of April and the first day of August, 1792,
purchase a very great amount of the said certificates, as well from persons who
came to exchange the same at his office, in pursuance of a provision for that
purpose contained in the said Act of the twenty-seventh of March, 1789, as from
others; which certificates, so purchased, were afterward actually redeemed and
paid for at the Treasury; thereby committing a high misdemeanor, rendering his
official trust subservient to the purposes of speculation, and injuring the
reputation, as well as the interest of the commonwealth, whose officer he was.

"And the said House of Representatives, by protestation, saving to themselves
the liberty of exhibiting at any time hereafter, any other accusation or
impeachment against the said Comptroller General, and also of replying to the
answers that the said Comptroller General shall make unto the said articles or
to any of them, and of offering proof of the said premises or any of them, or
of any other impeachment or accusation that shall be exhibited by them as the
case shall require, do demand that the said John Nicholson, Comptroller General
of this commonwealth, may be put to answer all and every the premises, and that
such proceedings, examinations, trial and judgment may be upon him had and used
as is agreeable to the constitution and laws of this commonwealth, and the said
House of Representatives are ready to offer proof of the premises, at such time
as the Senate of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall appoint.

"Additional Articles of Impeachment against John Nicholson,
Comptroller General.
"Article VI. THAT the said John Nicholson, Comptroller General of this
commonwealth, being entrusted by the aforesaid Act, entitled, "An Act to repeal
so much of any Act or Acts of Assembly of this commonwealth, as directs the
payment of the New-Loan debt, or the interest thereof, beyond the first day of
April next, and for other purposes therein mentioned," passed the
twenty-seventh of March, 1789, to receive the said certificates, commonly
called New-Loan certificates, from the persons holding the same, and to
re-deliver, to such persons, the certificates of debts, due by the United
States, loaned to this state, did, in the execution of the trust so in him
reposed, receive, from sundry persons, certain certificates, commonly called
New-Loan certificates to be exchanged as aforesaid; whereby, and by virtue of
the said Act of Assembly, the said certificates became the property of this
commonwealth, and ought to have been delivered by him, to the Register-General,
for the purpose of being cancelled and preserved; yet the said John Nicholson,
then being Comptroller General of this commonwealth, well knowing the same to
be the property of the commonwealth, but contriving and intending to convert
certain of the same certificates to his own use and emolument, did, between the
tenth day of April, 1792, and the first day of August, 1792, unlawfully, and
contrary to the duties of his office and the trust so as aforesaid in him
reposed, subscribe the last mentioned certificates to the loan aforesaid,
proposed by the United States to the creditors of this state, in his own name
and for his own use and benefit; whereby the said John Nicholson has committed
a high misdemeanor, in the violation of the trust and confidence by this
commonwealth in him reposed, and manifestly tending to the injury and loss of
the said commonwealth.

"Article VII. That the said John Nicholson, Comptroller General of this
commonwealth, being entrusted by the aforesaid Act, entitled, "An Act to repeal
so much of any Act or Acts of Assembly of this commonwealth, as directs the
payment of the New-Loan debt, or the interest thereof, beyond the first day of
April next, and for other purposes therein mentioned," passed the 27th day of
March, 1789, to receive the said certificates, commonly called New-Loan
certificates, from the persons holding the same, and to re-deliver to such
persons the certificates of debts due by the United States, did, in the
execution of the trust so in him reposed, exchange, for sundry persons, certain
certificates, commonly called New-Loan certificates, by receiving of the said
persons, the said New-Loan certificates, and delivering, in return thereof, an
equal amount in the certificates of debts due by the United States; whereby,
and by virtue of the Act of Assembly in such case made and provided, the said
New-Loan certificates became the property of this commonwealth, and ought to
have been delivered to the Register-General to be cancelled and preserved; yet
the said John Nicholson, then being Comptroller General of this commonwealth,
well knowing the premises, but contriving and unlawfully intending to convert
certain of the same certificates to his own use and emolument, and by
subscribing the same to the loan aforesaid, by the United States proposed, to
procure the amount thereof to be paid to him by this commonwealth, did, between
the first day of April, 1792, and and the first day of August, 1792, unlawfully
and contrary to the duties of his said office and the trust so as aforesaid
reposed in him, subscribe the said last mentioned certificates, commonly called
New-Loan certificates, to the said loan proposed by the United States, in his
own name and for his own use and benefit; and did afterward apply for, and
obtain the amount thereof; to be paid by the Treasurer of this commonwealth to
his use, whereby the said John Nicholson has committed a high misdemeanor,
has violated the trust and confidence so as aforesaid in him reposed, and has
occasioned great loss and detriment to this commonwealth."

"HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, Wednesday, September 4, 1793. P. M.
"On motion,

"Resolved, That Messrs. Morgan, Swanwick, Evans, Gallatin, and Johnston be a
committee to offer to the Senate an amendment of the first article of the
impeachment of John Nicholson, Comptroller General of the commonwealth, by
substituting the words "twenty-seventh" in the place of the word "sixth," in
the thirty-second line, and to request the Senate to direct the same to be
made."

"The answer of John Nicholson to the articles of impeachment exhibited against
him by the honorable the House of Representatives of the commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
"The said John Nicholson, saving to himself all advantages of exception to the
said articles, respectfully answers and says,

"That he is not guilty of all or any of the matters in the said articles
contained, in manner and form as they are therein charged against him."

"The Replication of the House of Representatives of the commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, in their behalf, and in the name of the People of Pennsylvania,
to the Answer made by John Nicholson, to the articles of accusation and
imp^^^^^ent exhibited by them to the Senate, and now depending against him.
"The House of Representatives of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Prosecutors
on behalf of themselves, and the People of Pennsylvania, against John
Nicholson, Comptroller General of the said commonwealth, reply to the answer of
the said John Nicholson, and aver It is worthy of remark that notwithstanding
this averment, the House of Representatives who made it, never went into any
examination of the evidence, on which the charges were founded; and that Mr.
Nicholson in answer to his letter of 25th Feb. 1794, (see page 200) was
informed by the managers that the oral testimony given in the former House had
not even been reduced to writing or preserved.
, that their charge of high misdemeanors against him the said John is true, and
that the said John is guilty of all and every the matters contained in the
articles of impeachment, by them exhibited against him, in the manner and form
as they are therein charged, and this the said House of Representatives are
ready to prove against him, at such convenient time and place as the Senate
shall appoint for that purpose."

The Speaker addressed the managers and observed that the Senate were ready to
hear them.

Whereupon, Mr. Morgan rose, to open the prosecution, addressing himself to the
Speaker and Gentlemen of the Senate; premising, that as a Member of the House
of Representatives, and one of the managers appointed to conduct the present
impeachment; he would endeavor to give a general view of the testimony, both
written, and unwritten, which would be adduced in support of these charges. He
observed, that, this practice had been borrowed from that country, from which
the most of our rules, and precedents were copied: They found it necessary in
that country to bring notorious offenders to the grandest tribunal of the
nation: therefore impeachments were found to have been conducted before the
house of lords in England as early as the year 1321.

This being the properest court where persons of fortune and influence should
be tried, and where deception and imposition could not avail, nor have any
weight.

In Pennsylvania few instances had occurred, the proceedings are circumscribed,
and she has adopted the practice of England by ingrafting this precedent in her
constitution.

The present impeachment was brought forward against this officer by the House
of Representatives of this commonwealth, conformably to the precedent above
alluded to, and agreeably to the constitution which prescribes, that "The House
of Representatives shall have the sole power of impeaching."

"All impeachments shall be tried by the Senate. When sitting for that purpose,
the Senators shall be upon oath or affirmation. No person shall be convicted,
without the concurrence of two thirds of the members present."

"The Governor and all other civil officers, under this commonwealth, shall be
liable to impeachment for any misdemeanor in office. But judgment in such
cases, shall not extend further than to removal from office, etc." and
according to the practice acknowledged and recognized in GREAT BRITAIN.

He adverted to the manner in which the present trial had been instituted, and
he read the report pages 83-4-5-6-7, at the same time giving the history of the
manner when and how, that report was brought forward, and the first five
articles were adopted, which can be easily collected from a perusal of the
foregoing pages.

Mr. Morgan made suitable remarks on every member and section of the report,
and of the several circumstances attending its being adopted.

He observed, that to understand the subject properly, it was necessary to go
through the laws of Pennsylvania, and the Acts of Congress, relative to the
subscription to the first loan; to consider the provision of Pennsylvania t^
comply with the requisition of Congress, and to examine minutely whether she
considered New-Loan certificates as a debt, in order to raise this
superstructure on a fair construction of the respective Acts of Congress, and
laws of Pennsylvania.

He said that the amount of New-Loans which were redeemed was about 63,000
dollars, and that Mr. Nicholson owned about 60,000 dollars of that sum.

He read the preamble to the Act of the 16th March, 1786, explaining the views
of the Legislature to provide for the payment of the debts due to the citizens
of this commonwealth, as Congress could not; the 13th section was then read as
being more immediately connected with the present case; the 14th section
describes the class of creditors to be relieved, and gives a description of the
certificates which were entitled to interest.

He read a long report of a grand committee of Congress, Sept. 24, 1785,
Journals of Congress, volume 10, page 310, 311, 329, and consequent resolution,
by which it appeared that Congress were dissatisfied at the mode pursued by
Pennsylvania, and forbid their Commissioner of Loans to settle or issue, unless
as therein provided, that is with these States who had complied with the
requisition of 1781.

This was disagreeable to Pennsylvania who afterward passed the Act of March
1, 1786, with a view to counteract the measures contemplated in the resolution
of Congress, and to accommodate the citizens of this state, who were creditors
of the United States. And near two million pounds of New-Loans had been issued.

Mr. Morgan gave the history of New-Loans, issued in consequence of this Act of
March 1, 1786 -- repealed by Act of March 27th, 1789, the interest paid for
four years; the second and third sections are the most material parts of the
repealing Act -- the former principles are recognized in this Act, and after
its passing no other use could be made of the New-Loans than to exchange them
for Continental certificates.

They could no longer continue a claim, as the law was repealed which
constituted them a claim: It became difficult from payments in the Land-Office
to return continental certificates, and the fund from the Land-Office was added
in-consequence of the practice of splitting certificates.

In the repealing Act of 1789 the Legislature contemplated to restore their
debts to the parties -- Pennsylvania designed an exoneration on the return of
the continental certificates, on one single condition, to wit, the restoration
of those certificates to the parties.

The State has been injured, the criminality of persons depends much upon
circumstances, she is injured not by her own acts, but by the conduct of one of
her officers, by a wrong construction of law, whether wilful or mistaken, the
Senate will judge when the facts and evidence will be laid before them.

This construction under the Act of the 10th April, 1792, has involved the
State in a loss of near 15000 dollars, and this immense loss has been sustained
by this construction of the present defendant.

Mr. Morgan read part of the 12th and 13th sections of the Act of Congress of
the 4th August, 1790, which contemplates only the assumption of certificates
issued for services or supplies, none excepted but "certificates issued by the
commissioners of army accounts in the state of North Carolina in the year 1786."

The Act of 27th March, 1789, passed before the Act of the 4th of August, 1790;
If the New-Loans are not subscribable to the first loan, they cannot be to the
second of the 8th May, 1792. The idea of subscribing them never entered the
mind of any person during the continuance of the first loan.

He read the Act of Assembly of the 9th of April, 1791, respecting purparts,
for making up the deficiency of interest on continental loans, the Legislature
considered the persons relieved here as their only creditors, whose debts were
subscribable, had New-Loans been considered as existing debts, equal provision
would have been made for them in the said Act.

In the next place he adverted to the Act of the 10th of April, 1792, in which
Act the Legislature determined to pay off their proper debts with the purparts.
The 2d section appropriates the stock to pay the debts mentioned in the first
section, the section describes, 1, the fund; 2, the debts, here he observed
that it was necessary to see if New-Loans were included; the interest on
New-Loans was not payable at this time. As it is under a construction of this
law the articles of impeachment were brought forward, it was necessary to pay
proper attention to it, and to weigh the particular state of the affair with
the eyes of scrutiny and candor.

This is the construction put on it by us, we cannot tell what is the
construction of the Comptroller, or his counsel. Agreeably to the duties
required of the Governor for the purpose of carrying this Act into execution,
it was necessary for him to have an account of the debts. -- He therefore
applied to the Comptroller and Register-General, who estimated the debt to be
redeemed, and the stock to be sold; this estimate, Mr. Morgan said, did not
include New-Loans, but through some fatality this document has been lost.

Had the Legislature designed to redeem the New-Loan certificates it was
necessary to appropriate larger funds -- The stock which had been ordered to be
sold, was only adequate to the other debt.

The fifth section refers only to certificates mentioned in the second section.

The sixth section is apparently more indefinite and uncertain, and depended
upon what provision Congress would make.

Mr. Morgan then read the Act of Congress of the 8th of May, 1792,
supplementary to the Act of August, 1790, which is extended on the same terms,
same construction must be attached to each Act, as both Acts are on the same
principles. Here he referred to the 2d section of the Act of Congress of the
8th May, 1792, relative to non-subscribing creditors, to get the same interest
which he said, merited particular attention.

In the 6th section of the Act of the 10th of April, 1792, as it is confined to
the assumption before the first of July, and nothing could strictly be done
conformably to it under the last Act of Congress, because no certificates could
issue under it until March the 1st, 1793: This compared with the 6th section of
the Act of Assembly of the 10th April, 1792, it became impossible that both
laws could be literally and expressly complied with; a correspondence took
place, between the Governor, Secretary of the commonwealth, Comptroller General
and the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States, and arrangements were
made accordingly -- all the extracts which he read were repeated, reiterated,
dilated and descanted upon, placing every subject in various points of view:
remarked that he had gone through the different laws of the United States, and
acts of this commonwealth, which were connected with this business, that he
would then be under the necessity of referring to written documents and oral
testimony; that the letters were numerous and lengthy, and as it was then
within a quarter of two he proposed deferring the reading of the letters until
the next day.

The Speaker asked Mr. Morgan how long it would take to go through them, he
answered, two or three hours, whereupon the Speaker adjourned the trial until
11 o'clock the next day.

In the minutes of the House of Representatives the following entry is recorded:

"In conformity to the resolution adopted yesterday, the House resolved itself
into a committee of the whole, for the purpose of attending the trial of John
Nicholson, Comptroller General.

"The Speaker quitted the chair and Mr. Wynkoop was placed therein.

"The committee then proceeded to the Senate chamber for the purpose aforesaid,

"After some time the committee of the whole returned to their own chamber.

"The Chairman then left the chair and the Speaker resumed it.

"The Chairman then reported that the committee of the whole had attended the
trial of the articles of impeachment against John Nicholson,
Comptroller General.

"Whereupon,

"The committee appointed to manage the trial of the articles of impeachment of
the House of Representatives, against John Nicholson, Comptroller General
reported progress."

Second day of the trial. THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 27.
AT 10 minutes after the hour of eleven the consideration of legislative
business was postponed during pleasure, in order that the Senate might sit in
their judicial capacity.

The Court being called: --

Mr. Morgan resumed his argument respecting the difficulty which occurred in
the Act of Congress granting no certificates until March, 1793, and the Act of
the 10th April, 1792, requiring a transfer before the first of July, 1792, and
adverted to the necessity of an arrangement in consequence.

He observed that the actions of the Comptroller General were contrary to his
(the Comptroller's) own opinion respecting the redeemability of the
certificates in question, and that this could be manifest from the letters to
be produced, which were written by that officer, by the Register-General and
other public officers -- for this purpose he began with the following letter.

"SIR, June 22, 1792.
"THE Act of the Legislature of Pennsylvania, entitled "An Act for paying and
redeeming certain public debts, and for defraying the expenses of government,
provides that to entitle the holders, of such debt of this state, as is
assumable by the United States, to payment therefore, they shall first subscribe
the same to the loan of the United States, and on or before the first of July,
1792, transfer to the State-Treasurer for the use of the commonwealth, the
certificate or certificates which they shall receive from the United States, in
consequence of such subscription, or all and singular the interests and
benefits to be derived from the provision which has been made by the
supplementary Act of Congress, passed at last sessions providing for the public
debt.

"Under the said Act of Congress the certificates for the subscriptions made
will not issue until March 1st, 1793, and consequently they cannot be
transferred within the time limited above. The Loan-Officer on making the
deposit of State debt grants a descriptive receipt therefore, conditional to
return any, that may not be assumable -- we have considered this subject, have
consulted the Loan-Officer aforesaid, and obtained his concurrence, and are of
opinion, that the best way will be to receive from the parties those
certificates of deposit signed by Mr. Smith, examine the same, as to their
being genuine certificates, and assumable, as well as the amount of principal
and interest of such as are, till July 1st, 1792, and take a transfer to the
Treasurer thereon, in such manner as the Loan-Officer agrees, shall enable him
to issue the certificates on the first of March, 1793 -- according to the
provisions of the Act of this State aforesaid.

"This plan is submitted for the approbation of your excellency.

And we have the honor to be, etc. JOHN NICHOLSON, JOHN DONNALDSON."

His Excellency THOMAS MIFFLIN, Esquire Governor of Pennsylvania.

"Secretary's office, Phila. June 23, 1792. "GENTLEMEN,
"THE Governor directs to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 22d
instant; and to inform you, that, thinking it proper to have the sanction of
the Secretary of the Treasury in making any arrangement with the general
government to satisfy that part of the law for the redemption of the State
debts, which require a subscription to the loan proposed by Congress and a
transfer of the evidence of the stock, he has written to that officer on the
subject, and will communicate his answer as soon as it is received.

I am, Gentlemen, etc. A. J. DALLAS, Secretary."

To the Comptroller and Register-General.

The letter from the Governor to Mr. Hamilton, page 96, 97: --

And the letter from Mr. Hamilton to the Governor, page 97, 98, were then read,
with applicable observations on each.

The arrangement made in consequence of the foregoing took place, and the
Comptroller and Register were to certify the genuine and assumable quality of
the debt, the party after assigned to the Treasurer, a certification was made
to the Governor, who issued his warrant on the Treasury for payment.

That the Comptroller General certified New-Loans to be genuine and assumable
he produced the abstracts of Thomas Hale, Joseph Honeycomb, and Alexander
Addison.

Question by Mr. Lewis. To whom were they certified to be genuine and assumable?

Ans. There is no direction, suppose to Mr. Smith.

Mr. Igersoll observed that the abstracts on the table, were sent to him from
the Loan-Office of the U. States.

Mr. Morgan. This certification must be in his official capacity, as he could
not do it in any other way, by which he has transgressed the bounds of his
duty, he was not warranted in so doing, if the certificates were not assumable.
He referred to the communications between the officers of the general and state
governments.

Whatever might have been the opinion of Mr. Hamilton before he had seen the
law, his sentiments were otherwise after he did see it.

He then read the letter from Mr. Hamilton to Mr. Dallas, page 76-7-8-9,
commenting as he went along; -- observing that the New-Loans were not issued
for services or supplies but for Continental certificates. They were not
evidences of debt when certified, as the law was repealed. The Secretary of the
Treasury could not be acquainted with our laws, and the certificates on the
face of them appeared to be for debts. As they were sated to him they appeared
to be subscribable, afterward on more mature information and consideration
they were not so.

In a subsequent letter the Secretary gives a different opinion. He read the
following: --

"Treasury Department, August 21, 1793. "SIR,
"I HAVE had the honor of your letter of the 29th of July last which the press
of business has prevented my sooner answering.

"The certificates to which you refer have not been admitted upon the loan
proposed by the acts of Congress payable in evidences of State debt.

"The following circumstances have attended the case. Certificates of the
description of those called New-Loan certificates of Pennsylvania to the amount
of 65,210 dollars and 28 cents were offered for subscription under the Act,
entitled "An Act supplementary to the Act for making provision for the debt of
the U. S."

"It appeared (a circumstance which had not come to my knowledge till after
those certificates were so offered) that there was a law of the commonwealth of
Pennsylvania which rendered it questionable whether they could legally be
considered as a subsisting debt of the commonwealth, a quality necessary to
their being assumable, and an opinion of thee Attorney General of Pennsylvania
was communicated to me, showing that he did not view them as a subsisting debt
of the commonwealth.

"This led me to state the case for the consideration of the Attorney General
of the United States, who gave an opinion that the Acts of the Pennsylvania
Assembly of the 27th of March, 1789, and of the 30th of March and 1st of April,
1790, abolished the certificates in question as debts of the state except for
the purpose of being re-exchanged for Continental certificates, and therefore
that the former as wanting the due recognition from that state could not be
legally received upon loan.

"To this opinion I was about to conform and to direct the rejection of the
certificates offered to the loan.

"But having learnt that there was a probability of a judicial investigation of
the point, I forebore to give a final instruction concerning it and left the
matter suspended.

"When the commissioners were about to close the settlement of accounts between
the united and individual States it became necessary to certify to them the
amount of the debt of this commonwealth which had been admitted upon loan. The
course pursued was to certify absolutely the sum which had been subscribed and
finally admitted, and to state in a note the amount and situation of the
certificates in question which had been offered to the loan and not admitted.
It is understood that this amount was not embraced in the statement of the
Commissioners.

"There has been no suspension of the interest on so much of the debt of the
commonwealth as was subscribed and admitted upon the loan.

"These circumstances amount to a virtual rejection of the certificates to
which your enquiry is understood to have reference.

"I state them particularly that the precise course of the business may be
accurately seen.

ALEX. HAMILTON."

"His Excellency the Governor Pennsylvania."

Mr. Morgan observed that this opinion of the Secretary was not on general
principles, but immediately applied to the New-Loan certificates certified by
Mr. Nicholson to be genuine and assumable.

The grounds not unknown to our officers, the Comptroller must have been better
acquainted with them than the Secretary of the Treasury. It does not appear
that in his former communications he ever mentioned the repealing Act of 1789,
to Mr. Hamilton; therefore the Secretary's former decision must have been on a
partial view and consequently of no credit.

Mr. Nicholson knew that no subscription could be made without a previous
surrender of continental certificates, and this he was not empowered to do:
This appears from the law, and his letters on this subject to the Governor. See
part of his letter in Italics, page 222, for the contrary.


Mr. Morgan then read Mr. Hamilton's letter to the Governor, pages 102 and 103.

The following letters were then read.

"Secretary's Office, Philad. 23d Dec. 1791. "SIR,
"ENCLOSED I send for your perusal, a letter which the Governor has received
from the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States; and his Excellency
directs me to request that you will, as soon as possible, make a full report to
him upon the subject to which it refers. I am, etc.

A. J. DALLAS,"

TO JOHN NICHOLSON, Esquire Comptroller General of Pennsylvania.

Comptroller-General's Office, Philad. December. 24, 1791. "SIR,
"IN compliance with your excellency's desire communicated by letter from the
Secretary of the commonwealth of yesterday, covering a letter addressed to your
excellency by the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States, dated the
21st instant; I report --

"That the whole of the certificates of this state granted for a like sum of
certificates of debt of the United States, amounts to L1,937,885:15:3 Of which
there was redeemed, 118,470:6:6 Balance, 1,819,415:8:9 L 1,937,885:15:3

By an Act passed in March, 1789, the holders of this balance are entitled on
presenting their certificates of this state and liquidating the interest
received thereon, to receive back their former ones or an equivalent; this has
taken place to a great amount, insomuch that there does not at present remain
much unexchanged on a comparison of the whole, the exact amount at present
unexchanged I cannot tell, a number of exchanges to the amount of 40 or 50
presented are pending for want of the parties paying the indents due, the
remainder I estimate from 40 to 50 thousand pounds, if absolute precision be
necessary, I will have the additions and selections made so as to give the sum
exactly.

When I read the letter of the Secretary of the Treasury referred to aforesaid,
I was doubtful until I consulted it again, whether it really imported that the
interest payable quarterly on the certificates granted on the Assumed debt of
this state, would be suspended until the certificates of the Federal debt not
yet exchanged for the New-Loans as aforesaid should be surrendered or an
equivalent in stock under the funding system, as such a case would prostrate
the faith of the United States to the will of the Legislature of this state, if
they should refuse to surrender them, then the United States (without any fault
on the part of the original subscribers or the present holders) would not pay
the interest they had issued their obligation for, in which they promised
payment. It appeared to me that if such were the law the public credit of the
United States might be shaken by it and rendered precarious, but on turning to
the law it will appear that the provision for returning the certificates of the
United States, was to prevent the United States from paying the interest twice
on the same debt, and that in conformity thereto, if any of the certificates of
this state commonly called New-Loan debt had been before the first of October
last, when the loan closed, subscribed to the said loan, it would have been
requisite before the stock had issued therefore, that an equal sum should have
been surrendered by the state as aforesaid. The state would thus have redeemed
her certificates through the United States in the same manner at present
practiced, for individuals, but no such certificates of this state were
subscribed -- consequently the United States are entitled to none of the
continental certificates, which are demandable by the persons holding the
New-Loans. If they should be delivered to the United States, this state might
have to pay the New-Loan certificates without having this resource to do it
with. I think too highly of the faith of the public to suppose, that the
holders of New-Loan are compellable either to subscribe them to the United
States or to re-exchange them for the continental certificates, or that to such
as do not, the state are absolved from payment both of principal and interest,
but the market value and the irredeemable quality of the continental stock and
the present funds of the United States are generally sufficient to induce the
change, as is evinced from the great quantity already so exchanged, of the
remainder some part is exchanged almost every day, and if the loan should be
opened by Congress the exchanges would be increased thereby.

I have, etc. JOHN NICHOLSON."

His Excellency THOMAS MIFFLIN, Esquire Governor of Pennsylvania.

Feb. 29, 1792. "SIR,
"THE subject committed to me by your excellency in December last, respecting
the claim made by the Secretary of the Treasury to a surrender on the part of
the State, of the Continental certificates not exchanged, having been brought
to a close; and being this day informed at the Treasury that all obstacles were
removed respecting the transfer and payment of interest quarterly on the
assumed debt of this state, or the payment quarterly to the state of the
residuum unsubscribed of this state's quota; and orders having gone out to the
Loan-Office of the district of Pennsylvania, consequent thereupon, I hasten to
inform you thereof.

"The subject was an important one, and to have required the Continental
certificates from Pennsylvania, while the New-Loans for which they were given
were out, and the state responsible for, without these means of redemption,
could have placed her in an unpleasant situation. To take off the appearance of
this hardship, it was suggested, that in case the New-Loans not exchanged,
would not be subscribed to the United States by the holders (which on the
proposed terms of the loan might be done) yet still that the state would by the
terms of the same loan, be in the receipt of a sufficient sum from the Union to
meet the interest due to these creditors. But to this it was objected, that
this receipt of interest by the state would be temporary, and would cease when
the settlement of our accounts with the United States should be effected, and
the balances provided for agreeably to law, whereas the demand against the
state would be perpetual, and could only be discharged by payment of the debt.

"On the whole after much attention to this business it has been settled to
our wish; and the good sense of the Secretary of the Treasury has led him to a
decision, under the Act of Congress of August 4th, 1790, which is equitable and
consonant with the scope of the said Act. I am, etc.

JOHN NICHOLSON."

His excellency THOMAS MIFFLIN, Esquire Governor of Pennsylvania.

Mr. Morgan made suitable remarks on these letters, and observed that
Pennsylvania had paid upwards of 63,000 dollars, and had nothing in return, and
could not procure the Continental certificates. This act being done
clandestinely must have a different construction than if it had been done
openly.

The Comptroller General obtained the money before the Governor or
Register-General had any information of it: It was done in a way regardless of
the checks of office. It was necessary that New-Loans should be declared
assumable before they were subscribed, if there had been a full consultation it
would show some degree of fairness. The Governor should be consulted if there
should exist any difference of opinion between the Comptroller and
Register-General.

Mr. Nicholson shut the secret in his own breast, the dates of interest on the
face of the abstracts were only inferences, and the Register-General did not
know they were New-Loans.

Mr. Morgan read the warrant No. 462, by which Mr. Nicholson reduced the money
into his possession, the Register-General was not to blame as he did not enter
into the calculations of abstracts. -- Dates of interest and hurry of business
might have induced him to overlook or not to have attended to this particular.

He read the following letter --

"SIR, April 28, 1792.
"PROPOSALS of 12. in the pound and upwards have been received for 986,000
dollars 3 per cent. stock. The sum estimated to be necessary for the redemption
of the State debt according to law. A particular account of the proposals shall
be laid before you -- in the mean time we give this information, and are, with
great respect, etc.

JOHN NICHOLSON."

His excellency THOMAS MIFFLIN, Esquire Governor.

[Intended to have been signed by the Register.]

He observed that the original letter from the Governor written two days after
the foregoing and the answer were not to be found.

He read the following letters: --

"SIR, April 30th, 1792.
"ENCLOSED is the list of the proposals and the sums respectively for 986,000
dollars 3 per cent. stock for redemption of the state debts submitted for your
approbation. We are, etc.

JOHN NICHOLSON, JOHN DONNALDSON."
"N. B. I. Brunson and Co. have relinquished 30,000 of their proposals of the
27th, which is therefore not included in the enclosed list."

His excellency THOMAS MIFFLIN, Esquire Governor of Pennsylvania.




List of proposals for the purchase of 3 per cent. stock: --

John Nicholson, in trust 46,000 at 12. Isaac Brunson and Co. 20,00 12.
Griffith Evans 3,000 12. John Nicholson 7,000 12. James and Wm. Miller 5,000
12. Philip Reilly 10,000 do. Thomas M. Willing 10,000 do. Isaac Brunson and Co.
20,000 do. John Donnaldson (A.) 10,000 do. John Donnaldson and Co. 30,000 do.
John Donnaldson 10,000 do. Joseph Webb 2,000 12. N. G. Philips 20,000 12 1.
John Lynch 10,000 do. Robert Morris 200,000 12. George Eddy 30,000 12 1. George
Meade 15,000 do. Isaac Brunson and Co. 20,000 12. James Crawford 10,000 do.
John Nicholson, 12,000 12. Le Roy and Bayard 159,000 12. Walter Stewart 30,000
do. Thomas M. Willing 5,000 do. Robert Morris 250,000 12. Wm. Bingham 6,000 12.
John Donnaldson 6,000 12. Walter Stewart 20,000 12. Clement Biddle 20,000 do.
986,000

JOHN NICHOLSON, JOHN DONNALDSON."
April 30, 1792.

I approve, 30th April, 1792, T. MIFFLIN."

"Will you be so good as to calculate the specie sums to be paid on each
proposal.

A. J. DALLAS."

"Secretary's Office, Philad. Dec. 24, 1792. "GENTLEMEN,
"THE Governor directs me to request, that you will immediately furnish him
with a copy of the estimate, upon which the sale of the 3 per cent. stock to
the amount of 986,000 dollars, was directed, for the purpose of redeeming the
state debts, agreeably to the Act of Assembly. I am, etc.

A. J. DALLAS."

To the COMPTROLLER and REGISTER-GENERAL of Pennsylvania.

SIR, December 26, 1792.
"THE quantity of 3 per cent. stock directed to be sold by the second section
of the Act of the 10th of April, 1792, was estimated at the price of 12 per
pound, as the market price at that time was lower, it would not justify an
higher calculation, and the limitation of price in the Act would not admit
sales for less.

"The calculations are not preserved, however it is easy to re-state it.

"The funded debt then to be redeemed was about L.103,559

"The funded depreciation debt, 48,450

"Amount L. 152,009

"Equal in dollars to 405,357 33

"To redeem 218,469 84/100 dollars 3 per cent. at 10 109,234 92

"To redeem 145,646 56/100 deferred state purparts at 39 per cent. required
56,802 15

"And to redeem the residue of the dollar-money, about 12,500 dollars and
interest 20,112

"Amount 591,506 40

"The amount of the neat proceeds of the sales -- 986,000 dollars at 12 591,600

We have the honor, etc. JOHN NICHOLSON, JOHN DONNALDSON."

His Excellency THOMAS MIFFLIN, Esquire Governor of Pennsylvania.

Here Mr. Morgan. remarked that the New-Loan certificates were excluded. -- If
these two officers made a partial statement, they did not comply with the
requisitions, it must therefore be conceded that it included all: The act of
the 10th of April, 1792, was their rule of construction. He then read the 2d
section of that act. Mr. Morgan then held in his hand an abstract which had
been actually redeemed, which did not on the face of it show the certification
of the Comptroller for being genuine and assumable, but it was in the hand
writing of that officer, in the abstracts of others, it was necessary, here it
was not, the form is similar to the others; it consisted of eight columns. --
1. Date of certificate. 2. Number of ditto. 3. By whom issued. 4. To whom
issued. 5. Commencement of interest. 6. Amount of each certificate. 7. Interest
computed to December 31, 1791. 8. Total amount.

In this abstract it is necessary to observe that a certificate purchased from
an irreproachable witness on the 7th of July, 1792 is contained in a receipt
dated the 30th June, 1792, an erazure is made to cover purchases made after the
first of July, to bring them within the time prescribed by the act.

The foregoing were offered to support the three first articles, the fourth is
rather a deduction from them, he observed that the three first were considered
together for they could not be separated.

He read the fourth article.

Mr. Nicholson, he observed, could not certify to the officers of the United
States in his private capacity, he therefore did it under color of his office,
there was no specification of New-Loans on the face of the abstracts, and no
fund provided to pay them, the money must therefore have been drawn from the
Treasury without any previous appropriation, or out of a fund otherwise
appropriated, which is contrary to the constitution; he quoted the 21st section
of the first article of the constitution of Pennsylvania. It is apparent from
these facts and circumstances that the Comptroller General knew when he made
the certification, and unless an appropriation can be shown, it will not be
disputed that the New-Loans could be redeemed out of any other than the fund
contemplated in the Act of the 10th of April, 1792. He repeated the reading of
the second section, and said, that unless some other law can be shown, which he
knew nothing of, there was no fund, the section mentioned nothing of New Loans,
nay it appropriates the funds and excludes New-Loans; the sale of the three per
cent. stock was co-extensive with its object. If therefore 986,000 dollars were
only sufficient, and part directed for New-Loans, it would affect the other,
and injure the proper state creditors; the honor of the state would be
disgraced, as she promised payments and had not funds.

To prove that the money was reduced to Mr. Nicholson's possession, he read the
Governor's warrants, Numbers 425, 451, and 462, July 9, 12, and 14, 1792.

The Treasurer appeared with his books to show that the money was paid the 14th
July, 1792, before the Register or the Governor knew any thing about the
subscribability of New-Loans.

The consequences of this transaction aggravate the crime, Mr. Nicholson's gain
on the whole was about 14 or 15,000 dollars, and the commonwealth lost 25 per
cent.

Mr. Morgan read the 5th article, observing that he would substantiate the
charge contained in this by respectable witnesses, they did not appear, and he
moved for an adjournment, which was granted, with directions from the Speaker
to be punctual. -- The members of the House of Representatives returned to
their chamber, and repeated the ceremony, as in page 214 and 215.

The letter of Mr. Nicholson, read yesterday in the House of Representatives
(see page 200) was read the second time; and referred to Messrs. B. Morgan,
M'Lene, Evans, and Bowman. It does not appear that they reported on it.

Third day of the trial. FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 28.
THE Senate met; and the members of the House of Representatives in committee
of the whole repaired to the Senate-chamber.

At 10 minutes after eleven o'clock Mr. Morgan rose, having premised that his
arguments the preceding days respected the first, second, third and fourth
articles of impeachment against the Comptroller General, that he would then
proceed in order to the fifth.

That he would show by the different statements of that officer to the
Legislature in his official capacity, that he did not look upon New-Loan
certificates as a State debt after the passing of the Act of March, 1789, as
Mr. Nicholson made no mention of them in any of his communications.

That the Governor was of the same opinion.

The committees on Ways and Means of the same;

And the Legislature likewise.

That after the printed documents would be brought forward, he should then
adduce oral testimony. He read part of the State of the Finances of the
commonmonwealth as reported by Mr. Nicholson on the 7th November, 1787, in
which Mr. Nicholson mentioned the New-Loans as an existing debt against the
state.

That in all his communications previous to March, 1789, the Comptroller
mentioned the New-Loans as an existing debt; and a total change of sentiment
took place in him, in the Legislature, and Governor, after that period; because
they conceived the law of March, 1789, had done away the claim which existed by
the law of 1786, and the New-Loans were omitted in all their subsequent
statements as no longer an object of Legislative consideration.

He observed that the Governor in his speech to the Legislature on the 10th
December, 1791, did not mention New-Loans as a debt or claim on the state, and
that he did not forget them, as he made mention of the payment of the arrears
of interest due on them, for which provision is made in the repealing act of
March, 1789.

He read part of the Governor's speech to both Houses on the 28th December,
1790, being the first session after the passing of the act of March, 1789, in
which the Governor enumerated the aggregate of all the engagements of the
commonwealth, and mentioned only the balance of interest due on the New-Loan
debt; if they had been debts, he would not have executed his duty in omi^ting
to state them, that funds might be provided by the Legislature for their
redemption.

The same idea was pursued by the Governor in all his communications respecting
the New-Loans.

The Comptroller General himself, the committee on Ways and Means, and the
other officers were of the same opinion. Mr. Morgan read part of the report of
the committee on Ways and Means, Feb. 8th 1791, page 166 of the minutes,
wherein the other debts of the commonwealth are mentioned and provided for, but
not the New-Loans: Notwithstanding this is called a statement of all the debts
of Pennsylvania, and added that every body put the same construction on that
debt.

He read part of the statement of the Comptroller and Register-General of the
30th November, 1791, to the Governor, and observed that the Governor and the
Secretary were betrayed into the part they had acted, and for proof of which he
would call witnesses.

Alexander James Dallas, Esquire sworn.
Ques. by Mr. Ingersoll. Had there been any estimate made by the Comptroller
and Register-General of the stock to be sold and debt to be redeemed, which
estimate cannot be found at this time, and did or did not the Comptroller ever
hint that New-Loans were redeemable?

Ans. Immediately after the passing of the Act of the 10th of April, 1792,
agreeably to direction from the Governor, I applied, by letter, to the
Comptroller and Register-General, in the following words:

"Secretary's Office, Philad. 13th April, 1792. "GENTLEMEN,
"BY the Act, entitled "An Act to provide for paying and redeeming certain
public debts and for defraying the expenses of Government." The Legislature
contemplates the payment of certain debts on the first day of July, next, by
the sale of 3 per cent. stock, at a certain rate, with a power however to
suspend the sale until the stipulated price can be obtained, you will be
pleased therefore to take that Act into immediate consideration, and report
what arrangements will be necessary, in your opinion, for carrying the
redemption of the debt into effect. By order of the Governor,

A. J. DALLAS."

To the COMPTROLLER GENERAL and REGISTER-GENERAL of Pennsylvania.

Soon after this the Comptroller and Register-General joined in a report to the
Governor on the subject, which the Governor perused, approved, and signed with
the initials of his name; in consequence of which indorsement I returned it as
an official document to the Comptroller or Register's office as their authority
to act, I do not know to which of them, not by myself, but by one of my
assistant clerks, whom I ordered to take it and deliver it with his own hands.

When the subject was before the Legi^^ature, an enquiry was made for this
document, and, I think, sir, that application was made both to the Comptroller
and Register to furnish it, after search in their respective offices, they
answered, it was not be found among their records. I then strictly examined the
papers in my office, whether by some mistake or other, it had not been sent to
the Comptroller or Register-General, after this search my mind was clear, that
it had been transmitted to the officers above mentioned.

I wrote again by the direction of the Governor to the Comptroller General and
Register-General, (see page 226.)

On the 26th of the same month they united in a joint report to the Governor,
(see page 227.)

Mr. Dallas observed that he was not provided for being an evidence in this
cause, that letters might be in his office, of which he might be totally
ignorant, and if he should be unacquainted with such, or mistaken in dates or
numbers he hoped to he excused, as he did not prepare himself to be a witness
in this business. The last estimate corresponded with the first, I speak more
from the conviction of my mind, than from the recollection of the document. The
Comptroller and Register's first estimate, was dated before the 16th of April,
1792, which directed the mode of carrying the Act of the 10th of April, 1792,
into execution, supposed to be lost.

Ques. by Mr. Ingersoll. Did any communication, except in writing, pass between
the Governor and the Comptroller General respecting the stock to be sold and
kind of debt to be redeemed, subsequent to the Act of the 10th of April, or
whilst that business was pending before the Legislature?

Ans. Not to my knowledge; the Governor showed me a plan of finance recommended
by Mr. Nicholson, who requested him (the Governor) to submit it to the
Legislature, I showed it to some of the members, Mr. Gallatin for instance was
one of them, who, if I understood him right, informed me he had seen and read
it before, and refused to read it again.

Ques. by the same. Do you remember any conversation between yourself and Mr.
Nicholson, respecting the redemption of New-Loans, or whether any intimation
was made to you respecting the operation of that Act to embrace New-Loans?

Ans. On my first hearing of the redemption of New-Loans, I was much surprised,
I called on the Register-General, same day I wrote to Mr. Ingersoll, (page
98-9), who appeared to be at a loss himself; I also called on the
Comptroller General, and asked him upon what grounds he was proceeding in the
redemption of New-Loans; as it was my opinion they were annihilated by the Act
of March 27th, 1789, except for the purpose of equalizing the interest for four
years, and the re-exchange.

Mr. Addison was in the office at the same time, he introduced himself to me, I
learned that his business there was, for the purpose of re-exchanging or
redeeming New-Loans -- Mr. Nicholson told me that he was sure he was right, and
acting under the regular construction of the Act, but gave me no particular
reasons for his proceedings.

I mentioned it to the Governor who directed me to get the Attorney-General's
opinion on the subject, which was accordingly obtained, (see pages 100-1-2.)

Ques. by Mr. Ingersoll. Do you know any thing further on this business, or
relatively to what passed between the Comptroller and Mr. Addison?

Ans. I understood that Mr. Addison had two New-Loan certificates either for
re-exchange, or redemption, he came to my office, I showed him the annihilating
Act, and gave him my opinion on the same. Mr. Dallas retired to be called up
again, if wanted.

John Donnaldson, sworn.
Ques. by Mr. Ingersoll. Have you been called upon to render an estimate of the
debt to be redeemed and stock to be sold about the 13th April, 1792?

Ans. About that time the Comptroller General and myself received a letter from
the Governor, directing us to render an estimate or statement of the debt to be
redeemed, and of the stock necessary to be sold according to the directions of
the Act of the 10th of April same year, for the purpose of redeeming that debt.

The documents on which this statement or estimate was made, were lying in the
Comptroller's office, the estimate was drawn up there, I concurred in it, a
calculation of the 3 per cent. stock contemplated to be sold, was annexed, or
added to it; which was transmitted to the Governor, who approved of it, and it
was returned, I believe, but do not know at this time, what became of it.

In December, 1792, being called upon by the committee of ways and means, for
it, I turned to my letter book with confidence expecting to find it there, but
could not, whether hurry of business, or what prevented me from copying it, I
cannot tell. I went to the Comptroller's office, it could not be found there,
we sat down and made out another from the rough papers which accorded with the
first, to which I gave my signature.

Ques. by Mr. Ingersoll. Did that estimate contain a statement of all the stock
to be sold and the debt to be redeemed?

Ans. It occured so to us at that time.

Ques. Do you recollect the amount of the 3 per cent. stock entered in the
second estimate?

Ans. I know it to be the same precisely in the first as in the second. (He
read it.)

Ques. Did or did not the Comptroller intimate at any time to you his ideas,
that New-Loan certificates were subscribable, if so at what time, and when was
the date of the first warrant issued for the payment of such redemption?

Before the witness had time to answer this question, Mr. Rawle proposed that
it would be better to state the matter generally. -- Therefore the question was
altered to this.

Ques. How was the redemption of State debts conducted.

Ans. As well as I can recollect when the debt was to be redeemed the party
generally made out two copies of an abstract of the debt he possessed, these
abstracts were sometimes printed and contained eight columns -- in the first
column the date was inserted, in the second the number, in the third, the name
of the person by whom isued; in the fourth, to whom issued; in the fifth, the
commencement of interest; in the sixth, the amount of each certificate; in the
seventh, interest computed to the 31st December 1791, or otherwise agreeably to
the quality of the certificates; and the eighth or last, contained the total
amount of principal and interest in pounds, shillings and pence.

That abstract was brought to the Comptroller General to certify the genuine
and assumable quality of the debt.

Ques. Were the certifications of genuine and assumable on both or only on one?

Ans. Sometimes on both, more from accident than design, as it was unnecessary.

Ques. by Mr. Wilcocks. You say, these abstracts were printed, where were they
to be had?

Ans. At the Stationers.

Ques. Were there none to be had at the Comptroller's office?

Ans. I do not know.

After this certificate was obtained from the Comptroller, they carried that
abstract and certificate to the Loan-officer of the United States, and there
subscribed it to the loan opened in a book for that purpose; after making this
subscription, the Loan-Officer gave them a duplicate of the abstract, and a
receipt, which were brought to my office, and examined there, the interest
calculated up to the time allowed by law, and an account was stated by me,
State of Pennsylvania to -- Dr., owing to the hurry of business it was divided
between my Clerks and myself, they made the calculations of interest and
additions, and I made the entries; or they made the entries, and I made the
calculations and additions; -- that calculation with the abstract was sent to
the office of the Gomptroller-General, a corresponding entry being made in my
books.

Ques. Was you always able to make this?

Ans. Being oftentimes much hurried, a person helped me in the calculations and
castings; interests were calculated sometimes by myself, and sometimes by
another, but the entries were for the most part made by me. I think it
underwent an examination at the Comptroller's office, and in that case the
abstracts were returned to me because I had not completed the returns of the
particulars and different kinds of debt, but the gross amount: the Comptroller
signed it, the same was brought to me, which I countersigned, and it was then
sent to the Governor, who granted a warrant on the Treasury for the amount.

I recollect to have no conversation with the Comptroller respecting New-Loans,
until after the date between the 14th and 17th July, 1792, when the abstracts
No. 264, 265 and 266, and warrants had passed my office.

On this conversation a conference took place concerning this matter, wherein I
agreed with him in sentiment, that the New-Loans were subscribable, redeemable,
and embraced under the act of the 10th April, 1792.

Ques. Was it Mr. Nicholson gave you the information?

Ans. I received information out of doors, that New-Loans were contained in the
abstracts, and was so well convinced, although I went to Mr. Smith's to see
whether New-Loan certificates were included, that I afterward passed several
abstracts knowing them to contain New-Loans, for which warrants issued and were
stopped in my hands, except one from Mr. Addison which I delivered him by
mistake.

In my conversation with the Comptroller we referred to the several acts of the
United States and laws of this commonwealth, the only difficulty which occurred
was the delivery of the Continental certificates for which the New-Loans had
issued -- He answered it was a buness of the United States, and that he either
had, or would settle that business with the Secretary of the Treasury of the
United States. He also avered that a person (as a creditor) holding the
certificate, had it in his power to do it, knowing that the suspension of
interest was the only difficulty, and that that would only take place until
certificates of the United States were rendered.

This was the substance, I do not recollect the precise or specific terms.

Ques. You mention that you stopped some warrants -- relate that circumstance.

Ans. I stopped them in consequence of a conversation with Mr. Dallas.

Ques. by Mr. Tilghman. Where did the conversation with Mr. Nicholson take
place?

Ans. I believe in my office. I think I had a conversation with him at his
office door in consequence of receiving subscribable debt for three per cent.
stock.

Ques. How was abstract No. 262 subscribed?

Ans. I recollect, that on receiving a debt, some were subscribable, I made out
an abstract in my own name, which I afterward made over to the commonwealth. I
went down to Mr. Smith's, where I subscribed in blank for their amount, the
hurry was so great in his office that he could not count them, this was on the
30th of June, as soon as Mr. Smith had leisure, some days after, he counted
them, and found that they corresopnded with the abstract, he gave his receipt,
dated 30th of June, corresponding with the time I had subscribed, which also
appears in his report. I think, but will not be positive, that Mr. Nicholson's
name was there in blank on the books of subscription.

Ques. Have you the warrants here, which were stopped in your hands?

Ans. Yes -- here are four warrants and one certificate.

Ques. by Mr. Ingersoll. Will it require time to examine, or can you state the
amount of all the proper state debt?

Ques. It will require time to examine. (Retires.)

Thomas Biddle called up, and affirmed.
Ques. Do you know any thing of a certificate brought to the office of the
Comptroller General for exchange, and bought by him. If you do, please to
inform the Senate?

Ans. In June 1792 I bought for my father from Solomon Raphael a New-Loan
certificate signed by Nicholson and Rittenhouse, being one of those commonly
called New-Loan, in the name of John Thompson. Three year's interest had been
paid by the state on the certificate, and it was one of those endorsed between
Sept. 1777 and March 1778 -- and bore interest on the nominal sum. The next day
I sent Jesse Morris, a young man who lived with my father, to the
State-Treasury, to receive the interest due thereon, he soon returned and
informed me some difficuly occured respecting it, that Mr. Febiger had stopped
the certificate, and had sent Mr. Reilly his chief clerk to the Comptroller
with it.

I therefore went to the Comptroller's office, met Mr. Reilly on the stairs,
and he returned with me to Mr. Nicholson's room.

I was informed more fully of the circumstances by the Comptroller General. I
then recollected to have seen this described in an advertisement on a file of
stolen and lost certificates usually hung up in Mr. Nicholson's office; and
likewise in the neswpapers. I enquired of Mr. Nicholson whether any loss
respecting this certificate would accrue to Mr. Biddle.

Mr. Nicholson informed me that in a former case of the like nature, the person
who held them, had amicably settled the matter, and letters were sent to
Thompson respecting the certificates; likewise that he believed it would be no
injury to Mr. Biddle, as it could be exchanged.

Upon this I turned to Mr. Nicholson's desk, took a blank exchange and filled
it up, describing this certificate of Thompson's, which I purchased of Raphael,
the business rested here, and I went home, and left both the certificate and
exchange with Mr. Nicholson.

Ques. Did or did not the Comptroller mention to you that the continental
certificates for these were not in the office?

Ans. Yes he did, adding that they were loaned on bond to Thompson.

Ques. Can you describe it?

Ans. No, it is now a long time ago, I cannot describe the certificate, the bill
of parcels, which I got from Raphael, and the papers were lost during the
disorder, and thereby the whole of the facts are deranged.

Ques. Do you recollect the date of either September 1777, or March 1778, to be
endorsed.

Ans. Yes -- and I wrote to Mr. Nicholson by the direction of my father the 5th
day of July, 1792, who had been wholly interested in this business. (Retired.)

Clement Biddle, affirmed.
I had been in the habit of purchasing New-Loan certificates and entrusted that
business principally to my son, about the latter end of June, 1792, I saw by
the bills of parcels, that my son had purchased a New-Loan certificate from S.
Raphael, who frequently brought in certificates, which I purchased from him at
their current value; same time I observed that one year's interest was due, not
apprehending any difficulty, I sent it to the Treasury to draw the interest.

Either that day, or the next, I do not recollect which, my son mentioned the
circumstances, and the difficulty in the payment of interest, and exchange, --
after which, on conversing with some friends, and considering the law, and
knowing that it was payable to bearer; I was convinced that I could not suffer,
the state had indemnified the holder, it must be exchanged, the law was passed,
the state must make it good.

A few days after, not immediately, I came to Mr. Nicholson, and had, I
believe, two opportunities, and spoke to him before the state-house; and I
urged the exchange as there could be no exception to my right, he seemed to
admit my right, but mentioned that he had or must first write on the occasion,
to Mr. Thompson, from whom it had been stolen. I mentioned the inconvenience
arising from delay, and to the best of my knowledge, was turning off with an
intention of going home. After I mentioned that, he answered, and proposed to
give me the parts in stock, and to take it himself, which I considered as an
accommodation, and by recurring to my letter book of the 5th or 6th July, I
find that I wrote a letter or directed my son to do it, that I was obliged by
his offer, and requested him to to take the certificate and to transfer the
parts which the same would yield; by recurring I find the certificate was for
800 dollars nominal amount subject to depreciation between September 1777, and
March 1778, and three year's interest paid. I sent up that note: in a few days,
and in the course of business I received the stock agreeable to the amount, I
do not recollect the parts in stock. I had no idea then that New-Loans were
subscribable, nor for some time after.

Ques. by Mr. Wilcocks. You say that Mr. Nicholson offered the parts in stock?

Ans. If I had exchanged them I should have received original Loan-Office
certificates on paying the interest or an equivalent in Indents, I should then
have loaned them, and received the stock in 6, 3, and Deferred, which Mr.
Nicholson transferred to me, and this I considered an accommodation in point of
time, in going to the office, and usual routine of this business. When I urged
my right, and desired an exchange, he offered to take it upon himself, and to
transfer the parts, I had no idea for what purpose, or for what object?

Ques. Do you know the date of your letter to him?

Ans. Yes; the 5th or 6th of July.

Ques. Do you know the difference between the value of the parts you received
and 20 in the pound, was it 25 per cent?

Ans. I cannot tell, cannot ascertain, I don't think it near that, I do not know,
but will make up an account, sign it, and send it.

Ques. by Mr. Ingersoll. Did you take up that certificate out of the office, or
custody of the Comptroller?

Ans. I did not.

Ques. Was it the same day, or the day after your son mentioned the difficulty,
that you went up to the Comptroller-General's office?

Ans. It might be a week thereafter, or longer, I cannot ascertain. (Retired.)

Jesse Morris, affirmed.
I took a certificate from Mr. Biddle's to Col. Febiger's, where I presented it
to Mr. Reilly, who took it from me, kept it, and carried it to the office of
the Comptroller General, I left it with Mr. Reilly, and went home, to inform
Mr. Biddle of the difficulty, which occurred. I do not know the time.

Ques. What passed at Febiger's?

Ans. I gave the certificate to Mr. Reilly. (Retired.)

Mr. Philip Reilly, sworn.
Ques. Do you recollect Mr. Morris coming to you with a certificate.

Ans. Yes; the latter end of June, 1791, or beginning of July, 1792 I should
say, a young man came from Mr. Biddle's with a New-Loan certificate for L.300,
on looking over the certificate, I immediately knew it to be one of those
stolen from John Thompson of Buck's county, the number was in the act of
Assembly, Sept. 30th, 1791, for the relief of Thompson and others, (Here Mr.
Reilly read a part of the act, when Mr. Rawle told him never mind it.) The
State-Treasurer being out of town, I doubted whether I should pay the year's
interest or not, and therefore went to Mr. Nicholson's office, and asked him
whether I ought to pay it or not, observing at the same time, that it was one
of those stolen from J. Thompson, which Mr. Nicholson also recognized; he told
me that he would take the Attorney-General's opinion, and if that young man
would call in the afternoon he would let him know about the interest.

And I never knew any thing more about it until I saw it in one of Mr.
Nicholson's abstracts.

Ques. by Mr. Ingersoll. Was that abstract blank?

Ans. I went down to Mr. Smith's, and found Mr. Nicholson's name in the
subscription book, no sum, the blank was not filled up.

Ques. What time was it?

Ans. I think it was the latter end of June.

Ques. Was it before or after you discovered that Mr. Nicholson had subscribed
New-Loan certificates that you saw this blank subscription?

Ans. It was seven, eight, or ten days before it was generally known that he
had subscribed New-Loans.

Mr. Rawle called Mr. Reilly back, and asked him, Did you deliver the New-Loan
certificate into Mr. Nicholson's own hands?

Ans. I did. (Retired.)

Mr. John Oldden, affirmed.
Being then desired to proceed, he said, as it is a good while since these
transactions had happened, and as my memory may fail, I had rather answer
questions.

Mr. Oldden was then desired to inform the Senate what he knew about this
business, or had you any New-Loan certificates in the year 1792?

Ans. Yes; on or about the 4th of July, 1792, I had a number, suppose about
seven or eight hundred odd pounds in New-Loan certificates, I, according to the
usual practice made up an abstract, and took them to the Comptroller-General's
office to be exchanged, presented the abstract and certificates in due form,
and left them with the Comptroller as it was usual on such occasions.

Ques. by Mr. Lewis. For what purpose?

Ans. After presenting them, I expected the original Continental certificates
in lieu of them, I asked when I might get the Continental certificates, the
answer, as well as I can recollect, was, that I should have them the next day
about the same hour, it was then about 12 o'clock. I went up the next day --
(Mr. Oldden was desired by Mr. Lewis to tell what passed in the mean time.) On
the evening of the same day, I received a letter or note from the Comptroller,
which note is lost, the purport of which was, that he would pay me an equal
proportion and quantity of 6, 3, and deferred stock, and arrearages of interest
for them, take the certificates himself, and save me the trouble of funding the
Continental ones.

To this note I returned no written answer, but told the bearer that I would
see the Comptroller the next morning and would complete and finish that
business, and so the matter rested.

I saw the Comptroller the next day, I fancy, it must have been in the mean
time, an idea struck me, that he could pay them into the Land-Office, and
intended to ask him something more, don't know whether I went up twice or
thrice, still not ready; and when I did the last time, I told him, if he would
give me thirty dollars beyond what their value was, as I supposed they would be
of more use to him, he should have them. To this proposal the Comptroller
agreed, transferred the stock to me at Mr. Smith's, and gave me a check on the
Bank of the United States for 155 dollars and 85 cents, and 30 dollars for my
good will of the certificates, being in the whole one hundred and eighty-five
dollars and eighty-five cents.

Ques. When you offered the certificates to the Comptroller for 30 dollars, did
the Comptroller tell you it was too late?

Ans. I do not recollect, not certain, that any such thing was mentioned, it is
a long time ago, the arrearages of interest and thirty dollars constituted the
sum for which he gave me a check, and that was on the 7th of July, 1792, this I
know from an entry in my memorandum book, the only written account, which I
have of this transaction.

The abstract No. 262, was looked for, found, and showed to Mr. Oldden, and he
was desired to inform the Senate whether his certificates were in it; he
directly pointed to the eleven last certificates and said these are the
certificates to which I referred in my testimony.

Ques. Did you see the abstract No. 262, in Mr. Smith's office or elsewhere?

Ans. No -- I never saw that abstract until I had been called before the House
of Representatives last year.

Adjourned until 11 o'clock the next day.

In the minutes of the House of Representatives the following entry is
recorded: --

"In conformity to the resolution of the 25th instant, the House resolved
itself into a committee of the whole, in order to attend the trial of John
Nicholson, Comptroller General.

"The Speaker quitted the chair and Mr. Wynkoop was placed therein.

"After some time,'

"The committee of the whole returned.

"The Chairman then left the chair and the Speaker resumed it.

"The Chairman then informed the House that the committee of the whole had
attended the trial of John Nicholson, Comptroller General.

"The committee appointed to manage the trial of the articles of impeachment
against John Nicholson, Comptroller General reported that they had made further
progress."

Fourth day of the trial. SATURDAY, MARCH 1.
SENATE met pursuant to adjournment.

Mr. Morgan apoligized for the unavoidable necessity they were under of
postponing the trial, as it was out of their power to proceed to the 6th and
7th articles of impeachment as the testimony of two persons are closely
connected, one of them was seriously indisposed, to procure whose testimony
they had taken preparatory steps, one of them, Mr. M'Connell, could be
procured, the other, Mr. M'Clenachan was very sick and could not venture out,
that measures were taken to have his testimony by Monday next, and observed
that he expected this would be acceptable to gentlemen on the other side, as an
amicable spirit of accommodation seemed to prevail among the parties concerned
in managing this important trial.

Mr. Tilghman observed that he had no objection to the postponement for the
reasons adduced by the gentleman manager, but he entertained some hopes that
Mr. M'Clenachan's indisposition was not so great, but that he would attend,
should the case be otherwise, and that he could not attend personally, he had
no objection to to have his testimony taken in the manner proposed by Mr.
Morgan.

Adjourned until Tuesday next 10 o'clock.

In the minutes of the House of Representatives the following entry is recorded:

"In conformity to the resolution of February 25th last, for the purpose of
attending the trial of John Nicholson, Comptroller General.

"The House resolved itself in a committee of the whole,

"The Speaker quitted the chair and Mr. Erwin was placed therein.

"The committee then proceeded to the Senate-chamber for the purpose aforesaid.

"After some time,

"The committee of the whole returned to their own chamber.

"The Chairman left the chair and the Speaker resumed it.

"The Chairman then reported that the committee of the whole had attended at
the trial of the articles of impeachment against John Nicholson,
Comptroller General.

"The committee appointed to manage the trial on the articles of impeachment of
the House of Representatives, against John Nicholson, Comptroller General,
reported further progress.

Fifth day of the trial. TUESDAY, MARCH 4.
SENATE met pursuant to adjournment.

Mr. Morgan,

Mr. Speaker and Gentlemen of the Senate,

Having gone through the five first articles of impeachment against the
Comptroller General of this commonwealth, it now remains for me to go on to the
6th and 7th articles, to understand these two, a considerable scale of
important facts and corroborating testimony must first be attended to -- If I
have shown that the Comptroller's opinion was, long before the passage of the
Act of March 1789, that the New-Loans ceased to be a State debt, it will render
his conduct more criminal, a retrospective view of a past transaction will add
some information to what has been already advanced: in one of his reports on
the state of the finances, dated October 1, and December 11, 1790; he had
stated what debts were valid against the commonwealth and what were not.

Here Mr. Morgan read the report page 385, in the appendix to the minutes of
1790, containing what debts were to be discharged, and what were valid,
agreeably to the report of the proper officers; that the present constitution
allowed of no draughts from the Treasury except by previous appropriations made
by law. But in page 389 in the 7th article of the finances are several
subdivisions, wherein the amount of the principal and interest of the New-Loans
are defined, and excluded from redemption in the Land-office, whereby they
cease to be and are no longer a debt of the state. This is explained in express
terms, page 395 that New-Loans were then excluded. Here then we rest our
testimony of the five first articles, these are objects of our accusation for
plain and obvious reasons.

We now come to objects of greater moment, to impeachments of a deeper dye, as
the articles are of greater magnitude the punishment is to be severer, inasmuch
as the Comptroller as a faithful guardian to preserve the property of the
public, did not lay his hands on the treasures of the commonwealth, for the
purpose of saving the same, but made his official duty subservient to
speculation. If the testimony already exhibited and arguments adduced, has made
equal impression on the Senate as on the managers and on the House of
Representatives, who are his accusers, the articles of impeachment will have
the effect which the law and constitution require. (Here Mr. Evans assisted Mr.
Morgan in arranging the papers and preparing the parts to be read.)

Among the various persons who came to the Comptroller's office to loan their
certificates, we find the name of Hans Hamilton, in different progressions, and
if I am RIGHTLY INSTRUCTED it will be proved that Loan-office certificates of
the United States and New-Loan certificates were deposited with Mr. Nicholson,
and both ultimately subscribed to the Loan of the United States.

It remains with the Comptroller General to account for that procedure, if the
Act had required the same Continental certificates to be returned, the case
would be plain, and owing to the circumstances of both, the New-Loans and the
other certificates having been subscribed by the same person a presumption is
raised; and he should show why they had not taken different courses. The moment
that they ceased to be private property, they immediately became the property
of the commonwealth, for the New-Loans and the Continental certificates could
not be public and private property at one and the same point of time, yet both
have been subscribed.

In the list of New-Loans certificates originally issued, book A, page 129 -- a
certificate of L. 11:16, No. 4051, issued to Hans Hamilton, same page, No. 4052
for L. 268, No. 4053, L.242:7:6 making in the whole L. 522:3:6.

In the next Book A, stating what Continental certificates were received for
the New-Loans issued, from which it will appear a small error of 23 only
excepted, that they agree exactly. Continental certificates with their numbers,
etc. are as follows: -- No. 8316 Dolls. 31 42 8317 714 60 8318 212 36 Interest
1st May, 1781. 8319 60 68 Interest March, 1780. 8320 32 60 8321 78 76 8322 70
60 Interest November, 1780. 8323 191 Interest Aug. 27, 1781. 1392 02 These last
have been subscribed by the Comptroller General in the name of Hans Hamilton.

To prove that the Continental certificates thus deposited exactly corresponded
with the New-Loans, I have in my hand a certificate from the Register of the
Treasury signed by Joseph Nourse, March 4th, 1794, by which it appears that the
Comptroller General had subscribed by the Act of August 4, 1790, the
certificates issued as aforesaid.

It thus appears, that the first therein, corresponds exactly with the second
in the other, in numbers, names, dates, commencement of interest, and total
amount; the correspondence between them is best ascertained by going over the
abstract, and examining the same, and, by comparing it with the Comptroller's
books. I will now proceed to show the New-Loans were also subscribed -- No.
4151 Hans Hamilton L.11 16 0 4152 do. 268 0 0 4153 do. 242 7 6 These three last
contain the whole of the Continental certificates in the above statement; so
that it appears Hans Hamilton came forward and had New-Loans issued for his
Continental ones, two evidences of the same debt -- this inconvenience would
not have happened if the intention of the Legislature had been pursued. After
the law of 1789 the New-Loans were only a receipt or claim to get back the
Continental certificates; by this means a duplication of debt had been brought
against the United States, contrary to what the Union and Pennsylvania had
contemplated. This is the only testimony now in our power, it remains with the
Comptroller General to show and explain; it is manifest that we had two debts
instead of one, the certificates of the United States and those of
Pennsylvania, it is in his power to satisfy the Senate if his books were kept
in the manner in which they ought to have been -- if this transaction is not
cleared up, the presumption is that something is unfair and unworthy of this
officer.

To show however by as direct testimony as the circumstance of this case will
admit that the Comptroller General has made use of certificates brought to, and
deposited with him for re-exchange which he afterward subscribed to the Loan
of the United States.

The circumstances which both points are briefly to prove, are these; that
Matthew M'Connell furnished or sold a certificate for L. 3275:19:4, to Blair
M'Clenachan, which is among those subscribed by Mr. Nicholson in his grand
abstract. The presumptive testimony will be strong, that the Comptroller
received this certificate in his official capacity, and that he afterward took
it to his own use: The first witness whom we shall call on this subject is
Matthew M'Connell.

Mr. Matthew M'Connell, sworn.
Ques. Did you ever sell or transfer that certificate or one of a similar
amount, to Blair M'Clenachan?

Ans. I delivered a certificate of the same amount with the one, now, in my
hand, to Mr. M'Clenachan, viz. for L. 3275:19:4, on the 23d day of April 1788,
as appears by an entry in my books.

Ques. Do you recollect whether it was in your name?

Ans. It appears from the entry that it was in my own name, neither number nor
date is recollected by me, nor mentioned in my memorandum-book.

Ques. Was it paid or sold to Mr. M'Clenachan?

Ans. It was delivered to Mr. M'Clenachan agreeably to an engagement or
contract, he delivered me some certificates for which I was to deliver a
certain quantity of another kind to him.

Question by one of the counsel for the defendant. When did this happen?

Ans. I delivered him more certificates at the time alluded to, and afterward.

Ques. How long afterward?

Ans. I hold in my hand a list of sundry certificates which I had delivered to
him in 1788 -- amount not cast up, they are extracts of entries from my books.
This list I delivered the House of Representatives last summer. The first
parcel was delivered in the year 1788 -- I do not know when I delivered those
in 1789.

Mr. Tilghman requests to have the list -- Mr. M'Connell retired.

Mr. C. Febiger, sworn.
Mr. Morgan stated what this witness was to prove; -- that on the 15th Sept.
1790, Blair M'Clenachan received the interest, first came to have the
certificate entered, there had been no money in the Treasury when he came, the
first time; made the following entry on the stairs, viz. L. 3275:19:4, on the
15th Sept. 1790 he received L.150 on account of interest. The entries were made
in the books March 6th and 11th 1790.

Question by the Speaker to Mr. Febiger. Are persons under any difficulty in
getting their money out of the Treasury?

Ans. Money is not always in it.

Question by Mr. Ingersoll. Was the sum and number entered in your books when
the identical certificate had been before your view from which you might
conveniently enter the same?

Ans. The certificate was entered the 11th March 1790.

Question by the same. I observe on the preceding page of your book the date
March 6th 1790, and it then continues three pages and the date is March 16th
1790?

Ans. The money was paid and receipt given Sept. 15th 1790.

Question by Mr. Lewis. Had Mr. M'Clenachan the certificate with him when he
received the interest?

Ans. No.

Mr. Hilary Baker, sworn. (Gallery of the Senate very thin.)

His deposition amounted to this; that he saw Blair M'Clenachan on Saturday the
first of March instant, appeared to be much afflicted with the gout, that he
was rolled about in an armed chair, from one part of his room to the other,
that in every other respect he appeared to be in good health; the deponent left
Germantown early on Sunday morning before Mr. M'Clenachan was up.

Mr. Evans, one of the managers, observed that B. M'Clenachan, the witness, was
summoned by Mr. Martin, the Serjeant-at-Arms of the House of Representatives,
and wished to have him sworn, he was called, some delay occurred whilst the
Senate waited for him, after some time he came forward, and was sworn. His
deposition was, that he had seen Mr. M'Clenachan at his house in Germantown the
25th of last month, showed him the summons, which required his attendance
before the Senate, that he attentively read the same, and told Mr. Martin, that
he communicated all that he had to say on the subject, to Mr. Morgan, Mr. Evans
and Mr. Bowman, in the presence of Mr. Nicholson, that he was glad Mr.
Nicholson had been there, that he (Nicholson) might know that there had been no
undue means used against him: that his hands and feet were swelled, was rolled
about in an arm-chair through the room; that he would not keep the writing but
desired the Sergeant to take it with him; adding you may perhaps have occasion
to present it when you will have to render an account of this business.

Mr. Morgan observed, how they had taken all means in their power to procure
the viva voce testimony of the witness, was proceeding to read the
interrogatories and answers. Whereupon the Speaker asked him was it by the
unanimous consent of the defendant's counsel -- and being answered in the
affirmative, he then stated how the commission issued to the two magistrates,
etc. and began the reading as herein after set down, Mr. Rawle read the
interrogatories, Mr. Morgan the answers.

To the honorable the SENATE of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
WE the subscribers, appointed to take the answers of Blair M'Clenachan, Esquire on
oath to several interrogatories committed to us in writing, to be proposed to
him, relative to an impeachment made before your honorable House by the
honorable the House of Representatives of the commonwealth aforesaid, against
John Nicholson, Esquire Comptroller General of the said commonwealth, do
respectfully certify that on this first day of March, Anno Domini one thousand
seven hundred and ninety-four we repaired to the dwelling house of the said
Blair M'Clenachan at Germantown, in the county of Philadelphia, and
communicated to him the several interrogatories aforesaid, which are hereunto
annexed; and that the sold Blair M'Clenachan then and there, after having
carefully and attentively read, examined and considered the said several
interrogatories, did on his solemn oath on the Holy Evangelists of Almighty
God, to him by us duly administered, declare unto us his answers to the said
several interrogatories in the words following -- that is to say: --

Inter. 1. on behalf of the state. Were you at any time proprietor of a
New-Loan certificate issued by the State of Pennsylvania to the amount of L.
3275:19:4?

Ans. 1. It is probable that I had a certificate of that amount, but I cannot
be certain thereof as I had several large ones, and did not make out any
account or list of my certificates when I delivered them to Mr. Nicholson; but
it may probably be found on examining the books of Mr. Rittenhouse, the late
State-Treasurer, what certificates I received interest on.

Inter. 2. Did you sell or lend such certificate or deposit such certificate,
at any, and what time, with, or to Matthew M'Cornell?

Ans. 2. I never, to the best of my knowledge, either sold or lent to, or
deposited with Matthew M'Connell a certificate of the amount of L. 3275:19:4,
but I did lend him a number of small certificates, (amounting in the whole to
upwards of L. 3000) a considerable time before I delivered my certificates to
Mr. Nicholson, -- my son will furnish you with the exact sum from a memorandum
made by me in a book at present in his possession.

"SIR,
"I HAVE sent you the memorandum of those certificates which my father lent to
Mr. Matthew M'Connell, it is in his own handwriting, and the leaf which I
enclose containing the whole sum.

Sir, your ob. servt. GEO. M'CLENACHAN.


Certificates lent Matthew M'Connell, Broker, Second-street.

No. 17795 January, 85 L.1350 0 0 2353 November, 84 328 9 9 13285 January, 85
169 17 6 16864 do. 85 201 11 3 11940 do. 85 99 11 3 13065 do. 85 6 11 3 12616
do. 85 44 8 7 16935 do. 85 203 12 6 13719 do. 85 228 6 1 16863 do. 85 398 8 9
L.3030 17 0

The above certificates delivered to Mr. M'Connell the 30th of March 1789, to
be returned when demanded."

Inter. 3. Did you afterward, and at, or about what time receive such
certificates back from Matthew M'Connell?

Ans. 3. As I did not lend Mr. M'Connell a certificate of L.3275:19:4 I could
not receive one from him in return -- the amount of the small certificates
which I lent him, he did return to me.

Inter. 4. Did you take such certificate to the office of the
Comptroller General for exchange pursuant to Act of Assembly of March 27, 1789?

Ans. 4. I took all the New-Loan certificates that I possessed (which were to a
very considerable amount) to the Comptroller General and delivered them to him
to be exchanged, without having made any list or account of them.

Inter. 5. Was such certificate exchanged by the said Comptroller General, and
did you receive in lieu thereof Continental certificates of equal value to the
same as those you originally loaned to the State?

Ans. 5. I received from the Comptroller General Continental certificates, to
the full amount (as I suppose and as he informed me) of the New-Loan
certificates which I had delivered him.

Inter. 6. Did you ever sell any certificates to John Nicholson, the
Comptroller General or any other person?

Ans. 6. To John Nicholson I never sold any certificate, to others I did sell.

Inter. 8, proposed on the part of the defendant. If the answer to the 4th
interrogatory on the part of the commonwealth should be in the affirmative, at
what time did you take such certificates to the office of the
Comptroller General for exchange pursuant to the Act of Assembly of 27th of
March, 1789.

Ans. 8. I took no account of either the number or value of the certificates,
nor of the time of delivering them.

Inter. 9. If the answer to the first part of the fifth interrogatory on the
part of the prosecution should be in the affirmative, at what time was such
certificate so exchanged by the Comptroller General?

Ans. 9. I cannot tell.

Inter. 10. If the answer to the latter part of the fifth interrogatory
aforesaid should also be in the affirmative, at what time or times did the same
take place, and whether the certificates were received by you at one time or
oftener, and whether the certificates you so received were all those for which
your New-Loans had been originally granted, or whether they were all at the
time of such delivery, and until received by you, the property of the State of
Pennsylvania, or whether any part of them were, or were not at the time, as
aforesaid, the property of Mr. Nicholson?

Ans. 10. I do not recollect whether I received them all at one time or
oftener. -- Of the certificates dated between first September 1777 and first
March 1778, I believe I received back the identical certificates for which
New-Loan certificates had been granted -- but as to those of other dates, I
cannot tell; and until I received those certificates in exchange for the
New-Loan certificates, I considered them as the property of the State, and no
part thereof whatever as the property of John Nicholson.

Inter. 11. If the answer to the 6th interrogatory should be in the negative,
did you never barter nor commute with Mr Nicholson New-Loans for other
certificates, if you did so barter or commute, set forth the particulars at
large how, when, and for what?

Ans. 11. I never bartered nor commuted with John Nicholson any New-Loan or
other certificates in the whole course of my life.

Inter. 12. Did you or did you not, and if so at what time inform Mr. Nicholson
that you wanted to raise some money out of certificates, but that you were
determined not to part with the principal at less than 20 per pound, that you
did not expect the interest or indents would appreciate so much, and did you or
did you not then ask him to give you a sum in indents for said purpose, and if
so, how much and what amount of interest thereon, and where did this take place
-- and were there New-Loan certificates accompanied with the usual abstract or
account for exchange, and did you, or did you not apply to Mr. Nicholson the
same time for indents, before you received the Continental certificates, and if
so at what time, and did he then give you a further sum of indents on account,
and if so what sum, on what account, and how did you dispose thereof.

Ans. 12. When I delivered my certificates to Mr. Nicholson, there were many
persons from the country at his office, desirous of having their business
speedily done -- I told Mr. Nicholson I was willing that the country people
should be first served, and that he might settle mine at his leisure, but as
that would probably take up some time, I requested him to furnish me in the
mean time with some indents on account, to which he assented, and I received
indents from him at several times before I received the Continental
certificates, but do not recollect the amount of the indents received at any
one time, nor in the whole.

Inter. 13. Did or did not he, Mr. Nicholson, at your first application
mentioned in the last preceding interrogatory inform you, that if the said
New-Loan certificates were to be exchanged with the state you would have
indents to pay and not to receive -- and did he, or did he not say that he
would notwithstanding accommodate you with the sum you wanted, in indents, on
account of the same New-Loan certificates -- and did he or did he not deliver
you a sum at that first time aforesaid in indents, and if so, how much and in
what manner did you dispose thereof?

Ans. 13. On the final settlement of my account with the state, a balance of
4146 dollars and 24 cents in indents appeared against me, which in the summer
of 1793 I requested Mr. Nicholson to pay to the State on my behalf, and by his
account rendered me, it appears that he has done it.

Inter. 14. Did you or did you not at that time receive the Continental
certificates therefore equivalent, and did you or not at a subsequent period,
and if so at what time thereafter apply at the office of the
Comptroller General with the remainder of your New-Loan certificates, and did
or not the Comptroller General receive them, and set down with you in his
office and prepare an account thereof for exchange, and does the account
numbered 1838, and 183, and 184, herewith presented to you, appear to be the
same accounts, and did you, or did you not then request him to draw the indents
for you, which after exchange would be receivable on your Continental
certificates, and did you, or did you not receive those certificates
afterward, and if so, at what time?

Ans. 14. I recollect that I requested Mr. Nicholson to draw the indents on my
account from the United States, which he did, but the time I cannot recollect.

The remainder of this interrogatory is answered by my answer to the 10th
interrogatory.

Inter. 15. Did you, or did you not afterward, and if so at what time apply to
Mr. Nicholson to pay in your behalf the balance of indents or 3 per cent.
stock, which still remained due by you to the state on the exchange mentioned
in the last interrogatory, and to what amount, and did he or did he not inform
you he would do so -- and has he or has he not since rendered you an account
thereof.

Ans. 15. The answer to this is contained in my answer to the two last
preceding interrogatories.

Inter. 16. Was there a considerable time between the time of exchanging and
also between the time of funding your different certificates -- and if so, how
long?

Ans. 16. I cannot recollect.

Inter. 17. Have you any account of your New-Loan certificates to which you can
refer; or has this transaction rested only on your memory -- have you kept a
regular account of your New-Loan certificates, and how, to whom and at what
time, and for what were they disposed of, if any, produce the same, and annex
them to your answers.

Ans. 17. I kept no account whatever of, or concerning my certificates.

Inter. 18. Has your memory at all times since you have been called to answer
to these points uniformly retained the same view of them?

Inter. 19. Did you, or did you not at any time since you gave your testimony
on this subject to the late House of Representatives express to any person an
idea that you had forgotten said testimony, and your apprehension that if you
said any thing on the subject, it might be inconsistent with some part of the
evidence you had so given?

Inter. 20. Do you know in what manner you became possessed of each and every
of your other New-Loan certificates, or any of them, if so, name the
certificates, of whom purchased, or commuted, and when?

Inter. 21. If the answer to the first interrogatory be in the affirmative,
when and of whom did you purchase the certificates therein mentioned, and how
did you become possessed thereof?

Ans. to Inter. 18, 19, 20, 21. These four interrogatories I conceive are not
entitled to answers.

The first 6 interrogatories and answers were on behalf of the prosecution --
from thence to this, are interrogatories for the defendant.

Inter. 7 for prosecution. Did you not exchange several New-Loan certificates
at different times at the Comptroller-General's office? Were or were not the
papers termed "exchanges" always filled up on such occasions? Did you on such
occasions sign a receipt in a book for the Continental certificates you
received, do the exchanges annexed to the present interrogatories numbered
1838, 183, 184, contain an account of all the certificates exchanged by you at
the said office, or did you exchange others not included therein?

Ans. 7. I do not recollect having given any receipt to Mr. Nicholson. The
answer to the remainder of this interrogatory is contained in the foregoing
answers.

Inter. 8. If you did exchange New-Loan certificates other than those mentioned
in the said abstracts numbered as above, is the annexed New-Loan certificate
numbered 17748 for L. 3275:19:4 one of those which you did so exchange, and is
it the identical certificate to which you refer in your answer to the first
interrogatory?

Ans. 8. The answer to this is contained in the answer to the first
interrogatory.

Inter. 9. If you answer the second interrogatory in the negative, did you or
did you not lend any other certificates of New-Loan to Matthew M'Connell, and
at or about what time?

Ans. 9. The answer to this is contained in the answer to the second
interrogatory.

Inter. 22, pro defendant. If the answer to the first member of the 7th
interrogatory on the part of the prosecution be in the affirmative, at what
times were those respective exchanges made, if the days or months or years be
not remembered, attach to it the time as near as you can to the beginning or
end of the first loan of Congress, and the distances of time between those
exchanges?

Ans. 22. Having kept no accounts concerning my certificates I cannot recollect
the times.

Inter. 23, pro defendante. Did you or did you not hand to Mr. Nicholson when
you were with him on the street in the city of Philadelphia some New-Loan
certificates, and if so, what numbers, amount, and sums respectively, and also
at what time, and what request did you then make of Mr. Nicholson?

Ans. 23. I do not recollect having delivered Mr. Nicholson any certificates at
any other place than in his office -- nor do I remember having made any request
of him except what I have before mentioned concerning the indents.

Inter. 10, for prosecution. Do you know any thing further that may be material
in the cause? If yea, relate the same as fully as if you were particularly
interrogated thereto? JARED INGERSOLL.

Ans. 10. I have only to observe, that after the funding law of this state was
passed in 1785, I took all the Continental certificates I was possessed of,
without knowing either the number, or amount of them (as I had no account of
them in my books) and without making any list of them, delivered them to Mr.
Nicholson to have them funded: -- and after the law of 1789 I delivered all my
New-Loan certificates to him in the same manner, to have them exchanged,
without knowing either the number or value of them -- placing the highest
confidence in Mr. Nicholson's integrity.

The truth of which several answers the deponent further corroborates by
letting his name hereunto.

BLAIR M'CLENACHAN.

In testimony whereof we have hereunto set our names the day and year first
within written.

HILARY BAKER, JACOB SERVOSS.
The committee of Accounts of the House of Representatives reported on the 22d
April, 1794, eleven dollars and 57 cents to Mr. Baker, and eight dollars to Mr.
Servoss for taking the deposition of Blair M'Clenachan, and for their expenses
to and from Germantown.

Mr. Morgan then read the following account: --

"Blair M'Clenachan to John Nicholson, Dr.
"A balance due in indents on exchange thereof with the state per account March
27th, 1789, and which he paid to the State July, 1793 4146 24/100 at 96 per
pound 1969 45 Arrears of interest from Jan. 1791, 2 years 51 82 2021 27

A true copy of John Nicholson's account rendered to me BLAIR M'CLENACHAN."


Mr. Morgan observed that having now closed the testimony he wished to be
indulged with a patient hearing whilst he took a short review of all the
articles of impeachment, stating that the four first were nearly alike; the
first of which related merely to Mr. Nicholson in his official capacity,
certifying that certificates were due and owing from the state which did not
exist as debts -- that this has been done is apparent and obvious, that loss
and injury has accrued to the commonwealth, is likewise manifest, from the
calculations which have been offered. I hold in my hand (said Mr. M.) a
calculation which will, if wrong, be combated in his general defense, wherein
the whole loss on this point sustained by the public amounts to L.5187:6:7.

The calculation as follows, 22499 2 44998 14999 6 8 2 29998 13 4 9999 11 1 6
p. cent. at 20 L.9999 11 1 4999 15 6 deferred at 126 2812 6 11 7499 13 4 3 per
cent. at 12 4499 15 4 17311 13 4 Deduct 22499 0 0 Loss to the State This paper
although not read on the trial, is here given at full length, because it is of
importance to show at one view the amount of this cause and the total loss and
damages complained of on the part of the prosecution.

The defendant, as will appear hereafter, by his counsel, urged that no loss
accrued to the state, who only paid what they had promised and engaged to pay,
and that it was of little importance to their faith and integrity what might be
the market value of the public securities of the United States which they had
received in exchange for the New-Loan certificates.

The defendant also contended that the calculation was unfair and below the
value of the stocks of the United States in the market at the time of the
subscription which he stated to be as follows, and referred for a confirmation
of his statement to the price current of brokers in the city at the time, viz.

Dr. The sum paid by the State as stated above, - L.22499

The principal of all the subscriptions paid amounted to L.18,092:9:5 of the
Continental certificates received therefore, amounted to L.12061 13 0 6 per
cents at 226 13569 7 1 Deferred stock, 6030 16 5 at 132 3367 4 0 The remain. 3
per cents. 4406 10 7 at 129 2809 3 3 22499 0 0

Add 1 years interest on L.12061 13 0

6 per cents. and L.4406 10 7 of 3 per cents. from January 1791, till July 1792
1283 16 10 21029 11 2

Sum which the State would have been in advance after paying her New-Loans
aforesaid had she then funded and sold the Continental certificates which she
received in the New-Loans from the former creditors 1469 8 10

The Editor would have been happy to have also given the statement promised by
Col. Biddle. See his evidence at foot of page 241. But if it was furnished the
prosecution did not bring it forward, it was not read or offered during the
trial, nor has it come to his knowledge.


5187 6 7

The second and third articles are fully proved by the abstracts and other
official documents which had been produced, and by the same testimony with the
foregoing, all as fully as the nature of the case could admit.

The fourth article is rather a deduction from the other three, by his
certification he contemplated the withdrawing a large sum of money from the
Treasury without any previous appropriation, by which 63,000 odd dollars were
drawn from the coffers of the state -- which is contrary to the Constitution of
this commonwealth, and a charge of high misdemeanor against the defendant.

The evidence in support of the fifth article is full and explicit. He
purchased by himself or agents, as well from those who came to the office, as
from others, that all (...) ^he the testimony of Mr. Oldden confirms, he went
or sent to the office, a certificate was left by Mr. Riley, Mr. Nicholson sent
proposals to Oldden, at length Mr. Oldden consented, and sold his certificates,
these transactions and other testimony come fully to the point. Mr. Oldden's
testimony will also apply to the sixth and seventh articles. (He read the sixth
article.) These are more criminal than the preceding ones; M'Clenachan's
testimony will apply to these, the certificates became the property of the
state the moment they were placed in the hands of the Comptroller General. They
were neither the property of Oldden, M'Clenachan, or John Nicholson. None of
those persons could use them for their own purposes. If he has converted them
to his own use, he has done a great injury to the commonwealth, and it is a bad
precedent. (Here he read the seventh article.) From all which it is plainly
proved that he is guilty, that all this had been done is manifest from his
abstracts in his own hand writing, from oral and written testimony, from the
warrants presented to and paid by the Treasurer, the state sustained an immense
loss -- which loss, though great, the inconvenience is still more considerable.
(He then read the letter, page 102-3.)

Here (Mr. Morgan observed) the Secretary entered into a disquisition of those
measures adopted by the states, who have issued their own certificates -- in
which case he ordered the payment of interest to be suspended for a time, so
that it appears that Pennsylvania, who had issued her own certificates, had
been under the necessity of making an arrangement, such as herein set forth, to
prevent the payment of interest twice; this measure was not attended to. The
Comptroller was well acquainted with it -- this alternative occasions a double
subscription to complete the measure, as in the case of Blair M'Clenachan who
subscribed his original certificate to the domestic loan, and the Comptroller
subscribed to the state loan.

Thus the Comptroller General has drawn sixty-three thousand, odd hundred
dollars, without any previous appropriation from the Treasury of Pennsylvania,
by which she has lost above five thousand pounds specie; because the
Continental certificates are so much less when divided into securities: The
difference between twenty shillings in the pound and the current value of the
different parts of stock creating that sum.

I will conclude by observing that as it was the public good and not any
acrimony against an individual, has moved us to institute the present
prosecution; I hope the decision will be such as the good of the state, public
justice and equity require, and that it will be conducted with temper and
moderation.

Mr. Morgan sat down, having been on the floor nearly sixteen hours during five
days.

Mr. Tilghman observed that the hour of adjournment approached, that it would
be better to adjourn, as the time could not be sufficient for him to open the
defense, that the view would be broken and disjointed, that the Comptroller had
been so busy that the papers were not well arranged, and he expected to have
the documents in proper order by ten o'clock the next day.

Adjourned.

In the minutes of the House of Representatives the following entry is
recorded: --

"In conformity to the resolutions of the 25th February last, the House
resolved itself into a committee of the whole, in order to attend the trial of
John Nicholson, Comptroller General of this commonwealth, now depending before
the Senate, on the articles of impeachment exhibited against him by the House
of Representatives.

"The Speaker quitted the chair and Mr. Wynkoop was placed therein.

"The committee then proceeded to the Senate-chamber for the purpose aforesaid.

"After some time,

"The committee of the whole returned to their own chamber.

"The Chairman then left the chair and the Speaker resumed it.

"The Chairman then reported that the committee of the whole had attended the
trial of the said John Nicholson.

"The committee appointed to manage the trial of the articles of impeachment
against John Nicholson, Comptroller General reported that they had exhibited
the several charges against him and produced the necessary evidence in support
thereof before the Senate."

Sixth Day of the trial: WEDNESDAY, MARCH 5.
SENATE met, court called, etc.

Mr. Morgan rose --

Mr. SPEAKER and GENTLEMEN of the SENATE,

Before the Counsel for the defendant begins, I rise to show that Mr. Nicholson
did not keep his books of exchanges agreeable to the instructions of the
Supreme Executive Council, this I think necessary, to show that if the evidence
on behalf of the prosecution is not so complete as it should have been, it is
not owing to our fault but to the defendant's neglect, who did not keep his
books conformably to the following instructions.

"In COUNCIL. PHILADELPHIA, Thursday, May 21st, 1789.
Upon the second reading of the report of the committee on the mode of
exchanging the New-Loan certificates. It was resolved that the following
instructions be given to the Comptroller General.

"SIR,

TO facilitate the exchange of certificates agreeably to Act of General
Assembly of the twenty-seventh day of March last, Council have judged it proper
to give you the following instructions, viz.

"1. Every person who in conformity with the said Act shall present to you a
New-Loan certificate, may at his option receive from you the Continental
certificate or certificates, for which the New-Loan certificate was granted, or
receive a like sum of principal in certificates of debts of the U. States,
which have been paid into the Land-Office.

"2. When New-Loan certificates have been cancelled and several certificates
have been by you given for the amount thereof, to enable the party to make
payment to the Land-Office, etc. -- and where one or more of the latter shall
be presented as part or parts of such New-Loan certificate, the person
presenting the same may in lieu thereof receive so many of the original
Continental certificates as shall be equal to, or nearest, it, and under the
amount of the New-Loan certificates so presented.

"3. In those instances in which it may be impracticable for you to make the
exact amount of a New-Loan certificate or certificates with Continental
certificates, you will issue a new certificate or certificates, bearing similar
interests for the balance or balances.

"4th. In a set of books to be prepared for the purpose, you will keep exact
and fair accounts of all certificates you may receive, diliver or issue, with
their numbers, principal sums and dates of interest.

"5th. That the balance of interest to be received or paid by the state
according to Act of Assembly, may be ascertained, you will calculate the
arrears of interest which may be due on all New-Loan certificates you may
receive as well as on all Continental certificates you may deliver.

"6th. You will receive indents or facilities for balances of interest as may
be due to the state, a^^ of the indents or facilities you have received or may
obtain from the United States, upon the Continental certificates in your
possession, you will pay such balances of interest as may be due from the State.

"7th. You will keep exact accounts of all indents so received, in books
prepared for the purpose.

"8th. If you consider it necessary to your own security or to the regularity
of your proceedings in the premises you will demand receipts from all persons
to whom you may deliver certificates or indents as well as require vouchers of
the certificates or indents which may be delivered or paid to you.

"9th. In the first Wednesday in every month you will produce to Council for
their inspection the books in which your transactions relative to the exchange
of certificates according to Act of General Assembly of the 27th day of March,
1789, are contained.

"10th. If any difficulty or obstruction should occur in the execution of the
duties required of you by the Act above mentioned of the 27th day of March
last, or by the foregoing instructions, you will represent the same to Council,
that such difficulty or obstruction, if possible, may be obviated or removed.

"You will have the foregoing instructions set up in your office for the
information of all persons concerned.

Mr. Tilghman.
Mr. SPEAKER and GENTLEMEN of the SENATE,
When or how impeachments began in England, or for what purpose, and whether
this mode, like engines, are made use of for power or faction, is immaterial.
Here they form a part of the Constitution of this commonwealth. There
hereditary nobility command respect. Here the Comptroller meets the charge, and
he is to be tried by his peers. The tribunal is great, and the cause of
importance. The defendant meets the impeachment conscious of his own innocence,
he never shrunk from it, he at first proposed a question to be argued before
the Supreme Court, (see page 82) he is impeached in the name of the people of
Pennsylvania, the House of Representatives is the grand inquest of the nation.
The Senate will judge without any regard to the impressions made on the House
of Representatives. The Comptroller is here in the same situation as any
defendant in a common law court. The grand jury found the indictment, the
Senate as a jury is sworn to try the indictment. Lord Mansfield's expression on
this occasion is worthy of notice, That the juror's mind should be like "blank
paper," free from any impressions but that of the evidence. That the late House
of Representatives and the Managers were actuated by the purest motives, and
the present House also, I have no doubt, but from what source this impeachment
springs time only will discover. Public bodies are liable to be acted upon when
the object in contemplation is to acquire public good or great public evil; the
public good is a fascinating consideration to carry on a prosecution. The good
intentions of the House is not doubted, but this goodness might make them
liable to be easily acted upon. Popular bodies are easily warped by an artful
individual when he meditates the ruin of his neighbor, and impresses an idea
on the Assembly that he has the public good at heart.

Objections have been made against commonwealths and popular governments on
this account -- Socrates and Phocion, some of the greatest men of antiquity,
fell through the mistaken zeal of popular bodies: no doubt the Assemblies who
convicted them, thought that they had condemned them for the public good; and
now these Assemblies are cursed and their memory held up to public execration.
But no objection with us. The subject on which I have the honor to address you,
has not been very familiar to me, having no knowledge of it but what I
collected since I have been retained by the Comptroller. Its branches are
various, requiring much perspicuity and a thorough acquaintance with the
subject. The Comptroller throws himself on the candor of his Judges, he has
always acted from a proper construction of the Act, or not. If he has, he
cannot be guilty, and it is no proper subject of impeachment, if he had not, it
is a subject of enquiry whether such construction was his known opinion or
basely contrived. If he put a bad construction on it, we should enquire,
Whether the guilt is from the heart or from the head. The consequences are
removal from office, utter incapacity to hold any post of honor, profit, or
trust -- the charges ought to be clear and perspicuous -- they are not so
perspicuous [the first article read.] There is a point in this article that
mentions he did subscribe at various times. I do not know to whom, nor did I
know till the opening, there are some certifications, but none in his own case
-- should there be any obscurity in our defense it is to be attributed to this,
to whom did he declare them to be subscribable? it wants certainty.

[2d article read.] "Declare" without saying to whom, total want of certainty,
entirely omitting to whom or at what time.

[3d read.] This wants certainty likewise as depending on the first and second,
which are in their own nature, uncertain.

The fourth article is stated by the Manager as a deduction from the former
articles. If the former articles want certainty, this being deduced will
consequently be void of certainty likewise.

The fifth is so vague, it requires no comment.

The sixth read. I confess myself at a loss for the meaning of this charge,
whether it is meant that Mr. Nicholson took them without paying value for them,
and then subscribed them to the loan of the United States, or whether he did
after lodgment pass value for them.

The seventh states more explicitly, but don't express whether Mr. Nicholson
paid value for them or not, an exchange is completed, and he subscribed them, I
suppose they will explain themselves by and by.

In charges of such serious tendency, the particular objects should be pointed
out -- That certainty and perspicuity which are so necessary in indictments in
common law courts not altogether requisite, that precision and critical nicety
required in the courts of Justice would be too much in this particular, but
these articles are too vague, too doubtful, too uncertain, we are not bound to
answer these charges; the charge must be definite and according to the laws of
the land before it can be entitled to an answer. But we will, notwithstanding,
proceed to answer them, and if the Comptroller's judgment is right, this
honorable court will not hesitate to pronounce him not guilty.

Here Mr. Tilghman showed that the opinion of Mr. Nicholson was invariable as
to the New-Loan certificates being a claim against the commonwealth, and that
several other officers were of the same opinion -- His opinion on opening the
first loan when he had no interest -- when this subject was before the
Legislature and never doubted until after the passing of the Act of the 10th of
April, 1792 -- and for this purpose he cited the following letters requiring
and giving information on the subject of New-Loans.

"SIR, Philadelphia, Sept. 30, 1790.
"AS I am ordered to receive on loan, certificates of the debt of the State --
I shall be much obliged to you to give me a description of the several sorts of
those certificates and such checks as will enable me to do that business with
security to the U. S.

I am, etc. THOMAS SMITH, Commissioner of Loans."

JOHN NICHOLSON, Esquire Comptroller.

"Comptroller-General's office, Sept. 30, 1790. "SIR,
"I RECEIVED your favor of this date and until I can give you a complete
check, have enclosed herewith a blank form of a depreciation certificate, and
one of Funded Debt the only two kinds receivable by you under the funding law
of the U. S. granted by this state, as it is not presumable the New-Loans will
be offered subjected to the restrictions in that law prescribed.

"As the state certificates are only to be deposited with you for loan, not
actually loaned till a certain period have elapsed, you will be able to check
those left with you more particularly hereafter.

I am, etc. JOHN NICHOLSON."

THOMAS SMITH, Esquire Commissioner of Loans Pennsylvania.

Mr. Tilghman then explained the "restrictions" alluded to above by examples of
short and long interest.

(CIRCULAR.)
"Treasury Department, June 6, 1791. "SIR,
IN consequence of an enquiry made of me, I think necessary to inform you that
I consider the holders of certificates received from the government of any
state, in lieu of certificates of the Federal debt, as having a right to
subscribe those state-certificates to the loan of the assumed debt, and I
consider the state as having a right to subscribe the Continental certificates
which they have obtained by the exchange, to the loan proposed by the Act of
the 4th August, 1790; but no interest is to be paid on the assumed debt of the
state, either to the state or to individuals, until you shall be informed, that
I am satisfied, that all the certificates so issued by the state have been
re-exchanged or redeemed, or that all those, which shall not be re-exchanged or
redeemed, have been surrendered to the U. S.

"To distinguish in a clear and striking manner this description of New-Loan
certificates from all others, I have determined to have a hole, of about one
fifth of an inch, cut through a part near the center, being at the end of the
blank left for the creditor's name immediately before the word "is" and
directly over the letter "t" in the word "amount."

"When the stock represented in these certificates shall be transferred from
and to the Loan-offices or the Treasury, the transfer certificates must have
this central hole cut or punched through them in like manner.

"In order to full information, on this subject, I request you to transmit to
me a copy or sufficient extracts from any laws passed by the Legislature of the
state in which you reside, relative to the exchanges of Federal certificates
for those of the State, and to the re-exchange of those of the State for
federal certificates, in doing which you will be careful to collect whatever
there may be. You will also communicate such observations as may appear
necessary for the perfect understanding of the course, which the business has
taken. I am, etc.

ALEXANDER HAMILTON."

To THOMAS SMITH, Commissioner of Loans.

Mr. Tilghman said, that from this letter it is extremely probable that the law
of 1789 was before the Secretary when he wrote that letter, although he does not
at present recollect it.

Mr. Tilghman then read the following --

"Treasury Department, June 8, 1791. "SIR,
YOU are right in considering yourself not authorized by law to accept on the
loan of the assumed debt certificates of the state of Pennsylvania, dated on or
after the first day of January 1790. It is however my wish that you minute in a
book to be kept for that purpose the amount of such certificates offered by any
person, together with the name of the person offering them.

It will not be proper that you commit the examination and checking of the
certificates of the assumed debt to any person who does not actually belong to
your office. It cannot be deemed a legal execution of your duty to rely upon
any person not duly authorized. You will receive these certificates and give on
the delivery of them to you, and before comparison with the checks, a
descriptive receipt for them, which will amount to no more than an
acknowledgment, that such certificates are placed in your hands with a view to
the loan. The subscribers will be sensible that the receipt cannot be deemed
final, because the subscriptions may exceed the assumption, and the
certificates may prove counterfeit or forged. Having received them in the
manner above mentioned, you will commit to some person competent to so nice and
important a business, the comparison of the certificates with the registers and
checks in the offices of the state, to which no doubt the easiest access will
be given. Should however any unexpected impediment occur, you will make it
known to me.

"I do not perceive any objection to your striking a mark in the form you have
exhibited () upon all the certificates deposited with you toward the loan of
the assumed debt, which however should be done in such manner as not to
obliterate the printed or manuscript words. You will be careful to select a
proper place for the mark, which as far as possible should be uniformly made,
that the eye may instantly perceive it.

"I do not consider you as justifiable in refusing the certificates of the
state of Pennsylvania (which are in all other respects assumable) because they
have been received of the state in lieu of Continental certificates. It will
not however be improper to use your endeavors to persuade the holders to
exchange them, but you cannot, if they persist to offer, refuse to receive them.

"You will perceive on re-examination that you have misconceived the
instruction contained in my letter of the 9th ult. in regard to Loan-office
certificates issued prior to March 1778. It applied to those only pointed out
in the 10th section, that is to the non-subscribed, and not to those that
should be loaned. You will discontinue the practice of making such endorsements
on those loaned, and you will, when transfers takes place of such stock as has
arisen from loans of those certificates take care not to make a similar
endorsement on the new certificate to be given. I do not think any person
making a loan has a right to do it in any other manner than that which is
deemed to be perfectly conformable with the law. In regard to such
non-subscriber's certificates as have not that endorsement on them, I have no
objection to your making it if desired, but great care must be taken to be
correct.

I am, etc. ALEXANDER HAMILTON."

THOMAS SMITH, Esquire Commissioner of Loans Pennsylvania.

Mr. Tilghman read part of the 17th and the whole of the 18th section of the
Act of Congress of 4th August 1790, to introduce the correspondence with our
government. Under that law it was the duty of the Secretary of the Treasury to
provide that interest should not be paid twice on the same debt, he then read
the following letters --

(CIRCULAR.)
"Treasury office, June 27th, 1791. "SIR,
THE Legislature of the U. S. have directed, in the 18th section of the Act,
making provision for the public debt, that the payment of interest should be
suspended, in respect to the debt of any State, which may have issued its own
certificates for those of the U. S. "until it shall appear to the satisfaction
of the Secretary of the Treasury, that certificates issued for that purpose by
such state, have been re-exchanged, or redeemed, or until those, which shall
not have been re-exchanged or redeemed, shall be surrendered to the U. S." I
find it necessary therefore to request your attention to the subject. If the
State of Pennsylvania has issued any such certificates as are contemplated by
the above recited section; it will give certainty to the operations of the
Treasury, and may prevent delays, inconvenient to the public creditors. If you
will direct the proper officers to cause the state of the fact, as it regards
Pennsylvania to be made to appear to me. Should this general suggestion be less
explicit than your desire, I shall, on being notified that it is your wish,
point out more particularly the documents that would appear to satisfy the law.

I have the honor, etc. ALEXANDER HAMILTON."

His excellency the Governor of Pennsylvania,

"Secretary's Office, Philadelphia, July 1st, 1791. "SIR,
IN obedience to instructions that I have received from the Governor, I
transmit to you a copy of a letter from the Secretary of the Treasury, which
affects the business of the New-Loan certificates issued in lieu of Continental
certificates, and the state of the re-exchange directed to be made by the late
Act of Assembly.

"You will be pleased with all convenient dispatch to make a report upon this
subject to the Governor, accompanied with such statements as you shall deem
necessary to satisfy the enquiry of the Secretary of the Treasury and the
object of the law to which he refers.

I am, etc. A. J. DALLAS."

John Nicholson Esquire Comptroller General of Pennsylvania.

Letter [Page 102-3] then read, and

Letter [Page 220] Mr. Dallas to Mr. Nicholson.

Also letter [Page 220-1-2.] Mr. Tilghman descanted very largely on this last
letter, as it required particular attention, being written before the loan
opened the second time --

"Secretary's Office, Philad. 27 th Dec. 1791. "SIR,
"THE Governor has written to the Secretary of the Treasury of the U. S. upon
the subject of his letter of the 21st inst. which was communicated to you; and,
having enclosed that part of your report, which states the amount of the
New-Loan certificates issued, and redeemed, and the probable balance of the
unexchanged certificates, he mentions, that he has given you instructions to
confer with the Secretary of the Treasury in hopes that the difficulty
suggested may be removed, without claiming the interposition of the
Legislature. I am directed, therefore, to request your attention to the
subject, and that you will communicate to the Governor, the result of the
proposed conference.

I am, etc. A. J. DALLAS."

To John Nicholson, Esquire Comptroller General of Pennsylvania.

Here he observed no idea had been suggested all this time from the Governor to
the Comptroller that the New-Loans were not subscribable to the loan of the
United States.

"Comptroller-General's Office, December. 29th, 1791. "SIR,
"I have received instructions from his excellency the Governor to confer with
you on the subject contained in your letter to him of the 21st instant. If the
difficulty suggested should arise in a doubt, whether part of the assumed debt
of Pennsylvania by the U. States might not consist of certificates given for a
like sum of others of the U. States not exchanged and to be surrendered, it
will be easily proven, that it does not; at any rate, I could propose a
conferrence with you on the business at any time you may appoint, provided you
approve thereof. I am, Sir, etc.

JOHN NICHOLSON."

ALEXANDER HAMILTON, Esquire S. T. U. S.

"Comptroller-General's Office, January 18th, 1792. "SIR,
"Enclosed is one certificate of each kind granted by the state of
Pennsylvania; that numbered 13768, L. 400 J. Chew Thomas, is the only kind
granted for the debt of the U. States, and on which the question arises,
whether any thereof have been subscribed to the funding system of the United
States. The other two kinds, No. 1687 for depreciation of the army, and 2506
for all other debts due by the State, you will find include all that have been
subsribed with the Loan-Officer.

"I also send you vol. 3 of the laws of Pennsylvania, where you will find at
page 17 marked down, the law under which the certificates, were granted
mentioned first above.

"I will send for the certificates and book when you shall have done with them.
I am, etc.

JOHN NICHLSON."

The Hon. ALEX. HAMILTON, Sec. of the Treasury U. S.

In consequence of these letters a conference took place. Letter (page 223-4)
then read --

"Treasury Department, Comptroller's Office, Feb. 2, 1792. "SIR,
"YOU are requested to inform me as soon as may be, whether any certificates of
the description of which the enclosed is a copy, have been subscribed to the
loan payable in state certificates -- and, if any, what is the estimated amount.

I am, etc. OLIVER WOLCOTT."

THOMAS SMITH, Esquire Commissioner, etc.

Here follows the form of a blank certificate --

[No. (...) ] B. (...) L. (...) ( Pennsyl. Arms.) The Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, has received on loan, from the (...) sum of (...) to be paid to
the said (...) or bearer, on or before the first day of March, in the year of
our Lord one thousand seven hundred and ninety-six, with interest from the
(...) day of (...) 17 (...) at the rate of six per centum per annum, to be paid
half yearly at the State-Treasury; according to the directions of an Act of the
General Assembly, passed on the first day of March 1786.

Comp.G.office, 178 Countersigned, John Nicholson. D. Rittenhouse Treasur.

Here Mr. Tilghman observed that Mr. Nicholson was still of the same opinion,
and that before the time of passing the Act of 10th April, 1792, he proposed a
plan in opposition to that Act, in which he included New-Loans as a state debt
as follow --

(A.) "A plan for modifying the present debt of Pennsylvania.

"WHEREAS the Commonwealth and the creditors may be reciprocally benefited by a
communication of the debt in manner hereinafter provided: it is proposed.

(B.) "That beside the provision for payment of the debt by parting with the
stock of the United States, the property of this State, the creditors may at
their option subscribe their debts to the following loan hereby proposed.

"That the stock thereby created shall bear an interest of six per cent per
annum, commencing July 1st, 1792, payable quarter yearly, that is to say on the
2d days of January, April, July, and October in every year.

"That the certificates or evidences of the debt shall not be transferable, but
the debt may be assigned by the creditor or his attorney duly constituted at
the proper office in the Treasury department, whereupon new certificates for
the debt shall issue corresponding with the credits on the books. That the said
debt shall be redeemable by the State at the rate of two per cent per annum of
the principal. That the State shall have the power of redeeming the debt
whenever expedient in such portion but no greater.

"That the faith of the State be pledged for the punctual payment of the
interest, and that the interest and moneys receivable from the United States by
Pennsylvania or so much thereof as may be necessary be appropriated to that
purpose, provided always that the Legislature may withdraw this appropriation
upon providing other adequate and sufficient funds.

"That the following debts of the State be receivable in the said loan,
deducting one fifth from the amount of the principal and interest.

1st. The funded debt L. 190,000 2d. The depreciation debt funded and unfunded
with interest (C.) 3d. The Bills of credit of 1785 21,000 4th. The Bills of
credit of 1781 10,900 5th. The Bills of credit of June 1st, 1780 and interest
9,500 6th. The Bills of credit of March 1780 (island money) and inter. 700 7th.
The interest notes issued in 1783 90 (D.) 8th. The New-Loan certificates and
arrearages of interest about say L. 20,000. 232,190 Deduct 46,438 Leaves
185,752

"That the Bills of credit emitted by the late Province and by the State before
the year 1780 shall be received in the said loan at the rate of 100 for 1, viz.
9th. of the former 266,439 (E.) 10th. Of resolve and commonwealth mo. 220,000
486,439 equal to 4864 7 6 (F.) 11th. That the purpart certificates given by the
state on the subscribed debt of the U. States shall be received in the said
loan at 68 per pound L.54,617:9:3 at that is 18,205 16 4 (G.) 12th. That the
purparts given on the Pennsylvania 3 p. cent. stock (assumed) shall be received
therein at 9 per pound 81,926l. 3s. 10d. is at that rate equal to 36,866 15 9
Amount 245,688 19 7 1. Annual interest of the amount L. 14,741:6:8, a year in
1792 is 7,370 13 4 To be taken out of L. 14,738:2:1 interest of 6 and 3 per
cent. stock, and out of L. 20,984:8:5 receivable on the assumption Act 35,712
10 6 Annual Revenues. Balance remaining of the above 28,341 17 2 2. Excise,
licenses, Secretary's fees, Land-office fees, tax on writs and fines 7,387 9 6
3. Taxes, imposts and other debts 42,982 0 0 4. For lands, say 4,500 83,211 6 8

Annual Expenses.
1st. Support of government 31,000 2d. Contingent fund 2,500 3d. Roads 5,000
4th. Pensions and militia expenses 3,829 1 3 5th. year's interest on the
present debt till July 1792 7,335 9 4 6th. Frontier defense for 1792 4,500
54,164 10 7 Balance of revenue on hand 29,046 16 1 L.83,211 6 8

"The above balance after deducting some necessary improvements for the rivers
and hospital and some grants for public purposes to be provided for in the
year, may remain as a fund for payment of any such creditors as may prefer
redemption to the commutation of their debt, and to supercede the sales of
stock so far as that may amount to.

"By adopting this plan, the State will always be adequate to every exigency
and expense, and have (...) handsome fund left for useful improvements without
saying any tax or burden on the people, or without counting more on the
product of the Land-office thin by the present plan of improvement it will be
likely to yield for some years to come.

Respectfully submitted, JOHN NICHOLSON.
March 15th, 1792.
"References and observations.
(A.) "It is not proposed that this plan should oppose the provision for
redemption of the debt, it may be added thereto, and when payment is held out
with one hand, the commutation proposed with the other cannot be complained of
whatever be the terms.

(B.) "To pay the debts required, would take upwards of L.230,000, which sum
must all be in the Treasury before the State can with safety declare payment,
so great a sum to be brought in without returning into circulation would in a
degree incapacitate the dealers in the funds from purchasing our stock, we see
now the effect a few days discontinuance of discounts at bank has on stock.
The Act would limit a time in which the money must be in the Treasury, the
sales of the stock must take place within that period, to raise the money the
creating such necessity to sell, and the knowledge that so great a quantity
would be in the market, would reduce the price of the 3 per cent. stock, to be
sold, and the more so, as the time approached nearer an end, and all this while
the moneys from the first sales would be unproductive, although not so the
property sold to raise it. But without allowing for these things let us suppose
the present price 129 to be obtained throughout the sales, the State would then
be divested of a specie capital of above L.400,000, of which a part might
always be held as a mean of discharging the reduced debt, which would exist on
the plan proposed, and leave a balance of near L.200,000 clear profit in favor
of this plan, and this sum would be greater by all the reduction of the price
from the causes aforesaid which would be very considerable. But this is not
all, for after divesting the State of all her 3 per cent. stock it would take
the most if not all the 6 per cent. or deferred stock, to be parted with to
make up the deficiency, and the State deprived of this annual income would be
obliged to resort to direct taxation for further expenses or improvements which
the interest of this stock is now appropriated to.

"All writers on the subject of finance agree that a public debt is accompanied
with some advantages by combining the interest of individuals with the success,
stability and honor of government, and although these and other advantages should
be outweighed by the disadvantages, so that a public debt ought net to be
termed a public blessing, yet in the present case we should possess all the
political as well as pecuniary advantages without any of the objections, for as
it is shown above the State possess the specie capital always to meet the debt,
although they are at liberty to redeem in certain portions, yet they are not
bound to pay, and may continue without doing it until Congress pay the capital
of their 3 per cent. stock.

"The policy of this measure must strike forcibly every one who is desirous of
preventing the annihilation of the State governments and preserving the balance
of power between them and the General government. The limits of which are but
imperfectly traced out in some cases by the federal Constitution, and if the
doctrine of implication gains ground, may prove no barrier to the encroachments
of power. We see what exertions the policy of the general government directs
to, on this head respecting the assumption of the State debts.

(C.) "By the present laws or proposed arrangements of the committee on Ways
and Means there is no provision for exchanging these bills at the Treasury for
specie or for redeeming them, except to such as have public payments to make,
which may be done therein, although they are all engaged to be redeemed this
year, this plan will prevent the collection of the revenue from being clogged
in future with these bills.

(D.) "It is proposed that these certificates should be received with the
arrears of their interest on the same term as the other preceding debts of the
state. The holders nevertheless to be continued in the privilege of exchanging
them as at present. But it would seem proper that after due notice so as not to
extend to the period of the limitation of the next loan by Congress, a
limitation should by law be put to such power of exchanging, that thereafter
the Continental certificates should be subscribed for the use of the state, and
that the state having provided for the redemption of such as might remain
unexchanged, unsubscribed the loan herein proposed or unsubscribed ^o the (...)
or the state debts by the United States, should declare that interest should
thenceforth cease thereon unless payment were demanded.

"No sum is extended in this case as the Continental certificates will be in
possession of the state to be opposed to this debt as far as the same may be
subscribed as herein proposed.

(E.) "These emissions thus provided for, may and will redeem them out of the
way and may prevent difficulties hereafter. That a government may interrupt the
currency, so as to take it out of circulation and redeem it by other bills we
have, beside other precedents, two in Pennsylvania between the year 1730 and
1740. All the old bills were called in and others given for them, and at the
Revolution a similar law was passed respecting all the bills emitted before
that period: But how far the government may decide that after a fixed period
thus to exchange them shall have elapsed, they may wholly refuse payment
thereof, no such terms existing when the bills were emitted, is a question
which may better be got rid of in this way, which will afford the holders more
than the last current value of the bills. This is clear that the bills emitted
by the old government should have no better fate than those emitted under the
present, nor should any preference arising out of distrust of the late
revolution, and the present government, operate any advantage to this class,
while those should suffer who in confidence, and compliance with the laws of
the state, exchanged their bills, the former for the latter.

(F.) "These certificates cannot be redeemed, consistently with the faith and
honor of the state, by calculating the accumulated interest half yearly, for an
annuity of nine years, because they and the Act under which they were issued,
contain an obligation to pay the interest until it shall be done by the United
States, If therefore no payment should be made of interest in 1801, or any
future period, on deferred debt by the United States, the obligation of the
state still compel us to pay.

(G.) "These certificates granted for the additional interest of 3 per cent.
bind the state in such a way as that the government can never be released;
therefore consistent with good faith, without a commutation accepted at the
choice of the creditor, unless the United States should raise the interest to 6
per cent. which will not be done; or unless the United States, who may when
they please, should pay off the capital. The latter is not shortly to be
expected, unless on the application of Pennsylvania, who could make it their
advantage to redeem the Pennsylvania assumed debt. It would be well therefore
to hold out this proposition for such as should not within a limited time
subscribe their 3 per cent. purparts, according to the terms herein proposed."

Mr. Tilghman observed that Mr. Nicholson proposed this plan to several members
of the Legislature, containing his declaration and opinion as to the
subscribability of New-Loan certificates to the loan of the U. S. (See last
line page 284, and first line page 285.)

He read the following letter --

"DEAR SIR, 21st March, 1792.
"I FIND from consulting Mr. Gallatin, and several other gentlemen, that your
plan would not, at this time, meet with any chance of success, though its
principles appear to me to be good. The Governor has considered the subject,
and will probably determine tomorrow, how far it would be proper to transmit
the plan to the Legislature. I am, etc.

A. J. DALLAS."

JOHN NICHOLSON, Esquire

Wm. Bingham, Esquire sworn.

Question by Mr. Tilghman. Do you recollect any thing of a plan of finance
enclosed to you in 1792 by the Comptroller General?

Ans. I do, it was enclosed to me in a letter by the defendant, and proposed as
a substitute for the one brought in by the committee on ways and means.

I do not recollect particularly the plan, being more engaged in the one before
the House, but from some parts of the one now produced I think it is the same.

Mr. Tilghman observed that

While the Act of the 10th of April 1792 was under the consideration of the
Legislature, Mr. N. thought it his duty to give it every decent opposition by
mentioning to the members and by trying to carry his own plan into execution,
and particularly as it would by the 6th section make the State liable to redeem
whatever Congress would choose to assume.

Richard Thomas, Esquire sworn.
My memory is imperfect, I remember the defendant had some conversation with me
whilst the bill was depending before the Legislature, I remember generally that
he said, the bill as it stood would admit of constructions that would open a
door for speculation, I cannot recollect perfectly, but I fully understood from
him that he was opposed to the bill for that reason, I do not recollect the
very words, but from that principle, a speculation disadvantageous to the State.

Alexander Hamilton, Esquire Sec. Treasury U. S. sworn.
Ques. by the defendant's Counsel. Do you recollect what passed at any
conference between yourself and the Comptroller General, and what difficulty
occurred to you respecting the subscribability of New-Loans?

I recollect there were several conferences between the Comptroller General and
myself, am unable to distinguish with precision the one alluded to, I recollect
one interview in particular in which this point was discussed, that is, whether
interest on the state debt should be suspended. I really charge my memory with
nothing more than, that Mr. Nicholson urged arguments to induce me to believe
that the spirit of that part of the Act of Congress was only to prevent the
payment of double interest, and that a surrender was neither practicable nor
equitable, (see page 220-1-2-3-4); as none of these had been subscribed, this
inconvenience could not arise, the intention of the Act of Congress was
fulfilled, I was convinced the reasoning was just, there being no basis on
which the U. S. could demand a surrender.

If the New-Loans in my view of them at that time had not been subscribable,
this difficulty could not have arisen. The Comptroller always appeared to me to
be of the opinion that they were subscribable -- none were subscribed in the
former loan. The enquiry whether any had been subscribed to the loan was
directed to the commissioner of loans, the information mud ultimately have come
from him -- Mr. Wolcott might have been the intermediate agent, I cannot
remember.

Ques. Have any been subscribed to the second loan?

Ans. I cannot without previous preparation answer that enquiry, I could have
easily ascertained it, I do not recollect, my conjecture is that there were
none, there were some certificates of that description which were not finally
admitted. I recollect there were some discussions.

Ques. Are they entirely rejected or are they depending?

Ans. They took a course somewhat peculiar, in the view of the Treasury they
are virtually excluded, the time allowed for the loan being passed; after the
Attorney-General's opinion on a point raised they were not admitted, this point
arose after the second loan opened. The subject had not engaged my
consideration, nor did it come forward in a prominent point of view until after
the second assumption. The Attorney General of the state of Pennsylvania gave
his opinion that they are abolished, as debts of this state. I may have read
the Act of March 1789, but I do not recollect having seen it until after the
closure of the first loan. I did not see that Act during the first conferences.

On Ques. by Mr. Bradford. It did not occur to me that the Act of 1789 was
passed after the adoption of the Federal Constitution, until the business was
closed at the Treasury -- the Constitution was not considered by me until
afterward.

Ques. Can you furnish a copy of the opinion of the Attorney General on that
point?

Ans. Certainly. (See page 81-2.) (Retired.)

John Smilie, Esquire sworn.
Ques. by Mr. Bradford, Please to inform the Senate of your recollection of Mr.
Nicholson's objection to the passing of the Act of 10th April 1792?

Ans. I believe Mr. Nicholson communicated some objections which he had against
the Act, I do not perfectly recollect, he spoke to me more than once on the
subject. I do not recollect seeing his plan of finance; it is probable that he
showed it to me, but I do not remember.

(Retired.)

Mr. Robert Hare, sworn.
Mr. Nicholson in the spring of 1792 communicated to me his plan of finance.
Here is the original plan with Mr. Nicholson's reasons in recommendation of it,
there was no more of it I believe; the transaction took place two years ago; I
know of no other conversation on the subject, I was not careful, having no idea
that I should be required to answer any thing about it. Whilst the finance-bill
was before the House, Mr. Nicholson sent for me into the committee room, I
informed Mr. Nicholson that I believed the plan would not be relished as coming
from an officer, and would be the cause of some jealousy, Mr. Nicholson told me
that the Governor would recommend it, I showed it to another member, who
likewise differed with Mr. Nicholson, as I did: It did not come from the
Governor, so no further notice was taken of it.

Ques. Did Mr. Nicholson mention his objections to you?

Ans. Mr. Nicholson had a general condemnation of the Act in view -- he
communicated no further ideas to me, our conversation was very short, there was
an interesting debate in the House at the time, and I left him immediately.
(Retired.)

The following is a copy of the letter handed by Mr. Hare with the plan
recommended by Mr. Nicholson, (page 279, etc.)

DEAR SIR, March 22d, 2792.
"ENCLOSED is a copy of a plan on the subject of the public debt, which I wish
much to see connected with the offer of redemption which on pecuniary and
political principles promise much in favor of Pennsylvania. The Governor I
believe will submit it to the Legislature. If it meets your approbation, I wish
you would support it in the House. It will save Pennsylvania from that
necessity she will otherwise be under of recurring to taxation for support of
government and incidental expenses without any thing for improvements. By this
a surplus will exist this year of L.29,000. So that Monongahelia inland
navigation may be encouraged without injuring other essential objects, that
there will be money for the Hospital, etc. The annual surplus of the revenue
after improvements, will constitute a handsome sinking fund. With esteem, etc.

JOHN NICHOLSON." ROBERT HARE, Esquire


William Montgomery, Esquire sworn.
I remember being one day in Mr. Nicholson's office, whilst the law of the 10th
of April 1792 was pending before the House, he expressed his disapprobation of
the law, as it would expose the state to inconveniences, and would prove of
advantage to individuals -- not particular what passages or section he alluded
to -- he gave me to understand that some individuals would take the advantage
to the loss of the state. I think he mentioned his own plan a better one.

Abraham Smith, Esquire sworn.
Whilst the Act of 10th April 1792, was before the Legislature, Mr. Nicholson
called at my lodgings, he told me he did not like the law, and his arguments
convinced me, this turned my attention to the plan recommended by him, on
examination I saw some parts of it which I did not like, and therefore thought
his plan wrong. The particular reasons not recollected -- one objection was the
sale of so much stock would overcroud the market, and, sold to a disadvantage
would injure the state. (Retired.)

Mr. Tilghman remarked that as Mr. Hamilton's letter to Mr. Dallas had been
brought forward, the two letters (see page 74 to 79, and one letter, page 218
to 220) should also be read, which he did. In the latter the Secretary mentions
the virtual rejection of them, but did not recollect the Federal Constitution.

Mr. Donnaldson was called --

Shortly after the House arose after the passing of the Act of the 10th April
1792 I was in the Comptroller's office on business -- Mr. Gallatin was present,
I observed that the 6th section was very loose and would embrace unfunded
depreciation debt. In which sentiment there was an agreement of opinion, and I
think Mr. Nicholson observed if Congress would assume the old bills of credit
of the state, the Act would embrace them. Mr. Gallatin observed that the
section was more general than he at first thought, or intended it, and that it
would embrace unfunded depreciation, don't recollect that any conversation took
place, nor difference of opinion about that law until after the subscription of
New-Loans, when we had a conference, and we agreed in opinion that they were
subscribable and assumable. No other conversation about them until the
conference abovementioned. I recollect the letter of the 13th of April 1792,
respecting the sale of stock. But as to that said to be lost, in my letter book
there is no reference to such a letter, I have been much perplexed about it,
strongly impressed that there had been such a letter, but cannot account for
it, and doubt whether there was any as it is not on my books. When the
committee on Ways and Means had the subject before them last year, they
required the estimate -- I turned to my letter book, but could not find it.

The defendant's accounts were passed through my office in the usual form. His
abstracts were made in his office, this difference, that assignments were made
on them in his office, then they were sent down to mine.

Ques. Is there any thing upon these abstracts from whence, in the common
course of business, they could be distinguished that New-Loans were included?

Ans. Yes; dates of interest on New-Loans commenced at mixed and different
dates. The date of the commencement of interest on funded and depreciation debt
on fixed and particular dates. Funded debt first of January, first of July,
depreciation 10th April, 10th of October. No other certificates but New-Loans
are depreciated on the principal.

Ques. Do you recollect any other distinguishing mark?

Ans. None that occurs to me at present, the names of the issuers were the same
in the one as in the other. Dates of interest promiscuous in New-Loans, in the
other certificates the dates of interest fixed and determined. The fact was I
never considered it of any consequence what the abstracts were made up of, so
that they were received at the Loan-office.

I encouraged subscribing under the idea that Pennsylvania would be a creditor
state, the documents were presented to the Comptroller, if they passed him,
that is whether they were assumable; they then came to me a second time, the
principal examination was confined to the calculations of principal and
interest, the business was carried through in the usual time, no hurry or
solicitude on the part of the Comptroller to carry his business through, or get
his abstracts passed. If there had been I should have turned the other business
by. One day's business was generally finished the same day. In the ^d
conference with Mr. Nicholson, I was perfectly of opinion with him and I was
confirmed in my opinion until doubts were raised by Mr. Dallas, who procured
the Attorney-General's opinion. The construction of the law was the subject of
conversation -- I introduced it.

Ques. by Mr. Wilcocks. Had you no opportunity of seeing the certificates? [Not
10 persons in the gallery.]

Ans. I have frequently, where certificates were brought to be redeemed, and
returned those subscribable to the parties, the certificates subscribed were
never brought to my office.

Ques. by Mr. Ingersoll. You say that Mr. Nicholson mentioned bills of credit?

Ans. The first observation was made by me, that it would extend to unfunded
depreciation; by Mr. Nicholson, that it was a sweeping clause, and would extend
to every thing, that is if the United States, would take in the bills of credit
of this State, the section would embrace them or whatever Congress would assume.

Ques. by Mr. Ingersoll. What about the documents in your office relative to
forfeited estates?

Ans. The most of them were issued before my appointment.

Ques. by Mr. Tilghman. At the time of conversation with Mr. Gallatin, the
Comptroller, and yourself, was there an acquiescence that whatever was
assumable and subscribable was redeemable?

Ans. We deemed that clause would extend to every thing Congress would redeem,
the whole unfunded depreciation, nay every species of debt. But bills of credit
and unfunded depreciation were particularly mentioned.

Ques. by Mr. Gibson. Were the unfunded depreciation redeemed under the 2d or
6th section?

Ans. Under the 6th section.

Adjourned till 10 o'clock tomorrow.

In the minutes of the House of Representatives the following entry is recorded:

"In conformity to the resolutions of the 25th February last, the House
resolved itself into a committee of the whole, in order to attend the trial of
John Nicholson, Comptroller General of this commonwealth, now depending before
the Senate, on the articles of impeachment exhibited against him by the House
of Representatives.

"The Speaker quitted the chair and Mr. Wynkoop was placed therein.

"The committee then proceeded to the Senate-chamber for the purpose aforesaid.

"And after some time,

"The committee of the whole returned to their own chamber.

"The Chairman left the chair and the Speaker resumed it.

"The Chairman then reported that the committee of the whole had attended the
trial of the said John Nicholson.

"The committee appointed to manage the trial of the articles of impeachment
against John Nicholson, Comptroller General, reported that they had made
further progress."

Seventh day of the trial. THURSDAY, MARCH 6, 1794.
SENATE met pursuant to adjournment.

(Messrs. Wilcocks and C. Evans only attending, not 10 spectators in the
gallery.)

Mr. Tilghman

Having examined a number of witnesses and read many documents to show that our
construction of the Act is consonant to law, and that the defendant's opinion
and judgment was the legal one, I will only examine one or two more to the same
point. -- In order to show this more fully I will quote the Governor's words in
the minutes of the Assembly, 10th December, 1791, page 12, where his words
allude to the payment of arrears due not on New-Loan certificates but "on the
New-Loan debt." Where they are quoted, they are styled New-Loan certificates.
The reason why the New-Loans are not stated as a debt to be paid, is because
the commonwealth thought she had a fund in her hands equivalent to answer them
at any time, the State and her officers conceived they had a fund, commensurate
to their redemption, either when the party should come to exchange, or when
future provision should be made by the Legislature. The word "redeemed,"
minutes, page 389, 1791, so much relied on, alluded only to the Land-Office.
Page 421, the Register-General heads the title "New-Loan Debt." In Mr.
Donnaldson's report 15th August, 1791, No. 25, the expression is "Arrears of
interest on New-Loan Debt:" with many other similar expressions.

Mr. Albert Gallatin, sworn.
Ques. We wish to know if you had any conversation with Mr. Nicholson about the
Act of the 10th of April 1792 -- the purport, time, etc.?

Ans. I have understood that those were the points to which I should give
evidence, and I have just sent for the minutes of 1791 to whet my recollection
as my memory is imperfect at this time. [Gets the books.] The only difficulty I
have is, the date of the conversation, I do not recollect that very well,
whether before the bill was reported, or while the report of the committee on
ways and means was before the House -- the import of the conversation was that
Mr. Nicholson had an objection, he gave me his plan, and requested me to give
my opinion, the plan before the House was to redeem the debts, his plan did not
propose a redemption but commutation with an irredeemable quality. I thought
the redeeming plan better and therefore did not approve and I returned him his
plan. Another circumstance, After I returned the plan to Mr. Nicholson, the
Secratary of the commonwealth showed me that plan or a copy of it, and
requested me to look at it, and that Mr. Nicholson requested the Governor to
recommend it to the Legislature, the bill agreeably to the report of the
committee of Ways and Means was then under the consideration of the
Legislature, I told Mr. Dallas that I had seen it before, and disapproved of
it, and told him the Governor had better examine the plan, and not send it
except he approved of it.

After the bill passed; and the House adjourned. I was in the Comptroller's
office; the conversation turned on the possibility of carrying the Act into
execution, seseveral difficulties arose, and objections were started, on
account of the price of stock in the market being lower than the price limited
in the Act, and propositions were made to get over the difficulty. Also whether
a part of the 3 per cent. stock should be sold or the whole at once; I was
afraid the whole plan would be defeated. These objections were raised by the
officers. The defendant suggested that by the law unfunded depreciation
certificates were redeemable, although the Legislature perhaps might not intend
it: That it appeared to him unfunded depreciation was redeemable, although the
report excluded them. Upon that Mr. Nicholson showed me the 6th section, I
assented to what he said, and said that I thought the unfunded certificates
were included in that section. I added that I had drawn the bill myself, and
had made the 6th section a proviso to the second; expressly providing for the
redemption of certain certificates therein defined, which would put the thing
beyond dispute, because the second section defined the thing to be redeemed,
that the proviso was made a distinct section out of the House; as some kind of
proviso, always considered in the House, but assented at the same time that the
construction would extend to unfunded depreciation. I had no time to form an
opinion, it was of the moment, on the first impression. I also added that it
was very immaterial to the state to redeem this way, or by the Land-Office, the
price being at that time nearly the same as cash. The defendant refers to the
price-current of the brokers to prove that the price of New-Loans in the market
was then as high as unfunded Depreciation certificates.
Mr. Donnaldson was present the whole or most of the time. I don't remember
member to hear any other opinion from Mr. Donnaldson except at that time. At
the next meeting of the Legislature on my return to the city, I was astonished
to hear that New-Loans were redeemed -- I had a small New-Loan certificate from
Mr. Douglass, which I kept pretty late, don't know whether before or after the
law passed, I gave it to the Comptroller to exchange it, he said he was
hurried, he would get it exchanged and subscribed and give me the parts; he
gave me a receipt for the New-Loan. I do not know the time, it was about May,
it was not completed at the end of April, I left town with that receipt in my
pocket, which I gave to Mr. Douglass, I know I had no idea of their being of
any other use than for the purpose of exchange, if I had thought they were
redeemable, I would enquire and do the best for him who employed me.

Ques. Did you not give an opinion that whatever were subscribable, were
redeemable?

Ans. Yes; that was the ground of my opinion that the unfunded depreciation
were redeemable.

Ques. by Mr. Lewis. Of what date was that conversation?

Ans. A day or two after the advertisement was published, I staid in town ten
days after the House had adjourned, the advertisement was put into the public
papers before I left town, the sale of stock was the 16th April -- the sum to
be sold was 986,000 dollars. I think the advertisement was the ground of our
conversation.

Ques. by Mr. Ingersoll. Did you concur in opinion with the Comptroller General
that if Congress should assume the state debts that bills of credit would be
redeemable?

Ans. That was not mentioned, if it was I did not assent. The reason why I
recollect it, was that during the following Legislature a letter was written by
the Comptroller in which such an idea was introduced. This made me look into
the law, to see whether there were any grounds for it, saw there a distinction
made between certificates and bills of credit, the sixth section includes only
certificates. The Comptroller's letter is in the fall of 92 or spring of 1793.

Ques. by Mr. Ingersoll. Do you recollect how the Register-General expressed
himself at that meeting?

Ans. I don't remember his giving any opinion, I think he acquiesced as far as
the unfunded depreciation certificates.

Ques. by ditto. In the course of this conversation was there any other object
than the unfunded depreciation certificates?

Ans. None that I recollect.

The Register-General expressed his opinion very fully next year before the
committee of ways and means, but before that time I do not remember.

Ques. by Mr. Ingersoll. Did he mention his opinion at the time New-Loans were
redeemed?

Ans. Yes. (Report of committee on ways and means, page 337) a part of the
report was grounded on the testimony of the Register-General respecting them --
(Here he read "deluded into error, discriminate," etc.) the whole of that was
grounded on the declaration of the Register-General, he declared he was not
consulted and the abstracts on the face did not discriminate, there was a
change took place between this and the time when the articles of impeachment
were before the House, he said the abstracts sufficiently discriminated, and
that the New-Loans could be easily distinguished. Another article was then made
to conform to this idea. (Hers Mr. Gallatin pointed out what, he called, an
error in the minutes, page 361 and 374.) He also said he always conceived if
they were assumable, they were redeemable with this single difficulty, whether
there was power lodged with the Comptroller to give up the Continental
certificates* The Comptroller had always certified the subscribability without
his knowledge. He was also asked how he did not discover them by other marks --
his answer was, that his part was the calculation of interest, and did not
attend to any other. Last summer when the committee of investigation examined
the certificate of John Thompson, for L. 231:7:7, found that interest was
calculated on L.300 -- that certificate was reduced by the scale of
depreciation, I asked Donnaldson, here was one you could not mistake, you said
you calculated the interest from this calculation, and date of interest, you
must be satisfied that this was a New-Loan? -- He seemed much confused and said
a clerk had done it, and appeared as if he knew nothing of it. He also said he
passed one small one after he knew it.

Ques. by Mr. Lewis. Were the articles found without the witnesses being sworn?

Ans. Mr. M'Clenachan, Mr. M'Connell, and Mr. Oldden were sworn -- Donnaldson
was a public officer, and was not sworn, no other witness whatever was attached
to this third article but Mr. Donnaldson.

(He retired.)

Mr. Joseph Boggs, sworn.
Ques. Did you subscribe any New-Loans to the state loan of the United States?

Ans. Yes; about the latter end of June or beginning of July 1792, I was asked
for New-Loan certificates, I asked what they would give me, they said 6 or 7
pence more than for final settlements, I had none then, but from this
circumstance I was induced to try to find out what they wanted to do with them.
After reading the Act of Congress of 4th of August 1790, assuming state debts,
and the Act of this state which was passed in April 1792, it was my opinion
they were assumable, and in consequence I purchased and subscribed part on my
own account and part on account of another person, none on Mr. Nicholson's
account, I cannot tell who came to me, I made an abstract, carried it to Mr.
Nicholson, he certified them genuine and assumable, they were not redeemed as
the business was stopped.

Ques. by Mr. Ingersoll. What Is the reason of 6 or 7 pence higher than the
other certificates? Were they equal before?

Ans. No difference. I did not know that Mr. Nicholson was purchasing at that
time -- was informed by the Register-General that a stop was put to them in the
Secretary's office.

Mr. Tilghman proceeded --

It appears also that Judge Addison was making a second subscription, it is
presumable that he knew the law. It is mentioned that Mr. Nicholson did not
certify in his own case. This is a strong circumstance: If he was conscious
that the certification would be improper, he would have omitted it: before the
second loan it was not customary. A counterfeit certificate of Lawman, of
Lancaster, gave rise to this certification.

Mr. Richard Smith (son to the late Commissioner of Loans) brought the
subscription book to the state loan of the U. S. and being sworn, declared as
follows.

George Lawman of Lancaster subscribed in the name of Gungachu, a certificate
No. 234 which proved to be counterfeit. I believe the cause of certifying was
to prevent inconvenience to the parties, when they came without such
certification they were generally sent to Mr. Nicholson's office, I did not
know when the practice commenced -- it made no odds to us whether it was done
or not, as the receipt which my father gave was subject to examination, when
the first and second loans closed we took the certificates to the Comptroller's
office and examined for ourselves. (Retired.)

Mr. Tilghman.

It has been objected that the Governor called for a statement which does not
at this time appear, although its contents are pretty satisfactorily
acknowledged, a bare attention to the time when this transaction took place
will show the assertion is unfounded -- It is true the state committed herself
so far as to redeem what would be assumed, but as the Act of Congress was not
then passed, it was unknown what Congress would assume. The Comptroller never
thought New-Loans came under the second section, the sale of stock related only
to the second section, he could not divine more than others, it by no means
follows from this that New-Loans were not redeemable -- strange that in the
fourth article they endeavor to prove the premises from the conclusion. It was
lawful for him to purchase as well as others, the moment a doubt was suggested
he stopped and paid Judge Addison July 23, 1792, for his subscription pound for
pound. If this is doubted, recourse may be had to the bank, where they will find
that Mr. Nicholson paid the full amount.

He read the following letter --

"Secretary's office, July 23, 1792. "GENTLEMEN,
"THE Governor directs me to request that you will avoid giving any sanction to
an idea that the New-Loan certificates of the State are subscribable to the
loan proposed by Congress, or certifying that they are so to the Continental
Loan-officer, until he has received the opinion of the Attorney General upon
that subject.

I am, etc. A. J. DALLAS."

To the Comptroller and Register-General.

Mr. Tilghman. --

Before I proceed to the next head, I will remark that the state ought to pay
the full amount, that the New-Loans were subscribable and redeemable, and
consequently the state ought to pay pound for pound, and really the complaint
against the Comptroller is of an extraordinary nature -- "Mr. Nicholson
acquired wealth that the state ought to have got!" -- I fancy if any questions
ought to be raised, it ought not to be between the commonwealth, but between
the persons from whom Mr. Nicholson bought, he however bought fairly. I now
come to the Acts of Assembly, and I will show that the construction drawn by
the managers, is injurious and derogatory, and I hope to show Mr. Nicholson's
construction to be consonant to good faith, honor and equity. If the law is to
receive their construction, it will oppose the Federal Constitution, which is
the supreme law of the land; and therefore it is utterly void.

My positions are, that New-Loans were subscribable to the first loan, also to
the second, and likewise redeemable under the sixth section of the Act of the
10th April 1792.

(Here Mr. Tilghman read the 3d, 7th and 11th sections of the Act of March 1,
1786, to prove that New-Loans were as much a debt as any other.) No matter
whether the commonwealth became immediately indebted or through the agency of
others. Temporary provision is not apparent from the Act. If the commonwealth
entertained temporary views they were not mutual. Mutuality and reciprocity are
the essence of contracts. Whatever is reasonable with private persons in the
case of contracts is so with the State.

But it has been contended that the Act of March 27 1789, puts these
certificates into an ambiguous state; let us examine the Act itself -- "Whereas
the duties on exports and imposts are given to Congress -- temporary relief --
it became inconvenient to pay half-yearly, etc." -- this Act does not compel an
exchange, it leaves it optional; perhaps the commonwealth could not pay, what
then ought to be done? -- we will give you an option. You are our creditor; we
have contracted to pay you principal and interest; we will pay you four year's
interest because we are able to do so, and we will give you back your original
certificate at your option, or we will pay you when we can.

The 3d section did not contemplate that all would exchange, and it implies too
much injustice and impropriety to presume they meant to absolve themselves from
the payment of the remainder; "MANY," is a relative term, it does not imply a
majority, it means some may, others would not.

Under the construction of the Managers the New-Loan holder is a creditor of
nobody; but possibly or probably may become the creditor of the Continent.
Notwithstanding the time of payment is altered, yet the State holds the value
in her hands and continues no debtor. How can such a construction be put on
this Act without flying in the face of the Federal Constitution -- (Section 10
of the first article is cited,) Congress in the ninth section of the same
article is denied the power of making ex post facto laws.

This is the last of all supposable cases, by this Constitution no State can
pass a law impairing the obligation of contracts made between A and B,
consequently a State cannot do it, when she is a contracting party.

I now refer to the Act of 7th April 1791, that the commonwealth contemplated
them as a debt. (He quoted Act of 7th April, 1791, page 51 and 54.) Where the
State seemed to contemplate the preventing of New-Loans from subscription. No.
235 is the first abstract which was certified -- No. 234 was counterfeit as
aforesaid. No certification of genuine and assumable from Mr. Nicholson before
the counterfeit was discovered.

It was not the duty of the Comptroller General to certify -- no checks of
office have been broken -- Mr. Nicholson was under no obligation to consult the
Governor -- no law required a discrimination, it would be wrong to do it, no
intention in the Comptroller to deceive, if a difference of opinion with the
Register-General existed then it would be right, he took no pains to color, no
labor to shed confusion, the New-Loans in his abstracts might have been known
from all others, if the Register or any other person would examine them, this
afforded an infallible criterion, if he had been at any pains to conceal -- it
would be contemptible swindling, (...) mean point of view indeed, "till he got
the money. The subscription was in his own name, fairly and openly "to promote
and procure his own emolument" -- come what will of these allegations no such
thoughts were in the Comptroller's mind, he sets all such at des^^

The 4th a article of impeachment.

There is a ^^nd, 12th appropriation, by the Act of 7th April, 1791, and
applies to our case by the 6th section of the Act of 10th April 1792. Out of
this fund were redeemed the unfunded depreciation warrant No. 1551 for
Brigade-Inspector, and several others which he referred to. If there was no
fund it was no guilt imputable to the Comptroller, as it was not his look out,
but the Governor's who drew the orders. (Here Mr. Wilcocks hinted to Mr.
Tilghman, "no matter what fund, so you get the money." Mr. Tilghman replied, "I
believe it to be the same with the Managers and their Counsel; but we have a
legal fund though you have not.) Other warrants were produced here -- warrant No.
243 in favor of Mr. Rittenhouse, May 16th, 1792, no law expressly appropriating
this fund.

Mr. Dallas was called up and said, he never knew unfunded depreciation debt to
have been paid under the Act of 10th April, 1792. The unfunded depreciation
debt was not in the estimate (Mr. Trimble was introduced with his book) and Mr.
Dallas read from his records the forms of the certificates and warrants -- the
original statement did not extend to unfunded deprecition debt: The Comptroller
and Register-General were called on for a statement of the debt to be redeemed
and accordingly the Governor directed the sale.

Mr. Tilghman -- Having observed that the 1st, 2d and 3d articles of
impeachment are not supported, and the 4th being a consequential deduction from
the preceding ones, if the former has no foundation, the latter cannot be
supported, I will tomorrow endeavor to discharge my duty respecting the
succeeding articles.

Adjourned until 10 o'clock tomorrow.

In the minutes of the House of Representatives the following is recorded: --

"In conformity to the resolutions of the 25th February last the House resolved
itself into a committee of the whole in order to attend the trial of John
Nicholson, Comptroller General of this commonwealth, now depending before the
Senate, on the articles of impeachment exhibited against him by the House of
Representatives.

"The Speaker quitted the chair and Mr. Wynkoop was placed therein.

"The committee then proceeded to the Senate-chamber for the purpose aforesaid.

"And after some time, they returned to their own chamber.

"The Chairman then reported that the committee of the whole had attended the
trial of the said John Nicholson.

"The committee appointed to manage the trial of the articles of impeachment
against John Nicholson, Comptroller General, reported that they had made
further progress."

Eighth day of the trial. FRIDAY, MARCH 7, 1794.
SENATE met pursuant to adjournment.

Mr. Tilghman. --

Under the 12th appropriation the law admits the fund for claims and
improvements. Instances can be produced: But it is immaterial whether there are
instances or not, if the law is with us. (The Treasurer was sent for at this
time, who answered he could not come, and if the defendant wanted the vouchers
he must send a horse and cart for them.)

Under the fifth and sixth articles the Comptroller is charged with purchasing
certificates of persons coming to his office for the purpose of exchanging them
-- I acknowledge the fact and contend it is lawful; he purchased of Oldden, I
contend that the property of the certificates were not vested in the State or
Pennsylvania, the business was inchoate: a good deal remained to be done, the
property belonged to the party, the amount of interest was to be calculated,
indents to be paid, etc. before the exchange was completed. Instances will be
be shown to prove the practice of withdrawing after they had been thus rendered.

John Pearson, for whom a subpoena had been issued, was called but did not
appear.

Griffith Evans, sworn.
I had been in the practice of frequently bringing New-Loans to the
Comptroller-General's office to be exchanged. I was once at the Comptroller's
office, I met a person from Chester county who had previously left a New-Loan
certificate with Mr. Nicholson to be exchanged, he appeared to be going away, I
suppose to get indents; I offered to do it for him, Mr. Nicholson delivered me
the certificate which I afterward exchanged, probably at some subsequent
period when I was exchanging more for myself, the date I suppose in the winter
of 1792.

Ques. Was it before the passing of the Act of the 10th April 1792? and inform
of any circumstances respecting it.

Ans. I will relate a circumstance; previous to the passing of that Act, I came
to the Comptroller-General's office, I met Mr. Gallatin going down, almost as
soon as I came up to Mr. Nicholson's table, I said is it possible that they
will pass that law? if passed as reported it will include New-Loans. Mr.
Nicholson said, I have been endeavoring to convince Mr. Gallatin that it will
do so.

We conversed on the subject and both agreed that it would not be for the
interest of the State, and that it would be better if the Act did not pass. We
thought it better for the State not to sell the stock. Mr. Nicholson said, he
thought he had convinced Mr. Gallatin. I do not remember any thing about
unfunded debt -- it appeared to me so extraordinary that I thought it would not
pass. We did not go into particular statements, no other inconvenience
mentioned except the selling of the public stock. After the law passed I
revolved in my mind whether I should go into a speculation, but from some
consideration I did not.

Mr. Tilghman:

On the 16th of March 1792, the House of Representatives (by the minutes)
resolved itself into a committee of the whole to take the Act of the 10th April
1792 into consideration. I will show from the books of Mr. Nicholson that he
spoke to Mr. Gallatin as the last witness had deposed -- (after some debate the
diary, book A, of the Comptroller was rejected as improper testimony, being the
private memorandum of the defendant, as they alleged.)

Mr. Donnaldson was called and declared,

I was never before the House of Representatives; only before the committee of
Ways and Means: never on oath. I was requested to reduce what I had to writing,
and send it to them, which I did.

Mr. Tilghman. -- It has been supposed that Hans Hamilton received Continental
Loan-office certificates from the commonwealth of Pennsylvania these have been
subscribed by John Nicholson on Hans Hamilton's account to the domestic debt of
the United States -- And the corresponding New-Loans also by the
Comptroller General on his own account to the State loan. The inference thence
drawn is that the New-Loans were first exchanged and then subscribed, we are
not charged with having misapplied the Continental certificates, the charge
must be that the New-Loans were exchanged and then subscribed, but this by no
means appears, nor was it the case, as we shall prove by the testimony of Hans
Hamilton himself, that Mr. Nicholson purchased those New-Loans of him.

J. Donnaldson attended with his books.

The first entry of the redeemed debt made on the 2d of July 1792. The number
of the abstract was presented and the entry was made of the whole. The first
entry of unfunded depreciation debt was Samuel Powel, upon the separation of
the debt the abstracts were sent to Mr. Nicholson's office to mark the several
kinds. They were sent in August or September. After their return to my office,
I entered the abstracts. The next of unfunded depreciation was No. 218, Robert
Buchannan. The next instance was No. 256, Jasper Yeates. The whole amount of
unfunded depreciation was 4,070 dollars and 10 cents: It was paid out of the
sale of stock. I find by my report, that my estimate to the Governor did not
include them.

Mr. Tilghman:

The unfunded Depreciation were entitled under the sixth section of the Act of
the 10th April 1792, and yet they contend that no fund was provided: I have now
the warrants from the Treasury -- (Here a number of warrants were produced to
show that similar claims were paid by the 3d and 12th appropriations out of the
fund for claims and improvements.) Here I will leave the 4th article.

I shall now proceed to show instances of New-Loan certificates being lodged
with the Comptroller General for exchange and withdrawn by the proprietors. The
following letters were then read.

"Comptroller-General's office, June 21, 1792. "SIR,
"A NUMBER of the New-Loan certificates said to be lost or stolen, and which
are provided for by the Act, entitled "An Act for the relief of the estate of
Sarah Caldwell, and also for the relief of Mary Beer, James Steer, and John
Thompson," have been and are presenting at this office for exchange. The said
Act directed and they have accordingly given security to the commonwealth to
indemnify the said commonwealth against the said certificates. The parties who
produce them show that they have purchased them bona fide for a valuable
consideration; as the Continental certificates for which they were given are
already delivered up, they cannot be delivered again, but the parties claim an
equivalent, and the object of this application is to receive the instructions
of your excellency, whether under the circumstances of the case, the nature of
the certificates payable to bearer, the security which has been taken as
aforesaid, and the Act of 27th March 1789, allowing the holder of such
certificates to receive a like amount in Continental certificates. The laws as
well as the reputation of the State do not require that the parties as
aforesaid should have their certificates exchanged on their application.

JOHN NICHOLSON."

His excellency the Governor of Pennsylvania.

"SIR, June 23, 1792.
"BEFORE the Governor can give an answer to your letter respecting the New-Loan
certificates which though said to have been lost, or stolen, are now presented to
be exchanged at your office, he wishes to know the names of the respective
holders, and the nature of the testimony which they offer to prove that they
are bona fide purchasers for a valuable consideration. On receiving this
information he will probably refer the consideration of the subject to the law
officer of the State.

I am, etc. A. J. DALLAS."

To the Comptroller General of Pennsylvania.

"Comptroller-General's office, June 25, 1792. "SIR,
"THERE have been certificates of John Thompson produced at this office by --

"Clement Biddle, Esquire who shows the bill of sale from the last holder.

"Solomon Marks, junior, who produces two from preceding holders.

"Robert Ross who produces a bill of sale from the last holder before him.

"The two last have withdrawn their certificates and parted therewith to others.

"The above is in pursuance of the Secretary's letter of the 23 instant. I am,
etc.

JOHN NICHOLSON."

His excellency THOMAS MIFFLIN, Esquire Governor of Pennsylvania.

The above letters prove the practice.

Some witnesses were called, and in waiting for them some time elapsed: Mr.
Tilghman had some time before handed the deposition of Hans Hamilton to the
Attorney General of the State of Pennsylvania; in this interval Mr. Tilghman
requested the gentlemen concerned in the prosecution to declare whether they
would or would not oppose its being read to the Senate -- he observed that it
would take a fortnight to procure another deposition as Mr. Hamilton lived over
the mountains in Westmoreland county, the roads being in a bad condition, and
mentioned that Mr. Smith who knew that rout well, said it would take that time
to complete the journey.

Mr. Ingersoll observed that it was extremely disagreeable to him to
procrastinate the trial, or delay the proceedings, but to admit ex part
evidence or depositions was also against his inclination, if he should admit
the testimony offered he might incur censure.

If on the other hand the witness should again say what he had said before, the
refusal of the deposition might have some unfavourable construction, he did not
wish to do any thing that would incur censure on the one hand, or could be
construed as an hardship on the other, he wished to consult his colleagues on
the subject, that his duty as an Attorney on this side, and his conduct as a
fair adversary on the other might be manifest.

Mr. Lewis observed that the character of the witness was unexceptionable, and
the Managers might do as they pleased.

Mr. Tilghman agreed to any time the Managers and their Counsel would appoint
to prepare interrogatories to the witness.

Col. Porter, sworn.
Ques. by Mr. Tilghman. Inform the Senate whether you have, or have not lodged
any certificates with the Comptroller General, and afterward took them away?

Ans. I am unprepared to give evidence; I recollect having left an abstract of
New-Loans with Mr. Nicholson for the purpose of re-exchanging; do not recollect
dates, amount, nor numbers, nor whether it was after or before the 10th April,
1792, but probably it was in 92. I applied to the Comptroller and got them,
having an occasion for an immediate sale.

Thomas Hale, sworn.
I have withdrawn one or two certificates from the Comptroller's office after I
had deposited them there, I subscribed them afterward with Mr. Smith, an
abstract being first made out, when I first left them I did not know I could
subscribe them, I gave no reason for withdrawing them: I got my information out
of doors, I do not recollect that New-Loans were rising in price, nor whether
the transaction took place in June or July: I left them in the morning and took
them away in the evening of the same day.

Daniel Stroud, sworn.
I lodged a great many at one time in Mr. Nicholson's office, they remained
several days. I withdrew them because I thought I could do better than to
exchange them, this happened about the beginning of the year 1793. I gave no
reason for withdrawing them, Mr. Nicholson had no objection.

Adjourned till half past nine o'clock tomorrow morning.

In the minutes of the House of Representatives the following entry is recorded:

"In conformity to the resolutions of the 25th February last, the House
resolved itself into a committee of the whole, in order to attend the trial of
John Nicholson, Comptroller General.

"The Speaker quitted the chair and Mr. Wynkoop was placed therein.

"The committee of the whole then proceeded to the Senate-chamber for that
purpose.

"After some time,

"The committee of the whole returned to their own chamber.

"The Chairman left the chair and the Speaker resumed it.

"The Chairman then informed the House that the committee of the whole had
attended the trial of John Nicholson, Comptroller General.

"The committee appointed to manage the trial of the articles of impeachment
against John Nicholson, Comptroller General, reported further progress."

Ninth day of the trial. SATURDAY, MARCH 8, 1794.
SENATE met pursuant to adjournment.

After some consultation Mr. Ingersoll informed the counsel for the defendant
that the committee of managers had instructed him not to admit the deposition
of Hans Hamilton. His reasons: --

Because it was take (...) ^his city the 27th of January last, the Legislature
th^n in session, the attorneys for both sides in town, Mr. Nicholson might have
detained the witness by subpoena, or if the witness should think it too long,
the Attorney General might have been consulted, and they would have managed it,
that his deposition might have been taken in the regular way, that the practice
of taking depositions privately is very exceptionable, and if taken in the
absence of the opponent is discountenanced by courts of law, a witness may
commit himself by giving sundry depositions; that the Comptroller knew, or knew
not, that this charge would be brought forward, or was uncertain; if he knew
it, he should have given notice, if he knew it not, it was strange he took it
at all, if he was uncertain he might have had a specification of the charges,
if he had asked for such specification. That it was a week or more since he
called for the book of Exchanges, no intimation was then given of the
deposition, nor since until the evening of the day before yesterday, that the
deposition could not be admitted, nor the trial postponed; that the day of
trial had been fixed, and every obstacle could have been removed on proper
application.

Mr. Tilghman. I acknowledge that the deposition cannot be admitted agreeably
to the strict rules of evidence. However well this point may be known to the
committee and their counsel, it was unknown to the counsel of the
Comptroller General, till lately; Mr. Nicholson did not consult us; if he had
applied to us, I cannot pretend to say what we should have advised him to do. I
request however that we may have time either to procure his deposition, or
liberty to prefer the present deposition. If the defendant had been negligent,
it is hard to condemn him unheard. One of the Managers agreed to inform the
Comptroller whether this would be brought forward on the trial or not, which
was not done.

Mr. Ingersoll. I cannot conceive that a witness can come forward as well as if
he had not been previously sworn; I will however agree to say nothing about
Hans Hamilton; If there can be a return of the commission before the argument
will be closed: I have no doubt but a return may be had without interruption.

Mr. Tilghman. I think the proposition a fair one, Mr. Hamilton is known to
some members of the Legislature. And if the answers cannot be had in time, the
Senate will judge whether they will wait for them or not.

Some arguments were adduced respecting the postponement of the 6th and 7th
articles, at last it was agreed to omit Hans Hamilton altogether. The Editor
having procured a copy of the deposition takes this opportunity to lay it
before his readers.

Hans Hamilton deposes and says, that finding on application at the
Comptroller-General's office, and that of Thomas Smith, Esquire that he could not
get his business done without being delayed long at expenses in this city, he
did in the year 1791 apply to John Nicholson, Esquire with the following
certificates of New-loan, as near as he can remember, and from comparing with a
list of saidcertificates now in his possession.

L.669 18 2 242 7 6 268 0 0 24 6 0 4 19 6 11 16 0 4 19 6 12 15 2 1239 1 10

"That the said John Nicholson proposed to him to prevent his longer stay and
expense, that he would commute with him the said certificates for the like sum
is funded stock of the United States, as he would be entitled to receive from
the public or the value thereof, that the deponent thereupon agreed thereto,
and left his certificates aforesaid, and took the obligation of said Nicholson
to do as aforesaid, which paper he has since lost. That upon the deponent's
coming down in April, 1792, to the city of Philadelphia, he applied to said
Nicholson who gave him a line to the Bank, where he received his interest on
stock transferred to him by said Nicholson as he had contracted to do; that
having lately come again to the city he has on application, received from said
Nicholson the certificates for his stock as aforesaid, and having settled with
him respecting the transaction, he has been fully paid in cash by said
Nicholson for a balance of the stock, which had not been transferred to him.

"The deponent further says, that in all before the above dealing, and in
other private transaction which he has before had with said Nicholson, he has
found him to be upright, and has faithfully executed all his engagements with
him; and farther this deponent says not.

HANS HAMILTON."

"City of Philadelphia, ss. Before MATH. CLARKSON, Mayor."




Mr. Tilghman. I will now proceed to the interrogatories and answers of Blair
M'Clenachan.

Here Mr. Tilghman showed from the book of exchanges kept in the
Comptroller-General's office, that Mr. M'Clenachan had brought upwards of 74
thousand dollars to the office and had them exchanged. He also showed the
abstracts of these exchanges made out for Mr. M'Clenachan as it was usual for
the parties to do before their exchanges were made at the office.

Mr. Evans asked when the entries were made; the answer was, when the indents
were paid: the abstracts were made immediately -- and these were all the
exchanges that were ever made for Mr. M'Clenachan.

Mr. Tilghman. I will now take a retrospective view of the articles of
impeachment, and first of the 7th, which if taken by itself, and no objection
hereafter to be made the testimony fixes no criminality on the
Comptroller General; the 5th and 6th are not supported, no criminal conduct in
him to do what any person might have done, the exchange had not been
prohibited, any person might purchase. 4th article, the holders of principal
and interest are entitled to draw their money out of the 12th appropriation --
it is evident he used no deceit.

3d article. It is manifest that he used no deceit with the Register-General or
other officer, the account was sent forward in a positive manner, the amount of
the nominal sum plain, no disguise in the transaction, the abstract was in his
own name, from the nature of the account they might easily discover they were
New-Loans, he did not certify genuine and assumable in his own case. The 1st
and 2d articles -- the 6 th section provided a redemption pound for pound.
Whatever was subscribable was redeemable. Attend to the Act of March 1789 --
"Many would be willing to exchange" others would not, shall those who are
unwilling, be excluded, this is a misconstruction, any other construction than
ours would be derogatory to the honor and dignity of the State.

If the defendant had been mistaken, here is a great question, whether he acted
with a fraudulent design, or whether his actions were the result of his
judgment, his opinion was not similated but genuine and positive that the
New-Loans were subscribable to the loan of the United States. To convict him
there ought to be proof clear and unequivocal; the consequences of that
conviction are terrible, not only dismission from office, but incapacity of
holding any post of honor or profit, the party who attempts to criminate should
prove the charges. Six of the seven articles conclude with "Loss and injury to
the commonwealth." What loss and injury? she only paid pound for pound, she
received full value, she promised to pay pound for pound, consequently ought to
pay full value, this is no injustice. Can any saving of money be put in
competition with national honor and the immutable principles of justice? and
yet six of these articles conclude -- with loss and injury! I have no doubt of
his construction of the law being true and genuine, I shall therefore leave the
matter to the Senate, trusting that as the issue is important, so the decision
will be honorable to the Comptroller General.

MR. GIBSON.
Mr. Speaker, and Gentlemen of the Senate,
THE order which as Counsel for the defendant I shall observe in replying to
the articles of impeachment, will conform to that pursued in the arrangement of
the articles themselves. I shall accordingly begin with the first which appears
of the greatest importance, and serves as an introduction to the others.

This article, after declaring that the New-Loans ceased to be a State-debt on
the passing of the Act of March 1789, charges the defendant with certifying
them to be subscribable to the loan of Congress as debts of Pennsylvania,
contrary to his official trust, and as he well knew to the manifest injury of
the commonwealth.

The substantial part of the article consists in the position that the
New-Loans were not State debt after March 1789, nor of course subscribable to
the loan, and grounds on this basis the subsequent charge of guilt in the
defendant in declaring them to be subscribable.

To ascertain the weight of this position it will be necessary to ascend to the
origin of these certificates, and to trace them from that time to the period
mentioned in the article.

These certificates are derived from the Act of the 1st March 1786. Vol. 2. p.
417.

This Act after mentioning the occasion of passing it, directs the mode of
issuing the certificates and places them upon the same footing with the most
favored certificates of the state.

The first section declares "it is just and proper that the patriotic citizens
of this State, who in the late arduous conflict, yielded their property and
their personal services to the public use, and thereby eminently contributed to
the establishment of the peace, liberty, and safety, of the United States of
America, should be relieved, as far as circumstances will admit, from bearing
an undue proportion of the public burden, which ought to rest equally on all
the citizens." The second proceeds to direct blank certificates to be procured,
and prescribes the form, viz. The commonwealth of Pennsylvania has received on
loan from (...) the (...) of (...) to be paid to the said (...) or bearer on or
before the first day of March in the year of our Lord one thousand seven
hundred and ninety-six, with interest from the (...) day of (...) at the rate
of six per centum per annum to be paid half-yearly at the State-Treasury
according to the directions of an Act of the General Assembly, passed on the
(...) day of (...). The third directs the loan to be opened, to continue so two
years, and regulates the dates of the certificates to be issued. The fourth
distinguishes the kinds of Continental certificates to be received. The sixth
and seventh mention that certain Continental Loan-office certificates issued
between 1 Sept. 1777 and 1 March 1778 are subject to liquidation by the scale
of depreciation on their final redemption, although the possessors are entitled
to receive the annual interest at full value on the nominal sum until such
redemption takes place, and direct a reference to these certificates to be made
on the New-Loans issued therefore; that on the payment of the principal they may
be subject to the same liquidation.

The other sections provide for the payment of the interest on the New-Loans
half-yearly -- make them redeemable at the Land-office -- provide for the
Continental certificates received and for conducting the loan.

A Supplement to this Act was passed 28th March 1787, p. 508, extending the
loan to those citizens who had made loans in the Continental Loan-offices of
Delaware and New Jersey.

From the whole complexion of this Act it appears that the Legislature
considered the certificates issued in pursuance of it, or in other words the
New-Loans, as effectually State debt, as those of any other description. For
they on the face of the certificate promise to pay the principal on or before
the year 1796, and the interest half-yearly until that time. The Land-office is
open for their reception as for other certificates; and those which were
peculiarly situated as already mentioned, are directed to be reduced to specie
value on the payment of the principal.

The merit of the holders of these certificates was equally great, with the
holders of any other. The debts were contracted in a common cause -- the
citizens of Pennsylvania were the creditors, and the State herself enjoyed in
common with the other States, the benefits of their exertions.

That the provision made in this Act was designed to be permanent, and the
New-Loan creditors considered by our Legislature of the most meritorious class,
will appear in the strongest manner by referring to a resolution of the
Legislature upon this subject on the 27th December 1786, Minutes of Assembly,
p. 97.

This resolution took place upon a very pressing occasion -- Congress being
much embarrassed, appointed a committee to disclose to our Legislature the
urgent state of their affairs, and to request an immediate grant of the impost
to enable them to comply with the engagements of the Union. -- The Legislature
after paying all the attention due to the importance of the occasion, resolve
in words as strong as language can express, that their engagements to their own
citizens prevent them without a breach of good faith from complying with the
request, at the same time informing Congress of their unfeigned regard for the
honor of the United States, and of their unremitted exertions to do all in
their power to support it. (The report is as follows.)

"The report of the committee to whom was referred the report of the committee
of the late House of Assembly, appointed to confer with the honorable Mr.
Monroe and Mr. King, read December 15th, was read the second time, and adopted
as follows, viz.

"The committee, to whom was referred the report of a committee of the late
House of Assembly, appointed to confer with the honorable Delegates on their
mission from Congress, beg leave to report --

"That they have examined the object of the said report with the attention due
to its importance:

"That they cannot help considering the debt of the United States in one
aggregate point of view, and are of opinion that the principles of justice
require like payment of every part, whether the same be due to foreigners or
citizens:

"That there appears to have been due to the citizens of this commonwealth a
sum which she has undertaken to pay them, and which probably amounts nearly to
her proportion of the whole debt.

"That the appropriation of funds for that purpose is of such nature, that the
report now referred to your committee (and which was adopted by the last
Assembly) declares, "an immediate compliance with the recommendation would
involve a breach of the faith of this state, pledged to the public creditors,
citizens thereof, unless at the same time some further and other funds were
provided for payment of the interest due and which shall become due to them:"

"That in the opinion of your committee, the magnitude of the appropriation
just mentioned renders the provision alluded to in the report impracticable.

"That in the opinion of your committee, it would neither be just nor prudent
to call on the citizens of Pennsylvania for payment of taxes, to discharge the
money due to others, while that which is due to themselves is unprovided for.

"Your committee therefore propose the following resolution:

"That the Delegates of this State in Congress be instructed to assure the
United States of the sincere desire of Pennsylvania, to make an adequate
provision for all the debts of the Union; that this desire, fully evinced by
her ready compliance with past requisitions, will equally operate on future
determinations; that the distress of her citizens, to whom large sums were due,
and who were at the same time compelled to pay their proportion of supplies for
the current expenditures, called loudly for relief; that having waited in vain
for a general assent to the measures proposed by Congress, until the grievance
complained of could no longer be borne, it became necessary to assume the
payment of those sums which were due by the Union to her own citizens; that in
consequence, the funds now required by the United States were appropriated to
this object, and the debts due to individuals were transferred to the State,
whereby Pennsylvania became the creditor of the Union; that this House cannot
divert the funds specified from the appropriation formerly made, until such
solid provision be made for all the public debts, as that the annual interest
payable to Pennsylvania will be a certain and sufficient fund for discharging
those sums, which she is bound in the manner abovementioned to pay to her
citizens, but that Pennsylvania will in the mean time account for her full
quota of the sums necessary to discharge the interest, and instalments of
principal, due or to become due by the United States, and, after deducting
therefrom the interest she is entitled to receive, will regularly pay any
balance that may remain due on such quota."

In this situation the New-Loans continued; a debt deliberately formed, and
sanctioned by this resolution, until the Act of the 27th of March 1789, p. 694,
which it is contended has destroyed the debt.

It may be proper to glance at the situation of affairs at the time of passing
this Act, before we proceed to consider the Act itself. For by seeing how far
the necessity of the times required an alteration, and what alteration was
requisite to answer and remove that necessity, we obtain a good criterion to
determine the true intent of the law; -- as the first must have been the cause
inducing the Legislature to pass it, and the last the object designed to be
accomplished by its passing.

It appears then that by the Act of March 1786, the Legislature freely and
openly established the loan upon permanent and liberal principles, that they
had constituted a debt, which they considered themselves absolutely bound to
discharge, and which they could not, consistently with good faith attempt to
injure. In the year 1789, from the establishment of the Federal Constitution,
Congress became entitled to the impost, and the State was in consequence
deprived of her most useful and productive revenue, and was utterly unable
without additional taxes, to discharge the annual demands, These additional
taxes it would be too burdensome at this time to levy, as the citizens
exclusive of those they paid in common, were then paying an annual land tax of
L.76,000; many of the former were greatly in arrear, and of course no
additional one would be punctually complied with. The best mode that occurred
to remove these difficulties was to suspend the payments of the New-Loan debt,
which from its greater magnitude pressed harder man any other. The suspension
of the principal (which might easily be done as the payment could not be
exacted by the contract before 1796) immediately closed the Land-office against
it, which in consequence became a more productive fund for the redemption of
the other debt, and together with the present stoppage of the interest, would
remove the embarrassment occasioned by the loss of the impost. As Congress
would probably provide for the public debts, being constitutionally authorized
to do so, it would be but fair to permit these creditors to enjoy the benefits
of such provision, as a compensation for the loss now suffered, and to enable
them to become Continental creditors for that purpose.

That this was the intention of the Legislature we may not only presume from
adverting to the situation of the times, but it also appears from the
complexion of the Act itself.

The first section which constitutes a lengthy preamble, recites the Act of
March 1786, with its supplement, and states the actual situation of things.
That Congress have power to provide for the public debts; that they have become
entitled to the impost, which the State consequently loses; that the aggregate
fund, out of which the New-Loans were paid is diminished by the withdrawing of
the impost; that Congress will no doubt provide for the creditors; and declares
that on these considerations the relief granted by the preceding Acts should
cease, provision should be made out of the Treasury of the United States, and
that proper alterations are necessary.

This preamble conforms to the statement just given. As far as there is a
recital and construction of the preceding Acts, they must both conform to them.
The Legislature certainly had no design to deceive -- nor to form a
construction, nor to pursue measures, in consequence of such construction which
the Acts themselves or public faith would not warrant. The provisions made in
the former Acts were designed to be permanent, and if public necessity now
compelled an alteration it justified it no further than the inability of the
State required -- that inability required no more than a temporary suspension
of payment, and justice to the creditors demanded that to compensate this loss,
they should be entitled to any benefits Congress might grant by exchanging
their certificates should that measure become necessary. This Act should not be
considered separately and distinctly, but relatively to the others on the
subject, and the construction be determined from a general view of the whole.

The alterations intended are contained in the second section, which directs
"That the interest due and to become due and payable upon all and every the
certificates issued by the Comptroller General in pursuance of the said recited
Acts or either of them, shall be paid up so as to complete the payment of
interest to four years; and that so much of every Act or Acts of General
Assembly as directs or secures the payment of the principal sum or sums in the
said certificates or any of them mentioned, or of the interest thereof beyond
the term of four years shall be and the same is hereby repealed and made null
and void."

The Legislature instead of repealing the Act of March 1786, or destroying the
certificates, declaring them in the language of the impeachment to be no longer
a debt, or evidence of a debt, due and owing from the State of Pennsylvania;
merely repeat that part of it, which provides for the payment of the principal
or the interest beyond 4 years: the remainder therefore of the Act continues in
full force and every thing already completed stands unaffected. The expressions
null and void could not be here intended to have any reference to the past,
because the interest is directed to be paid on the whole to complete 4 years,
and in order to comply with this requisition payments must in many instances be
made of interest accruing after the passing of this Act, as in these cases its
commencement was not four years before its passing; the whole clause therefore
with respect to payment, operates on some as a present on others as a future
prohibition, but in no instance as a retrospect.

Moreover had the Act of March 1789 entirely repealed the Act of March 1786, it
would not have thereby effected the destruction of the certificates. They were
completed under the Act while in full force, and could not be injured by any
subsequent repeal. Like titles under laws that afterward become obsolete,
expire, or are repealed they still remain in full vigor.

The Act also of March 1789 so far from having a retrospect to the past, only
refers to the present and the future, and besides the payment of the interest
already mentioned, contemplates the probability that many New-Loan creditors
may wish under the circumstances in which they are placed, to retake the
Continental certificates loaned to the State, and therefore appropriates them a
fund for the redemption of the New-Loans to such as choose to take them; the 3d
section regulating the proceeding -- Council under whose direction the whole
was placed, among other regulations direct by rule 3d that where an equal
exchange cannot be made fresh New-Loan certificates shall be issued for the
balance. These have accordingly been issued in numerous instances, and have
always been considered of equal validity with those originally issued. This
could not be justified had the law abolished the certificates, as their
circulation would be destroyed, they would no longer exist a demand against the
commonwealth, and of course no new ones could legally be issued.

Had the Legislature designed to annihilate the debt, they certainly would have
taken effectual measures for that purpose and have abolished the certificates
altogether. An apposite instance has taken place in North Carolina, where the
Legislature designing to destroy certain certificates, commonly called
Warrenton certificates, which had corruptly issued, although under legal
authority; they explicitly declare that all the certificates of this
description are null and void and shall not be received in payment of taxes or
any other public demand whatsoever. (North Carolina Laws, p. 475.)

Let us suppose however for a moment, that the Legislature designed to destroy
these certificates. It would then be contended that they were deprived of the
power. At the time of passing this Act the Federal Constitution was in complete
operation: The 10th section of the first article declares that "No State shall
enter into any treaty, alliance or confederation; grant letters of marque and
reprisal; coin money; emit bills of credit; make any thing but gold and silver
coin a tender in payment of debts; pass any bill of attainder, ex post facto
laws, or law impairing the obligation of contracts, or grant any title of
nobility." -- That the state by the first Act, contracted with the holders of
New-Loans and engaged herself to pay them, can admit of no doubt, for
independently of the Act itself, it is solemnly acknowledged in the resolution
of December 1786. As little doubt can be entertained that if the Legislature in
the last Act, intended to destroy the debt, it was invalidating the engagement
and of course impairing the contract. This Act therefore if designed for this
purpose is void by the Constitution of the United States. This Constitution was
lately adopted; it had been fully debated before its adoption; many of the
members of this Legislature had also been members of the Convention that
adopted it, they must have been fully sensible of its obligatory force, and
little inclined to act in direct, and it may be added, violent opposition to it.

To construe this law then, as an abolition of the debt, would be to make it
violate every principle of national honor and justice -- to operate in the
nature of an ex post facto law, rescinding contracts fairly made, and solemnly
acknowledged to be binding -- it would make the Legislature act in direct
opposition to their former explicit declarations and the Federal Constitution
-- it would in fine be supposing intentions very different from those that
actuated the Legislature at the time.

We have seen then that the occasion did not require an abolition of the debt;
that a repeal of the whole Act of March 1786 would not effect it, much less
then a repeal of a particular part -- that it would be contrary to the
principles of justice and the Constitution to destroy it -- of course we have
no reason to presume that the Legislature intended it.

Indeed the intention of the Legislature as it may be collected from succeed^^g
acts upon this subject, appears to have been very foreign from abolishing the
debt.

By an Act passed 7th April 1791, p. 51, the Governor is directed to negociate
a loan with the bank of North America, which when effected, together with the
other funds are formed into an aggregate fund to discharge certain obligations
of the commonwealth, and these are to be paid agreeably to the order they are
arranged in by the Act. Among others are the arrearages of interest due on the
New-Loan certificates. These certificates are here classed among the other
obligations of the State, as certificates still in existence, and the
arrearages of interest are directed to be paid prior to any future interest on
the funded debt.

An Act passed 30th September 1791, page 147, giving relief to Sarah Caldwell
and others, who had lost New-Loan certificates, after reciting the particulars
of their case directs sufficient security to be given to indemnify the
commonwealth against the certificates before the relief can be granted. It is
remarkable also that this Act pursues exactly the same expressions in requiring
the indemnity against the certificates with those used in a former Act passed
for the relief of Sarah Caldwell long before the Act of March 1789, viz. 4th
October 1788, page 535, sect. 2. If these certificates were destroyed by the
Act of March 1789 they would no longer be recognized by the Legislature as
certificates of this state -- If the state was not answerable for the amount of
them it would be useless to require an indemnification -- This indemnification
is general, being intended to guard the state against any injury that could
possibly arise from granting relief in the premises, or the New-Loans though lost
might still be in circulation. As the same requisitions are made in this Act
that are made in the first mentioned one which preceded the Act of March 1789
and in the same words; we may further conclude, that the Legislature considered
them as much obligations now as they were then, and prudently provided against
any contingent injury that might otherwise arise, from granting the relief
intended by the Act.

The 3d section of an Act passed 7th of April 1791, page 54, directs the
injurious and impolitic expedient of re-issuing the bills of credit which the
public faith was already plighted to destroy; to pay off the arrearages of
interest due on the New-Loans, in order that they might not interfere with the
arrangements of the commonwealth for subscribing to the loan of Congress. Their
interference must certainly have been a matter of great importance to render so
injurious an expedient necessary in order to prevent it; but in what manner it
may be asked can they possibly interfere? If they no longer continue State
debt, the State is no longer under an obligation to pay them, she therefore on
this account could have no concern -- if they are not subscribable to the loan
of Congress, they could not interfere with the arrangements of the State for
subscribing to that loan; for they would be of no validity, and if offered for
subscription, would undoubtedly be rejected. The Continental certificates which
the State had received in lieu of the New-Loans, she had already appropriated
as a fund for redeeming them, and if they were exchanged for the New-Loans,
these last would not be subscribed by the State, because the law of the United
States which authorized the subscription, expressly directed an equivalent to
be surrendered up, before interest could be paid, and as the State in this
instance, would have parted with the equivalent it would be injurious to do it.
The New-Loans could therefore interfere with these arrangements in no other way
than this; they were at this time both State debt, and subscribable to the loan
of Congress; their quantity (if subscribed) would exclude the other State
creditors from subcribing, and deprive the State of the opportunity she now
had, of discharging great part of her debts, and of making ample provision for
the future discharge of the remainder. In order to improve this favorable
opportunity, it became a matter of most serious concern to exclude these
certificates from subscription, and the State was compelled through the want of a
better, to pursue the injurious expedient mentioned in the Act, which it was
presumed would be, as it actually was, counterbalanced by the result.

By virtue of the Act of Congress of the 4th of August, 1790, two loans were
opened; one of the domestic debt to its full amount; the other of the State
debts to the amount of 21,500,000 dollars, which were assumed by the United
States, under the exceptions and restrictions laid down in the Act. Of these
21,500,000 dollars, the portion allotted to Pennsylvania was, 2,200,000, which
was payable in those state certificates which prior to the 1st January, 1790,
had issued for national purposes. The debt of Pennsylvania was at this time
classed under three descriptions, Funded debt, Depreciation debt, and New-Loan
debt. On the whole of the Funded, and part of the Depreciation (thence called
Funded Depreciation) the State paid an interest of 6 per cent.; on the
unfounded depreciation, (which include the remainder) interest though payable,
had never been paid as no funds had been appropriated for the purpose: and on
the New-Loans, no interest except the 4 year's arrears was at this time paying.
The whole amount of the funded and depreciation debt, did not exceed 1,500,000
dollars; the New-Loans alone exceeded 2,200,000 the sum assumed. If therefore
the New-Loans could be excluded from subscription, and the holders induced to
redeem them by the Continental certificates, at the same time proper
encouragement given to those State creditors, to whom the State was paying
interest, viz. the holders of the funded debt, and funded depreciation, to
subscribe to the State loan; the State would immediately get rid of all her
New-Loan debt, she would have the amount of the other subscribed, redeemed by
virtue of the subscription -- her revenues would be relieved from the greater
part of the annual interest she was now paying, as upon the plan she was
pursuing, the interest she would receive from the unsubscribed residuum, would
compensate the subscribers for what they would otherwise loose by subscribing.
If on the contrary, the New-Loans were subscribed, they would exclude the
others, and add to the burdens of the State. No time however could be more
favorable than the present, for accomplishing the plan, and no mode better
adapted to the purpose, than the one pursued.

In the domestic loan, the interest subscribed, was separated from the
principal, and exclusively became 3 per cent. stock: two thirds of the
principal became 6 per cent. stock, and the remaining third, 6 per cents
deferred. In the State loan the principal and interest were thrown into a
common mass, one third of which was converted into 3 per cent. stock, two
thirds of the remaining two thirds into 6 per cent. stock, and one third of two
thirds into 6 per cents. deferred. From this last arrangement it followed that
unless the interest subscribed, amounted to one third of the whole sum
subscribed so much of the principal as equalled this deficiency, supplied its
place and was converted into 3 per cents. In order that the interest should
amount to one third of the whole, it required an arrearage of eight years and a
quarter. In the case therefore of the New-Loans, when the arrearages was eight
years and a quarter, the holder might subscribe them to the State loan, or
exchange them for the Continental certificates and subscribe these to the
domestic loan, since in both cases the interest alone, became 3 per cent.
stock. Where the arrear was greater it was his interest to subscribe the
New-Loan in preference to the Continental certificate, as the excess of
interest became 6 per cent. stock or 6 per cents. deferred. Where it was less
it became injurious to subscribe them because part of the principal went to
supply the deficiency. By paying off four years immediately on the New-Loans,
and discountenancing their subscription to the State loan, (which was done by
the Act passed two days afterward, making the arrangements alluded to in this
Act, and which gave encouragement only to the subscription of certificates on
which an interest was then paying,) the arrears of interest were reduced below
eight years and a quarter, it became the interest of the holder to redeem the
New-Loan by the Continental, and subscribe to the domestic loan. It was also
his interest to receive the 4 years arrear in preference to subscribing the
New-Loan; as the indents to be paid the State on the exchange to equalize the
interest, were then low, the amount he paid the State on the New-Loan became
due to him on the Continental, and the money paid him by the State became a new
principal. The State by agreeing to pay 6 per cent. on the deferred, and 3 per
cent. on the 3 per cent. stock, created by the subscription of the other State
debt, was a sufficient inducement to the creditor to subscribe, as by this mean
the arrears of interest were converted into 6 per cent. stock.

The State by this policy got rid of most of the New-Loans; redeemed 650,000
dollars of her other debt; and became entitled to an interest of a residuum of
1,550,000 dollars, which amounted to nearly 56,000 dollars annually or upwards
of L. 20,000. These were the advantages she promised herself from the plan she
had then formed; they appeared sufficiently important to be purchased at the
expense of this ruinous expedient, and they were effectually secured, in
consequence of the measures pursued. These two Acts as effectually show the
ideas the Legislature entertained of the subscribability of New-Loans as the
most express declaration that could possibly be made on the subject.

From the foregoing survey it sufficiently appears, that the Act of March,
1789, did not destroy the New-Loans, that in the opinion of the Legislature
they still continued a debt, and were in their estimation subscribable to the
loan of the United States. It will now be proper to consider the Act
establishing that loan and to point out that part which admits their
subscription.

The Act of Congress of the 4th of August 1790, continued by that of the 8th of
May 1792, was formed to introduce order and harmony into the public finances,
by reducing to a few kinds the great variety of public securities; -- to make a
Continental debt of all those State certificates which had issued for national
purposes -- and to give security and value to the whole by preventing
counterfeits, and appropriating permanent funds for their regular payment. It
therefore in the 13th section, page 93, assumes all State certificates or notes
which had issued prior to the first of January 1790, as compensations or
expenditures for services or supplies toward the prosecution of the war,
excepting the Warrenton certificates of North Carolina which were expressly
excluded.

The New-Loans clearly come within this description. They were directed to
issue, and consequently did issue, only for Continental certificates which had
issued for these services. The services themselves were the original inducement
for issuing them, and Continental certificates of this description only were
received.

If this section is construed strictly according to the letter the depreciation
certificates about which there has existed no doubt would also be excluded, as
they strictly speaking did not issue for services but to compensate losses
occasioned by the depreciation of the soldiers pay; though here as in the case of
the New-Loans, the services rendered were the original inducement.

This construction would also operate to exclude a considerable portion of the
funded debt, as it stood at the time of the loan. For although the greater part
of it originally issued agreeably to the letter of the Act, as compensations or
expenditures for services or supplies, yet, for the convenience of payments at
the Land-office, and to facilitate their circulation, the original certificates
were frequently surrendered up, and new ones issued for different sums, and in
different numbers as suited the convenience of the party. These last therefore
having issued for other certificates would agreeably to this strict
construction be excluded.

In order to accomplish the design of this Act it was as necessary to assume
the New-Loans as any other certificates. They were certificates of the State,
and the State was a creditor of the United States to an equal amount. Congress
therefore by assuming them, and directing that before interest could be paid an
equal amount of Continental certificates should be surrendered up, at once
withdrew both from circulation. As a holder of New-Loans, the United States
could exchange with the State for an equal amount of Continental certificates,
and the sum subscribed, for which the State would be debited in her accounts
with the Union, she could balance by presenting an equal amount of New-Loans
which she had redeemed in this way, and which would be on the same footing with
the other certificates she had redeemed.

Could any doubt exist respecting the construction of the 13th section, it must
be removed by the 18th, page 97, which considering all certificates situated
like the New-Loans, as subscribable under the 13th section makes the necessary
regulations to prevent any inconvenience that might otherwise ensue.

The Secretary of the Treasury in his instructions to Mr. Smith the
Commissioner of Loans for this State, declares they are subscribable, and
directs arrangements in consequence. In his letters to Mr. Smith, he constantly
considers them subscribable. His negociations with our government are founded
on a belief that they have been actually subscribed, and turn at last upon the
fact of their having been subscribed or not.

If an inconvenience were to arise to the State in consequence of their
subscription, this would not destroy their subscribability. That arises from
the assumption of Congress and not from any arrangement of the State. The loan
is opened to the State creditors and the consent or refusal of the State has no
concern with it. Congress may assume what debts they please, and the creditor
may transfer to them all debts of a transferrable nature. This is a matter
entirely between Congress and the creditor in which the State cannot interfere
more than in the transfer from citizen to citizen. In the settlement of
accounts between the United States and this state, the interest commences, and
either party may allow or reject such items as are improper, but this can have
no effect upon the original assumption, which concerns merely Congress and the
state creditor.

One object in view by the assumption was to withdraw the creditor, from the
precarious and frequently inadequate relief of State provisions. These
creditors were certainly of this description, and in no case except in others
similarly circumstanced could Congress assume certificates with so much safety,
as they had issued for debts originally liquidated and adjusted by the United
States.

I hope then it has been satisfactorily proved, that the New-Loans were in
their first establishment State debt; placed on a permanent footing, and highly
favored; that their destruction was not designed by the Act of March 1789;
that at succeeding periods they have been considered as State debt and
subscribable by the Legislature itself, of course the subscriptions made have
been conformable to law.

We now come to the position which forms the essence of the second article,
viz. that the New-Loans were not nor could in any way be contemplated as
objects of redemption by the Act of April 1792.

This Act was designed to discharge the certificates of the State, and her
other obligations which the public interest required and which it was now in
the power of the State to perform. Our Legislature had always conceived it to
be more advantageous to the State to redeem her certificates in the cases where
she had it in her power through the medium of the United States in preference to
paying them off and making that payment a credit in her accounts with the
Union. This was evident in the first subscription to the State loan which was
promoted by the state, and this was their wish in the Act of April 1792 as is
apparent from the Act itself. By the first subscription the State redeemed all
the certificates that were subscribed, and only paid in return that portion of
interest which the United States did not, which payment was to continue only
until the United States paid it. She now wished to redeem all her debt
inclusive of the evidences of this obligation, commonly called Purpart
certificates, and although she in the present case, paid off the whole in the
first instance, yet she received from the United States an equivalent for the
greater part of it, which was an active and productive stock annually
increasing in value, and which by good management might be usefully
appropriated. The difference in value between the certificates received and the
money paid by the State in redemption, which was the only loss sustained by
this mode, (for if they were of equal value it would only amount to a mutual
exchange of equal interests) was of less consequence, than paying off the whole
at once, and that payment remaining a dormant claim upon the Union, until the
final adjustment of accounts and provision for the balance should call it into
activity. It should be considered also that Pennsylvania was at this time
deemed a creditor State, to a considerable amount and as in other cases of
debtor and creditor, it was more to her advantage to redeem her certificates by
way of set-off in this account than to advance more money on it and thereby
swell the credit further. Moreover upon striking the balance of this account
the State had no reason to presume that she would be more favored in the
discharge of it, than the citizen creditors had been in the payment of their
debts, but that certificates would issue to her in the same proportions, they
had already issued to them. It was therefore better to receive them now and
make them immediately productive than wait a future day.

The Act therefore of April, 1792, after appropriating the 3 per cent. stock as
a redeeming fund, and directing certain debts to be paid from the proceeds of
the sale; contemplates in the sixth section a further provision to be made by
Congress, and directs that all certificates entitled to such provisions, shall
be entitled to the benefits of this Act upon transferring to the state all the
benefits the creditor was to enjoy from the provision. The 8th of May following
the loan was extended by Congress upon the same terms, and of course included
all certificates that were subscribable to the first. This Act of April 1792
directing all certificates to be paid that were subscribable of course redeemed
them. The New-Loans have already been proved to be subscribable to this loan;
and are therefore within the provisions of this Act. That they came within the
view of the Legislature at the time, and were designed to be redeemed, will
appear from the following considerations. The Legislature knew they were in
circulation. They had passed laws relieving those who had lost them. They had
endeavored to prevent their subscription to the first loan, and promote their
redemption from the fund provided. In this design they had succeeded so far as
to redeem the greater quantity; the whole amount now in circulation not
exceeding fifty thousand pounds, a sum comparatively small. Although interest was
not now paying, it was accruing, and the arrear becoming great. Though the
Continental certificates were a fund for their redemption, yet the creditor
could not be compelled to redeem them in that way. The year 1796 was
approaching when they were to be paid agreeably to contract. The extension of
the first loan was contemplated in this Act, as the measure most probable,
which they knew would include them. In fine, every argument that applies to
prove the necessity of redeeming any part of the public debt, applies with
equal force in favor of the redemption of the New-Loans.

The third article charges him with not consulting with the Governor, nor the
Register-General; nor discriminating the certificates on the abstracts, by
which he declared them assumable, nor on the certificate by which he declared
them redeemable, by which means the checks of office were broken, and the other
officers deluded into error.

Both loans were opened with the concurrence and approbation of our
Legislature, who promoted subscriptions of state debt by laws enacted for the
purpose. It of course became the duty of the officers of this state who had it
in their power to facilitate the subscription by their assistance. Mr. Smith
the conductor of the loan in this state, applied to the defendant before the
opening of the first loan (see page 271) to give him a description of the
several sorts of certificates subscribable, and such checks as would enable him
to conduct the business with security. The defendant was the only person to
apply to, he having issued all the certificates of the state, and having all
the checks in his possession, he accordingly gives him the required information
and at the same time his opinion that the New-Loans were subscribable. None can
presume he had any interest at this time in giving this opinion, as the loan
closed without any subscription of New-Loans being made.

After the closing of the loan; in all the conferences which took place on the
subject of New-Loans, by the direction of the Governor, and which were reported
to him, the defendant continues of the same opinion; no exception is made to
its propriety, and all matters rested in this way, till the opening of the
second loan.

Before the passing of the Act of April 1792, the defendant opposed that plan
of redemption and proposed another to the Governor in which New-Loans are
expressly provided for. He deprecated the evil consequences which that Act in
its original comprehensive form, would probably occasion, and opposed its
passing by speaking to members of both Houses on the subject, and pointing them
out, (see page 279 to 286.) The Act was afterward narrowed down to include
certificates only. Had he designed to speculate on the Act, it would have been
his interest to encourage its passing, or at least not to oppose it; after it
became a law he was as much entitled to its benefits as another citizen.

On the opening of the second loan it was discovered, that non-assumable
certificates had been subscribed, and the owners in consequence deprived of
them until the closing of the loan, at which time they would be returned. To
prevent this inconvenience in future, the defendant undertook to examine the
certificates brought for subscription, and if they were genuine and assumable,
to mark them so. His conduct in this transaction was intended to oblige and
assist all parties, it was an undertaking of great trouble, and no profit to
himself; the information given, was for the use of Mr. Smith and the creditors
who might rely upon it or not. There was no law forbidding such proceeding. It
was further in advancement of the interest and laws of the State. The mode
pursued was the dictate of the moment, the words "genuine and assumable" being
sometimes written on the abstract, at other times on the certificate, and in
both cases signed with the initials of his name. The matter was notorious. His
opinion openly given. No objections advanced against it, and the loan closed
without any idea of criminality in his conduct being entertained by any body.

With the form of the abstracts the defendant had no concern, That was settled
by the officers of the United States. Blank forms were printed for general
convenience, and printed forms were generally used. As all the certificates
assumable were equally so; there could be no occasion to discriminate on the
abstracts, their several kinds. If it had been necessary as the information was
for Mr. Smith he would have requested it. It was not the duty of the defendant
to do it, as he had merely undertaken, and that voluntarily to declare them
genuine and assumable; and it would require more of his time than his official
engagements would permit. Since all certificates subscribable were equally
redeemable, there could be no occasion to discriminate on the abstract on the
transfer to the State their several kinds, because they were to be equally
paid. If it were, the Register-General should have done it, as they came before
him in the first instance, and it is his duty to register the accounts of the
State. After his examination, they were presented to the Comptroller General
accompanied with a demand on the State for payment. The abstracts themselves
afforded every information that a discrimination could, for the dates of
interest marked on the abstracts, distinguished the several kinds of
certificates; the interest on the funded debts commencing on one fixed date,
that on the depreciation on another, and that of the New-Loans on various and
mixed dates, all of them however distinct from the other two. There could have
been no design in the defendant to conceal any circumstance relating to the
New-Loans from the Register-General as they had had a conversation on the
subject, in the course of which they both concurred in opinion that the
New-Loans were subscribable and redeemable, and the Register-General afterward
passed the accounts knowing them to contain New-Loans.

His own subscription being openly made in his own name, confutes the idea of
any clandestine design, and strongly shows his thorough conviction of being
right in his opinion. Had he supposed the contrary and wished to deceive, how
easy would it have been to divide the sum into small parcels, and procure other
persons to subscribe for him in their own names. The idea that he meant to
deceive until he obtained possession of the money which seems to be advanced in
this article, is too futile to have any weight and was perhaps introduced more
from inadvertence than design. Detection would eventually be certain; and the
consequences of that detection would be disappointment and disgrace. His own
subscription was not hurried through the offices, it remained the usual time with
the Register-General who might, and probably did, examine every item.

No checks of office have been broken. No official consultation is required by
law in any instance; nor can there legally, be any interference of the Governor
except upon a difference of opinion between the Comptroller and Register in
which case he is called in to decide: Here was no such difference of opinion
and of course there could be no interference of the Governor. The Governor also
knew from the defendant's former communications, and his late proposal for new
modelling the debt, made at the time the Act was before the Legislature, that
he considered the New-Loans as a debt and at a future time to be redeemed. The
certificate presented to the Governor on which his warrant was grounded was in
the usual form, there could therefore be no concealment implied in it. The
accounts which were presented and adjusted and in consequence of which
adjustment this certificate was drawn, were also presented in the usual form
and therefore would not authorize any deviation from the usual course of
proceeding. Any cause that would require a discrimination of the New-Loans
would also require a discrimination of the funded debt and the depreciation
certificates. Yet no such discrimination has been made and no complaint has
arisen in consequence.

If any interference in the second loan by the defendant was wrong from
principle it was equally wrong in the first loan, for the two loans were
precisely upon the same footing. Yet no fault has been found with him for it;
and he has only been criminal according to the articles for acting between the
10th of April, and 1st of August 1792, the principle is therefore admitted to
be right and the execution only wrong.

But if it be (as we hope we have proved) that the New-Loans were subscribable
and redeemable, that all the proceedings on his part have been regular and
legal; he has acted in every instance right and is a subject of commendation
rather than blame.

Even on the supposition of his having formed a wrong opinion; that opinion has
been proved to be formed, when there was no interest to induce him to form it.
To be advanced upon every public occasion that required it. To be persisted in
and mentioned at a time when a selfish interest would induce a concealment; and
we cannot look for a change, when it had received sanction, from time, from
meeting with no opposition of sentiment, from the concurrence of others in the
same, and when nothing additional arose to occasion an alteration. Even then
upon the supposition the opinion on examination shall be found erroneous; it
was innocently formed and cannot subject its author to the pains and penalties
of an impeachment.

The following positions then have it is hoped been fully established. That the
New-Loan certificates continued a State debt notwithstanding the Act of March
1789, which did not contemplate their destruction, and which could not effect
it had it been its design. That they were subscribable to the loans of the
United States and known and acknowledged to be so by the Legislature itself.
Than they were redeemable by the Act of April 1792, and designed to be so by
the Legislature that passed the Act. That no checks of office have been broken,
of course the defendant has broken none. That his conduct throughout has been
open, candid and sincere, and strictly conformable to law in every particular.
That his opinion on the subject is right and so innocent in its formation that
had it been wrong he could not be amenable to punishment in this prosecution.

In the minutes of the House of Representatives the following entry is recorded:

"In conformity to the resolutions of the 25th February last, the House
resolved itself into a committee of the whole, in order to attend the trial of
John Nicholson, Comptroller General.

"The Speaker quitted the chair and Mr. Wynkoop was placed therein.

"The committee of the whole then proceeded to the Senate-chamber for that
purpose.

"After some time,

"The committee of the whole returned.

"The Chairman left the chair and the Speaker resumed it.

"The Chairman then informed the House that the committee of the whole had
attended the trial of John Nicholson, Comptroller General.

"The committee appointed to manage the trial of the articles of impeachment
against John Nicholson, Comptroller General, reported that they had made
further progress."

Tenth day of the trial. MONDAY, March 10.
MR. RAWLE.
Mr. Speaker, and Gentlemen of the Senate,
I HAVE the honor of being of counsel for the House of Representatives of the
commonwealth of Pennsylvania who are the exclusive Representatives of the
People of this State, and they found it their indispensible duty to execute
their constitutional right of bringing before the Senate, in this instance, the
exclusive Judges, a public officer who has long superintended the finances of
the State, under a serious charge.

John Nicholson, Comptroller General of Pennsylvania is accused of having
violated the confidence and betrayed the trust reposed in him. Upon common
cases the hand of the law is directed by the ordinary courts of criminal
jurisdiction. The Senate is constitutionally assembled to decide upon a cause
in which the interests of a People are involved to which the common limits of
practical law are scarcely applicable.

A cause which requires the more consideration as it is the more rare, since
public trusts are confided but to a few, and since violation of these trusts
are happily uncommon, the present is recorded as only the first under the
present Constitution of Pennsylvania, every g^^^ citizen will wish it may be
the last.

To constitute an offense there must be a concurrence of fact and of intention.

The errors of the judgment cannot be criminally punished.

But when by the aid of testimony we probe the heart, when motives unlawful
from the station and the opportunities of the agent are already proved to be
the excitements to action -- then the act is closed in the list of offenses,
and the voice of society calls for its judicial animadversion.

Of offenses there are two general classes, one is found in the breach of any
positive law, municipal institutions, or statutes.

The other in the breach of a law not of human institution but impressed by
nature on the heart.

The penalty of the first may be incurred without any criminal intentions, but
the other depends upon the will, ignorance may at times occasion a lapse into
the first, the other is known to all men at all times, in all places.

The defendant's counsel have anticipated another very obvious division of the
question; that is, that the Comptroller acted under a proper or mistaken
construction of the law. If the latter, corrupt motives must be plainly
charged, and clearly proved.

If we show that the defendant made a profit against law, the impeachment is
supported. If we show that impelled by improper motives, by artifice and
dexterity he evaded, although he did not break the law, it is equally supported,
and the commonwealth is entitled to judgment against him.

Something has been said as to the manner of framing the charges.

It has been stated only to be waved, and at the same time the Senate is
informed that the defendant does not well know what he is to answer, you're
told that he will go fully into his answer.

If we pass this over we hear of it as a defeat. If we confute the objection we
are told they did not mean to rely on it.

But we aver the charges are exhibited in the authorized and customary form,
that the minute certainties of indictments are not requisite, that nothing is
intentionally dark or tending to deceive, and that as in some instances of
indictments the defendant may require a specification, these are framed
conformably to well established precedents in another country. (Here Mr. Rawle
quoted 2 vol. Woodeson, page 605, and Foster's reports of Crown Laws, 389, 390,
to show that in barratry the defendant is not compelled to answer until a
specification of the charges is exhibited; and said, such was not requisite in
impeachments, and therefore concluded it was only want of form and accuracy had
been attempted to be shown; Mr. Lewis interrupted him, and said, It is not to
the form but to the substance of the articles of impeachment that he intended
to take exception.)

The accusation is, in substance divided into six different and substantial
heads which Mr. Rawle then enumerated including the 5th and 6th articles in one.

1. Declaring New-Loan certificates to be subscribable.

2. Declaring them to be redeemable.

3. Deceiving the Governor.

4. By the aid of such deception drawing money out of a fund otherwise
appropriated.

5. Buying certificates actually delivered to him for exchange.

6. Converting to his own use certificates actually exchanged.

The formal arrangement of these charges is comprised in seven articles of
impeachment. In all them he is charged with criminal motives, with the
Commission of a misdemeanor; and if the evidence is adequate to the charges
there is no doubt but the result will be a judgment against the
Comptroller General.

FIRST ARTICLE
Was read by Mr. Rawle in a short and abridged manner, retaining only the
principal data, such as facts, and dates; omitting the useless appendages of
amplification.

The general charges are thus opened with the statement of a fact resulting
from the plain and obvious text of the law and finally reducible to this single
point: Whether there existed a Legislative power in the country.

If the Legislative power resided in the General Assembly, and, if the Act of
27th March 1789 was passed by that General Assembly we have then only to
enquire whether it did not abolish the former engagements of the State and
reduce the certificates to mere receipts for other certificates.

Without any efforts of ingenuity, or having recourse to messages, votes,
resolutions and other proceedings of of the Legislature from their minutes, we
are led to acknowledge the affirmative from the existence of the Act of March
27, 1789, and to ascertain with accuracy the operation of it, we are led to
consider the nature of New-Loans previous to the passing of the law.

The Act of March 1, 1786, depended upon the circumstances of the public at the
time, the state possessed the impost, and appropriated it to pay the interest
of the reputed quota of the State debt incurred during the late war.

In the year 1785 the Legislature affected by the distresses and yielding to
the clamours of many of their own citizens, creditors of the United States,
finding itself possessed of a great and growing fund arising from the imposts
-- by its Act of 16th March 1785, appropriated such a proportion of that fund
with the arrearages of the taxes as should amount to L. 123,932, the estimated
quota of this State of the annual interest of the federal debt.

This Act though little noticed, yet deserves no small degree of preliminary
attention.

13th section. The State-Treasurer is to pay that sum annually to the
Continental Loan-officer.

11th section. Moneys arising from imposts and arrearages of taxes so far as
released from former appropriations are respectively and expressly appropriated.

Having thus observed, that, this Act, the parent of the New-Loan Act, could
not in its outset be considered as otherwise than temporary, for the chief part
of the impost being the principal fund, remained only the conditional property
of the State; Pennsylvania having by her Act of 23d September, 1783, acceded to
the requisition of Congress in regard to the 5 per cent. and the annual tax as
soon as thirteen States should accede thereto.

To this reference appears in the second and third sections of the Act of 16th
March 1785.

In the 4th section, one or more have not complied.

In the 5th section, considerable time may elapse.

In the 6th section, citizens labor under hardships.

In the 7th section, relief to them, and to accord with such measures as the
United States in their wisdom may adopt.

By this it is apparent that the provision made by Pennsylvania was temporary,
whereas the United States did resolve for 25 years. The declarations of the
intentions of our Legislature contained in the last recited sections are
expressly affected by the 18th section, in which the provisional limitation of
the Act is contained, and this express designation of the original fund
confutes one of the arguments of the counsel who opened the defense, (Mr.
Tilghman.)

I need not enter into messages or resolutions to discover the signification of
this provision; it was intended and declared to be temporary and conditional,
and as such the Legislature has always acted upon it.

We are told it is of no use to the creditors out of what fund this debt is to
be paid, whereas the fund is held out and the party accepts it on the faith of
that fund, and that only.

One of the Managers, (Mr. Morgan) has stated that Congress was dissatisfied,
(see page 211) this leads to consider the Act of March 1, 1786.

The articles of Confederation gave no power to provide the necessary funds for
the payment of the public debts. Hope and view on one side, and the actual
state of things on the other. For these reasons the Act of March 1, 1786
passed: --

First, The Act is expressly occasioned by the resolution of Congress of the
24th of September 1785, if the resolution had not passed the Act would not have
been made. (Mr. Rawle read the preamble to the Act 1st March, 1786.)

Secondly, The aggregate conditionally assigned by the Act of 16th March 1785
is the only fund appropriated by the Act of March 1, 1786.

Thirdly, There is no repeal of the conditional clause in Act of the 16th March
1785 by the Act of March 1, 1786; the spirit is the same, only differing in
mode, and form from the Act March 16th 1785.

Fourthly, There is no assumption of the principal, for the receivability of
the certificates in the Land-office was common to almost all kinds of
Continental certificates.

The difficulties of the country increasing, the necessity of a common head
became more apparent, the Federal Constitution under which we now so happily
live, was formed and recommended the 17th September, 1787. It was adopted by
Pennsylvania the 13th of December following, and by nine States on the 21st of
June, 1788. The Act of 27th March, 1789 adheres to the original contract, it
does not deviate from it. The Legislature of Pennsylvania on the 27th of March,
1789, found the Constitution thus adopted and ready to be put in execution, it
consequently found the fund liable to be withdrawn, it found the United States
able to do justice to her own creditors. The people their constituents who
surely included the creditors had assented to the subtraction of the fund from
their first application. In adherence therefore to the original contract, they
confirmed the payment of interest during the intermediate interval from the
first steps taken by Pennsylvania to the cessation of the fund: They terminated
the payment from that time afterward.

In the great scale upon which this ought to be considered, the difference of a
few months is not to be regarded: The fund ceased the 1st August, 1789, four
months after the passing of the Act, when the General Government took place.

If the Act of March, 1789 was inactive and wanted efficacy until that time, it
then received it, the original contract was terminated. After that, none who
agreed to the federal Constitution can oppose this construction. This subject
was ably handled by the young gentleman (Mr. Gibson) who spoke last, whose
talents exhibited on this occasion are an honor to himself, and promise to be
an ornament to his country.

The Act of March 1789 repealed part of the law of March 1786, the law of 1786
repealed that of 1785.

After the passing of the Act of March 1789 nothing of the Act of 1786 remained
except what related to the payment of interest: For by that Act three things
were to be done, 1. Receiving certificates on loan; 2. Delivering out New-Loans
in exchange for others. 3. The payment of interest; the loan closed with the
Act of March 1789, after that time no certificates could be issued,
certificates issued by the Comptroller General after that period are
unwarranted by law. Issuing was unnecessary, the Act of March 1789 is explained
and arguments against our position are answered by this explanation.

The Act of March 1786 was only a loan, it is so declared in every part of the
bill. The obligation arising from a loan is ended with the restitution of the
thing loaned. A. lends B. certificates to be paid the 1st of May, B. returns
the certificates, the loan is ended. Therefore the State is discharged on the
return of the Continental certificates, (Mr. Rawle then adverted to the
certificates and the length of time, and it was acknowledged by Pennsylvania as
a loan to be returned by the first March 1796, or sooner if convenient, and
then the whole contract to be at an end, the four year's interest being paid.)

Sir, It cannot be supposed the Legislature of Pennsylvania intended to go
farther in 1786 than they meant to go in 1785.

In the summer of 1786 the Convention met at Annapolis; on the 30th December
same year delegates were appointed to the General Convention; at this time a
federal Union was expected; the answer returned by the Assembly, 27th December
1786, to Congress is not surprising, (see page 319, 320).

We do then aver, that the Act of March 1786 was only a loan, little comment
need be made on the enacting clauses of the law, as the only engagement
pretended was not to discharge the principal, but to advance the interest on
account of the United States: The Act of March 1789 in unequivocal terms puts
an end to that part of the contract, and therefore the New-Loans were not
subscribable to the loan opened by Congress. He certified them to be
subscribable, we aver the contrary. The public debt of the United States in
June 1790 was divided into three classes, 1. Foreign, 2. Domestic, and 3. State
debt.

The foreign debt was something more than ten millions: The domestic debt was
about forty or fifty millions. Of the State debts an estimate cannot easily be
made. To the question what debts were intended to be assumed by Congress,
circumstanced as the Union then was, it was proposed to assume the State debts;
and to the question, What were the State debts? the answer is obvious, debts at
that time due by the State.

Mr. Rawle then read the 13th section of the Act of Congress 4th August 1790,
entitled "An Act making provision for the debt of the United States," the sum
assumed being 21,500,000 dollars. The two general heads of SERVICES and
SUPPLIES describe the consideration, no other certificates admissible; and the
expression in the Act, "debts by them respectively owing," therefore a debt of
that kind would embarrass individual States if the fund was withdrawn;
Pennsylvania had then a peculiar and proper debt, and unless the vacant land
and the Continental certificates had afforded a fund, she would be considerably
embarrassed, the magnitude of her debt is not easily ascertained now, if
understood at first; the holders had no other to look to, setting aside the
bills of credit: the amount of funded and unfunded depreciation certificates
was about four or five hundred thousand pounds of our money, these were
admitted into the general class as being issued for services or supplies in
prosecuting the war and for the expenses incurred during the general conflict.

The New-Loans were not within this description, they were only available to
withdraw the Continental certificates, and four year's interest; this is the
fact, so far as we can gather the evidences of the intentions of the
Legislature, and as far as we can collect a knowledge of our finances from the
laws of our country.

The commonwealth was under no obligation to redeem the New-Loans.

Certificates, therefore originally loaned were divided into two classes.

1. Those which were the property of the State from the New-Loans having been
laid out in the purchase of land.

2. Those which were to be presented to the holders presenting the New-Loan
certificate for re-exchange.

By the Act of 7th April 1791, no officer of your commonwealth by the Acts of
your Legislature could subscribe State debts. Her Continental certificates were
an encumbrance to her until the New-Loan certificates were brought forward on
the domestic loan.

Two days afterward, the 9th April 1791, the purpart Act was passed by the
Legislature; if the State of Pennsylvania considered New-Loans as a debt, and
subscribable she would have included them in that law. The Act of 30th March
1791 by which the Treasurer is directed to subscribe, refers to and depends
upon the provision of the Act 1st April 1790. By the Act of April 1, 1790 it
had been directed that they should be deposited with the State-Treasurer: could
he part from them without the order of the Legislature? It was not till the
30th March 1791 that an application was made of them. Then they were
subscribed, not to the State, but to the domestic loan.

By this exposition it is manifest that the law of the 27th March 1789 repealed
every former provision, and that the New-Loan certificates were only a demand
to get back the Continental certificates and for equalizing the interest for
four years.

I shall not consider the Constitution of the United States, so far as relates
to the Acts of a State with its own citizens; no contract was impaired, no ex
post facto law had been passed; it is not necessary on our part to introduce
any consideration about it.

Yet in a charge of an highly criminal nature some extenuation is sought in the
endeavor to establish that this was not a single construction of the law; but
that others, whose judgments were not perverted by any corrupt motives, were of
the same opinion; that the same opinion was entertained by the principal
officers of the United States' Treasury. If our construction is right, contrary
opinions are erroneous; but had he, with all the light that ought to have been
communicated to him, held the same opinion, what shelter can the misconduct of
one officer find in the error of another. It is not uncommon to justify the
culpable transactions of some by the erroneous judgments of other individuals;
if they do not mean this as an extenuation, it is intended as a justification,
if not designed as one, or the other, it ought not to be brought forward at all.

Mr. Rawle then asked, whether the opinion of the Secretary of the United
States, a most respectable officer, should be a justification and a proof of
the innocence of the defendant, whereas the Secretary renounced his former
opinion on being better informed, this information ought to have been furnished
by the Comptroller General. This opinion of the Secretary should not be
depended upon, inasmuch as he renounced the same on better information.

Mr. Rawle then read, commented, and made remarks on the circular letter of Mr.
A. Hamilton to the Governors of the respective States, (see page 275-6). Then
on letter Dallas to Nicholson, (page 276) -- then on letter (page 102-3) --
then letter Dallas to Nicholson (page 220) -- then letter Mr. Nicholson to
Governor (page 220-1-2) -- then on letter Mr. Dallas to Mr. Nicholson, (page
277) -- then on letter Mr. Nicholson to Mr. Hamilton, (page 277) -- then on
letter Mr. Nicholson to Mr. Hamilton, (page 278).

So far as these communications extend, it is apparent from the evidence or
testimony of the Secretary (see his testimony page 287-8-9) that no information
of the repealing law of the 27th March 1789 was ever brought before him in a
"prominent point of view." When that was known, an arrangement immediately took
place and the result is known; -- Mr. Rawle then read the letter from Mr.
Hamilton to Mr. Dallas, (page 76-7-8-9).

It is well known that the Comptroller General was the only officer of the
commonwealth, who had communicated with the Secretary of the Treasury on this
subject; -- Mr. Rawle then read the following letter: --

"SIR, "Philadelphia, July 29, 1793.
"IN order to enable me to communicate to the Legislature of this State, at
their next session in August a complete statement of the public finances, I
find it necessary to request, that you will decide upon the question, Whether
the New-Loan certificates of Pennsylvania are within the assumption of the Act
of Congress? If the certificates are within the assumption the State will be
entitled to the evidence of the debt, for the amount of those, which after
being assigned to her, were subscribed to the loan, but if they are not within
the assumption they must of course be returned.

"An explanation upon this subject is likewise necessary, to enable the
Attorney General to institute a suit which was directed at the late session of
the Legislature to be brought, for recovering the amount of the New-Loan
certificates declared by the Comptroller General of Pennsylvania to be
assumable under the Act of Congress, and redeemable under the Act of
Pennsylvania. I am, etc.

THOMAS MIFFLIN."

ALEX. HAMILTON, Esquire Secretary Treasury.

Mr. Rawle then read the letter from Mr. Hamilton to the Governor, (page 218,
219).

The foregoing letters were commented upon in a suitable manner by Mr. Rawle,
and he added; --

It is then clear that the New-Loans were never stated by the Comptroller or
Register-General as an existing State debt after the Act of the 27th March 1789
-- Notwithstanding all this we find the Comptroller General forgetting his
official duty, and in 1792 certifying these New-Loans to be genuine and
assumable; the large abstract is not certified by Mr. Nicholson to be genuine
and assumable; but the Senate well recollects, that the end for which it was
intended was visible, the 30th of June was the last day of subscription, the
certificates of John Oldden were subscribed by the Comptroller General as late
as the 9th of July, altering the date to hit the purposes, when the laws would
not warrant the redemption of any; his omission of certifying genuine and
assumable in his own case is a proof of more increased dexterity, than any
excuse can be a defense.

I trust the first article of impeachment is fully supported, the motives which
render these transactions so culpable, and the inference of these motives shall
be considered hereafter.

THE SECOND ARTICLE.
In the preceding article of impeachment a charge of practices indirectly, and
consequently pernicious to Pennsylvania have been comprised; in this we trace
the same passion in direct opposition with her laws, and operating most
immediately and unequivocally to her disadvantage.

Here again the prosecution commences with an averment of a fact for which we
only pray the candid investigation of the law: It is averred that New-Loans
were not specified and could not be contemplated as objects of redemption; that
they were not specified requires only a perusal of the Act.

(The second section of the Act of 10th April 1792 was then read.)

That the New-Loan certificates could not be contemplated by any fair
unprejudiced and unbiassed mind is not difficult to be established; that they
are not mentioned in the second section is apparent; as they were not included
in the second section, the sixth section ought not to be pressed into their
service as an auxiliary.

The loans on the part of the United States were directed to be opened on the
first of October 1790, and to continue open until the 30th September 1791.

Pennsylvania was then possessed of a large portion of United States' debt,
which the Treasurer was directed to subscribe by the 30th March 1791: It was
believed that Pennsylvania would be a creditor of the Union.

(Mr. Rawle glanced at the testimony of Mr. Donnaldson, which see last
paragraph, page 292,) this has been stated by Mr. Gibson, (see page 334.)

It was doubted whether the balance due to this commonwealth would be
punctually paid, as the subscription of every dollar of her own debt was an
assumption of the payment of it by the United States, it was considered as ha^
^nterest that the State creditors should subscribe. (...) was contemplated that
she would otherwise remain encumbered with her own claims, at the same time
that she might be an hopeless creditor of the Union; but as the manner of
funding the State debt would not have yielded to the State creditor a benefit
commensurate with that ensuing to the State, as she was relieved from the
payment of 6 per cents. by a measure which yielded to them only 4 per cent.; an
Act was passed the 9th of April 1791 inviting her own creditors to accede to
the United States' loan by engaging to compensate them for their loss. This Act
had its effect, subscriptions took place to the amount of L. 252,697: And
purpart certificates were issued to the amount of L. 136,543.

In December 1791 the Legislature beheld with satisfaction the wealth and
prosperity of the State, differing from the author of the plan of finance, she
passed the Act of the 10th of April 1792 -- the State being then only
encumbered with the interest on funded and unfunded depreciation debt, funded
debt, dollar money and purparts.

Far from thinking a public debt, attended with sufficient advantages, either
necessary to procure her importance in the Union, or to attach her own citizens
to her interests.

To counterbalance these inconveniences, they determined to make use of the
means to relieve her encumbrances at once, they resolved to sell so much of her
3 per cent. stock at 12 shillings in the pound, or L.60 per cent. as would
discharge all her debts: It was proposed by the Legislature fairly to purchase
the subscriptions of those of her own State creditors mentioned in the second
article who would subscribe; the law itself justifies this construction, and
manifestly negatives the construction attempted to be given to the sixth
section. In the law, as it now stands without any alteration, the sixth section
is a proviso to the second section, this we have in the testimony of Mr.
Gallatin (see page 295-6-7-8.) The fifth section directs the payment by the
State-Treasurer on or before the first of July same year; the 6th section goes
on to state that they shall be entitled to the nominal value from the Treasurer
upon condition that they shall subscribe to the loan, and transfer to the use
of the State-Treasurer.

Now, no other law exists authorizing the State-Treasurer to pay the nominal
value, and no other mode of effectuating the payment but by warrants drawn by
the Governor, payable out of this fund: The Governor derives his authority from
the fifth section in reference to the second; but no additional clause, no
authority is given to draw in execution of the sixth.

It follows therefore that the intention was, that, if the loan re-opened, the
second section was only to be executed as the parties should comply with the
sixth section.

The seventh section more clearly exhibits the views of the Legislature; it
requires the holders of every certificate intended to be redeemed to apply
before the first of July, and after that time all interest shall cease, but if
no sale, nor notification, interest shall continue: Now it is notorious that
New-Loans did not bear an interest of 6 per cent.; it is therefore consequently
obvious they were not included in this provision: Yet this is expressly
extended to all the certificates intended to be redeemed; it follows New-Loans
were not intended to be redeemed. If a member of the Legislature was to be
asked by one of his constituents, "What did you mean by this Act?" the answer
is obvious, "Read the seventh section."

They contend that the sixth is a separate and absolute provision; if so,
nothing is more true, than what proves too much, proves nothing at all.

Read it in this point of view. (The sixth section then read.) What is its
effect? An engagement that they will pay to every holder of State certificates
from New- Hampshire to Georgia the nominal value of his certificates!

No peculiar mention of the State creditors of Pennsylvania!

A construction liable and subject to such observations ought to be rejected,
and must be laid aside.

The sixth section don't control to the exclusion of, but is a condition
annexed to the second section.

Here it is difficult to reconcile the conduct and knowledge of the
Comptroller General with Mr. Gallatin's communication, (see his testimony, page
295, etc.) as Comptroller General it forms no matter of exculpation that he was
able to catch the State in an error, although a third person might take
advantage, Mr. Nicholson, as Comptroller General ought not to catch her in this
error in which she did not intend to fall.

THE THIRD ARTICLE.
This article consists of four parts or members.

1. Mr. Nicholson did not consult the Register-General.

2. Nor commune with the Governor.

3. Nor discriminate in his certification what certificates were subscribable.

4. Nor did the Comptroller General certify in his certification, what
certificates were redeemable.

Three of these charges are proved, and if one is proved, that is sufficient to
convict the defendant. (Mr. Rawle read the letter from the Secretary of the
commonwealth to the Comptroller and Register-General, page 232.)

In consequence of this letter the two officers joined in a report to the
Governor, which included the estimate approved by the Governor; which estimate
is now lost; this estimate (now supposed as aforesaid to be lost) embraced all
the debts of the commonwealth which were to be redeemed, not a partial estimate
of them but every species which were to be redeemed. (Mr. Rawle then read the
following letters.)

"SIR, April 16, 1792.
"CONFORMABLY to your desire expressed in the Secretary's letter of the
thirteenth instant we have considered the Act therein referred to, and as there
appears to be no discretionary power to suspend the operation of the Act and
the redemption of the debt by the first of July next except for the want of
purchasers of 3 per cent. stock at twelve shillings per pound at least, and as
the notification to the creditors to receive payment must take place by the
first of May next in case of such operation, it seems necessary between this
and that time to try the market in order to form a determination from the
offers that may be made: under this impression, we would beg leave to propose
that we should forthwith invite proposals to such amount as purchasers may
choose to offer on or before the 25th inst. payable and deliverable by the 30th
April instant.

"The result of these offers and the extent of them will enable your excellency
to judge whether a sufficient sum and price may be relied on by the first of
July next to warrant a call on the creditors to apply for payment.

JOHN NICHOLSON, JOHN DONNALDSON."

His excellency THOMAS MIFFLIN, Esquire Governor of Pennsylvania.

"Philadelphia, 27th April, 1792. "GENTLEMEN,
"IT is evident that the Legislature intended to make a general settlement with
the creditors of the State upon the principles expressed in the Act of the 10th
instant, and consequently a partial sale of stock, or a partial commutation of
State debt for stock, will not justify my issuing a notification, which, by the
terms of the law, must be addressed indiscriminately to all the holders of the
specified certificates and bills of credit, requiring them to comply with the
conditions of the redemption. But if the offers to purchase stock and to
commute the debt at the rate prescribed, shall, together, be commensurate to
the aggregate amount of the certificates and bills of credit, which are to be
redeemed, I conceive that, without violating the spirit of the Act of Assembly,
the object of the arrangement may be attained as well in this way as by an
entire sale of stock.

"You will be pleased, therefore, to extend the period for receiving proposals,
and to accept all that may be made in either of these forms, until the
requisite sum is obtained. But in the case of a commutation, there must be an
actual deposit of the State debt; in the case of a purchase the cash must be
paid, or secured to be paid beyond the possibility of disappointment; and in
both cases, the period of executing the contract must be referred to the time
which the notification shall limit. I am, etc.

THOMAS MIFFLIN."

To the Comptroller General and Register-General of Pennsylvania.

(Mr. Rawle then read the letter signed John Nicholson, which ought to have
been signed by Mr. Donnaldson also, page 224, he then added:)

Accordingly the Comptroller and Register-General joined in a report already
read, dated 30th April 1792, (see page 225-6.) This letter encloses the names
of the purchasers for the stock amounting to the sum of 986,000 dollars. The
former estimate is said to be lost; this document was general, not confined to
the second section as they contend. Mr. Dallas's testimony will vouch for this,
(see it page 231, etc.) who declared no verbal communication had passed between
him and the Comptroller or Register-General.

But it is said that no verbal communication was necessary, except when
differences of opinion between the Comptroller and Register-General had
occurred, and when they differed in opinion; How? When only one officer knew
the transaction.

The Comptroller General and Register-General could never disagree because the
Comptroller General had not communicated with the Register-General.

The testimony of Mr. Dallas and Mr. Donnaldson confirm that no New-Loans were
included in the estimate formerly rendered, and now supposed to be lost, nor no
unfunded depreciation, the second estimate is a proof of this, which is
declared by the Register-General and Secretary of the Commonwealth to be
substantially the same with that which was lost.

(Mr. Rawle then read the following letter.)

"Secretary's office, Philadelphia, 3 May, 1792. "GENTLEMEN,
"IN consequence of the doubt, which you have suggested, I am directed by the
Governor to inform you, that when he assented to the idea of the State debts
being received on the sales of stock, it was upon this principle, that it
should be considered and estimated as cash, at its nominal value; beyond which
nominal value, and the rates in particular cases prescribed by the Act of
Assembly, he is not authorized, upon the redemption, nor, consequently, through
the medium of a commutation to liquidate the demands upon the public.

"A fund commensurate to the whole amount of the debt to be redeemed, must be
established, before the Governor can issue his notification; and it is
certainly immaterial, whether that fund is satisfied by specie payments, or by
deposits as cash, in the public securities, for which the specie is to be
raised: but the Governor conceives, that it would be contrary to the spirit of
the law, to an impartial distribution of justice, and to the public interest,
were the proposals to be accepted, so that the payments by way of commutation
should be considered as cash, in order to entitle the parties to a transfer of
the three per cent. stock, and also as a deposit in order, to entitle them to
interest until the expiration of the time, which the notice shall limit for the
general redemption.

"By an arrangement of this nature, a discrimination is not only introduced
between the purchasers of the stock for cash, and those who purchase with State
debt, to the great benefit of the Latter class; but it will likewise operate
with similar inequality in relation to all those State creditors, who cannot
have the opportunity of settling their claims by way of commutation; the State,
too, will not only lose the current interest on the 3 per cent. stock; but be
precluded from the advantage of an immediate settlement with such of her
creditors as shall be disposed to anticipate the period, for which the
notification must issue.

Such have uniformly been the Governor's sentiments; but, if by any means they
have been misunderstood, he would rather relinquish all advantage from the
present proposals than suffer any cause of complaint to exist: He requests,
therefore, that you will be pleased to confer with the parties, on the subject;
and to inform them, that they may now make their election, either to abide by
their proposals upon the terms which I have stated, or to withdraw them. I am,
etc.

A. J. DALLAS."

To the Comptroller General and Register-General of Pennsylvania.

This last letter shows no particular sale in contemplation, the sale of stock
was to be commensurate to the whole amount of debt to be redeemed.

(Mr. Rawle then quoted the Act of Assembly of the 4th April 1792, page 218,
which directs the manner of settling the public accounts;) by this it is
manifest that it was the duty of the Comptroller General to have informed the
Register-General, it was their joint duty to draw, and certify the fund, that
the Governor might draw his warrant on the State-Treasurer with propriety. Nay,
they were to certify jointly: No excuse can be brought in justification of his
conduct for keeping the Governor ignorant of the transaction. This is a new
species of defense set up by the counsel for the Comptroller General. I am
willing to relinquish such parts of the members of the present article, as
respect any matter about castings and calculations, and dates of interest on
the face of the abstracts: but the fourth member, that the Comptroller General
did not certify in his certification to the Governor what certificates were
redeemable, is a serious charge. Some debts were to be redeemed by the Act of
the 10th of April 1792 -- What State debts? Why! only those debts which were
included in the estimate which had been furnished by the two officers, the
Comptroller and Register-General. -- Here it may be necessary to advert to his
own name being used; -- I answer, when the measure is concealed, no matter
about the man.

THE FOURTH ARTICLE.
This article charges the Comptroller General with a breach of the
Constitution, here no shelter can be found in the ambiguity or contradiction of
the law, it is a direct violation of a single clause in a plain and explicit
instrument; accordingly the endeavor is not to oppose but to escape the charge.

Astonishing to hear, that a warrant expressly to be paid out of a fund created
by the Act of the 10th April 1792, and actually so paid by the Treasurer, and
so reported to the Legislature by the Governor -- is to be protected from
reprehension by quartering it on another fund previously appropriated by law to
other objects, and although his warrants are expressly drawn and paid out of the
fund provided by the Act of 10th April 1792, they were drawn out of the fund
established by the Act of the 7th April 1791 -- and not out of the fund
provided by the Act of 10th April 1792.

By the Act of the 26th March 1789, L.10,000 were set apart for claims and
improvements; that this has always been considered a peculiar fund, and
appropriated to those cases which did not belong to any particular class, and
as such I shall show the sentiments of the Comptroller General upon it, in an
official statement under his own hand.

(Mr. Rawle read a part of the Comptroller's report, page 386, Minutes December
11, 1790, as follows, to wit:)

"There is another species of expense called claims, which cannot properly be
arranged under the debts of the State, and which is certain in its amount, as
it depends on the grants of the Legislature at the time, and not on accounts
adjusted upon fixed principles. The sum of L. 5,000 annually is appropriated by
Act of March 26th and 28th September 1789, and is constituted as a fund for
this purpose. It may be worthy the consideration of the Legislature, whether
such a fund is not likely to beget many improper applications, and whether,
after the State has, by an Act of limitation, barred even unsettled claims
which would have been legal, such an invitation should continue to be held out."

These claims (the defendant observed) were likely to beget "improper
applications," nothing in this provision relative to the Act of April 1791: No
New-Loans could be redeemed under that law, nor any claim on that fund.

But an unexpected effort is made to defend, which requires further
consideration, the charge is, that he caused money to be drawn from the
Treasury without a previous appropriation by law.

Not a single instance can be produced which will show, that where a warrant
has been drawn on a fund, to which it was not applicable, the same should be
paid out of the twelfth appropriation of the 7th April 1791. (Some warrants
were then produced, and read by Mr. Rawle, to establish his position, contained
in the last sentence.)

Question by Mr. Bingham to Mr. Rawle. Do you say, that the fund included in
the Act of the 26th March 1789 is embraced in the Act of April 1791?

Ans. Yes -- as far as the 12th appropriation extends.

Ques. by the same. Is the Act of March 1789 a part of the Act of April 1791?

Ans. No. By the Act of the 7th April 1791 all the revenues of the State were
collected into one mass, and formed an aggregate fund toward paying the debts
and obligations of the commonwealth, and finally to pay all warrants drawn for
claims and improvements.

It was with great propriety the warrant in favor of Mr. Rittenhouse of the
27th September 1791 was paid out of the fund for claims and improvements.

That warrants were drawn without a specification of the funds, in the case of
Dr. Hutchinson and others after verdicts in the Supreme Court: Was this
agreeable to law? In the second section of the Act of the 4th April 1792 the
duty of the Comptroller and Register are defined, where it is enacted that the
balance and fund should be certified by them to the Governor, and a warrant
should issue accordingly.

Can his conduct on this occasion be justified? Can this transaction be
pressed, as a defense, into the service of the Comptroller General?

(Mr. Lewis interrupted Mr. Rawle at this time, and desired him to produce the
warrants. Whereupon the warrant No. 14 for unfunded depreciation debt, was
read, and shown that it was not certified to be payable out of the fund of the
10th April 1792, but that it was payable per Act of the 10th April 1792, and
the following letter.)

"SIR, February 13, 1793.
"WE have the honor to enclose a statement of the certificates granted for
unfunded depreciation debt, agreeably to Act of 4th April 1792, which have been
issued since the first January 1793, and are, with, etc.

JOHN NICHOLSON, JOHN DONNALDSON."

Hon. GERARDUS WYNKOOP, Esquire Speaker of the House of Representatives of
Pennsylvania.

The statement consisted of six certificates amounting in the whole to ten
thousand five hundred and seventy-eight dollars and ten cents.

By these it was evident unfunded depreciation was not included in the estimate.

The Governor did not know that unfunded depreciation were included, nor could
it appear to him that there were any others but those directed to be redeemed
by the first estimate and expressly connected with it.

Had the conduct of the Comptroller General on these occasions been otherwise,
no impeachment would ever have lain against him.

I will reduce the remaining three articles into two as concise as possible,
the fifth and sixth I will consider together as the same evidence applies to
both.

(Mr. Rawle read the fifth and sixth articles of impeachment.)

The fifth states in general terms the final objects of the labors to which
the preceding articles refer.

That the plan of finance (which see page 280) was not laid for others, when
only L.20,000 was estimated to be out, that he purchased to so great an amount,
it must be acknowledged that he was industrious. (Mr. Rawle explained the
business respecting the certificate of Dr. Hutchinson and others, as not
connected with this business.) With regard to the sixth article of impeachment
that he subscribed for his own use the certificates received to be exchanged.

It is surprising that such a quantum of evidence has been procured. His
counsel do not deny the charge, but the inference, and contend to justify the
transaction.

That the Comptroller General led the way is apparent; 1. Mr. Oldden a
principal broker is at a loss to divine what use the defendant intended them
for. 2. Mr. Boggs certifies New-Loans rose in price, and unable to know what
for. But Messrs. Evans, Hale and Stroud have been produced to prove that the
New-Loan certificates have been taken back, after they were lodged for
re-exchange. The charge is, that the Comptroller General made proposals to
purchase, and did actually purchase from persons bringing certificates to his
office to be re-exchanged. Is this an answer to the charge? The question is not
whether on an alteration of their minds, they took back their certificates
after having lodged them with him.

But the charge is, that a steward of the public revenue is accused of having
prevented an exchange which the party was desirous to make, and which it was
his duty to accelerate, by which the State suffered a considerable loss: And
the defense is that in other instances wholly indifferent to the public, he,
and not another officer assented to the parties receiving back, at their own
request their own certificates for private purposes.

The last article is certainly of too serious and too plain a nature to be
viewed with indifference. We have Mr. M'Connell's testimony that he sold that
certificate to Mr. M'Clenachan; Mr. M'Clenachan's testimony proves that he
never sold any certificates nor had any private dealings with the
Comptroller General in his life, except the advance of some indents. That he
delivered all the certificates which he had to Mr. Nicholson; that he is of
imperfect memory that this certificate was of the number; that on the 15th
September 1790 he drew interest on this certificate. As Mr. M'Clenachan never
commuted with him, nor had any other dealings with the Comptroller, he is put
to prove how he came by this suspicious certificate.

The Comptroller General brings his books of exchanges, dates, numbers and sums
are not apparent on the face of them.

Twenty-six of these certificates united without dates, etc. make up L.26,000
which is No. 183; forty-five certificates make up L.27,000, No. 184.

Lord Mansfield observes, all evidence (Couper, 65,) is to be weighed according
to what one party can produce, and is in the power of the other to contradict.

We are not to make testimony but to find it; if any imputation is thrown on
Blair M'Clenachan, we did not select him, but his testimony should however have
this effect, that it deserves a better answer than has been yet given to it by
the Comptroller General.

This impeachment has not been precipitated, it is now almost twelve months
since it commenced; the Comptroller General has had full leisure for the
collection of official documents necessary for him: Having already taken notice
of a great part of his defense, it only remains to notice two circumstances
adduced by his counsel.

1. His innocence is to be inferred from his open and avowed sentiments at
former periods relative to the nature of New-Loans; (Mr. Rawle then adverted to
the Comptroller's letter, December 24, 1791, page 220-1-2, his letter to Mr.
Hamilton, page 278, and his letter to Mr. Mifflin, page 223-4.)

The unvaried tenor of opinion is certainly evidence of its sincerity -- but
when we find the same man, at or near the same period of time, and under the
same circumstances delivering opinions diametrically opposite, we are led to
enquire which of the two occasions required the most serious reflection.

But in the official document, 30th November, 1791, all the claims against the
commonwealth are mentioned and stated; New-Loans are omitted, yet they are not
altogether too inferior objects of notice, as L. 600 arrearages of interest on
them are mentioned.

It will not be pretended that he intended to mislead the Legislature or the
Governor; and it will not be pretended that the nature of the statement
precluded the mention of the principal of the New-Loans: For, 1. It is an
account of "claims," and he professes to have always considered this as a
claim. 2. The principal of other claims was noticed by him, such as funded and
unfunded depreciation debt, pensions, etc.

Yet while on this strong ground, this important period of the 10th April 1792,
it does not in all his correspondence appear that practical views, his avowed
opinion, his mortising and inlaying of New-Loans into the composition of the
fund for redeeming State debts, so as to make all appear of one piece was ever
communicated to any one; no intimation that the redemption of New-Loans was
practicable although that was the time to have avowed the sentiment.

This was however (as Mr. Tilghman says) authorized by the secret and avowed
objects of speculation.

2. That some of the Acts in question, being lawful to others were lawful to
the Comptroller General.

This is important and attacks the basis of some of the articles of
impeachment. I consider it as applicable to his purchases of Oldden, and
Biddle; his avowedly pursuing what he professed to suppose the literal
construction of the law of April 10, 1792, in opposition to what he knew to be
the meaning of the Legislature.

The interest of the commonwealth, the happiness and success of a republic
depend on the destruction of this unworthy principle.

It is an axiom, necessary for our prosperity, and almost inseparable from our
existence, that a public officer should have no interest opposed to that of the
public: Perverting public offices to private emolument was one of the principal
causes of the downfall of one of the greatest commonwealths in the world.

In this grand national view, I will not descend to the jealous superintendance
of courts of chancery over executors, guardians and trustees.

You, who are here collected, and delegated to decide this national enquiry,
will never forget, that solemn obligation are derived from important trusts;
and that whoever stipulates faithfully to serve the public, stipulates to
renounce every personal advantage incompatible with the public interest.

It is therefore, for a breach of this engagement he is accused -- an offense
which in all times has been denounced as requiring adequate punishment. 2.
Wooddeson, 602.

I fear no contradiction in saying, that had John Nicholson in 1782, when about
to take the oath "faithfully to serve the commonwealth," and to execute the
office of Comptroller General, declared his construction of it to be, that he
was at liberty to pursue his opinion of the letter of the law in opposition to
what he knew to be the intention of the Legislature. -- That he would claim the
privilege of private men to prefer his own interest to that of the public, and
that he would avail himself of his official opportunities for so doing -- he
would be rejected with disgust and without hesitation. If this conduct would be
wrong in 1782, it cannot be right in 1792. With these observations I submit the
case to the consideration of the Senate.

In the minutes of the House of Representatives the following entry is recorded:

"In conformity to the resolutions of the 25th February last, the House
resolved itself into a committee of the whole, in order to attend the trial of
John Nicholson, Comptroller General.

"The Speaker quitted the chair and Mr. Montgomery was placed therein.

"The committee then proceeded to the Senate-chamber for the purpose aforesaid.

"After some time,

"The committee of the whole returned to their own chamber.

"The Chairman left the chair and the Speaker resumed it.

"The Chairman then reported that the committee of the whole had attended at
the trial of the articles of impeachment against John Nicholson,
Comptroller General.

"The committee appointed to manage the trial on the articles of impeachment of
the House of Representatives against John Nicholson, Comptroller General,
reported further progress."

Eleventh day of the trial. TUESDAY, MARCH 11.
THE Court being called, etc. as usual.

MR. HIGGINSON.

Mr. Speaker, and Gentlemen of the Senate,

THE Senate of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania is called upon by the
Constitution to execute one of their most important functions, that is, A TRIAL
BY IMPEACHMENT.

The House of Representatives being the most popular branch have exercised
their jurisdiction in preferring the charges against John Nicholson, the
Comptroller General: This important right devolves upon you, whose part is the
more difficult as you have to decide and are set as judges over this
individual, your tribunal is the greatest in the land; being thus constituted,
you have to reason with capacity; the chain is composed of mixed business,
habits of intimacy, and principles of confidence between the two branches, and
sympathy for each other, a mere suggestion of the danger is sufficient to
destroy the existence of the danger.

Having premised this hint to you, his judges, permit me to say that the
defendant has every thing that is valuable at stake, his reputation is at issue
by this accusation; if rumor spread through every corner of the state, if the
public opinion, envenomed by prejudice, if reports of guilt and torrents of
prejudice, roused and fomented by malice, and fostered by envy, are sufficient
to condemn a man, the defendant is already brought to judgment.

Yet the impartiality of the tribunal will secure the officer from condemnation
on any other ground than that of a fair trial according to the evidence.

We have heard great panegyricks bestowed on impeachment trials in England, but
history affords but few examples of such trials being any other than
prosecutions, oppressive and violent, and ending in corrupt decisions.

The present trial, I hope, will be different in management and decision.

The articles of impeachment are divisible into two classes.

The 1st is subdivisible into four classes.

The 2d is of a different nature and scope, and consequently worthy of
different consideration.

Upon this, two points arise.

1st* Whether our construction has been right or wrong.

2dly. If not conformable to law, whether it had not been our honest faith and
good opinion.

The first, If New-Loan certificates were subscribable to the loan opened under
the Act of the general government.

2d. If redeemable.

The first of these depends on the Acts of Congress. (Mr. Higginson then read
the Act of Congress of the 4th August 1790, section 13th and the proviso.)

By this section and proviso two things are requisite.

1st. That they should be issued before the first of January 1790.

2dly. That they should be issued for SERVICES or SUPPLIES.

With regard to the first of these qualities, it is evident they were issued by
Pennsylvania before the 1st January 1790. And it is equally evident as to the
second. The gentleman who preceded me did not go on to say, that the New-Loan
holders had no other debtor to look to but the state of Pennsylvania. They were
issued for Continental certificates, strange! He did not recognize this
particular! Strange that a transfer of the debt should alter the consideration!
The transfer was made for a valuable consideration. -- The law which they say
abrogated them was passed before the 4th day of August 1790. The North Carolina
certificates excepted, being issued in 1786 corruptly, for no valuable
consideration, is a strong argument in our favor; Congress prohibited the
assumption of these North Carolina certificates, and enacted that they should
not receive the benefit of this Act, because they were issued without any
valuable consideration; this exception makes the rule more strong; and the
New-Loans are much more included in that general provision, being issued by
government, and having the recognition of public authority, being exchanged for
Continental certificates which issued for a bona fide consideration.

Two objections may be raised against this argument. 1. That the certificates
of North Carolina were in their original form issued without that exception,
and that New-Loan certificates exchanged for Continental ones were not
recognized by the general government, nor by their officers, and that they
could not be specifically included in the 13th section: But are they not
expressly mentioned in the 18th section?

2d. By concluding from the generality of the rule, that New-Loans could not be
included: But as Mr. Gallatin, a man of much ingenuity, in the case of his
contested election, quoting the words of the 4th article of the confederation,
"paupers, vagabonds and fugitives from justice, excepted," argued that these
were included, if the article had been penned without these words. The
arguments are stronger here than if they had all stood without the exception.
But Congress to place it out of all doubt and controversy, enacted a clause to
except the certificates of North Carolina from being received on the loan.
There are no reasons which could apply, but would have applied to the necessity
of the New-Loans being expressly excepted from the loan of the Union, if they
had so designed.

At all events the exception whether sound or unfounded will be perfectly
immaterial, when we consider our law of the 27th March 1789, which passed after
the adoption of the Federal Constitution, if it meant to exclude them from
provision, why not make a literal exception to them?

Before I come to consider the Act which erects New-Loans into state debts,
permit me to observe, that the Act which authorizes the payment of a demand is
in fact an appropriation by law previous to the grant of the warrant, and is
constitutionally payable out of moneys not otherwise specifically and
previously appropriated.

One reason is, it would always promote the good faith and interest of the
state, and it would never commit it.

The money was to have been drawn from the Treasury by the warrant of the
Governor; if the certificate was in the usual form, if it was such as the
officers would and ought to have made, believing it to be just and right, the
officer is not to answer, if there was any thing untrue in the certificate, it
must be shown; if any marks of delusion, it must be pointed out. The Treasurer
paid the draft, if there had not been an appropriated fund the Governor ought
not draw -- the Treasurer ought not to pay.

The sum was certified by the Comptroller General, the same passed through the
office of the Register-General before it was handed to the Governor.

If the certificates are not redeemable by the Act of the 10th April 1792, the
charge is right, if they are redeemable the charge is not true; if not
literally true, the charge must fall to the ground: Nay, something more is
necessary to make it criminal, than to say true, or untrue.

One criminal point is an omission, but it must be shown; that it was the
officer's duty to discriminate, and it is their business to show that it was
his positive duty to make it known to the other officers.

But if the officer did what he thought right, he is indisputably innocent.

Much has been said about the liberality and justice of the Legislature,
respecting the Act of 1786, yet the measure grew out of self-preservation, and
the interest of government.

The State at this time had to choose the least of two evils. Pennsylvania was
punctual in paying her quota, other States were deficient; Congress was obliged
then to issue indents for interest which depreciated, persons from other States
might buy up these indents to the loss of Pennsylvania and the advantage of the
delinquent States, and yet the payment through the State Loan-office was
disagreeable to Congress. The State of Pennsylvania was therefore under the
necessity of passing the law of 1786 in order to shun the worst of two evils.
Her quota was assessed; and she paid it. The motives were in order to confine
her own payment to her own citizens, and the money to circulate in her own
territory.

Thus it was agreed on all hands in the Legislature at that time, that
Pennsylvania should assume the debt to her own citizens, the only difference
consisted in the mode: This is fully proven by referring to the plan of finance
then brought forward in opposition to that which was adopted, both equally
support our argument.

(Mr. Higginson read the following parts of the plans of Finance, see Minutes
of Assembly, 22d December, 1785, pages 117, 124, and 126.)

"XIII. Thus the foregoing balances due to the United States may readily be
discharged. But there is something more that claims the attention of
Pennsylvania.

"According to the estimation of Congress, the sum of 4,834,279 16/90 dollars,
will be necessary to discharge the interest on the domestic debt of the United
States till the end of the year 1784; and by the resolutions of Congress of the
27th of September, 1785, facilities or interest certificates are directed to be
issued for the interest due until the 1st of January, 1785, consequently
facilities will be issued nearly to the amount aforesaid.

"Although this state has discharged the interest of the debts of the United
States, nearly to the amount of the quota of Pennsylvania, in the sum requisite
to discharge the interest of the whole domestic debt to the said period; and,
although this state has by the Land-Office redeemed above L. 220,000 of the
principal of the domestic debt due by the United States to the citizens of
Pennsylvania, and yet continues to redeem the same by the means aforesaid;
nevertheless there remains a large portion of the whole of said debt yet due to
the citizens of Pennsylvania, and there are large arrears of interest yet
unpaid upon the principal sums so due to them -- This demonstrates the
delinquency of some of the other states; a delinquency which ought not to be
permitted, for (unless measures be taken to prevent it) they would even profit
by such delinquency, and the creditors of Pennsylvania suffer on account of
their faithful and strenuous exertions. The great quantity of facilities which
would be paid to the citizens of Pennsylvania would cause them to depreciate,
notwithstanding the provision made by Congress to prevent it; so that the
creditors in Pennsylvania would not have the value intended them, and to which
they are justly entitled -- And this depreciation would enable citizens of
other states to procure them in this state at a discount, and so to pay off
their proportion of the Continental requisitions with certificates obtained at
less than specie value. For remedy whereof it is proposed,

"That the possessors of all certificates of debts due by the United States to
citizens of this state, the interest of which were made payable at the
continental loan-office by the Act of March 16th, 1785, shall have it at their
option to receive from the Comptroller General of the state, a certificate for
a like sum in lieu thereof, bearing interest from the same date; and that the
faith of the state be pledged for the redemption of all such certificates so
issued.

"And that such Loan-Office certificates, entitled as aforesaid, as have been
granted for continental money, shall be settled and liquidated in specie by the
said Comptroller General, agreeably to the scale provided for that purpose by
Act of Congress of the 28th of June, 1780.

"And whereas, according to the said Act of Congress, the possessors of
certificates for money loaned before the 1st day of March, 1778, are entitled
to an interest of 6 per cent. per annum in specie upon the nominal sum
expressed in the certificates, until the final redemption of the principal;
that the said Comptroller General shall also certify said nominal sum on the
back of every certificate issued by him for Loan-office certificates of the
aforesaid description; to the end that the said possessors may receive the same
justice from this state as has been promised them by the United States."

The other plan contains as follows.

"III. As the demands under the 11th and 12th articles have not been duly
liquidated, the precise amount cannot be ascertained: But it is conceived that
the excess abovementioned, together with the sales of lands, formerly pledged
for the redemption of depreciation certificates, and the arrearages of militia
fines, supposed to be about L.31,500 would be more than sufficient to pay them;
and that probably these sources would afford the means of satisfying claimants
as fast as their claims could be adjusted. The balance should be carried to the
aggregate fund.

"IV. In order to provide for the sum contained in the 13th and 14th articles,
it is proposed that a subscription be opened at the Bank for a loan of
L.2,000,000 to the State, the subscription to be kept open till the first day
of April next. The subscribers to pay one-fourth of the subscription down,
one-fourth on the first Monday in April, one-fourth on the first Monday in
July, and the remainder on the first Monday in October. The payments to be in
Loan-office certificates, or other certificates of debts due by the United
States to citizens of Pennsylvania, on which the interest is by law now payable
in Pennsylvania, or in such depreciation certificates as are now entitled to
receive interest from the excise, or in specie. The interest to be payable from
the first day of April, at the Bank, half-yearly. The first half year's
interest to be paid on the first Monday in October, the second on the first
Monday in April, 1787, and so on, until the final payment of the principal. The
late proprietors to be entitled to the abovementioned sum of L.225,000 of the
loan, or to adhere to their rights under the Act of November 1779, at their
option.

"The provision proposed for payment of the interest, and eventual payment of
the principal, is as follows:

"I. A tax on imports.

"Under this head it is to be observed, that as the present plan is calculated
to forward and not obstruct the views of the United States, the duties proposed
will be the lowest stated in their recommendation. And when their system shall
be generally adopted, the duties now proposed may be relinquished, and an
equivalent sum be paid to the Bank from the duties raised for payment of
interest on the debt of the United States; and of which a considerable part
will be payable to the State, in consequence of their receiving continental
certificates for a loan made by the State."

"Note, It is not improbable that the funds will be insufficient for the
purposes to which they are appropriated. The disturbances at Wyoming may
perhaps call for a considerable sum, which is not comprehended in the estimate.

"VI. The amount due on the requisitions of Congress is (according to the 16th
article) L.91,915:17:6 which is payable by their Act on the 1st day of May
next. From this sum must be taken, 1st. The interest which will at that time be
due to Pennsylvania from the United States on Continental certificates received
at the Land-office and in taxes. 2d. The moneys paid and payable before the
first of May to pensioners disabled in the service. These two articles will
probably amount to about L.52,000 and will of course reduce the balance to
about L.40,000.

"But as it is proposed to receive on the abovementioned loan to the State,
Continental certificates to the amount both of the principal and the interest
which may be due on them, the interest will form a considerable part of the
sum. The total is estimated at L.1,775,000 and therefore that part which
consists of interest must greatly exceed the above balance of L.40,000.

"Note, The possessors of Loan-office certificates bearing date before the 1st
day of March, 1778, are entitled (by resolutions of Congress) to receive 6 per
cent. on the sum specified in their certificates, although their real value (by
the Continental scale of depreciation) is considerably less than the nominal
sum. Hence it follows that the calculation (in the 13th article) of a principal
sum due, which is made according to the amount of interest actually paid by the
Loan-officer, is erroneous. But since the interest due on Continental
certificates will (as just mentioned) be an addition to the principal, it is
probable that the excess of one will balance the deficiency of the other.

"By receiving in the proposed loan (at their real value) those certificates
which bear an interest of 6 per cent. on more than their real value the State
will gain the difference between the interest on such real value, and the
interest now payable by the United States, and the present holders of the
certificates will have no reason to complain, because they may (at their
option) either lend them to the State on the terms held out, or have recourse
to the United States on the terms of their resolutions.

"On the future requisitions of Congress, whenever they can be proportioned
(either by the rule laid down in the articles of confederation, or by the rule
lately recommended to the States) it will be expedient to raise an account of
quotas with the United States, passing to their credit the total sum payable by
Pennsylvania, and to their debit the total sum which Pennsylvania has paid. The
balance of this account (being the excess or deficiency of payments) will be
carried forward, so as eventually to be liquidated in the annual demands of
Congress, and annual payments of the State. Since therefore a considerable sum
will (in the event) be payable to the United States every year (however the
balance may now stand) it will be expedient to continue the present annual tax
on property, and carry the proceeds to the aggregate fund, which will receive.
-- "

It is true this last provision was not carried into effect, owing altogether
to circumstances and motives of state policy.

It may then be said, that it is contended the law of March 1786 was temporary.
True, this idea is in the preamble of the Act of 1789, but it is not presumed
that it can be construed by the ex post facto explanation of the same Act,
neither intended nor mentioned, nor does the Act contain a single idea of a
temporary provision.

Read this Act according to the minutes already read, it will be easily seen
that the New-Loans are an existing state debt. Read it you will see a better
rule of construction than by speeches, resolutions or reports of committees.
(The 1st and 2d sections were then read.) Now, Sir, let the first and second
sections of this law be taken in any point of view, I contend the New-Loans are
not destroyed as a debt, but at most only a suspension of payment, and a
provision for completing the payment of interest for four years.

Or, a modification as to payment: To those who did not choose to embrace the
invitation, there is an offer, in the second section. It was only as a
suspension, and to those who did not choose to embrace it, it was only a
modification of payment.

Then follows the provision of the option held out to New-Loan holders; thus
the Act operates either as a suspension, or a modification; in this, two points
are to be considered, enough of the Act of March 1786 is left to constitute a
debt.

2. Repealing a law is not repealing what was done under it.

Of the Act of March 1786 enough is unrepealed to make the certificates neither
null nor void.

For 1. In the 8th section the interest is directed to be paid: 2. In the 11th
section they are made receivable in the Land-Office.

Both are only mere forms of words, for the Legislature could not make them
null and void if they intended so to do; to do that, and to exclude them from
the loan they must be rejected by the Legislature of the Union as the
certificates of North Carolina heretofore adverted to.

The question may be reduced to this simple position, that as the gentleman
yesterday said respecting the existence of a legislative power in Pennsylvania,
a position indisputable; so likewise in this instance, the fundamental
principles of Nature, may as well be set bounds to as to the principles of
natural justice; in either case to become a legislative act, it might have the
form of a law, but not the force of one: There are moral impossibilities as
well as natural ones, and these exist with Legislatures.

A Legislature therefore can no more effectually annihilate any rights, or
enact away its own obligations, than it can enact that a body shall decrease in
gravitation in proportion as it descends to the earth.

Thus much I have said to enforce that rule of construction that if a law can
receive any possible construction, that will avoid so serious an imputation as
the violation of public faith, and will comport with justice, such construction
we are bound to put upon it. What a government cannot of right do, we surely
should not presume it meant to do; unless the Act was planned for such,
unequivocal in its meaning, and unsusceptible of any other construction.

In the third section the words many and so much are relative terms, and imply
that some would not be willing to exchange or to take back the Continental
certificates.

I observe that the framers of that Act, in order entirely to deprive the
holders of the benefit of an obligation solemnly issued by the state, would
have used other words, would have gone further than barely to give the holders
a permission to exchange if they saw fit; in contemplating the case of holders
who might not choose to exchange, they would have gone on, and declared
explicitly the consequences of not exchanging.

But, Sir, do the operative words of the repealing clause destroy the debt of
which the New-Loans are the evidence. In order to destroy them, the
certificates themselves should be declared null and void; because the payment
of the interest or principal expressed on the face of them ceases to be secured
by any law: does the debt of which they are the evidence cease to exist? Can
the existence of a debt depend on the existence of a provision for the payment
of it is interest or principal? May there not be a debt without any existing
appropriation for the payment of the principal or interest? Surely there may.

How then can it be said that by repealing all laws specifically securing the
payment of the principal or interest, the debt itself is annihilated?

No, Sir, both the Preamble and the Act clearly show, it was only meant the
exchange should be optional, and those who did not choose to exchange should
retain their certificates valid on their original grounds, though without any
particular appropriation for the payment of the principal or interest: This is
the case under the Continental loan, and those who did not choose to accept the
terms of that loan and subscribe to it, still hold and were meant to hold their
evidences of debt as valid as at the first moment of their existence.

The preamble to this Act states that the funds which were intended for the
payment of this debt were likely under the new government to be transferred to
the Treasury of the Union.

It was for this reason that the laws which specifically secured the payment of
interest or principal the New-Loans was repealed, leaving the debt itself, of
which they were the evidences, sound and entire. Says the state, I do not mean
to destroy my obligation, I cannot do it, but my funds are gone, and I must
suspend the payment, take your chance of my future competency, eventual
solvency, and ultimate payment, or I will give you another choice, you may if
you had rather re-exchange my obligation for those of the continent, then take
back your Continental certificate, and give back my New-Loan.

Therefore, Sir, instead of charging the Comptroller General with having
transgressed the law in violation of his duty and to the prejudice of the
state, rather let it be said, that he magnified the law and made it honorable.

If the provision in the third section respecting the Land-Office be regarded,
it will be recognized, that by the second section an obligation is imposed not
upon the holder but upon the state, pay the New-Loans on application with a
like sum in Continental certificates, let it be remembered that this idea of
exchange is altogether out of the question, as it does not come after the
repealing clause, the obligation, I say, is altogether on the state.

I ask then when the obligation of this transaction is not equally obligatory
on both sides, and when the state is either to pay or take up the New-Loans on
the application of the holders, by delivery of its own property of a particular
kind, but equal value, what is the reason, or meaning of it?

Does it not imply necessarily a right in the holder to demand, and an
obligation on the state to pay or deliver?

Does it acknowledge the debt or not? Are not the Continental certificates
strictly the property of the state? When they are obliged to part from them,
does she not part from a thing of value?

If the state lies under this obligation, the New-Loans are a debt due from
her, strictly and properly speaking, though they are redeemable only in a
particular mode.

What are the Continental certificates? They are not money to be sure!

But they are a commodity, or thing of value: The existence of the debt does
not depend on the species of payment: Whether my satisfaction of a demand, my
dislodging an incumbent obligation on me, is done by the delivery of money or
any other obligation, it is a debt still.

Let me ask, whether any subscriber of state debt believes that Congress if
their funds were to fail for the discharge of interest, could compel them to
take back state certificates again. AH PUNIC FAITH!

This would have been a mere tender law, and consequently void; and a nullity.

The continent had assumed state debts; the entries were made on the books of
the Treasury. In other words, will the United States perform their engagements
if the United States should say, take back your state certificates. Such a law
would be unjust, and not binding; any subtraction of the debt would be
dishonorable to the Union; it would rip up credit from it is source -- Oh! such
an idea is preposterous. What then is the meaning? Then sure, it does recognize
the debt. Are not the Continental certificates strictly the property of the
state.

Suppose for instance, that Congress had enacted that proposition into the
funding system, which was proposed by the Secretary of the Treasury in his
report on public credit, that two thirds of the debt should be funded at an
annuity of six per cent. redeemable at pleasure, and the other third be paid in
lands in the Western Territory, at twenty cents per acre. Would this have been
a destroying of one third of the debt? No; it could only have been in this case
a modification of the payment. Mr. Gallatin in his testimony (page 296)
declared that it was immaterial to redeem that way or by the Land-Office, the
price being then nearly equal; the Land-Office was shut against the New-Loans
by the Act of March 1789, but another door is thrown open, another fund is
substituted for the holders of the New-Loans, in point of principle the same.
The state says, we cannot go no further, the holder does not get quite so much;
Mr. Gallatin tells you, whilst the Land-office was open, a fund was provided;
then the Land-office being open recognizes the debt; shut the Land-office, the
loss is certain. Here is a recognition of the debt; this is a matter of
disgrace to Pennsylvania, first make an advantage of a bargain, then
depreciate, and lastly buy in at a discount.

Who is our accuser? The State of Pennsylvania. I demand that the state of
Pennsylvania will come with clean hands herself; we are ready to receive the
stroke of justice; there is no force in the objection; it is of no consequence
to say that Congress would eventually pay the money on the Continental
certificates; the means of reducing that to possession are certainly just as
valuable as the benefits those means can procure, and the parting with the
means is parting with the end, and therefore with the value.

Because, I pay my debt to my creditor with the bond of my debtor, it makes no
difference.

To explain further. If the New-Loans are admitted as debts of any kind; if
they invest the holder with a right, and impose an obligation on the state, as
in the words of the Act; if those holders are creditors at all of the state,
then they are within the sixth clause of the redeeming Act of the 10th of April
1792. (Mr. Higginson was interrupted by Mr. Ingersoll, who said, "It is not
admitted.")

If the holders are creditors this will not be denied. Are the holders of the
New-Loans creditors of any body? If they are creditors then, and the New-Loans
are the evidence of that credit, to whom are they creditors? Of the Union? No.
Are they creditors of the State? No; say they! that character is destroyed.

Justice and simplicity delight in each other; they are the creditors of the
state, or more literally speaking, they put their trust in the state, and the
state on the other hand, in this Act, acknowledges that she has something in
trust for them; which she obligates herself in this very Act to pay or deliver.

But, it is said, that this Act had received a silent construction from the
statements of this, and other officers, speeches of the Governor, wherein the
claims against the state are enumerated, in which the New-Loans were omitted,
reports of committees on ways and means, in which the actual demands against
the commonwealth are set forth, in many places they are called New-Loan debts:
These were likewise omitted, all being after the passing of the Act of March
1789, make a strong argument, as showing the uniform construction in all their
procedures.

It is not safe to infer strongly from mere omissions, this is a negative
circumstance, to infer from the omission more should be shown than the
omission; that there should have been a propriety or duty in absolutely
inserting them.

The Executive whose part it is to address the Legislature on the opening of
each sessions; to communicate to them the transactions of his department, in
the execution of pre-existing laws, to point out the objects which seem
particularly to claim legislative attention, and above all, to state the
situation of the Treasury, the amount of existing and payable obligations, for
which provisions must be made by actual appropriations.

Finds it necessary to resort to those officers with whom the documents giving
this information are lodged: These officers make reports with an eye to this
object; the Governor takes this report for his guide to that object in his
speech, or other communications.

And then the committees on ways and means, in the House, whose very name and
style point out their duty, and their sphere, reported upon the same subject;
in neither statements, speeches or reports were the New-Loans included after
the passing the Act of March 1789. And why not?

Because there was no propriety in including them, because they were unfunded,
and therefore irrelevant to the subject of Ways and Means: (Because the arrears
of interest excepted which were expressly stated) there was not arising out of
them any demand which the Legislature had made actually payable, and for which
an appropriation with Ways and Means would be necessary. It was on this ground
the unfunded depreciation was not included in them. To draw any inference from
this omission would destroy the distinction between funded and unfunded
depreciation debt. If an appropriation had been necessary, it would be a
subject for the consideration of the committees on Ways and Means. It is one
thing for the Legislature to resolve to pay a demand, and another, and a
subsequent one to provide Ways and Means, 'till the former is done, the latter
is nugatory and unnecessary.

Again, Sir, it is true, that in the last report read, which is the only
instance of the kind, there is a statement of all the debts of the
commonwealth, and also the sources of revenue, in which the unfunded
depreciation is included, and the New-Loans are not included, but this will be
accounted for, when we consider; that the Land-office was open to the unfunded
depreciation certificates, whilst it was shut against the New-Loans: for which
there existed the provision by exchange in the Act of March 1789, the State was
redeeming her New-Loans with those who choose to make the application without
diminishing her own active capital, while the holders of the Continental
certificates exchanged, suffered a diminution on the nominal value,
contemplated in the funding law of Congress; but as long as the State kept her
Land-office open to the unfunded depreciation certificates she was actually
paying off the unfunded depreciation out of her own capital.

But these topics may certainly be dismissed, for if the committee had
expressed their opinion directly against the New-Loans as a debt, it would be
neither more nor less than the last committee did, who originated this
impeachment, and could have no more influence or weight, except their opinions
had been bottomed on a more solid foundation.

But, again, it is contended from another quarter that this subject has
received a construction, and been expressly decided upon by the Secretary of
the Treasury against their subscribability. Permit me to turn for a moment to
that correspondence, the first letter which is connected with this supposed
decision is the letter of Mr. Gallatin of January 14, 1793, (page 74-5-6) and
its answer, (page 76-7-8) by which it is attempted to be proven that he has
decided on their non-subscribability.

(After the two letters were read, Mr. Higginson observed.)

I will not undertake to say how far it was proper for an individual member of
the committee to anticipate the Act of the whole, and as it were forestall
information on the subject; however, it may be remembered, that at this time,
the impeachment was slowly growing under the fostering kind culture of the
writer's, (Gallatin) hands.

The first circumstance that strikes me in reading this letter and the answer,
is, that the two last questions were left unanswered by the Secretary of the
Treasury; to the last he replies nothing, and on the matter of the second he
observed hypothetically, that if the New-Loans are not a debt they are not
assumable; from this circumstance I infer, considering that gentleman's
character, (I mean the Secretary of the Treasury) that those questions were in
his opinion improper; at all events it is certain that the answer to it was not
what was wished for, otherwise the subsequent letter of the Governor, which I
shall presently read, would have been unnecessary, the object of enquiry being
precisely the same. This letter of Mr. Gallatin's, contains a singular course
of reasoning, and deductions from premises, which the writer knew at the time
to be unfounded. The Secretary states forty thousand pounds, as outstanding; he
(Mr. Gallatin) then goes on to observe, "But as some have been offered," etc.
(page 75.) Sir, he had it not more in proof that some of them were not so
exchanged after they were offered than before. From the documents of the
Comptroller General a report had in the first instance been made to the
Governor, and transmitted to the Secretary of the Treasury; the writer's
animadversions therefore on that ground impliedly criminates that officer.

He observed also, that "I should be led to think," etc. The grounds of the
Secretary's opinion did not imply any such declaration; but even if the
premises had been true, the conclusion would not follow: This would indeed be a
fiction with a witness to it.

Here I will take it with Mr. Gallatin, that the reason why the Secretary of
the Treasury did not require the surrender or suspend the interest, must
necessarily have been, because, he looked upon all the New-Loans to be either
redeemed or re-exchanged; now, if in order to account for the Secretary's not
requiring a surrender or suspending payment of interest, the inference is that
he considered them assumable and redeemable; Does it follow that he should
reject them as assumable? by no means. The contrary is the proper conclusion;
it follows immediately and directly that he should admit them as assumable, and
it would also follow, that the demand could only be on the grounds that they
were assumable, and also that a suspension would follow unless the Continental
certificates were surrendered, which the Secretary of the Treasury agreed might
be done.

But the answer to this letter did not contain the idea which seems to have
been anticipated and expected by the writer; therefore we find the Governor
writing to the Secretary of the Treasury on the same subject the 29th July
1793, (letter page 351-2 then read) and the Secretary's answer of August 21,
1793 (see page 218-9). This letter left the question of the validity of the Act
of March 1789, respecting the assumability of the New-Loan certificates
untouched. The opinion of this officer on the subscribability of the
certificates is not expressed in any part of this letter. "These circumstances,
etc." this sentence contains an opinion, but that opinion is not on the
principle that New-Loans are not assumable, is not, that the law of March 27th,
1789 destroyed them as a debt, but it is that the foregoing enumerated
circumstances arising from the interference of Pennsylvania have amounted to a
virtual rejection of them in effect; which does not even implicate his opinion
on the question of law.

Again, "I was about to conform, etc." -- This surely does not imply his own
opinion, and how far this officer, after having referred a question of law to
the Attorney General of the United States, the first professional officer of
the government, and received his opinion, may think himself bound by it, I
cannot undertake to determine.

It is probable however, when the question was somewhat doubtful and the
opinion founded on public expediency, when this State appeared so anxious to
avoid any misunderstanding with the Treasury of the Union, that opinion might
be considered obligatory as to the fact of admitting or rejecting them. We
contend, however, that the Secretary of the Treasury had not in this letter
expressed his opinion at all on the operation of the Act of March 1789, much
less on the validity of it; if then, it is clear, that the Secretary of the
Treasury has in the course of this transaction expressed his opinion
unequivocally in favor of the New-Loans, and if in this letter he does not
express his opinion against them, there are still odds in favor of the officer
now on his defense: But I go further, Sir, and contend, that if this officer
has at all expressed his opinion on the principle of this question even after
the disclosure of the Act of March 1789, it is in favor of the New-Loans and
not against them.

This will appear from several passages in his letter in answer to Mr.
Gallatin's letter; when the Act of March 1789 had been brought into his view,
for he expressly adverts to that objection.

Before I read those passages, suffer me to make a comment on the first part of
a former letter (see page 76, etc.) from this officer. It may serve to show
that the extreme solicitude discovered by the State with regard to this
question might have betrayed the Secretary of the Treasury into a want of
accuracy, a mistake which can be very seldom imputed to him.

The paragraph to which I allude is that (page 77) "that they should at the
time of being subscribed be recognized by the existing laws of the States as
evidences of debts by them respectively owing." With the most respectful
deference to the writer of this letter, I conceive that this expression is not
sufficiently defined (...) accurate; for if any State had passed a law
abrogating certain certificates, which by the funding law were made
subscribable and redeemable, that law would not be permitted, or suffered to
take away that right or benefit thus given and guaranteed by a pre-existing and
paramount law of the United States.

Because, after the passing of the Act of the 4th of August 1790, the whole
loan under the assumption, at that rate, might have been defeated, frustrated,
and rendered void.

In a succeeding paragraph, he observed, "If however the New-Loan certificates
are not by the laws of Pennsylvania considered as debts but merely as receipts
for certificates of the United States," etc. (see page 78.) It may be observed
that this is a mere hypothetical expression, and as it comes in as a
qualification to the other remark, that as the certificates were then
presented, no doubt could be entertained of their assumability, it clearly
implies that if this condition fails, that is, if the New-Loans cannot be
considered as mere receipts demandable at the pleasure of the government, then
no doubt could remain of their assumability also.

Now taking it for granted for a moment that the State could convert that into
a mere receipt, which was originally issued as an obligation, yet she has not
done it; as there is nothing then which obliges the holder to part with his
New-Loan on the application of the State, it is utterly impossible to consider
the New-Loans as mere receipts, demandable at the pleasure of the State; and
their being so, constitutes the very object of the Secretary of the Treasury's
supposition. As then this hypothesis fails, as the New-Loans cannot be
considered as mere receipts demandable at pleasure, what follows? Why, they
revert back to their original ground, the proposition assumes its first and
original form, and in the opinion of the Secretary of the Treasury, they are
assumable: -- This idea is held out in another of his letters, where he adverts
to the Act of March 1789, but to suppose that the holders of New-Loans are
creditors, and their certificates no more than mere receipts, and consequently
no debts, this position cannot be supported without doing a violence to the
letter of the law; but, on the other hand suppose we shall coincide with their
construction of the Acts of the Legislature, and agree with the
Attorney General of the United States himself, who says, (page 81) that "the
Act of March 1789, etc. abolished these certificates as debts of the State, as
wanting the due recognition from the State, and cannot be legally received upon
loan." A moment's consideration will show that this was a contract: And when
the Constitution of the United States is brought into view, this instrument
says, that all debts and engagements shall be as valid against the United
States under this constitution as under the confederation. But they say first,
this does not apply, and secondly they say, the Constitution refers only to
contracts between individuals, and not between a State and her own citizens.

Now it is certain, loans are contracts, and if contracts are loans, and the
Act of March 1789 passed after the adoption of the Federal Constitution, then
it is certain that the New-Loans are subscribable and consequently redeemable.

If it can extend to contracts between citizens of a State, a fortiori, it
extends to contracts in which the State is a party.

So intimate is the connection; so great is the influence which the conduct and
character of the several States have upon that of the Union, that the framers
of this instrument must have been blind to the general interest, if they had
not introduced this provision.

To tie up the hands of the Union, therefore, in that Constitution would have
been useless, without tying up also the hands of the States with respect to
their contracts.

Will the United States tie up their own hands and not tie up the hands of the
individual States? Thus guarding the two extremes and leave a vacuum in the
middle unguarded!

What was the reason for inserting it in the Constitution? To preserve public
credit. Is there a more delicate subject in the world than public credit?

The situation of the country at the time made such a provision necessary. The
American name which from the independence had been sliding fast to ruin, had
every thing to make her happy, but wanted one thing to make her respectable,
that was CREDIT; the grand desideratum without which the rest would be nugatory
and unavailing.

Sir, if the limbs were palsied, what would it avail that the body was sound, I
will not insist upon the proverb of the sheep, but this I will say, that where
the children turn out badly, it is apt to hurt the reputation of the family: If
a State had the power of impairing her own contracts and sacrificing her faith,
then it would follow, that however well disposed the general government might
be, however sound at the center; yet all the States in succession might
sacrifice their credit by impairing their contracts, and the Union robbed of
her respectability, and her credit by the mismanagement of her children left to
parry the strokes of fortune.

But another thing; this omission would not only have been the road by which
the credit of the Union would desert it, but it would have been the source of
confusion and contention at home. If the Constitution had not expressed this
prohibition, civil wars might have been the monuments of its weakness. While in
one State the obligation of contracts was held as sacred as it ought to be; in
another they would be prostrated to temporary convenience.

Taking this case, then, to be literally within the words and essentially
within the spirit of this clause; let us see in what manner it has been
violated.

And first. Were the New-Loans a debt, or evidence of a debt due from the State
of Pennsylvania at any time before the passing of the Act of 27th March, 1789?

As to this, I take it to be undeniable that the New-Loans had been a debt of
this State. This is not only acknowledged and implied by the tenor of the
articles themselves, but they are expressly called a debt of the State in the
Act which created them; and also in the Act which impaired them.

Indeed, this is conceded on all hands, except by one, the Treasurer of the
State (see page 68) in his letter to the Speaker of the lower House; wherein he
styles them "Which in fact never were a State debt."

It may be observed however, that if the law of March 1789 should be found not
to abrogate or destroy the debt, which I think will appear, yet if it in any
way impairs the obligation of the contract, it is most clearly and undeniably a
violation of the Constitution of the United States, and therefore void to all
intents and purposes, and if so, this tribunal is bound to consider it, as
never having any existence.

Again, and for the last time, upon a strict comparison of the Acts of March
1786, and that of March 1789, it will be found that the New-Loan certificates
were equally unimpaired after the Act, as they were before.

Let us see how much, in order to distinguish between those parts which created
the debt itself, and those which directed the payment of principal and
interest: It may be considered the funds for payment of interest were
temporary. (Mr. Higginson then read the minutes of 1789, page 145, by which it
appeared that the provision respecting the principal of the New-loans was
introduced at the third reading of the bill. The original and primary object of
the bill being, that the interest should cease, as the provision for that
purpose had been temporary.

In page 184, "it was moved by Mr. Fitzsimons, seconded by Mr. M'Pherson," etc.
The bill originated through the exigency of the State. Before the law passed,
the Land-office was to have been shut, in what manner was it to be produced? it
was forbidden -- Is not forbidding a payment in futuro, a testimony of the
existence of the debt.

The payment of New-Loan certificates was prohibited in the Land-office. Now,
what parts are those of the Act of March 1786 which created the debt? Even the
Act itself did not immediately create the debt; those parts in the second
section do not. The loan was to be opened, suppose none choose to subscribe to
it immediately; then there would be no debt: By opening, subscribing, and
paying, the debt sprung into existence, that moment it became a debt: and a
certificate is given merely as an evidence of that debt. (The second section of
the Act of March 1, 1786 was then read.)

There is nothing in this to secure the payment of either principal or interest.

Nothing in the second section directs or secures the payment of the debt, the
kinds of certificates directed to be received on loan are not immediately under
the first and second sections.

But the repealing clause of the Act of March 1789 has full force, satisfaction
and complete existence out of the other clauses of the Act of 1786. Ingenuity
itself with all her hundred eyes is not able to escape the inference which I
draw from a strict comparison of the Acts of March 1789 and 1786.

Why then need we be drawn into the imputation of so disreputable a violation
of public faith? How then, can it be charged, as has been done by one
gentleman, that this officer by the magic wand of his office had conjured up
the ghosts of the departed New-Loans to frighten away the dollars of the
commonwealth, without imputing to the State, who was their creator, the odious
crime of unnatural murder?

Let us now consider how this has been construed by the Legislature.

In an Act passed the 30th September 1791, for the relief of Sarah Caldwell and
others, who had lost New-Loan certificates, the State undertook to subscribe
for their use, and to pay to them the interest on such subscriptions, on their
giving security to indemnify the State against the holders of her certificates.

This Act proves two things. First, that the New-Loan creditors of themselves
could do nothing, they had no claim on the Union, and therefore were not
creditors of the Union. And secondly, By requiring an indemnity from the
holder, inevitably implies a right of demand on the State vested in that
holder, and that right of demand whatever it be, constitutes the strictness and
propriety of character of CREDITOR.

In the instructions of the Supreme Executive Council (page 267) are these
words, "You will issue a new certificate." Will it be contended that these are
mere receipts? can certificates of parts be debts, when the whole was no debt
in its original form?

As the case then is brought thus clearly within the scope of the redemption
law of the 10th of April 1792, what can be offered in opposition to our
conclusion?

One thing only, that as the New-Loans themselves amounted to more than this
State's proportion of the assumed debt, it could not be imputed to the
Legislature, that they meant to include the New-Loans: it may be remarked, that
as the inference drawn by Mr. Gallatin from the consequences of the rule laid
down by him relative to the 4th article of the confederation, it only proved
the law a bad one.

As this is introduced a presumptive argument is brought forward against it.
They say, how injurious it is to the State, and of what bad consequences to
redeem her own debts at 20 in the pound! If they call this a bad consequence,
give it that construction, as a presumptive argument as it regards the State,
the consequence is with us, and not with them.

Here is a singular circumstance, they have violated the rules of law, they
have construed the law of 1786 strictly with regard to this object; and they
have construed the law of 1789, which confers benefits liberally in their own
favor.

Again, another argument is brought forward.

It is said the sixth section is a proviso to the second section.

If so, the object was those which she had before redeemed in the second
section to the benefit of the state.

If so, the sixth is co-extensive with the second as to objects. If the
New-Loans by the sixth section are redeemable through the medium of the United
States, it is still better: If they are not redeemable, the mode is not
commensurate to the objects contemplated in the second section, and it is wrong
to ascribe that to the Legislature, which could not be her motive.

Bills of Credit are enumerated and provided for in the second section; the
sixth section is introduced to be beneficial, and yet Bills of Credit are not
included in that section at all, notwithstanding which, it is called a
provision to the second section; with an eye to superior advantage, they
ascribe a ridiculous motive to the Legislature: that by the Act of April 7th
1791, the arrangement which is injurious refers only to the Act of March 1789,
as an arrangement for the future: The State may deem it proper to make such for
the purpose of avoiding any interference with the State or domestic
subscription.

Had it been the reason the State would have actually assumed her domestic debt.

It was easy to tell the amount of what was outstanding.

It was only to conduct the outstanding from those on hand; there was no
difficulty; it was only to add or to subtract; the object was to leave greater
room for those debts which were a greater and a more immediate burden on the
State.

One of two things must be their object.

1. Either to narrow down the interest, or 2 To give a facility to
re-exchanging, and to their subscribing to the Continental loan; and in either
case the New-Loans would not be re-exchanged at all.

No other reason can be properly given for it; if we construe the law
liberally, and not foolishly.

It was contended, that if we should have construed the sixth section
literally, we could not have given it so foolish a construction.

It is said the Comptroller committed himself by rendering an estimate to the
Governor. If a provision is made in the sixth section of the Act of the 10th of
April 1792, there may be some reason for it; but if not, the supposition is
unsupported.

Let us consider this a little; it is clear from the second section, that no
provision is made there for unfunded depreciation, and none for the New-Loans
in the same section.

One of them it is agreed, and both, we contend, are included in the sixth
section; it is also clear that no certificates which are not included in the
second section, can participate in the funds to be created by the sale of 3 per
cent. stock; for that fund is limited to the objects therein enumerated.

It this be true then in an estimate which was to direct the Executive in the
sale of 3 per cent. stock, neither the unfunded depreciation nor New-Loans
should have been included, even if the estimate had been made after the Act for
re-opening the loan had passed: But at all events, I ask, how was it possible
that the two officers, from the 13th to the 16th of April, could include in
their estimate objects that would be embraced eventually, if at all by the
sixth section; whereas the Act of Congress of the 8th of May 1792, was not then
passed.

Instead of using this construction of the law for their own purposes, they are
compelled to use it for our purposes.

Let us for a moment suppose, that the Legislature intended as they are
inclined to have it, and see the consequences, and how do you find this
construction of theirs, to work the destruction of the debt? Their construction
is conjectural, useless and dangerous: If subscribability is the criterion,
they are mistaken in the premises; if the New-Loans are a debt, subscribable
and redeemable are convertible terms.

If the ideas are not to be collected from the Act itself, then we shall in
time have an hundred laws instead of one, then an end to legislation.

Having made these observations on the first articles respecting the law, I
will in the next place treat of the the motives. But first permit me to make
some observations respecting the three last articles of impeachment.

We avow the facts contained in the fifth article, defend the legality, and
contend we had a right so to do.

When the defendant assumed the office of Comptroller General, he did not
relinquish the duties of a citizen. How far it may be good policy to pass
inhibitory laws, and how far it may be improper, to pass such positive laws,
until such laws are passed, we have certainly a right, and until a question is
raised on such positive law, our actions cannot be impeachable.

We have heard from Wodeson that a public officer should have no interest
distinct from the State.

Where is the force of this reasoning? attend to the circumstances. That
impeachable matter must be an injury to the State, and not the gain of the
officer. Where is the injury to the commonwealth in this particular? In what
does it consist? Does the payment of a just and valid debt constitute this
injury and detriment? If such can be viewed in this light it is well worthy of
observation.

The 6th and 7th articles aim to place us in a much more irksome and ugly
situation, and here I cannot help remarking on what fell from the other side;
that great merit is due to them for being able to show so much, when from the
heinousness of the fact, the Comptroller might conceal the whole matter; how
singular, that this very proof and testimony is evincive of our innocence. Nay,
in this particular our accusers take merit, that they have shown and proven too
much.

There is one thing common to both these articles, they infer property in the
State, and make it by implication necessary, and from different premises; it is
presumable the framers of these articles thought property essential to
constitute the offense.

In the sixth article it is inferred from the certificates being lodged for the
purpose of being re-exchanged. It may well be asked, Had the owner no control
over them, what was his ultimate object? On what condition were they to become
the property of the commonwealth?

Sir, the Act was only inchoate, indents were to be paid, or received. Could
the State withhold the certificates if the party choose to withdraw them? Would
it not be liable to execution as the property of the party? No doubt of it.

The committee, who were the drawers of this article, have shown their idea
that this conclusion was weak, and unsound, for if this constituted property,
the fifth article would be nugatory and unnecessary.

(The fifth article was then read.) This gives a definition of the exchange.
The committee have plainly discovered that the facts in the sixth may be
demurred to.

What is the proof brought forward to support this 7th article? It is said Mr.
Blair M'Clenachan was once the proprietor of a certificate which he never sold
to us, and they endeavor to throw the burden of the proof on us. This witness
speaking from memory, says he did not receive this certificate from Matthew
M'Connell, he does not pretend to say that he sold or exchanged this or any
other certificate with the Compttroller-General; but he tells us expressly that
he sold to others.

Let us examine this a little* He says he did not receive our certificate of L.
3275:19:4 from Matthew M'Connell, this he absolutely received in April 1788.

The witness, who is brought forward is unable to prove how he came by any of
his certificates.

This idea involves a new and delicate point of law, taken from analogy in
other criminal cases. When a felony or forgery is sworn to, and the instrument
with which the felony or forgery was committed be found on a person, the
presumption is so strong, because he has the thing wherewith the crime was
perpetrated, that the party with whom the instrument is found must account.
Here they say the witness did not sell it to us; but they endeavor by the
absence of the fact to lay the burden of proof on us, to make a criminal
charge where there is no proof of criminality.

A certificate was once Mr. M'Clenachan's; one of two things must be admitted.
1. That the certificate was exchanged, and criminally converted to our use; or,
2. We bought from some other person. It proves nothing against us. Out of the
two modes, which is most presumable? one is a fair purchase in a circuitous
route, the other a criminal conversion.

Is there a criminal tribunal on earth which would admit a proof so nugatory to
support and enforce a prosecution? Need I ask which will be chosen. Is the
heaviest and most attrocious item to be supported by the slightest proof, by
the vague remnants of a memory frail in its best estate? If this were supported
as it is represented, the breath of the offender might taint the walls that
hold him. But we find a millstone in the articles, and a feather in the proof.

Sir, I do not fear, because I do not believe that this tribunal will find it
to their satisfaction to convict a respectable fellow-citizen and a responsible
officer upon a rash and dangerous implication upon evidence so trifling and
indefinite, and that too going to a charge perfectly vague in itself and
general as the light we see by.

This brings me to the second division of my subject, relative to the criminal
motives, and being more than half through the arguments, it will take some time
to finish, and as it will be inexpedient to break off the subject in the
middle, I hope the Senate will adjourn.

Mr. Lewis rose, and observed, that the gentleman had spoken three hours, and
must be exhausted, and requested the Senate to adjourn.

Adjourned accordingly to four o'clock same evening.

In the minutes of the House of Representatives the following entry is recorded:

"In conformity to the resolutions of the 25th of February last, the House
resolved itself into a committee of the whole in order to attend the trial of
John Nicholson, Comptroller General of this commonwealth now depending before
the Senate on the articles of impeachment exhibited against him by the House of
Representatives.

"The Speaker quitted the chair and Mr. Wynkoop was placed therein.

"The committee of the whole then proceeded to the Senate-chamber for the
purpose aforesaid.

"After some time,

"The committee of the whole returned to their own chamber.

"The Chairman left the chair, and the Speaker resumed it.

"The Chairman then reported that the committee of the whole had attended the
trial of the said John Nicholson.

"The committee appointed to manage the trial of the articles of impeachment
against John Nicholson, Comptroller General, reported that they had made
further progress."

Same day, 4 o'clock. P. M.
THE Senate met, Court was called, etc.

Mr. HIGGINSON.

Gentlemen of the Senate,

Length of duty this forenoon has given me a violent head ache, I hope the
Senate will adjourn; I will take but an hour in the morning: In the mean time I
will concentrate my ideas, so that I shall not take up much of your time.

Mr. Morris informed him, that the Senate were disposed to indulge him.
Adjourned.

In the minutes of the House of Representatives the following entry is recorded
--

"In conformity to the resolutions of the 25th February last, the House
resolved itself into a committee of the whole, in order to attend the trial of
John Nicholson, Comptroller General of this commonwealth, now depending before
the Senate, on the articles of impeachment exhibited against him by the House
of Representatives.

"The Speaker quitted the chair and Mr. Wynkoop was placed therein.

"The committee of the whole then proceeded to the Senate-chamber for the
purpose aforesaid.

"After some time,

"The committee of the whole returned to their own chamber.

"The Chairman left the chair, and the Speaker resumed it.

The Chairman then reported that the committee of the whole had attended for
the aforesaid purpose.

"The committee appointed to manage the trial of the articles of impeachment
against John Nicholson, Comptroller General, reported that the counsel on the
part of the defendant who had commenced his arguments this forenoon being
indisposed, the Senate had therefore adjourned the further hearing thereof
until ten o'clock tomorrow morning."

Twelfth day of the trial. WEDNESDAY, March 12.
THE Senate met pursuant to adjournment; the members of the House of
Representatives in committee of the whole repaired to the Senate-chamber as
usual; the Comptroller General uniformly kept his seat as described in page
202, and wrote without ceasing, as well during the time employed by his own
counsel in the defense, as by the opposite party.

Mr. HIGGINSON spoke as follows --

Having yesterday observed on all the articles of impeachment, except the third
article; as it respects matter of evidence in supporting the criminal intent in
redeeming or causing to be redeemed New-Loans: I will make some remarks on that
head, and the circumstances which evince the integrity of the officer now upon
trial.

To introduce this, it is necessary to observe, that, out of the doubtfulness
of the question on the law itself, if on all hands the construction of the
several Acts has created embarrassment, it will be remembered, that on the
reading of the report to the Lower House, after the committee had had the
subject before them a very long time, Mr. Gallatin apologized for that delay by
informing the House that they had waited some time for the opinion of the
Attorney General of the United States (Mr. Randolph.)

If their charity has begun at home, I hope yours will not end there.

The Secretary of the Treasury doubted the construction of the Act of March
1789, and deemed it so doubtful a question as to induce him to consult the law
officer of the general government.

Now, sir, let it be recollected, that in ordinary and perspicuous cases, this
recourse is never had to professional and official opinion. From this, then, it
may fairly be inferred that this case was not ordinarily perspicuous.

It is impossible to state the degree of perspicuity which is necessary for any
particular mind to found a conclusion upon.

But if the mind of the Secretary of the Treasury in considering the case from
the relation that every law bore to the subject, partook of these
embarrassments, how easy is it to conceive that from the bona fide construction
of the Comptroller General, that decision might have resulted, the consequence
of which was the redemption of these certificates.

If then there was this want of perspicuity that created on all hands
hesitation and embarrassment, it would have been highly useful and proper in
the Legislature to have given to this section a clearness incapable of being
mistaken. If upon laws of uncertain construction, every error that an officer
commits in following the dictates of his own judgment, should be liable to
impeachments, such posts must have been deserted, or held on a slipp^^^ ^^dge,
and at a great hazard, when every step may be that of destruction.

But in the second place with regard to their subscribability, other officers
of eminence, of talents and integrity, concurred in opinion with the officer
now under consideration.

Sir, it is in testim^^^ that the Secretary of the Treasury pending the first
loan was of opinion, that the New-Loans were subscribable, and gave such an
opinion to the Continental Loan-officer, and that the business is not to this
moment decided upon, and he mentioned the same to the commissioner aforesaid
(see page 273-4-5.) "I do not consider you as justifiiable." etc.

Mr. Addison, a law officer of the government, was of this opinion, a gentleman
well qualified, and of much integrity. What is to be inferred from the silence
of all the State officers during the demand of the Continental certificates?
they all held the same opinion. (The letter, page 102, was then read.)

If the Secretary of the Treasury had been unacquainted with the law, were the
Governor and Secretary of the commonwealth ignorant? The whole tenor of this
letter necessarily implies the sense of the writer to be that the New-Loans
were liable to be assumed, for the whole provision being to prevent the payment
of interest twice on the same sum; no question could arise out of it with
regard to the New-Loans, without their being subscribable: In all, the
suspension of interest and assumability were the principal things to be
considered. If any doubt had existed with the Governor, would he not have
sifted it to the bottom? If any doubt remained respecting their
subscribability, would they not endeavor to clear up the matter?

With regard to the Secretary of the commonwealth, there is a circumstance
which strongly corroborates the assertion, that he must be satisfied of the
subscribability of the New-Loans. He appeared to be surprised when the matter
of the assumption was communicated to him; this information seemed to run
counter to his judgment! The Secretary had seen Mr. Nicholson's plan of
finance, in that plan the New-Loans are recognized as a debt; he approved of
the plan, (see his letter page 286.) It came before him with its "prominent
features;" the plan put the New-Loans on the same footing with other debts of
the commonwealth. Why surprised? Perhaps the reason may be, because there was
no redemption law at that time. Is that a reason? Why? certainly not.

Further, It is given in testimony that after several conferences the
Register-General concurred in opinion with the Comptroller General, and that
the accounts contained some certificates depreciated on the principal which no
body could mistake for any other than New-Loans; the probability is, that the
same was redeemed; immaterial whether before or after our abstract, which had
been bona fide presented and redeemed: Yet this man, whom they represent as
hackneyed in perfidy, this man who veiled and masked the proceedings to delude
the other officers of government into error is found expressly to have
communicated with them, while they participated in the conviction which that
conference produced.

The next reason, then, that I would offer is that the Comptroller General held
the same opinion on the assumability of the New-Loans, long before the Act of
April 10, 1792, by which alone he became interested.

First, From the testimony of the Secretary of the Treasury (page 287-8-9.)
2dly, From the Comptroller's own letter to Mr. Smith, the Loan-officer (page
271-2) eighteen months before the redemption law. Nothing is clearer than that
the writer of this letter was confident that the New-Loans were assumable,
although he was convinced they would not be offered subject to the
disadvantages of the funding law.

It was against the interest of the New-Loan holders to subscribe them, it was
for their interest to exchange them for Continental certificates, and then to
subscribe those. In the next place, the same opinion is also expressed in his
letter (page 220-1-2) to the Governor. I ask whether it is possible for any
thing to express more clearly and unequivocally his opinion of their being a
debt due from the state, and of their subscribability; it seems from the former
part of this letter that the Secretary of the Treasury had taken higher ground,
and demanded a surrender of Continental certificates equal to the amount of
New-Loans outstanding; or suspend the payment of interest, this it is evident
had been actually relinquished by the Secretary.

Hitherto the current of testimony sets in, strongly, on the side of innocence.
(His next letter to the Secretary of the Treasury, page 277, then read.)

It will be remembered that in the letter of the 24th December 1791, five days
before this, the Comptroller tells the Governor, that none of the New-Loans
were actually subscribed; though they were subscribable, and therefore there
was no need of a surrender. This was the object of the negotiation, and
therefore he informs the Secretary of the Treasury of the same thing; that if a
doubt should arise, whether part of the assumed or subscribed debt of
Pennsylvania does not consist of New-Loans, it can be easily proved it does
not. No body can doubt this to be the meaning, when they recollect that in his
former letter to the Governor, and that to Mr. Smith, he not only recognized
them to be subscribable, but said they were not, or would not be subscribed; it
being against the interest of the holders.

Still less shall we doubt it, when we turn to the letter (page 278) wherein we
trace the same sentiments.

(The letter page 223-4 was then read.)

Thus, we see the consistency and uniformity of the officer now on defense, in
persevering in the same opinion for the space of eighteen months before he
became interested. Sir, I think this gives a mortal blow to the prosecution,
and the charge of fraud vanishes like the baseless fabric of a vision, which
leaves not a wreck behind. But this is not all, for if we descend to the
particular periods when the transactions took place, we shall discover there,
also, a train of co-temporary facts, equally invulnerable and conclusive.

The next reason which I shall offer, arises from the caution which he gave the
members of the Legislature when the redemption law was under consideration.

When the extent of that law was in contemplation, when gentlemen undertake to
paint the distressed and ruinous consequences to the state, which would follow
the admission of the New-Loans to sweep away the whole quota of the assumption
of Pennsylvania, while at the same time it absorbed the specie from her
treasury; let them have the charity to remember that this officer, whose spirit
they are now grieving, raised his voice and hands against that dangerous
proceeding at that time. This is not the language of disgrace.

But, again; the transactions were conducted in the usual forms of office, and
in his own name; and it is remarkable that the committee on whose report this
impeachment was founded, gave their opinion in that report, that the said John
Nicholson has been guilty of a high misdemeanor for two reasons, one of which
was that he passed and certified the New-Loans to the Executive in the usual
forms of office, thereby causing them to be redeemed. The jet of the reason is
in the "usual forms" of office, by which they were redeemed.

If then forms had been unusual, the very singularity would have been prima
facie, a presumption and evidence of other than ordinary design or intention,
this charge is indeed to make the usual course of business the evidence of
guilt.

A like charge and equally unimportant appears to me the matters contained in
the third article of impeachment.

This article is mean in substance, and pitifully drawn: The first thing
singular is, that they begin with the criminality and go on to the facts. "In
order to promote and procure his own emolument," etc. till it was actually
reduced to possession, implying, that after the emolument was reduced to actual
possession, there was a certainty or probability of detection; this idea is too
futile, nobody in their senses will believe this to be true; for what purpose
could it answer to deceive for the possession, when certain detection was to
follow it? Again in order to avoid "discovery till" etc. "he did not consult
the Register-General," implying that after the emoluments were in his
possession, he did consult the Register-General: Let me ask, how came this
peculiar phraseology to be given to this article?

We have had the history of that from Mr. Gallatin, who was the principal
member of the House of Representatives at the time, we have been informed that
upon the examination of the Register-General, although not examined upon oath,
the first part of this article was founded.

It was found, that, after most of the abstracts had passed and the
Comptroller General had actually received the amount of his; there was a
consultation among the officers, when the Register fully concurred in opinion
with the Comptroller General, and although there were sufficient distinguishing
marks on the face of the abstracts, to ascertain that New-Loans were contained
in them; and although these distinguishing marks were in a part to which the
whole business of the Register was confined, namely the calculation of
interest, and therefore, it was no fault of the Comptroller General that they
were not sooner known, and although the Register declared that when they were
known, he was fully of the same opinion, and accordingly officially passed some
abstracts afterward, knowing them to be New-Loans; yet the committee,
forsooth, instead of throwing aside the article as unsupported, resolved to
amend the article, to suit the testimony whatever it might be, in order that
the Comptroller General might be set for a while on the stool of repentance;
because the Register-General in calculating interest on a certificate
depreciated on the principal, was not sagacious enough to find out that it was
a New-Loan, and therefore in the true style of the dramatist, the passion for
incident is to absorb every other faculty.

But, Sir, let me proceed to the facts, facts! Did I say? I was wrong, sir,
there is not a single fact charged in this article, they are only omissions.
That "he did not consult the Register-General, nor communicate the matter to
the Governor" before he got his money, and that he did not discriminate between
the New-Loans and others. It is pretended, that this was an incumbent duty on
him, the contrary is clear, for neither did his duty require it, nor the usage
or practice of the officers make it necessary. It is not shown to be his duty
but it has been observed that in so important a case, he ought to use some
works of supererrogation.

Is it singular that a man should be charged criminally, for the omission of
that which avowedly was not required of him by law?

As to his certifications to Mr. Smith the Loan-officer, I conceive them to be
out of the question, for these reasons. 1. He was not acting then as an officer
at all, but having received a letter from Mr. Smith, requesting information, he
gives it as a friend to the best of his knowledge. 2. As he was not then
performing a duty imposed on him in his official capacity, so neither was Mr.
Smith, who received the information, bound to give any credit to it, unless he
choose to do so. 3. As that information was for the United States, and not this
state, if that information was attended with loss or injury, the government of
the Union alone have a right to complain.

The certifications and proceedings with regard to our own state were in the
usual forms of office; no certificates were more particularly set forth or
described than others. The New-Loans themselves were specifically ascertainable
from the variety of dates in the commencement of interest, which no officer
with superficial attention could overlook. -- Besides this, one certificate in
the subscription of the Comptroller General was depreciated on the principal,
it was not possible to mistake that for any other than a New-Loan; therefore
the certification of genuine and assumable being done at the request of
individuals, and in no instance of the Comptroller's own subscription, it was a
labor without the smallest interest or profit: If then this minute of genuine
and assumable, had no sort of influence in the right or question of subscribing
them, in what shape can it be criminal? The subscription was in his own name
also. Sir, however this may be lightly spoken of, yet to ascertain the motive
it is of the first importance: As these certificates were payable to bearer it
was in his power to have them subscribed in the name of some unknown person,
and his interest in them could not have been discovered; the whole transaction
becomes an easy riddle instead of a well concerted plot, this circumstance
arose from conscious rectitude of mind, with that fearless independence, which
is the noblest associate of honesty and its surest indication.

Another reason: Sir, it is notorious, when the impeachment was brought forward
he solicited an immediate trial: it is not the part of conscious wickedness to
court enquiry, but to dread and procrastinate it even when it is unavoidable,
yes time and delay are the only harbors of guilt! these things may be fetters
to the guilty; but they are wings to the innocent, when he was impeached, he
flew to met the prosecution. I will not enquire for what purpose that
accusation slept in impotent abstraction in the bosom of a numerous committee,
till the very close of the session.

Although many months have elapsed since this impeachment was preferred,
although the commit of investigation, have used every effort during the
recess, after trying by every means to discover official frauds, yet they have
been unable to fasten on a single instance of the sort, among the numerous
documents and the voluminous records of that department; but they have laid
their hands on a solitary fellow-citizen, the dark and doubtful corners of
whose memory they have ransacked again and again, with the pleasing hope of
discovering the thong that would bind in disgrace an obnoxious transgressor.

I will not pretend to say, that the motive for postponing the investigation
was to suspend him during the vacation as a culprit with his lips sealed for
the hand of scorn to point his slow and moving finger at. I will not say that
it was to rake up the ashes of long-forgotten transactions, in hopes, that
while the memory had lost the co-temporary circumstances necessary to explain
them, they might by the breath of suspicion and party be invigorated and
matured into a crime: But I will say, that whatever be the motives for
postponing it, the impulse in the accused in soliciting an immediate trial,
could be no other than the impulse of innocence.

Sir, need I mention that such a thing would be against his real and
substantial interest; on this ground the gentlemen have placed the cornerstone
of this prosecution. Common sense decides that the eventual emolument of this
officer can have no operation as a proof of guilt.

It is understood in the first place, that he directly contravened his own
interest in cautioning the members of the Legislature when the Act was under
consideration. For laying it down as a principle that every man is most
strongly inclined to make gain. He was either possessed of these certificates
at the time the redemption law passed, and was of opinion that the law would
warrant the construction it received, or he had them not at the time, and
thought the law would not bear that construction; now, if he was not possessed
of them at the time, there was nothing to induce him to purchase them, as he
had nothing to lose, and having given his opinion against them, he would have
no motive in becoming possessed of them, but a firm belief that the Act would
warrant their redemption. If he was possessed of them, or if he was not
possessed of them, but only intended to become so, he certainly would not have
interposed his opinion at the time, as it might be expected that it would have
produced an amendment to the sixth section of the Act, by the introduction of
some negative words. In the next place, it is not a difficult task to separate
the appearance of truth in this sort of argument from the real fallacy which
gives it a direction against the officer now on trial; as it is to be
understood that his eventual emolument is contended for, as the strongest proof
of guilt; and this is certainly nothing at all.

Let us examine the truth or fallacy of these transactions.

I take it that in the event, interest or speculation might result from either
case.

If he corruptly put a decision upon the law, contrary to his real opinion,
speculation and interest was his object. But I presume this emolument as we
find it, would have followed the construction itself, whether that construction
originated in an honest or dishonest motive. In the one case, if he acted from
a dishonest motive, speculation was his object, and he acted corruptly. In the
other if he acted from an honest motive, speculation was the effect. In the one
case he would speculate because he had so decided the law, in the other he
would so decide the law, because he had predetermined to speculate; so that the
argument of emolument is thus far as broad as it is long; but I apprehend on a
closer inspection it will be found against the prosecution and in favor of
innocence.

One fact is certain, that a profit has resulted to the officer, it is mother
was either honesty or corruption, let it is parentage be decided by natural and
fair probabilities; arguing from the effect to the cause. It is a fair rule of
justice and common sense, that effects in the natural world shall be attributed
to the most probable and the most natural causes, and in moral cases to the
most innocent causes. This emolument might result from honest or dishonest
causes: In the one case, speculation and emolument is the natural and
legitimate effect of a construction fairly and honestly put upon the Act. In
the other, it is the corrupt pretext for a construction inconsistent with the
opinion of the party using it, and prosecuted at once against honor and
honesty. So far are they from proving any thing, that their argument of guilt
must be deserted, unless some other strong leading circumstances can be brought
forward to its support. Are there any others? No. So far from being able to
bring forward any proof to convict the defendant, that all their arguments seem
to militate against themselves, and every circumstance adduced by them, seems
to favor the cause of innocence.

But these observations might be spared, for how unspeakbly absurd is the
argument of interest when placed in contact with some part of the testimony. It
has been proved by testimony in profusion, that this officer entertained the
same opinion as to the assumability ot these certificates, pending the first
loan of Congress, and long before our redemption law passed, as he does now.

Sir, can we believe that it was the hope of interest which supported this
officer through those scenes of deception, before the Act, which in fact
created it, was in existence? Behold then the gordian knot untied, for the
argument of interest to have force must take it for granted, that this officer,
while he expressed his opinion unequivocally eighteen months before the Act of
April 1792, foresaw nevertheless, that such a law would pass and afford him an
occasion of profit; nay, further it must be taken for granted that his
coincidence of opinion with the Secretary of the Treasury, and other officers
of the state and general, government so long before the time, was a game of
hypocrisy, which his cunning induced him to play to conceal the mercenary
designs which futurity was to gratify.

Behold then this rope of sand, will this then, bind a victim to the altar? Can
we believe that it was the hope of interest which supported this officer
through those scenes of deception before the Act had an existence? For if
interest was at that moment the embryo motive of his heart; if he could at that
distance of time foresee the growing harvest; while he prepared his sickle to
partake of it, instead of being arraigned as a culprit he should be deified as
a prophet.

Mr. Speaker,

IN a public point of view it is much to be regretted that charges of such
serious magnitude and importance, should be thus built upon the slenderest
foundation.

It is observed by some parliamentary speakers, I believe (by Chesterfield,)
that accusations by impeachment are not so likely to be well founded as
presentiments by grand juries, for while in the one case political objects and
party spirit are most apt to govern the accusers, in the other they are
generally governed by the dispassionate and impartial dictates of judgment
operating on the weight of evidence. The history of impeachments in England
verifies this idea, and confirms its truth, perhaps, Sir, in a more popular
government this circumstance and its consequences are the more dangerous.

It augurs not well of the public weal in a free country, where all officers
depend directly or remotely on the voice of the people, to find them swept away
from the port of confidence by the plea of groundless accusation.

An impeachment is an engine of State as sacred in its nature, as it is
delicate in its construction, and nothing but imminent danger will warrant the
use of it, the danger of falling a sacrifice to popular indignation, which
sometimes even merit has provoked, or to party resentment, of all the
resentments the most implacable, will enhance the difficulty of procuring good
officers, while it depreciates the incentives to virtuous actions in those who
are such; while events are our preceptors, and have taught us, that we should
give to government only the same enlightened self interest, which is granted to
a good man in the ordinary concerns of human life.

Let then the sword of the people be suspended over the heads of their
servants, but let not its descent be so accidental or precarious that like the
sword of Dionysius over the head of Damocles, it should be as much the
tormentor of the faithful, as the scourge of the unjust.

Sir, the officer now on defense, discards all fear, he provokes no compassion,
he solicits no favor, he demands but justice. Here are facts on which he
challenges your consciences, and defies your persuasion. Winnow the chaff from
the substance and the breath of heaven will dissipate it, so that it cannot be
gathered. To construe a law is an act of the understanding, how wide is the
difference between intelligence and integrity.

Let then the records of this tribunal, which his accusers had destined to
emblazon his disgrace, harmonize with the decrees of time, the great arbiter of
reputation; nay, the decrees of that arbiter who is greater than time, and
greater than heaven itself.

SAMUEL DEXTER, jun. Esquire Member of Congress from Massachusetts!
Mr. Speaker, and Gentlemen of the Senate,
THIS subject is very complicated in its nature, and my attention has been
much attracted to other objects, and interrupted in the study of this case: So
singular were my circumstances that at the first appearance I might reasonably
claim an apology. A stranger invited to appear before this respectable body,
nay, invited by the honorable House of Representatives of Pennsylvania, to lend
his aid to defend their cause, and assert their rights; my obligation was
multiplied, when I considered the importance of the honorable House who made
the application; conscious as I have been, that I shall not be able to add to
the reasoning of the enlightened gentlemen (Messrs. Morgan and Rawle) who
preceded me on the same side; perhaps prudence would have induced me to
decline; but when called upon by so reputable a Legislature, nay, a stranger
solicited to defend the cause of the public, and to redress their wrongs
against one of their own citizens, loaded with the wealth and spoils of the
commonwealth!

This consideration commanded my exertions and magnanimity; the invitation was
too flattering, I could not refuse my aid; I will not waste your time in making
prefatory observations, but will endeavor to make the cause now before the
honorable Senate very intelligible, and therefore will divide the subject into
four points.

1. Has the defendant caused New-Loans to be subscribed, which were not
subscribable by law?

2. Has he caused New-Loans to be redeemed, when by law they were not
redeemable, and thereby had broken and violated the Constitution of this
commonwealth?

3. Has he not appropriated to his own use New-Loan certificates which had been
surrendered to the commonwealth by the holders, and should have been cancelled?

4. Has he not done all this knowingly and corruptly to make unjust gain,
betraying the interest reposed in him, and traded on the public confidence?

These divisions were necessary before I begin to answer the objections which
have been raised against the forms of these articles of impeachment; but no
farther advantage can be taken of them, as to their form; they are not
deficient either in substance or form -- as to forms, two things are only
necessary, 1st. They should be clear to be understood. 2d. They should be a
comtent plea in discharge of another prosecution for the same offense.

To make objections to mere forms, the relics of ancient times, I say, times
of darkness and ignorance, is like the observation respecting the nets and the
traps in which he had been caught: The articles are sufficiently definite, and
answer all the purposes of justice in trials by impeachment. Mere forms are
never attended to in such cases.

Impeachments should be so worded, as to answer two purposes, 1st. They should
be definite. 2d. They ought to be substantial as to form: The articles under
consideration are sufficiently definite and substantial, to answer these two
purposes.

We have been told that the House of Representatives adopted this as a mode of
persecuting, rather than prosecuting.

That honorable body does not wish to persecute, the business of the
Legislature is primarily the protection of the innocent; the protection of the
innocent is of greater importance than the punishment of the guilty; yet it is
of some importance to the community when a public defaulter is punished.

A man who is clearly charged with such crimes, it is not unimportant to the
public to know how he can acquit himself, and how he has discharged his trust;
although it is irritating to any Legislature to prosecute such an offender as
the present defendant.

If zeal in the counsel who have appeared for the Comptroller General, had been
an evidence of innocence, the defendant ought to be acquitted; never had any
defendant more brilliant display of rhetoric, or apparition of reason, to
prevent his being found guilty, than the Comptroller has had on this present
trial.

In my arguments I will consider two things, to wit, the law and the testimony;
in the way that I have divied the subject, the different constructions of the
Acts of Assembly as they seem to favor or make against the the defendant shall
be attended to. The construction of the Act of 1786 relative the the issuing of
New-Loans is perhaps doubtful, and unimportant; if the defendant's construction
is the true one, what will be the issue? But it will be very material if our
construction is the right one, as guilt is charged home and fixed on him; if his
construction is right, it by no means acquits him; and it will not ultimately
determine the case.

Previously to my entering further into this business, I will consider the
causes and motives which produced the Acts. I will not read them, they have
been already repeated, no person can be better acquainted with them than the
Speaker; it will not be controverted that the Act of 1785 was enacted as a
temporary provision for the payment of interests, the Act of 1786 was passed on
the failure of the Act of 1785 for the same persons and had the same general
object in view, and brought the Act of 1785 into execution.

I can see no reason why the Legislature in 1786 should make that perpetual,
which in 1785 was temporary. There is neither reason nor equity for it; if
equity did not require it, there was no reason to grant it. This is prostrating
the principles of justice; the Legislature would not unnecessarily increase its
own burden.

The Gentleman's reasoning, who opened the defense is somewhat singular; he
says it became "an equitable claim," so far I agree with the Gentleman. But,
Sir, will the gentleman go on, and say, that the contract was not as great to
the inhabitants of all the other States who have been creditors of the Union,
more equity was not due to the creditors citizens of Pennsylvania, than to the
creditor citizens of other States; if the premises are admitted, the
consequences cannot be avoided.

Equity is not partial and would embrace the whole, this is clear reasoning, he
cannot deny it.

The Act of March 1786 did not, at all events, pledge the public faith for the
redemption of those certificates in money; if then it is viewed in this light,
why did the State receive the Continental certificates and give their own
certificates in lieu of them? The object of the Legislature was to make a
substitute. If Pennsylvania did not take the certificates, and was to pay, she
might do it at her loss, as she could have no claim on Congress. This is
confirmed from general opinion, and their subsequent views.

If the Treasurer had paid off the Continental certificates they could not
issue the New-Loans; and for this purpose Pennsylvania chose to take in the old
Continental certificates and issue new ones, so that the commonwealth might at
her option be the creditor of the Union, or debtor to her own citizens, by
returning them to the original holders; in the mean time to settle and pay the
interest was the intention of the Legislature: It is manifest, and confirmed by
the opinion of every persen conversant in the transactions of the Assembly, and
by the public Acts.

One circumstance of great importance is to be attended to; that is, the margin
of the New-Loans and the reference to the Continental certificates; this
provides how the debts were to be secured, and the memorandums made in the
same. -- (Here he read a New-Loan certificate.)

This margin was of no consequence unless they wished to return the New-Loans.
We here look for the intention of the Legislature, and not for the negligence
of the executive officer. Was it of consequence to pay in cash at all events,
full interest on depreciated principal? this was not sufficient for it might
have been settled at the issuing, why not at the time reduce the certificate
and give the whole amount when reduced by the scale. If a purchase, it was
worth just as much as the value of the certificate's nominal amount of
principal and interest.

Another reason and a better one than the construction of the law, is the
intention of the Legislature,

The preamble of the Act of March 27 1789, calls it a temporary provision, look
into the preamble of that Act, is a Legislative construction important, relying
on the margin and memorandum in it, does all this weigh nothing?

Was it maneuvre in the Legislature? it is too disrespectful, too indelicate to
suppose, out of the whole I find that the Act of 86 took the certificates into
the custody of the state and that they were only to pay the interest; if
otherwise they would have found a fund to provide for the payment of the
principal, they knew at that time the funds were precariously in their hands,
if so, it would perhaps be wrong to contend that nothing more was intended than
a re-exchange by the Act of 1786. Therefore the law of 1789 repealed nothing;
but carried the Act of 1786 into effect.

The construction of the law of 1786 is much more certain and important. If we
choose to take back our certificate at any time, we shall have a right so to do,
to do away these they enacted the repealing law of 1789. The question now is
not whether the law is right or wrong, but what was the intention of the
Legislature. If the law was right, it does away most of the difficulty, the Act
of 89 is an Act of much importance, of clear and certain construction, let us
enquire what was the intention of the Legislature, not whether it was
constitutional or not, the law is right or wrong only as the Legislature
intended. After we shall discover the intention we'll enquire if open under the
Constitution, and whether obligatory as a law is another question.

The construction of the defendant is so contradictory, so distorted, the
English language can hardly find a definitive idea to correspond with it, he
hardly knows what answer to make, every thing he advances is directly opposite
to what is mentioned in the Act, so obstinate is every part of it in favor of
the prosecution; and he is obliged to run counter to every expression in the
law; if the Act of 1789 designed only to unfund the debt, it is equally unjust
with destroying it, it is different not in principle but in degree. If it is
so, for what reason: It is alleged they could not destroy the claim, is it not
equally a breach of contract to unfund as to destroy it, truly equal; why
unfund the principal that was never funded if the reasoning of the Gentlemen be
right, they should have followed wherever it led them; was it not equally so to
subtract the fund? What did the law of 89 do? They say it had no effect, it
neither destroyed nor annihilated the operations of the former Acts, yet the
defendant must admit that the state committed a fraud in unfunding the debt,
the provision was repealed, yet they say it was altogether compatible with the
law of 1786.

If the alienation of the funds to the General Government had been the reason,
was not that surrender to be perpetual? Did they expect a return of the funds?
If they were to pay the interest, why not the principal? Where were the funds?
Where was the debt? It either proves too much, or it proves nothing at all; it
embraces both principal and interest, or only principal, and excludes the
interest. If this is not broad enough for them, consider only for a moment the
intention of the Legislature in passing the Act.

The declaration in the Act of 1789, proves they intended in 1786 to make a
temporary provision.

Could the Legislature labor a preamble declaring their intention, if they did
not mean to carry that intention into effect?

The Legislature expressly says, the payment of the said debts ought to be from
the Treasury of the United States, and not from Pennsylvania. A construction in
the Act of 1786, to abolish the same Act, if there is no reason for doing away
the Act of 1786, why labor three or four pages; to do what they did not intend
to do.

Yet if the preamble is read, no man will doubt that they did intend to repeal
the law, and possessed the right to do so; look further into it, you will find
the the words "certificates" "reasonable," etc. there.

In fine, that the debts, not interest, is to be paid by Congress; there is
another construction of the Act of 1789, almost too ingenuous to be admitted
and not easily understood, operating not on what is done under the Act.

In the case of the North Carolina certificates there was no Act to repeal, as
the certificates had issued fraudulently.

It is a contradiction in reasoning and almost in terms, do they provide that
the principal shall be paid by the State of Pennsylvania? Perhaps the Gentlemen
would have found no Act to destroy, when they were not issued by any Act. This
long Act of 1789 was not made for nothing, the Act of 1786 was completed in
1788. Therefore the Legislature in repealing the Act, meant to knock away the
foundation on which they stood.

Here the construction is too artificial to be credible, the defense is at war
with itself. First, that it did operate on the certificates, 2dly, It did not
operate. This is an invariable rule of all laws, that all parts should be
construed so as to stand and no part perish.

The defendant's construction is too fine spun to be strong, it breaks asunder,
by another it is held different still, it is so various that there arise three
contradictory modes, but truth is simple and uniform, there are various
accounts, all simple and consistent, if these are true, they are all the
creatures of fancy; they could not repeal the first and second sections of that
Act, and therefore could not provide for the payment* these are invisible
entities of reasoning, we need a microscope to aid our intellectual optics to
see them. The Assembly could not intend what they could not understand, where
is the law which directs payment? It proves the reverse of what was intended,
this is the reasoning the defendant is driven to, if the law proves it, they
will avail themselves of it, for my part I cannot think it was the intention of
the Legislature, the majority never spun thus finely this creature of
metaphysics by the Act of 1789.

Can a man have an intention to do what he does not understand? the exchange
being optional does not serve the defendant, it conforms to our statement. The
option to re-exchange is no objection to our construction, "Many may be
desirous," it is therefore true, that it is optional with the holders, it is
therefore consistent with my explanation, and perfectly consistent in itself.
Take the whole amount together, it is equity, it is justice. We make our
option, which is no more than this; come and take your original certificates,
we were never bound to pay you in cash, you may come and take them if you
please; it was not necessary to make a law to compel them to take their
certificates: It was only this, that if they did not come the obligation on the
part of the commonwealth was done away, we are not obliged to pay cash, we will
not pay cash, we will perform our contract, you may have your certificates,
they were never demandable in cash, they were never a claim for cash, they were
a claim for the original certificates for which they were exchanged, they are
no claim against the government.

That subsequent laws called them a claim it is true. They were a claim for
certificates, the defendant's object was to show a law to justify him; but this
reasoning proves there is none, the first section did not provide or payment,
and the subsequent ones were repealed. That these New-Loans were contemplated
as claims or receipts is undoubtedly true, if we would deny this, we should
commit an outrage against common sense; this is corroborated by the maxim, that
we are not to create a being to be destroyed, they knew such positions were not
supportable: Much reasoning and paper might have been spared: If our
construction is the right one, they were a claim for the original certificates;
one of the Gentlemen says, that the providing to pay in certificates is a
confession that they were a claim for cash; they were a claim, that claim was
merely for re-exchange; but not for cash.

The provision for exchange is no acknowledgment of debt. Another reason must
meet us very forcibly, that the law of 1789 is void, as being against the
constitution of the United States, and impairing the validity of contracts; it
is not so, if our construction of the law of 1786 is right.

But let us suppose for a moment (being willing to put it in every possible
point of view) that we are wrong, that it was an engagement at all events to
pay cash, this is taking the highest possible ground contended for.

I do not mean what is contended for on the other side, for it appears a little
singular, that the constitution of the United States should herein impair the
obligation of contracts. If the Act of 1786 had made an absolute debt, it is
repeal would not be contrary to the constitution, the section only means that a
state should not establish iniquity by law.

It was a mere act of favor by the State, or else it might be understood that
the state made laws, for carrying into effect the breach of contracts. Take
your New-Loans for the Continental certificates. If it means more than this, it
must be that the very letter and terms of the contract should be carried into
effect; if so, a State could not establish a chancery jurisdiction, which says,
penalties shall not always be exacted.

Nor statutes of limitations, a thousand pounds payable on demand, is as justly
due after four years as before; the four years expire, and the contract is not
performed; yet it is a bar pleadable and no injustice.

Let us advert to the statutes against usury, giving damages instead of
compelling a specific performance, and a contract to pay 12 per cent. if it
were not for the law would be a contract; the law says it shall be no contract.
Is this impairing the obligation of contract? this compels a person to receive
what he did not contract for; are these against the constitution of the United
States? where justice is done the contract is answered.

If the construction of the law must be literal, giving damages for specific
articles, such as to deliver lands instead of cash, must also be a breach of
contract: the specific article should be given, the Act of 1789 now under
consideration, says take your certificates instead of cash; these observations
are all unnecessary, because they go on the foundation that all New-Loans are
payable in cash.

But to give the Gentlemen every thing they want, admit for a moment that we are
wrong, this contract is unfair, suppose it is impaired, another question
arises, who is to say it is impairing the contract, where is the proper
judicature? Who is to be the arbiter between the State and her own citizens?
This is a serious consideration; Montesque, Lock and other writers will oppose
them here, the power of making laws is the supreme power of the State, is there
a power superior to the supreme power? If the judges have this power, it
follows that the supreme power is controlled by an inferior power. If courts
cannot, the Senate cannot, both as a court and a part only of the Legislature.

This is a very important question, there should be some important judiciary,
it is a complex question, the constitution is silent on the subject. We must
arrive at some period, let us proceed to the end of the chain, another
Legislature to judge the former, another to rejudge the latter, and so on to
infinity.

Can the Senate rejudge it, being only one branch? the Legislature of the State
has the supreme power, can any individual enjoy it? shall we leave it to a jury
to determine? they judge of facts, this is uncertainty, and contradiction,
shall every petty officer arraign his master? shall any man vainly imagine that
he is wiser than his representatives? language of this kind has been held,
nay, has been pratised. This is rising against the organization of society.

If he decided wrong, he decided at his peril; here it is contended is the
check, the judiciary are to judge; but this brings us back again, the judiciary
in that instance would sit above the Legislature, the people only are superior
to the Legislature, the Legislature is amenable in their representative
capacity to the people, but shall a jury judge? Do juries represent the
commonwealth? They are not the Representatives of the people, their office is
to judge of facts and evidence, not to judge of the constitutionality of laws.
If they are to be the ultimate criterion, it is void to day, because a jury
said so, it will be in force tomorrow, if a jury shall say so.

There is a sufficient check on the Representatives, it is this, they are
amenable to their constituents, their sessions being only temporary, their
doings may be repealed until then it is a law; they may repeal a law orderly by
subsequent representations -- No power on earth can exist superior to the
Legislature of the State, except what exists in the People, it does not exist
in the Judiciary, not in the Senate, nor in Juries. They will, if they
disapprove, choose others who will repeal obnoxious laws. If they mis-judge,
they are corrupt; they will again choose others; the power is less dangerous
here, if they refuse, the People may recur to their original state, dissolve
the social compact, untie the knot, and redress every mistake. Here is an evil
but a less one; this free agency in man, this torpid debility, this "vis
inertiae;" the former is the fever, the latter the death of patriotism.

I have been the more particular in this instance, as there are two important
points to be considered, that if these certificates were not subscribable, they
were not redeemable, although the reverse of the position is not true; if the
servant is to judge of what his master does, then the defendant is to
adjudicate between the State and the holders, there is no situation so unfit at
his to decide; the Comptroller assumes a right to adjudicate, he buys up all
the New-Loans, places himself in the shoes of one of the parties, and then
determines he is to be paid; this is the ground on which this judge stood on
this question between the State and the People.

But still disposed to suppose every thing credible; let them suppose us still
wrong; there are yet ample grounds for the conviction of the defendant, if they
still existed in the form of debts, they were not subscribable debts and
payable in cash, it was said that these were, by virtue of the Act of Congress,
subscribable; situated as these certificates were, it was out of the power of
Congress to take them, and to charge Pennsylvania with their amount in
adjusting the settlement between the United and Individual States: The
provision was only for such as the State acknowledged to be debts payable in
cash.

They were only acknowledgments of debt. The Secretary of the Treasury so
understood them, we will go on broader ground than this, and say, if they
intended to pay such, it would be completely out of their power. The State held
the Continental certificates; Congress could not say, we will not pay the
State, but pay the holders of New-Loans. The Act of 1789 declares the dissent
of the State.

It is true Pennsylvania owes A. because he holds New-Loan certificates, and
the Union owes Pennsylvania, because she holds original certificates. It will
not be contended that Congress designed to pay both; then could Congress pay
the holders of New-Loan certificates without the consent of Pennsylvania, and
pay the State too?

The subscribing New-Loans implies they were not to be exchanged, and makes the
State a creditor by virtue of having the Continental, without the consent of
Pennsylvania, Congress could not assume the New-Loans and refuse the payment of
the Continental.

Congress must previously authorize a power to determine the New-Loans to be a
debt, before they could assume them. This would amount, to decide a case
between a State and her own citizens.

The Supreme Court refused to decide it. The Secretary of the Treasury never
would decide this, if it was to be decided by its nature, none are competent
but the people, who might recur to original principles.

Congress could therefore make no such provision, if this is true, the New-Loan
certificates were not subscribable to the loan of the United States.

Thus, I have been willing to descend, step by step, from that ground on which
the prosecution rested, to prove the charge against the Comp. Genesis is well
founded, and his defense not maintainable. I will descend one step lower, and
admit that the New-Loans are assumable, yet the defendant is guilty in the true
sense of the articles of impeachment, and upon every principle of justice,
although no gentleman will agree that Congress, the Secretary of the Treasury,
or any other person had a right to decide on their assumability.

It was the interest of Pennsylvania that the Act of 1789 should be complied
with. They viewed themselves bound to pay 20 s. in the pound. This business was
committed to the Comptroller General, and he had the care of making the
bargain. Is it just in him to take measures to defeat this trust? It was his
business to promote it; he opposed it.

Has he not taken every dollar from the Treasury, which he has put into his
pocket, and this after the bargain was completed? She committed the management
of this transaction to her agent, the holders of New-Loans were to apply to him
for re-exchanges, he was the agent, nay, call it more, the commonwealth made
the offer, and appointed Mr. Nicholson to complete the re-exchange. Is this
faithfulness in an agent? Did he fulfill his trust? Does not this look like
perfidy? Did he take pains to procure exchanges? When persons offered to
exchange and surrender, did he not prevent that exchange? Did he not after they
were lodged in his hand as agent, and Comptroller General, purchase and put
them as Mr. Nicholson into his pocket? And if they had been so exchanged, could
they have been redeemed? After the parties had agreed to take the offer of the
State from this officer entrusted to make such bargain, and by which the State
would gain the difference in the exchange; he clearly had no equity to put this
difference into his own pocket. After the parties had consented to carry the
exchange into effect, he refused to deliver the Continental certificates, he
sent a line offering to take and buy them himself; nay, he actually purchased
them, after which he subscribed them to the loan of the United States, and
procured their redemption at the State-Treasury; so that all construction is
out of the question.

I ask, if guilt is not irresistably proved on Mr. Nicholson? Perhaps much less
than this would be criminal. Whenever a person was willing to sell a
certificate, every such person willing to exchange his property, but was
prevented by Mr. Nicholson, even in the streets, by which exchange it would be
the property of the State, but had been not only put into the pocket of the
Comptroller, but taken out of the Treasury of Pennsylvania.

It is a little singular that the ground on which the defendant rests his
defense, is by doing equity in opposition to law, and being anxious to defeat
the views of the Legislature, that equity should be done to the holders of
New-Loans, by procuring for them 20. per pound; instead of this equity, we find
Mr. Nicholson chose to make a bargain, and to take this equity from them, and
the means of doing it in like manner is wrested from them, lest the State
should take it. This is crushing equity to death; this aggravates the charges,
to deprive them of 20. in the pound, law or no law. If Mr. Nicholson knew it,
it was unjust, he defrauded the State or the party; where he took this equity
from the State, he defrauded the public, when from the holders he defrauded the
holders. Where then is this equity?

It has been stated, but not much relied on, that the abstract of Mr.
Nicholson was not certified, genuine and assumable. This is a mere quibble of
words, this is the Pharisee in judgment. We are here to do justice, an offense
is committed, he is guilty, if the evidence is sufficient to support the
charges, the essence is not in writing a word, and adding I. N. at the bottom,
a deceit had been practiced, the crime was not in the certificate, but in the
deceit, the State was defrauded, the deceit is proved if the evidence is
sufficient to support it; his abstract was in his own hand writing, he deceived
the officer who called for the certificate, he deprived the commonwealth of the
money which he pocketed at her expense. The substance of the charge is
literally true, and the same is proved and supported.

It is charged that he certified a number of New-Loan certificates to be
subscribable, the same is literally true.

The charge is proved, because he certified others, and that is equal to
certifying his own. I will dismiss this subject without any further
animadversion on this aggravating species of criminality, trusting that when
the Senate shall pronounce him guilty, they shall render that justice to their
country which is their duty to do. Adjourned to 4 o'clock this afternoon.

In the minutes of the House of Representatives the following entry is recorded
--

"In conformity to the resolutions of the 25th day of February last, the House
resolved itself into a committee of the whole, in order to attend the trial of
John Nicholson, Comptroller General.

"The Speaker quitted the chair and Mr. Wynkoop was placed therein.

"The committee of the whole then proceeded to the Senate-chamber for that
purpose.

"After some time,

"The committee of the whole returned to their own chamber.

"The Chairman left the chair, and the Speaker resumed it.

"The Chairman then informed the House that the committee of the whole had
attended the trial of John Nicholson, Comptroller General.

"The committee appointed to manage the trial of the articles of impeachment
against John Nicholson, Comptroller General, reported further progress, and
that the Senate would proceed in the further hearing of the counsel at four
o'clock this afternoon."

Same day, 4 o'clock. P. M.
THE Senate met, having adjourned the Legislative business for the purpose of
sitting in their judicial capacity. The House of Representatives also attending.

Mr. DEXTER,

Rose and said,

I endeavored in the forenoon to prove my first position, that the
Comptroller General caused New-Loans to be subscribed, which were not
subscribable by law.

The Act of March 1789 shows the Legislature did not mean to unfund the debt,
as the principal never was provided for, therefore it was unnecessary to repeal
what never was enacted.

It is contended by the counsel for the defendant that the interest only on the
New-Loans was attended to, and considered. If the interest was only to be paid,
why introduce the word principal, which was never funded at all? We will now
attend to our second division, which is, That he caused New-Loans to be
redeemed, when by law they were not redeemable, and thereby had broken and
violated the Constitution of this commonwealth.

That he caused New-Loans to be redeemed, that he certified them to be so, and
that that certificate was given, officially, will not be controverted. That
this fiscal arrangement by his certifications, had the effect of drawing the
money out of the Treasury of Pennsylvania, will not be denied.

The question is, Whether there was, or was not a law:

The Act of the 10th April 1792, is much relied on, to justify him. (Here Mr.
Dexter read a part of that Act.

It is agreed that the second section is not extensive enough to cover
New-Loans, and for the payment, redemption and discharge of all the
certificates of that description.

It is agreed that interest is not payable on New-Loans, as it is conceded that
this expression does not cover New-Loans, and as no interest was payable on
them, it is contended that in a part of the 6th section they are included,
assuming the New-Loans as subscribable, New-Loans are not mentioned, and yet
they are subscribable, and if subscribable, they must be redeemable, because
subscribable certificates are to be paid; but all the state and continental
officers agree they are not subscribable, and consequently not redeemable. (He
then read the 6th section). "The holder of a certificate or certificates,
subscribable to the subscription," etc. If they are not subscribable, it cannot
be within the purview of this act, it is well understood from the complexion of
the law, that whatever is not subscribable cannot be redeemable, and whatever
is not subscribable nor redeemable, cannot be included in this section.
Whatever might have once been the opinion of the Comptroller General, it is
evident it never was the opinion of the law officers of the state of
Pennsylvania, nor of the Attorney General of the United States. (Here Mr.
Dexter wanted to lay his hands on the letter of Mr. Randolph, page 81-2, but
could not find it) and he added, We need not recur to the unanimous opinion of
the officers, the laws are here, the Senate understand them, and will judge;
that paper ought to have been here; if the certificates are not redeemable,
then all the reasoning of the gentlemen will fall to the ground, because they
are not subscribable to the loan opened by Congress.

Admit that the New-Loans were subscribable, still they are not redeemable. The
gentleman who opened the defense, agreed that the fund had not been provided
for the redemption of New-Loans by the 6th section, but by the 2d. (Mr.
Tilghman observed, The gentleman did not attend to my statement. The sixth
section is more extensive than the second. The fund by the sale of 3 per cent.
stock, was not to cover New-Loans.)

Taking this to be true, the object of the defendant is not obtained, and it is
clear no New-Loans are redeemable; but recourse must be had to another fund,
nay, the fund for claims and improvements they say, covers it; the defendant's
warrant and certificate, prove the contrary; these are raw troops pressed into
his service; this is a strange departure of the Comptroller-General's plan of
defense; his counsel shift their ground. The Comptroller General committed the
fact, and retained counsel to find other laws for it, but those laws are
confessed to be of no use. It is said New-Loan certificates were a debt by the
Act of 1786. Could the Act of 1792 make them more than a debt? But the
Comptroller being determined to get a fund to draw his money from, and finding
he could not succeed in drawing his cash by virtue of that law of 1792, changed
his opinion, and his counsel procured him another fund. (Here Mr. Dexter said,
If I am not right, they will put me right. Mr. Lewis said, You're wrong this
long time, but go on.) The funds for claims and improvements should be made use
of; this was done by the Act of 1791. This is too remote for discussion, fixed
by its history raised per Act of 1789, and limited to L. 10,000 for claims and
improvements. (Here Mr. Bradford interrupted Mr. Dexter, and said, The Act of
April 7th, 1791, created the fund, and did not limit it.) This fund without any
particular appropriation only to provide for claims and improvements, and
without any provision for minute occasions or any occurrence which may happen
during the recess of the Legislature; why is this called up? it is a confession
of distrust, it is peeping out of the window.

Let us take the useless Act of 1792 out of the question; the Act of 1786 and
1791 are sufficient for the defendant.

The New-Loans are said to be a claim, therefore it is said to be within the
act of 7th April 1791, are not unfunded depreciated debt equally within it?
There are no debts but are claims, if they existed at the time of creating the
fund, they are all included in the fund for claims and improvements. These were
for objects too various and minute for legislation: this transaction must be
unconstitutional; if thus general, why not a little zeal in the defendant? By
the law of 1789 the defendant acquired wealth, and gained money.

It is argued that the act of 1789, stopped interest on New-Loans,
notwithstanding, by this means the Comptroller General got interest. The
gentlemen will not contend, that New-Loans are one of the objects.

When any money was drawn out of the Treasury, the fund was particularly
mentioned, that such a warrant or claim was payable out of such or such a fund;
therefore it especially behooves the defendant to show out of what fund, the
money was to be drawn to satisfy his demand. This act goes to show what shall
be paid out of the claim found by the act of April 7th 1791. This general
clause covers all warrants hereafter to be drawn by virtue of any law or laws,
etc. Was this a claim provided for? It is clear there was no appropriation;
consequently the Constitution was broken. This sweeping clause (6th section)
cannot cover so important a demand: By the law of 1786, the New-Loans are a
debt in some shape or other; by the law of 1789, they were made no longer
payable in cash, it was agreed that the interest was not to be paid in cash;
the principal was never funded. This is a blind general clause, altogether
incapable of altering the conditions of the New-Loans.

That the principal and interest of the New-Loans should be paid, but still I
misunderstand them* or they are mistaken, in saying that the Act of 1786
created a debt. The interest is not funded by the law of 1789. If an
appropriation to pay by the law of 1789, why introduce it by the Act of 1792?
If the Act of April 1791 provides for it, and a fund competent for its
discharge, why is the Act of 1792 sought for to make it more than a debt? This
is calling in a law, which gives it no additional strength, their own
consciousness betrays their faithfulness to their client, they are convinced
that their proof is not sufficient to support them; this is manifest, though
not expressed by them, it would be prudent in them to close the door of secrecy
on this distrust. Nothing can be done by the law of 1792 if they are right in
their construction of the Acts of 1786 or 1789.

It will not be contended that the Act of 1792 made the New-Loans a debt. If
the law of 1792 is useless, take it out of the question; having taken it out,
you apply for payment by the law of 1791.

If right in this reasoning, it will be admitted there was no fund, and
consequently no appropriation; and therefore the second charge is fully proved,
and the Constitution of the commonwealth was broken by the Comptroller General.

That there was an appropriation by the law of 1792, for the redemption of
debts, is evident from the second section. What is the Comptroller-General's
language? He says, although the Legislature say by the Act of 1789 that these
certificates are no debts, yet he says, A. B. C. are creditors of the
commonwealth by the Act of 1792. I know the state owes these people, I will
determine, I will take the money, I will pay it to the holders of New-Loans, I
will go further, I will purchase this equitable claim myself, having the power,
although the agent of the government, I will purchase it from the holders by
virtue of my official authority, and retain the money by virtue of the Act of
1792.

Is this the language of a faithful agent? On what principles of equity is this
justified? Is this justice to the New-Loan holders? I will no longer detain you
on this second division.

I am now come to the third general question, that is, Has he not appropriated
to his own use, New-Loan certificates which had been surrendered to the
commonwealth by the holders; and should have been cancelled?

That the Comptroller General, as trustee of the commonwealth, had done this,
will not be doubted; our evidence however on this point is not now as complete
as it may be, we expect the testimony of Hans Hamilton; but there are other
evidences, Biddle and Oldden, by whose testimony the same imputation is fixed
on the conduct of the Comptroller General.

The testimony of both are similar, both applied to Mr. Nicholson to exchange,
both brought the New-Loan certificates to be exchanged, one of them filled up a
blank exchange, they manifested their consent to re-exchange, no expectation
ever to receive back their New-Loans again, this is a strong evidence of their
intention to re-exchange, these were by all principles of justice surrendered
to the commonwealth, and ought to have been cancelled; the property was shifted
from the holders to the State, for the express purpose of being destroyed, if
he should have delivered the certificates to the original holders, it would be
perfidy in the agent.

We are told with confidence, that "the charge is a millstone, the evidence as
light as a feather." They are much mistaken in the merits of this controversy;
the property was not in the original holders as soon as the proprietor reached
it to the agent of the commonwealth, the same was completely shifted from the
original holders, not a doubt can remain of their being liable for the holder's
debts.

It will not be contended that if two parties agree to exchange commodities,
and they agree on all the terms, the bargain is completed. One says, here, take
my goods, I will call tomorrow and receive my articles. The property is
shifted. If these general principles are established and admitted, if the case
before the Senate be an exception to such general principles, it becomes their
duty to show it. This is not a bold assertion, but authority which is
acquiesced in; the agent was ready, the holder was ready, the party brought the
certificates to the agent, the exchange was proposed to the Comptroller, the
agent had possession, it was in the custody of the commonwealth, an express
agreement, "give me the original certificates" -- nay, more, the exchange is
made in writing. I will call tomorrow or when you can look up the original
certificates. If this was not a contract for New-Loan certificates, the
government had no original right to issue them.

The holder had a claim on the State for the amount of his certificates, and no
dealer in the market would doubt, but he had parted with his property.

What right, then, had the Comptroller General to make proposals for
certificates thus deposited and disposed of; and to appropriate them to his own
use? The fact is, there was delay. The Senate will judge of the intention of
the officer by the application: The certificates being thus deposited, the
bargain was completed; he purchased them from men who held the property, not
the property of Mr. Nicholson, but the property of the state of Pennsylvania;
and to give a reason why he did so, he produces neither reason nor authority
for his acting in this manner.

But there is another case still stronger than that of Oldden's or Biddle's;
and that is the certificate of Blair M'Clenachan.

It is true the matter is not perspicuous enough, but it is true enough to
satisfy certain facts, to wit:

It appears Blair M'Clenachan held such a certificate, he never sold to Mr.
John Nicholson it is true, he sold to others; it is also true, and possible, Mr.
Nicholson might have bought from others; if a fact, it is capable of proof --
and the weight of that proof rests on the Comptroller General.

It is incumbent on him to show how he came by it; he has subscribed it, it is
his duty to point out how he became possessed of it, we have paid it, it is
similar to stolen goods found on a person, he must account how he came by them;
this may be said to be less hard on Mr. Nicholson than on a felon, or on a
common vagabond, who knows nothing of accounts; this is not the case with Mr.
Nicholson, he is a person of information, of books, and of accounts, knows with
whom he deals, and keeps a diary to assist his memory. (Mr. Lewis gave him here
a loud hoarse laugh, for talkin^* of diaries, when none of them would be
admitted as testimony.) Why! he says so -- he began to keep a diary in March
1792.

It is a fact that he had this certificate, the amount of which is L.3275:19:4,
he can trace a transaction of so much importance, the name cannot be lost in
the mere hurry of business, if the person exists upon earth, Mr. Nicholson can
and ought to produce him; in some instances it is usual to give a bill of sale
of such certificates.

And further, Mr. Nicholson is in possession of books and official documents,
if it is not exchanged, where are the Continental certificates for which this
was issued.

Can the defendant show them? Let him turn to his books and show them; will not
the books be sufficient to clear up this point? and to show the amount on hand
and not delivered out, or how he has accounted for them, if the books are kept
as they ought to have been, it must appear from some of those official
documents in the possession of the defendant, if no other answer can be
procured, but that he is not bound to prove it, it is in vain to make any
enquiry into the conduct of a public officer.

If the certificate had been consolidated It was consolidated. See Mr.
M'Connell's evidence, page 186.
, still it is in his power to show this by his books The books also showed it
to have been the case.
. Finally, if we are to prove the charge, what other evidence can we produce,
or can be expected of us? We have proved the facts, the defendant must prove
his mistake. It is his duty to show, when and where he purchased it, and what
became of the counter parts: But if he does not, the charge is proved upon him,
and the evidence is strong and irresistible.

I am now come to the fourth general question, to wit: Has not the
Comptroller General done all this, knowingly and corruptly, to make unjust
gain, betraying the trust reposed in him, and traded on the public confidence?

Having proved the facts which were breaches of laws, it is incumbent on the
defendant to prove he is innocent, that it was done through mistake and
innocently, that he acted with an honest intention, and that this killing was
not maliciously done; if the Comptroller will not prove this, there is no doubt
of his knowledge and criminal intentions. Can any doubts exist of what a man
tells us in the public records, after the labor of many days, should he say
that he did not know it?

In these records he has explicitly shown the true construction of those laws,
his statement in 1790 is conclusive, (here Mr. Dexter read the minutes of 1790,
page 389) that the New-Loans amounted to a certain sum, which were claims
against the State, but by the Act of 1789 were excluded from redemption. (The
whole being taken, it reads, "redemption" by the Land-office.)

These claims were only claims for certificates (page 395, same date) by the
Act of March 178 they were excluded from the Land-office, in the same page are
most material passages, but for what purpose? They were claims not for money at
as early a date as December 1790. I have urged this confession as a reason, and
a number of circumstances strongly apply to confirm that this was the true
construction, that the Comptroller General and the other officers of government
concurred in the same opinion, that New-Loan certificates were not subscribable
to the loan of the United States.

It is said the Secretary of the Treasury was of that opinion, when he was
better informed, he renounced his former opinion. The consideration of the two
Acts of 1786 and 1789, together with the consideration of the Constitution of
the United States, never came before him for decision in a "prominent point of
view."

The Comptroller General was not mistaken in his views. Is he to shelter
himself under the opinion of the Secretary of the Treasury? After his partial
information to that officer, the Act of 1786 had been submitted by him to
Hamilton, the Act of 1789 had been retained, he knew it, and stated in his
reports the debt as a claim against Pennsylvania as they operated in the way.

Here is an important question, the Comptroller secrets the Act of 1789, is
this opinion a proof of innocent intentions? it proves the reverse.

The Register-General never knew that any New-Loans were subscribed, until Mr.
Nicholson had got his money; he went to Mr. Smith's office in a surprise, a
circumstance so singular, to know whether it was true or not.

It is also true, that the Comptroller General did not know what was the
opinion of the Register-General; a conversation took place, same time went to
Smith's office. The Register gives his reasons, namely, because he thought it
would be to the interest of the State. Therefore he gave it in the integrity of
his heart.

Mr. Addison and some other respectable gentlemen are named, as having
subscribed New-Loans. I doubt this to be evidence in the present case. Was not
the opinion of Mr. Addison founded on the opinion of the Comptroller General?
Did not the Comptroller broach it? Mr. Nicholson suffered others to act to keep
himself in countenance. Is that opinion sufficient excuse? Had it ever been the
same before? No, until the Comptroller rendered it fashionable, there is no
evidence of any person entertaining such an opinion before the
Comptroller General, who should have saved to the State the wealth that he is
now possessed of. This opinion would never have been thought of if the
Comptroller had not broached it. All the holders would have re-exchanged their
certificates if he had not defeated the views of the Legislature.

It is said, others determined to purchase New-Loans before Mr. Nicholson. The
opinion of Mr. Nicholson formed them; some determined before, others determined
after. Where is the public officer who has not determined the reverse? They
ought to be convinced, as they had been when they had the same opportunity.

It is said the defendant had long before the Act of 1792 the same opinion; it
is a mistake, his report made in 1790 clearly proves the contrary, he conceived
the design that the New-Loans were a claim, not a claim for certificates, but a
claim for cash.

His opposition to the law of 1792 has been much relied on, much credit has
been taken for the secret sources of wealth contained in his plan of finance
from pure and disinterested motives. Why did he oppose it? Does it prove his
innocence? The Comptroller opposed it; because it would subject the State to
the payment of some debts, which the commonwealth ought not to pay. Does not
this show a consciousness? Does not this prove that he knew New-Loans were not
redeemable either legally or equitably.

It shows covetousness; to suffer them to be re-exchanged might include an
imprudent proceeding. Was he not bound to take no advantage of their
imprudence? And he was not bound to uncover their nakedness. This he thought
right, and puts the difference into his own pocket; all this under the color
of law. By these principles he took the advantage of the holders with an ill
grace. All this is a plan proof of conviction, converting every thing to his
private gain. It is possible, nay, it is probable that he conceived the design
of opposing the Act of 10th April 1792, from pure motives, for what reason? We
say they were afterward corrupt. There are other parts of the evidence which
demonstrate the guilt of the defendant.

The statement of the Comptroller, that New-Loans were excluded in the
provisions for claims and improvement, is a proof in point; it cannot be
pretended that they are in the law of 1792, it is confessed not to be in the
second section, it is said to be in the sixth. Pure motives these! When this
officer wanted an engine because the word "subscribable" can be found in that
section.

The complete secrecy is a strong proof of his guilt, bound to communicate with
the other officers, which he declined until he actually obtained possession of
the money. If the opinion of the Comptroller was known for so many years, why
secrecy so many years? He did not receive money to pay it back again, he
carried his plan into execution before the Governor, a faithful officer took
measures to stop it, the Register was checked in the progress. This is the
conduct of Mr. Nicholson. This is the meaning of the articles. On all that came
before the House, I do not see a clause by which I can be able to find those
signs of innocence, he was the officer of the public, he was paid for his
services, he was not to sacrifice their interest to his own private gain; his
whole course is a sacrifice of duty to gain: he pursued it with a step as
steady as time. We have seen the conduct, we have traced the motives of the
Comptroller General; let us take an extensive view, let us compare them with
the general principles of faithfulness and honor. As an Executive officer, he
was an hand to fulfill the volitions of the public, the Legislature's will was
his duty. If we find him going forward in other principles of gain, they are
base. Is this faithfulness, fairness and honor, in a country like ours, where
the government lives on public confidence? They are shaken by every breath, if
they are not equipoised, the nice balance is easily displaced. By this means
the corruptions of European politics will destroy our constitution, and false
constructions will overwhelm our own politics, and sacrifice the principles on
which we built our Republic.

Of all the parts the public revenue ought to be most closely watched; revenue
is food which in a diseased state is humor and disease, and becomes the food
of corruption. No jealousy is too great to check unbounded power; no jealousy
too great to watch unlimited confidence, in equal systems purity and severity
are necessary,

We have been told that great patriots have been sacrificed to popular fury,
through clamor and prejudice. Is this an argument against convicting the
defendant! Where is the clamor, where is the public resentment? The influence
of the respondent is great, more danger of impunity, he has many friends. No
comparison between the Republics of ancient times and our own, the
representation here is judicious, their laws were indefinite; no more
similarity between America and Greece, than there is between their patriots and
the respondent. They knew nothing of representations, they knew nothing of the
divisions of power, they did not decide by fixed laws, passion was their only
principle.

Hence an unjust acquittal is perfidy to the public. I know the Senate have too
much understanding to leave their post; the proof is competent to authorize a
plenary conviction; if the opinion of the Senate should be different, the
Comptroller will not be punished for mal-conduct, the community will be
defrauded, the day of acquittal will be forgotten, it will be establishing a
reward for crimes, in future no responsibility will be expected, this will be
opening the floodgates of corruption; but consider, they ought to know that
you are above them; they will then do justice, as it is expected the Senate
will in this case do justice to the commonwealth of Pennsylvania and to the
respondent, and prevent the torrent of seduction from sweeping away our
liberties and our rights. Adjourned.

The usual ceremony in the House of Representatives, of placing a member in the
chair, was attended to: The committees reported to each other their attendance
and progress.

I received the following letter from Mr. Dexter, on or about the day of its
date; which is given literatim --

"Mr. HOGAN, 29th April, 1794.
"I ONCE mentioned to you that you must not publish any thing as mine in Mr.
Nicholson's trial without first letting me see it. As I have heard nothing from
you, I am apprehensive you have forgotten it. I have been so often
misrepresented to the public in this way that I cannot bear it any longer, and
shall publicly disavow it, if you proceed without first submitting it to my
inspection. It is no trifling think to dress a man in a fool's cap and then
introduce him to the public.

Your bb. servt. SAML. DEXTER, jr."

Mr. HOGAN.

THE speech alluded to, was not prepared at that time, nor was it put to press
before the 22d September following, when Mr. Dexter being absent, could not be
indulged in his request: However, I have notwithstanding his threat ventured to
give it to they public, and I call upon him to say whether it is not in the
same dress he gave it himself; if he should dispute any part of it, I shall be
ready to adduce proof that the several parts are in his own expressions.

EDMUND HOGAN.


The Editor has been thus careful in preserving the language, and copious
ramifications of the foregoing speech; being requested by one of the members of
the House of Representatives not "to lose one word of it:" And another member
declaring, that "the 300 dollars," meaning those given to Mr. Dexter, "were
well laid out." He therefore appeals to the hearers, and those concerned, for
the authenticity of every assertion therein contained.

Thirteenth day of the Trial. THURSDAY, MARCH 13.
THE Senate met; the consideration of Legislative business was postponed; Mr.
Nicholson and his counsel were at the table, inside the bar as usual; the Court
was called, as in page 201.

Mr. BRADFORD rose, and said,

Mr. Speaker, and Gentlemen of the Senate,

THOSE circumstances which have deprived the defendant of one of his counsel,
occasion my appearance in this cause. Having been substituted in his place, I
wish I were able to supply his loss.

I appear for an officer who has been long in the public service, and, I may
add, long a public favorite: -- an officer who has been as it were burdened
with the public confidence and oppressed with duties numerous, delicate and
difficult in their execution. When such an officer is accused, the very
confidence with which he has been honored begets suspicion; and if he be
accused of peculation, a jealousy for the people's rights provokes a peculiar
zeal in those who conduct the prosecution. That zeal has not been wanting: and
the result, I trust, will be honorable both to the House of Representatives and
to the defendant. Their committee, in their investigation of his conduct, left
no tract unexplored -- no office unsearched -- no expense spared: and yet,
although the defendant has been twelve years in office, they have been able to
bring forward only a single charge of this kind: and that founded on the single
testimony of an unrecollecting individual.

Impressed with the importance of the cause I will endeavor to discuss it as
well as my strength will permit: and in order to follow some method, the
articles of impeachment shall be my guide. They will be seperately considered
and probably seperately decided on by you: and therefore a distinct and
separate discussion of them is in some degree necessary.

The first article may be divided into three distinct positions,

1st. That the Act of March 1789, rendered the New-Loan certificates no longer
a debt or evidence of a debt.

2d. That he declared these certificates to be subscribable to the loan of the
United States.

3d. That this was a misdemeanor, in violation of his duty.

The first of these positions, is the basis of the whole prosecution. It
therefore deserves a minute examination: for unless it can be supported, the
Colossus which is reared upon it must inevitably fall. -- Its importance arises
from the Act of Congress of the 4th of August 1790, which makes the sums
subscribable to the loan, payable in certificates issued by the respective
states "as acknowledgements or evidences of debts by them respectively owing."

That the New-Loan certificates were at one time evidences of a debt owing by
Pennsylvania, seemed so manifest that it could not be denied; and accordingly
the committee thought it necessary to state, that the Act of 1789 had destroyed
that quality. They therefore placed this position in the front of the battle:
It is our duty to encounter it; and in so doing I will endeavor to prove,

1st. That these certificates were debts of Pennsylvania before the Act of
March 1789.

2d. That the Act of that date neither did nor could annihilate the debt. --

The first of these is a principle conceded in the articles of impeachment.
When they state that the Act rendered these certificates no longer a debt, they
implicitly admit that they were a debt before the Act was passed. The learned
managers, also, have occasionly admitted it; but as their counsel have told us
that it was not a debt -- but a temporary exchange of certificates -- that they
were not absolute contracts for the payment of money -- but mere receipts to
enable the holder to get back his Continental certificates -- it has become
necessary to examine this point.

By a debt every lawyer understands ex vi termeni, a sum of money due by
certain and express contract. Such we hold these certificates to be: -- a debt
created by the Act of March 1786.

The history of that Act has been gone into to prove that this was only an
engagement to pay the interest as long as the state chose, and not a permament
debt. And it was said to be a mere temporary provision, because it was
originally the debt of the United States and not the proper debt of
Pennsylvania.

It will therefore be proper in this place to mention a few facts which
illustrate the history of the certificate -- debt of Pennsylvania.

When the war commenced it was understood and afterward expressly stipulated
that all expenses should be paid out of a common treasury. Congress had
nominally the power of raising money but no organ by which they could
effectually exert that power. They could make requisitions but could not
enforce them: and it has properly been called a government of supplication. --
Hence they were obliged to issue paper-money; but that depreciated and large
debts were unavoidably contracted.

These debts were for services rendered, articles furnished or moneys advanced.

1st. Part of this debt arose from the depreciation of the soldiers pay.
Congress in 1786 determined to make up that depreciation, and not being able to
do it themselves, requested the several states to compensate their respective
troops for the deficiency of their pay. Hence arose the depreciation debt of
Pennsylvania, originally the debt of the United States, and still chargeable in
account to them. But as soon as the certificates were issued by the state, it
became her own debt and so it has always been considered. For the residue of
his demands the soldier received the paper of Congress; and for services
rendered to the United States, he held in one hand his depreciation certificate
issued by the state, and in his other a final settlement certificate granted by
Congress.

2d. The second species of certificates were those issued under the Act of 1st
April 1784. These have of late been called Funded debt -- but the greatest part
of them were issued for militia services, when called our by order of Congress,
or for commissary or quartermaster certificates and other debts properly
chargeable to the United States. Here again the state stepped in to assume; yet
these certificates are not denied to be the proper debt of Pennsylvania.

3d. But the greatest part of the public creditors who were citizens of
Pennsylvania, held Continental certificates. Neither principal nor interest was
paid upon these; and though this was not the proper debt of the state yet she
was one of the partnership, and as far as her quot* went, was bound to
contribute. She was willing to do this: but amidst a general delinquency of the
states, she had no encouragement to exert herself for the payment of any but
her own citizens -- and these she chose to prefer.

The Legislature accordingly made Continental certificates receivable in the
Land-Office. They went further, and by an Act of 1783 enabled the Loan-officer
to pay one year's interest on such of the Continental certificates as were held
by the citizens of the state. There were hopes, at this time, that Congress
would be authorized to lay a duty of five per cent. on imposts: but
Rhode Island refused to accede to it, and the hopes of a Continental provision
for the payment of the debt became more distant. Still Pennsylvania was
unwilling to assume so large a debt as was in the hands of her citizens: But
desirous of relieving them, the Legislature directed the state's quota of the
annual interest of the aggregate debt to be paid into the hands of the
Continental Loan-officer for the purpose of paying its own citizens, until
permanent provision should be made by Congress.

But this would have left foreign creditors unprovided for: and Congress by
their ordinance of the 27th September 1785, disabled the Loan-officer from
carrying the plan into effect. This defeated the Act of 1785. The indent
system, proposed by Congress, was seem to be delusive; the creditors suffered;
and the moment was arrived when Pennsylvania saw she must either abandon the
relief of her own citizens or take the debt due to them upon herself. In such a
crisis she did not hesitate, but nobly resolved to assume the debt, to become
the creditor of Congress instead of the debtor; and by interposing her own
credit and resources, to save her citizens from distress.

This gave birth to the Act of March 1786. The Legislature determined to open a
loan -- to receive the Continental certificates as gold and silver -- and to
give the note of the state for their amount, payable in ten years. -- In
nothing but its amount did this assumption differ from that of the depreciation
and other debts of the United States. The different species of certificates
seemed to be equal favorites: All of them were receivable in the Land-office,
all of them bore interest at 6 per cent. and by the Act of 1786 interest on all
of them was made payable half yearly.

In the assumption of the Depreciation and Funded debt, Pennsylvania became
entitled to a credit in account with Congress equal to the amount assumed: --
In that of the New-Loan debt she acquired a transferrable credit: in both cases
she contracted a debt to her own citizens and the certificates issued were
equally evidences of that debt. -- Why then are we told in such pointed terms
that this was not an original debt of Pennsylvania? Is the contract less valid
because the consideration is a negociable debt, and not cash or produce?
Certainly not. The engagement was thus, "Transfer to me your certificate and I
will give you my note to pay you an equivalent in money." If individuals had
bargained so, what court of law or ^^uity would have denied that the note thus
given created a debt? -- Here the consideration was a valuable one -- the sum
certain -- the time of payment fixed -- the note negociable. (Mr. Bradford then
read the form of a New-Loan certificate, see page 317.) It has the nature and
all the properties of a legal debt; and as to subsequent holders, they had only
to look at the face of the certificate, to learn that the state was obliged to
pay that debt to the bearer.

Again: The Act which created these certificates speaks of them as debts. Thus
in section II, it directs that the margin of the certificates shall be
"sufficient for a memorandum of the essential circumstances of the debts to be
thereby respectively secured." The same expression occurs in the eighth
section. -- They are considered as debts by the Acts of 28th March 1786, and
are so called in all the Legislative proceedings. It was so considered when the
Act or 1789 was before the House, and in their minutes it is styled a "debt
originally due by the United States and assumed by Pennsylvania for the relief
of her citizens." (See votes Assembly, 26th December 1786, page 93-97, and
November 1787, page 69; minutes 1789, page 77, 78, and 82, etc.)

Before I dismiss this part of the subject, permit me to make an observation on
what fell from the gentleman (Mr. Dexter) yesterday. He was mistaken when he
supposed that the memorandum on the margin was to be a memorandum of the
Continental certificates loaned. On the contrary the memorandum was designed to
serve as a check and to record the essential circumstances of the New-Loan
certificates, on whose margin it was made. The inference so ingeniously drawn
from it, is therefore unfounded: but mistake was a natural one for a gentleman
to whom this subject could not be familiar.

Thus it appears that the state made a contract for the payment of the debt not
only with the original creditors but with every bona fide holder. And if the
state reserved a right to abolish the debt, where is the evidence of that right
to be found? It is not in the law; it is not on the face of the certificate;
nor had it a being till the ingenuity of counsel created it.

I here dismiss this point. It is proved that the New-Loans were originally
evidences of a debt. 1. By the history of the Act which created it. 2. By the
nature of the contract. 3. By the terms of the Act. 4. By the written documents
of the Legislature. And, 5. By the articles of impeachment themselves.

I now proceed to prove, That the Legislature did not mean nor bad the power to
impair the contract or destroy the debt, by the Act of 1789.

1. The Legislature did not mean it; because upon a fair and legal construction
of the Act, it only operates to suspend the payment but does not affect the
existence of the debt. -- The Act of 1786 made provision for the payment of the
interest -- but the certificates issued under it secured the debt itself. I use
this language because it is the language of the Act. -- A repeal therefore of
the Act of 1786 cannot affect those certificates. There are no words in the Act
under consideration which discover any intention to affect them, to render them
irredeemable or to annul the debt. -- This is always expressly enacted where
the determination is such. It is so in all cases where bills of credit are
called in. It is so in the Act of 4th December 1789 (Dal. 759) where certain
certificates for supplies are directed to be brought in, and are declared after
a certain day to be irredeemable. This has always been done when the evidence
of the debt was meant to be affected. But in the case before us there is no
compulsion on the holders of the New-Loans to bring them in and exchange them.
They were left at liberty to hold them, or to exchange them, or to transfer
them to others -- The debt and the evidence of it remained secure though the
funds provided by the Act of 1786 were withdrawn.

But it has been much relied on, "that so much of the Act of 1786 as secures
the payment of the principal sum," is also repealed: And it is urged that a
refusal to pay either interest or principal is tantamount to annulling the
debt. -- But it is obvious that this clause affected only the certificate's
receivability in the Land-office. No part of the Act of 1786 directed or
secured the payment of the principal, except the section which made the
certificates receivable in that office. There was no adequate fund provided for
their redemption, and the hopes of receiving payment in 1796, rested on the
national faith and honor of the state. -- These were the security of the
holder and these were not affected by the repeal in question.

That the word "principal" was not inserted with an intention to annihilate the
debt, appears also by the history of the Act. The bill in its first concoction
and in all its subsequent stages till two days before it passed, was calculated
merely to stop the payment of interest. (Minutes Assembly 1789, page 78,
143-5.) If it had been passed into a law in this form, no question of this kind
would have arisen: And as the word "principal" appears to have been inserted on
a sudden thought, merely to meet that part of the Act of 1786 which made them
receivable in the Land-office, it cannot afford a ground for the inference that
is drawn from it.

The preamble has also been relied on as proving the intention of the Act. But,
without insisting that the preamble cannot control the purview, it may be
observed, that it states the want of funds, which had been diverted to the
general government, as the ground of the difficulty: and that it was reasonable
that payment of the debts due to the creditors should be provided for out of
the Treasury of the United States. -- It was hoped, probably, that Congress
would assume them -- or, paying the interest to the state, enable her to pay it
over to the creditors -- and until events should determine, the incapacity of
the state to meet the demand required a suspension of the payment. But in the
mean time an exchange of certificates was offered to those who chose it. --
Circumstances of imperious necessity may excuse the stoppage of payment -- but
nothing can justify an attempt to destroy the debt.

Again: The debt is so far from being extinguished by the Act, that the
Legislature recognizes it by directing the payment of four years interest
complete and providing a new fund for its redemption. But they do not compel
the creditors to resort to this fund. All the expressions of the Act show that
they have an option either to take back their Continental certificates or to
rely on the future ability of the commonwealth. It recites that "many may be
desirous" to take back their certificates -- that it is "just and reasonable"
to grant it to those "applying" therefore, etc. -- Expressions which prove that
the exchange was discretionary with the creditors.

"But can that be a debt of which the payment both of interest and of principal
is withdrawn?" Unquestionably it can.

1. It is plain that the destruction of the interest is not the destruction of
the debt. Thus during the war, interest ceased on British debts. So on money
attached. The interest on the state debts due from confiscated estates are at
this moment in that situation. There is no fund for payment of principal or
interest, and yet it is certainly a debt. 2. Neither will the annihilation of
funds for the payment of the principal operate thus. If these certificates had
never been receivable in the Land-office, they would nevertheless have been
evidences of a debt. The debt is created by the promise; the means of
fullfilling that promise are quite different from the promise itself. --
Besides, a debt may exist where there are no means of compelling payment. A
debt due from one individual to another is not annihilated by a defect of
remedy. For instance, when the revolution took place all positive laws ceased;
the creditor had no means of compelling payment; but although the remedy was
extinct the debt was in force. So in the case of alien enemies; their debts are
suspended, not extinguished. A similar point was lately ruled in the highest
tribunal of the United States, Georgia v. Brailsford. It is the same case in
those states where there is no mode of suing the government; though they refuse
to provide funds for the payment of the principal or interest of their
certificates, those certificates are not less evidences of debts owing from
them. So the New-Loans being evidences of a debt rightfully created are not
destroyed by the withdrawing those funds which the Act of 1786 provided.

It appears to me that the sense of the Legislature since the passing of the
Act of 1789 corresponds with this construction. This may be collected from the
Act of 29th March 1790, page 784. (Here Mr. B. read the Act and commented upon
it.)

From the view already taken of this point, it is apparent that the Legislature
did not mean to render the New-Loan certificates no longer evidences of a debt;
but there is still a stronger reason for avoiding the opposite construction,
which is, that it tarnishes the honor of Pennsylvania. -- It has been proved
that there was a debt solemnly contracted by the state on a valuable
consideration. Now what is supposed by the articles of impeachment? That the
Legislature intended -- not only to cancel this solemn obligation -- to violate
the sanctity of con^^^^ -- to sap the confidence in the public faith, but a^^^
to subvert the honest principles of government and violate the Federal
Constitution. Sir, it is imputing to the Legislature a crime greater than that
with which the defendant stands charged.

All government is instituted for the protection of our natural rights.
Property is one of these, -- and property in contract is as sacred as property
in possession. We have no safety if this can be violated; and those who think
that liberty can be secure where property is not protected will find themselves
miserably mistaken.

The necessity of preserving the faith of contracts between individuals is very
apparent. If one man should give his own obligation in exchange for another, no
court of law or equity would dissolve the contract: -- and the constitution of
the United States prohibits this injustice in all cases. Why should there be a
difference made between the promissory note of an individual and of a state?
States are moral persons, capable of duties and obligations; and none but those
who adopt the dishonest refinements of the Florentine politician will in such a
case distinguish between them. What is it to justice whether the one of parties
to a contract be one, or many -- an individual -- a corporation or a state?
Power, indeed, may be on one side, but power is not right. The naked arm of
violence may tear the contract in pieces, but the immutable justice of the
demand, remains the same. It is the sacred law of nature, says Puffendorf, that
the faith of contracts be observed. The most despotic governments are obliged
to respect this salutary principle -- this voice of the divinity which is heard
in every heart amidst all the violence of desire and the clamours of self
interest. -- But in republican governments the preservation of this principle
is essential to liberty. Such at least was the conviction of the people of
America when they formed their Constitution. They would not suffer so important
a principle to be at hazard and solemnly declared "That no state shall have
power to impair the obligation of contracts." This is at once our glory and our
reproach; our reproach as the evidence of past injustice; our glory as an
eternal bar to such injustice in future. This abstraction of power -- this
inability to do wrong is more truly honorable to the several states than
unbounded authority. I speak not only as counsel for the defendant, but as a
citizen who loves his country, when I say; that the preservation of this
article of the Constitution is of the last importance. We ought to watch over
it with a holy jealousy -- we ought to guard it with unremitting zeal -- we
ought to resist the slightest attempt to destroy or impair it. Among all the
captious exceptions and honest prejudices against the Federal Constitution, no
opposition was made to this principle -- no amendment proposed by any state.
Pennsylvania not only formally approved of, but after three years consideration
transplanted it into her own Constitution. We there find it placed among "the
great and essential principles of liberty and free government." (Mr. Bradford
here read the articles in the Constitution of Pennsylvania.) Around this every
honest citizen ought to rally: and yet this must be beaten down before the
defendant can be reached.

At the time of passing the Act of 1789, the Constitution of the United States
was in full force. Ought we then to suppose the legislature so forgetful of
their duty as to violate it? Is it necessary to sully the fair fame of
Pennsylvania by a harsh construction of the Act when an honest meaning is
easily discoverable in it?

But it is said the Act of 1789 restores all things to their old situation --
that this is equitable and just -- and therefore no violation of the
Constitution. To this we answer, 1. That the contract was to pay money not to
re-exchange certificates. The United States might as well annihilate their
assumed debts in the same manner. A man who purchases land on ground rent might
as well insist upon the seller taking back his land and extinguishing the rent;
or when farms have been exchanged, that they should be mutually restored. This
argument will not hold in common life nor in the case before us, 2. It did not
restore things to their old state. The purchaser of a New-Loan certificate
never loaned any thing and the proferred exchange was offering what he did not
wish and taking from him what he chose to keep. 3. Even those who loaned their
certificates could not obtain the same certificates again; and if Congress had
made the discrimination between original holders and alie^ee^ as many expected,
manifest in justice would have resulted from the Act. There is no security but
in strictly preserving the contract. To pretend, as was yesterday said, that
the meaning of the constitution was mo^ely this, "that no injustice should be
done by the states" -- and at the same time to leave them the judges of this
justice in their own cases, is to fritter away our liberties. -- Justice is
always the pretense; and even the pine-barren laws, as they were called, were
passed on the pretense of Equity.

It has been said that even a suspension of the payment of the interest was a
breach of the contract as much as the annihilation of the debt. But it may be
observed that funds for the payment of the interest were withdrawn by the
consent of the people themselves; and the inability to pay will excuse the
present stoppage of payment, but the obligation of the contract remains. Thus
the sudden revolution in the form of our government which abstracted the funds
justified a present suspension of payment; and in the mean time a re-exchange
was offered to those who chose to look to Congress, rather than rely on the
future ability and faith of the state.

But it is said, Suppose the Act were contrary to the Constitution, who shall
say so -- what judicature has authority to determine upon it? That point need
not be much discussed. It has more than once been settled, that the judicial
power is invested with authority to determine on the constitutionality of an
Act of the Legislature. In countries where they have no formed Constitution the
Legislature may be considered as supreme: But here their Acts are leges sub
graviore lege! It has so been determined in New Jersey in the case of Craig and
others, v. -- and also in North-Carolinna. In Pennsylvania we have often heard
this doctrine from the mouth of the Chief Justice, and a recent determination
of the Judges of the United States, on the pension laws, proves that they
entertain the same opinion. A decent respect for the opinion of the Legislature
is very proper and ought to govern every tribunal in a doubtful point; but an
undue submission would be a desertion of duty.

But we are pressed with the objection that this is to set the Judiciary above
the Legislative. But this is by no means the case. It only establishes the
preeminent authority of the people. They are above the Legislative and
Judicial. To both they have delegated limited powers; and the Constitution is
the supreme rule by which both ought to govern their decisions.

The objection is founded on principles long since abandoned. After the truths
established by our revolution -- and in the blaze of political knowledge which
illuminates the close of the 18th century, I did not expect to hear it affirmed
in a republican government, that the supreme power resides in the Legislature.
It resides only in the people who have delegated certain portions of it to the
different branches of government. Properly speaking neither of these is
superior -- They are in one sense equal and coordinate -- The Legislature is
controuled by the Constitution; and to the Judiciary the people have entrusted
the power of interpreting the laws. And as the Constitution is the supreme law,
the courts in the exercise of their functions must necessarily determine
whether the Acts of the Legislature interfere with its provisions. (Mr.
Bradford here referred to and read some passages from Publius's letters on the
subject.)

It is said that the people in case of a violation of the Constitution have no
remedy but another election. If this be true, there is no security that another
election will be in their power. If this be true, the Legislature might have
been spared the trouble and expense of an impeachment. They might have passed a
bill of pains and penalties against the defendant, or erected a torture chamber
to oblige him to confess. If this be true our liberties are prostrate at the
feet of the Assembly, and a limited Constitution is of no avail. -- What will
the Freemen of Pennsylvania say when they find the advocate of the House of
Representatives so liberal in surrendering their inestimable rights? or what
must they think of this cause which cannot be supported without shaking the
pillars of the Constitution?

To enforce his reasoning on this point the gentleman added that he never heard
that any power on earth had a right to adjudge a case between a state and its
own citizens. Then, Sir, he never read the Constitution of Pennsylvania which
expressly provides that a state shall be sued as an individual. The position is
a remnant of feudal ignorance; -- and surely in a criminal prosecution every
man has a right to avail himself, before any tribunal, of the shelter the
Constitution affords.

I will dwell no longer on this subject. From our examination of it, it is
equally evident that the New-Loans are still a debt -- and that the Legislature
did not mean nor had the power to destroy it.

I now proceed to examine the other position contained in the first article.
They are, That John Nicholson declared these certificates subscribable to the
loan of the United Sates, and that this was a misdemeanor. The fact of his
certifying or declaring them to be subscribable is admitted, except, that he
did not certify this, in his own case; in which alone he could have derived any
advantage from it. But no guilt results from this conduct, if it can be
justified or excused. We mean to do both, and contend, 1st. That this debt was
by law subscribable to the loan. 2d. That if it was not, it was at least his
real opinion; -- an opinion honestly entertained by him and many others.

New-Loans are within the description of 13th section of the Act of Congress.
Compare them with it. They were certificates issued before the 1st January
1790, by the state of Pennsylvania -- as acknowledgments or evidences of debts
by her owing. -- They are not within the exception of the section; -- nor could
they be legally refused at the Loan-office unless they could be proved to be no
longer evidences of a debt. -- I admit that they must be evidences of a
subsisting debt; -- but we have already proved it to be a debt, -- and it has
never been paid off, redeemed or otherwise legally discharged. The argument
need to be repeated.

But it is said it must be a debt recognized by the state. We answer, 1st. That
it never was disclaimed by the state; though unfunded, it was still a debt
undenied. 2d. If it was really an existing debt, the subsequent acknowledgement
or disclaimer of the state would be of no avail. To decline receiving
certificates of a disputed debt, was a proper rule in the Treasury, as they had
no power finally to decide on it; but their doubts or difficulties cannot
affect the creditor's right. The Act says no such thing. Whether the debt be
really owing, is the only question: If it be, it will exist independent of the
will of the debtor.

This assumption by Congress was not made for the sake of the state but of the
people. The history of the Act is well known. Congress could not raise money to
pay their debts during the war, and the several states were obliged to advance
their credit for the United States. The certificates they issued were
considered as a Federal charge, and yet in many of the states they were not
paid; while in others the state creditor was a favorite. To put these, who were
in justice, creditors of the Union, on a footing, the assumption was determined
on. -- Could a state therefore which might be opposed to this assumption,
defeat the measure by refusing to recognize the debt? The very exception of the
North Carolina certificates is a proof that it could not. These were disclaimed
by that state, and yet an express exception was thought to be necessary to
exclude them.

The amount of the Secratary's letter on this subject is, that the officers of
the Treasury, who are merely ministerial, take a safe rule in receiving
certificates on loan. But this does not preclude an enquiry. A man^^nus from
the Supreme Court may be issued to decide the question; and if the certificates
offered on loan, come within the description of the Act, the Treasury officers
would be compelled to receive them.

The opinion of the Secretary therefore is not to decide this question. Yet it
may be remarked that he did so far decide upon it as to write to Mr. Smith the
Loan-officer that he could not refuse the New-Loans if the holders insisted on
subscribing them. We are told however that the Act of 1789 was not brought into
his view; but on comparing what he was written on this subject it is probable
that he did see it, though he could not see any such doctrine in it as is now
drawn from it. (Mr. Bradford here commented upon several of the Secretary's
letters which were read in evidence.) -- It is true, that the certificates have
been virtually rejected. The expression was a cautious one; but the reason of
their being in this situation is, that Pennsylvania, who was the holder, took
no steps to have them loaned, or the question decided. The state officers even
desired that they might not be received, and the opinion of the
Attorney General of the state was, that they were not receivable. -- Besides,
in the late consideration which the Secretary have to the Act of 1789, he says,
that the circumstances of its being passed after the ratification of the
Federal Constitution did not occur to him.

Whether subscribable or not, depends therefore wholly on the Acts of Congress.
-- It is evident, that the Act contemplates this very debt as a state debt. The
18th section expressly provides for a difficulty which could arise in no other
case. (Here it was read and explained.) The very nature of these state debts,
was urged in Congress as a reason for the assumption; -- and there was a
peculiar and evident propriety in assuming them. But no difficulty was made on
account of the Act of 1789. -- If the New-Loans were to be excluded, why not
the same exception as that respecting the North Carolina certificates? Our
delegates were as attentive to the interests of Pennsylvania as those of other
states; and one of them was a member of the Assembly in 1789. The Act of
Congress was not passed in a hasty manner. It lay over a whole session and
there ^as time enough for consideration.

But it is objected that this proviso shows that the New-Loans could not be
subscribed because the state had authorized no one to surrender the Continental
certificates which were exchanged for them. To this two answers may be given
and both of them satisfactory. 1st. This debt was subscribable under the
general independent clause of the Act. The proviso respects only the payment of
the interest and was introduced merely for the security of the United States.
It does not in any manner limit or restrain the subscription. Such is the
construction given to it by the Secretary of the Treasury. (Here Mr. Gibson
read the letter p. 272-3, at the request of Mr. Bradford.) The state therefore
had the power to subscribe the Continental certificates to the domestic loan
and the holders of the New-Loans to subscribe to the state loan. But interest
would have been paid only on one of the subscription; and the interposition of
the Legislature to surrender their subscription; would not have been with
holden, if the rights of their creditors had required it. 2d. Mr. Nicholson had
power to exchange the Continental certificates for New-Loans, whether they were
presented by the United States or by individuals. The negotiation in 1791
established this. (Mr. Bradford here observed upon the letter relative to that
subject, see p. 2^2.)

Another objection is, That the sum of Pennsylvania state debts assumed by
Congress amounts to 2,200,000 dollars only; whereas if the New-Loans were to be
included, it would have been much greater. But the argument turns the other
way; for the whole of what is called the proper debt of the state did not
amount near to that sum. But the whole amount of the debts of the several
states was not intended to be assumed; but only a proportionable part of each.
And although the New-Loan debt was large, yet great part of it had been already
exchanged, and there was reason to believe that almost the whole would be so;
because, generally speaking, it was the interest of the holders to subscribe
the Continental certificates rather than the New-Loans. (Mr. Bradford here
exhibited some calculations of long and short interest on the different
certificates, to show their effect on the different loans.) Besides this
advantage, the payment of the interest on Continental certificates commenced
one year before that on the assumed debt. It was therefore probable that this
sum of 2,200,000 dollars would embrace all that would be subscribed. -- I will
not enlarge on this subject. The result of our enquiry is, that New-Loans were
subscribable, because they were evidences of a debt owing by the state.

But if a different construction could be put upon the Act, is it so plain a
point that the opposite opinion must be imputed to dishonest motives and not to
conviction of judgment? Is it a mistake, that can (...) expiated only by a
political auto de se? Is it a mistake, which every one else may commit with
impunity; but which must subject the defendant to a species of ostracism?
Forbid it candor -- forbid it justice!

I ought now to consider the motives which really actuated the defendant; but
it will be more convenient to defer this till the principle stated in the 2d
article is also examined.

The second, third and fourth articles are so intimately connected that the
whole may be reduced to this; that the defendant certified certain certificates
to be redeemable which were not redeemable, with a corrupt and dishonest view.

The first question therefore is, Were the New-Loan certificates redeemable by
the Act of the 10th April 1792? The article under consideration declares that
they were not; and on the soundness of this opinion all the rest of the three
articles depend.

The Senate will be pleased to remember that we contend that whatever was
subscribable to the loan was made redeemable by that Act. We admit that they
are not within the second section of that Act; but they are manifestly included
in the sixth. The words of that clause are remarkably strong: "The holder or
holders of any certificate subscribable to the subscription so to be renewed,
shall be entitled," etc. -- Hence subscribability and redeemability became
convertible terms. The Legislature put themselves in the power of Congress.
Whatever state debts Congress should choose to assume, entitled the holder to
the benefits of that Act. No other construction can rationally be put upon this
clause. Even Mr. Gallatin who drew the bill and gave us the secret history of
it, acknowledged the justness of that construction.

But it has been urged that the sixth section was not intended to include any
debts not included in the second.

Permit me here to remind this honorable body, that a mode of construction has
been introduced which is subversive of all legal certainty as well as of
personal safety. We are led from the language of the law, to the private
sentiments of the members of the legislature, and to the very manner of drawing
the bill. Though most the members of this court, were members of the
Legislature which passed the Act, they will remember that all recollection of
private intention at that time, is to be laid aside construing its meaning. Its
language alone is to be attended to. It is that on which every citizen must
form his opinion of the law; and to depart from this in judicial construction
is to poison the fountains of justice. The danger of this has created doubts
concerning the propriety of erecting such a court for the trial of impeachment;
and it has been made a great political question whether one branch of the
Legislature should ever decide on charges exhibited by the other. Remembering
the particular objects they had in view, they are in danger of limiting or
extending the words within or beyond their natural and proper import; while the
safety of the citizen consists in confining the judge to the meaning of the
Legislature as expressed in the law itself. Inconveniences may sometimes result
from this; but the partial evil is overbalanced by the general good. Beccaria
has an excellent chapter on this point. (Mr. B. here read some passages from
that author.)

But why do I dwell on this subject? -- I am speaking to the Senate of
Pennsylvania.

Judging therefore by the expression of the sixth section, no doubt of the
redeemability of the certificates could remain. But several objections are made
to this; and they seem to be all contained in the report of the committee on
that business. The first is, That no funds were provided by the Act for the
redemption of these certificates. I am disposed to admit that the funds
provided, are confined to the debts mentioned in the second section; but
whether any specific funds were provided or not is immaterial, as by the
existing laws there was a fund for all claims. -- But we must recollect that
the second second was to operate at all events, whether Congress renewed the
subscription or not; but the sixth was eventual and dependant on that
contingency. -- The Assembly therefore might choose to let it rest upon the
aggregate funds already mentioned. (Mr. B. here went into some calculations to
show that this might be sufficient.)

But the fallacy of their argument is proved by the case of the Unfunded
Depreciation certificates. They are not included in the second section, and yet
it cannot be denied they are included in the sixth. -- No specific funds were
provided for them; -- yet as they were state debts and assumable, they were of
course redeemable. The induction is fair, and even Mr. Gallatin, who drew the
bill and did not intend to include them, could not withstand its force.

That the Unfunded Depreciation were included was a general opinion. The
Register-General and Mr. Powel, the late respectable Speaker of the Senate,
were the first to put this construction on the Act. He did not hesitate to
present such certificates for redemption, and they were redeemed accordingly.
Judge Yeates did the same; and the Legislature to whom the Register-General
made a report of a large sum of these certificates being redeemed, did not
disapprove of it. To this day there is no disapprobation of it, -- no suit
brought; -- and well, -- for where is the court that would sustain it? -- If
then Unfunded Depreciation are redeemable, so are New-Loan certificates.

But to do away the force of this, we are favored with the secret meaning of
the author of the Act. Although we were in darkness before, now truly we are
enlightened -- the film is purged -- a new ray of light breaks in upon us --
and knowing what the drawer of the Act intended, we see as it were face to
face! -- Sin, if such principles of construction are to prevail in a criminal
presecution, the will of a Turkish Cadi would be as safe a rule of conduct as
the laws of Pennsylvania*

Secondly, It is urged that the sixth section can only be regarded as a proviso
or exception to the second. If the Legislature intended it as such, how easy
would it have been, to have added after "certificates? the word "herein before
specified." This would have confined its operation to the certificates
mentioned in the second section. But si voluit non dixit. -- The sixth section
as it now stands is a distinct independent clause If it operates as such on the
Unfunded Depreciation, why not on the New-Loans? "Because, say they, these are
not a state debt." Here we are thrown back upon the old question.

This forms the mind objection in the report of the committee. -- "Because,"
say they, "it does not extend to any but state creditors." Now, if New-Loans
were state debts, the holders of them mist be state creditors. There is no
magic in these words to include Depreciation and to exclude the Loan debt. They
are used merely to distinguish the creditors of the state from the creditors of
the United States. We are therefore brought back to that which is the only real
question in the cause; whether these certificates were evidences of an existing
debt or not?

But it has been hinted that whether in strictness it were a debt or not, yet
it was not so considered by the Legislature in 1792. What is the proof of this?
Their Acts contain no such thing -- and if an appeal is made to the private
opinions of the members, I repeat it, we cannot take notice of them. -- As to
the Comptroller, he always considered them as debts. In his statement of the
10th December 1791, he speaks of them as such, and the word "redemption" which
has been urged against him, refers only to the Land-office, from which the Act
of 1789 had excluded them. -- It was properly observed that it was not the duty
of the Comptroller to bring them forward in any other view, as there was no
present intention or ability to pay them.

Thus it appears that none of the reasons urged in support of the construction
which the articles put upon the Act, will apply. We must therefore resort to
the plain language of the Act. Whatever Congress should make assumable the
Legislature made redeemable. Nay, thee Act goes further, and makes the
acceptance in the Continental Loan-office, the rule for paying the nominal
value by the state.

The New-Loans therefore are included. And what are the inconviences of this
construction? -- The holders were citizens of Pennsylvania; they have given up
certificates for the payment of which the state was bound at least to the
amount of her quota -- and recieved a solemn promise to be paid 20 in the
pound. -- And yet the burden of the complaint is, that Pennsylvania was by the
defendant's conduct obliged to pay this 20 in the pound!

The certificates which the state received in exchange have been and may be
again sold at their nominal value; -- but if the state could get them without
paying a shilling in the pound, it seems as if it would be very acceptable.

Sir, this eagerness to put a little profit by the rife and fall of stock into
the pocket of the state is disreputable. It is to represent the sovereign state
of Pennsylvania as a jobber in the stocks. Such was not the intention of the
House of Representatives when they brought forward this impeachment.

Upon the whole it appears that these New-Loans were a debt -- that its
existence was not affected by the Act of 1789 -- that of course they were
subscribable to the loan, and being subscribable were redeemable. Hence if John
Nicholson did "recognize, certify and declare them to be subscribable and
redeemable" he did no more than the law authorized him to do.

Having now come to a dividing point of my argument, and finding it impossible
to finish the whole in the course of the morning, I submit it to the Senate
whether it will not be convenient to adjourn.

Mr. Lewis rose, and observed, that the gentleman must have been much
exhausted, having spoken four hours, had yet much to say, and he requested the
Senate to adjourn till next morning. Adjourned.

In the minutes of the House of Representatives the following entry is recorded
--

"In conformity to the resolutions of the 29th day of February last, the House
resolved itself into a committee of the whole in order to attend the trial of
John Nicholson, Comptroller General.

"The Speaker quitted the chair and Mr. Aontgomery was placed therein.

"The committee then proceeded to the Senate-chamber for the aforesaid purpose.

"After some time,

"The committee of the whole returned to their own chamber.

"The Chairman left the chair and the Speaker resumed it.

"The Chairman then reported that the committee of the whole House had attended
at the trial of the articles of impeachment against John Nicholson,
Comptroller General.

"The committee appointed to manage the trial of the articles of impeachment of
the House of Representatives against John Nicholson, Comptroller General,
reported further progress, and that the Senate would attend to hear the further
arguments tomorrow morning at ten o'clock.

Fourteenth day of the Trial. FRIDAY, MARCH 1.
SENATE met as usual.

Mr. BRADFORD in continuation.

Mr. Speaker, and Gentlemen of the Senate,

Having, yesterday, discussed the legal positions contained in the first and
second articles of impeachment, I am now prepared to examine the fact charged
in those articles. It is, That the defendant declared New-Loan certificates to
be subscribable and redeemable, and caused them to be redeemed, with corrupt
views, and in wilful violation of his duty.

We have endeavored to prove that he was right in his construction of the law;
but if it be admitted that he was wrong in that, still he is excusable, and no
guilt is imputable to him, if his conduct flowed from conviction of judgment
and not from corruption of heart. It is therefore of importance to sift his
conduct thoroughly, and to see what were his real opinions and motives. The
question then is, Did John Nicholson act thus knowing or believing it to be
wrong? I am willing to put the cause on this simple issue without holding the
opposite counsel to the proof of all the aggravations charged in the articles.
It may however be proper to take some slight notice of these, as they have been
pressed against the defendant.

To begin, then, with the first article: It is stated that he declared these
certificates subscribable -- " under color of his office -- and in violation
of the confidence reposed in him." -- It appears that he made this
certification in very few instances; and that this was done at the request of
Mr. Smith or of individuals, who wished to transfer or sell their abstracts
before the certificates due on them, would issue from the Loan-office. This was
an accommodation to those who requested it, but it was not an official act. No
Act of Congress nor of the state, either required or forbid it. Mr. Nicholson
did not certify it officially; he did not affix his official signature; he
merely subscribed the initials of his name. This was not obligatory on the
Commissioner of Loans, nor did he absolutely depend upon it. It is in proof
that he gave a receipt importing that the certificates were still subject to
examination; and in this examination he was directed by the Secretary of the
Treasury to depend on no one but himself and his own clerks. -- Being therefore
trusted neither by the United States or the state of Pennsylvania, respecting
this matter, the defendant's conduct could be no violation of official duty.
But to say "that if it was an official act it was a breach of duty and if it
was not an official act, he exceeded his powers and thus violated the
confidence reposed in him" -- is a very convenient argument! This is to put the
defendant on the bed of Procrustes: If he is too long, lop him; if he is too
short, stretch him.

2d. It is charged that it was done "in order to promote his own emolument."
This cannot be true, for he did not certify the certificates, presented by
himself, to be assumable; and in those cases where he did certify, no emolument
was or could have been in view. But this circumstance of itself cannot
aggravate the charge. To promote our own interest, is an honest end, if pursued
by honest means. If the certification was wilfully wrong, whether it was done
for his own or another's emolument, he ought to suffer; nay, it would be
inexcusable to promote the greatest charity on earth, by dishonest means. --
But it will presently be seen that he acted honestly; and that he sincerely
believed what he certified to be true. It was an opinion which he entertained
so early as the 30th September 1790 before the loan opened, and so late as
December 1791, after it was closed.

3d. It is charged to be a "misdemeanor as contrary to the Act of 1789." We
have already discussed that point, and shown that it was not contrary to that
Act; but if it were, yet, if the heart was free it could he no misdemeanor.

4th. Lastly, it is said to be manifestly to the risk and injury of the
commonwealth as he well knew. This is the point -- the sting of the accusation.
If this be true, we do not ask his acquittal; and I hasten to show he did not
know or believe that he was injuring the commonwealth.

In taking a view of the defendant's conduct, I am led to notice the
representation that has been given of it by the gentlemen who preceded me. I
acknowledge the beauty of the painting -- the strength of the figures and the
glowing elegance of the coloring; but I cannot perceive that a likeness to the
original has been at all regarded. It is, in truth, a fancy picture, which
shows the skill of the painter; but it is not a portrait, which exhibits the
just features of the cause. It may impose on an inattentive observer; but I
trust that so delusive a representation will have no effect on this court, to
whom all the facts are distinctly known, and who will form their judgment from
an impartial view of the whole.

That the conduct of the comptroller did not proceed from the dishonest motives
will appear, first. From its being founded on an early opinion -- conceived at
a time when no advantage could be derived from it -- an opinion fortified by
that of the most respectable characters, and resulting from a thorough view of
the subject. Secondly. From all the circumstances of the transaction which
taken seperately or together evince the rectitude of his intentions.

The Senate will consider that proof of his holding these opinions at a time
when no private or interested views could possibly actuate him, must be
decisive. I will endeavor to trace the proofs of this in order of time.

(Mr. Bradford then went into a minute examination of the evidence, and to
prove the early and continued opinion of Mr. Nicholson that New-Loans were
subscribable, he made several observations, 1st. Upon the letter of the
Comptroller 30th September 1790, p. 271-2. 2d. His letter to the Governor 24th
December 1791. p. 220-1. 3d. His letter to Secretary Hamilton 29th December
1791, p. 227. 4th. Upon the conference between him and the Secretary, p. 288.
5th. His report to the Governor 29th December 1792, p. 223-4. 6th. His plan of
finance and his observations thereon, p. 284.)

Being satisfied that these certificates were subscribable he could not avoid
believing that they were redeemable, because these were in fact convertible
terms. As soon as the Bill or Act of 1792 was published for consideration, he
informed Mr. Evans of his opinion on this point, in which that gentleman
concurred; and in a conference with Mr. Donnaldson and Mr. Gallatin, it was
agreed by them all, that whatever certificates were subscribable were also
redeemable. Hence it follows, that Mr. Nicholson's opinion of their being
redeemable was not a new opinion but substantially the same with that which he
had entertained long before, and at a time when no possible interest could
influence him.

Although he perceived so early as the middle of March that the New-Loans
would, if the bill passed, become redeemable, he was so far from desiring to
avail himself of the advantages it presented, that we find him solicitous to
prevent its passing into a law. He even remonstrated against it to several
members of Assembly; and declared that he thought the words comprehensive
enough to embrace bills of credit. But the representations which he made to Mr.
Gallatin and others were not attended to -- the Act was passed; and the door
being opened, he had as good a right to enter as any other person.

From that time until June, when he certified some of these certificates to be
assumable, we have no proof of his opinion on this subject being expressed; but
his conduct shows that it was firmly fixed; -- so firmly that he risked his
property and reputation upon it. He purchased this species of certificates with
a determination to subscribe them; nay, to subscribe them under circumstances,
which made the hopes of profit dependant upon the soundness of his opinion; for
he affected no concealment, and if he had, it would have been unavailing. He
knew also that if he was wrong in his construction of the law, he would be
exposed to the loss of character.

In July, Mr. Donnaldson who had heard the opinion of New-Loans being
subscribable, circulated out of doors, consulted the Comptroller about it. Mr.
Nicholson avowed the opinion, and satisfied the Register-General of its
justness; and so fully that he did not think it necessary to consult any other
officer, but passed the accounts and abstracts, although he knew them to
comprehend New-Loans. He certified them to the Governor, and would have gone
farther, if the warrants issued upon them had not been stopped in his hands. --
Why then is not the Register included in the impeachment? Because it is evident
that he acted from conviction of judgment. Why not extend the same charity to
the Comptroller; for it is not pretended that the understanding of the Register
is more cloudy or weak than that of Mr. Nicholson.

Lastly, we find the Comptroller avowing the same opinion to the Secretary of
the Commonwealth, who found him passing the account of Judge Addison which
related to New-Loan certificates. His expression was, "I am sure I am right,
and that it is the regular construction of the Act."

Thus it appears that long before as well as after the Act, he constantly
avowed one unvaried opinion on this subject, and under circumstances which
prove that it could be no other than the result of a conviction of judgment.

Here it will be proper to notice a few objections.

1st. It is said, that the letter alleged to be written to the Governor on the
16th April 1792 did not include the New-Loans, and therefore that neither the
Comptroller nor Register considered them as redeemable. -- Admitting that such
a letter was written, which is very doubtful on the evidence, it is said to
have been in consequence of the requisition of the Governor, who desired a
calculation might be made of the quantity of stock necessary to be sold under
the Act of 1792. -- The calculation that was then made could only be founded on
the 2d section, which did not include the New-Loans. The Act of Congress had
not then passed; and the sixth section of the law had then no operation, and it
was therefore unnecessary to include these certificates in the calculation. For
the same reason the Unfunded Depreciation were not included, although Messrs.
Gallatin, Donnaldson and Nicholson concurred in opinion that they would be
redeemable if Congress should assume them. Here, again, we may ask, why do we
acquit the Register-General and not the Comptroller also?

Again: It was hinted, that whatever the language of the Act might have been,
yet he knew the real intention of the House, which was explained to him by Mr.
Gallatin. The answer is, that Mr. Gallatin could only give his own opinion; the
intention of the Legislature is to be collected from the law; the Act speaks
for itself. Nothing more need be said on this point.

From this review, the inference is clear, that the defendant was fully and
honestly of opinion, that these certificates were both subscribable and
redeemable.

I have said that this opinion was strongly fortified by that of the most
respectable characters. -- It is true this is no proof of his construction of
the law being right; but it forms a strong ground of excuse if he was mistaken,
to show that others were mistaken with him. If it was an error, it certainly
was an error which had the appearance of truth.

Among those who entertained this opinion we find the Secretary of the
Treasury, whose discernment and penetration will be doubted by no one. It was
his duty to decide in the first instance upon this question. He had called upon
the Loan-officer for all the laws relative to it, and he afterward declared to
him, "That the holders of the New-Loans have a right to subscribe them; that he
might endeavor to persuade them to re-exchange their certificates, but if they
persisted that he could not refuse them." He intimates the same opinion to the
Governor in his letter, 21st December 1791, and the conference with the
Comptroller was founded upon it. At this time, it is evident, he must have
examined the Act of 1789, though he does not recollect that it was before him;
and if he afterward distrusted his former opinion, he explained it by adding,
that it did not occur to him that the Act of 1789 was passed after the
ratification of the Federal Constitution. -- But the question is, What was the
Secretary's opinion at the time he had the conference with the Comptroller,
not, what it appears to be at present?

The Commissioner of Loans entertained the same opinion of their
subscribability; so did Mr. Wolcot, as may be fairly inferred from his letter.
The Governor also is officially apprized of the same opinion, and though he does
not express his concurrence, yet his conduct was founded on a belief that the
Comptroller was right in his construction of the law. Indeed it seemed so
obvious a construction, that few who examined the Act, doubted it. Almost all,
whom he conversed with, agreed with him. Mr Evans was convinced of the
soundness of the opinion, and determined to adventure in a purchase of these
certificates. Mr. Donnaldson was convinced, though not deluded. Of the same
opinion were Mr. Boggs, Mr. David Rittenhouse, Judge Addison and others. The
last mentioned gentleman examined the Act which Mr. Dallas showed to him in the
Council Chamger, and he was so fully satisfied, that he received the amount of
his certificates from Mr. Nicholson, who advanced the money, in order to
accommodate him. -- Why then should it be deemed criminal in the Comptroller to
yield his assent to what convinced so many?

Second. The honesty of his intentions appears from all the circumstances of
the transaction. -- If he had been conscious of any unjustifiable views he
would have attempted concealment; but his conduct was open and fair. He
concealed nothing but what was proper to be concealed; and as soon as the
subscription was made he was careless who knew it.

In the first place, it appears that he made the loan, and subscribed in his
own name. It would have been easy to have used another's, and to have concealed
himself under the name of a friend. Again: He inserted certificates in his
abstract, which must have discovered to the Register-General and others, that
they were New-Loans. -- Thirdly. He did not attempt to hurry it through the
offices. It lay there the usual time and went through the usual train of
business. -- Besides, he knew that the subscription of New-Loans must be known
not only to all the officers of the Treasury of the United States, but also to
the state, when an arrangement for delivering up the Continental certificates
became necessary. He also certified the abstracts of others, who had no motives
for concealment and would no doubt mention the transaction. In this case, if
his construction of the law was not tenable, he would be obliged to refund. The
clumsy fraud, if it had been a fraud, could not fail of being detected, and if
it were detected, his hopes would be blown up, and must have proved fruitless.

To the insinuation that all this was done for the purpose of getting money
into his hands for a time, which he could not finally keep, I have nothing to
say. His circumstances were not so miserably dependant as to make this pitiful
scheme possible. -- In short, he must have been destitute of common sense if he
had acted thus openly and incautiously, without a perfect conviction that he
was legally as well as morally right.

I shall now dismiss the first and second articles, and proceed briefly to
examine the third and fourth.

I consider the third article as a mere statement of evidence, and if the two
former articles cannot be supported, neither can this, which is urged to prove
his corrupt views and his endeavors to avoid discovery and detection. For this
purpose it is charged, 1. That he did not consult the Register. To this the
answer is plain, that no law obliged him to consult that officer; and why
should he have consulted him when he had no doubts on the subject? Besides, it
was unnecessary; for soon after the law passed, he and the Register settled the
principle, that whatever was subscribable was redeemable. -- Again: It is said,
2. That "he did not consult the Governor;" and to this it has been replied,
that the law directs him to consult the Governor only in those cases where the
officers differ in opinion. It may be added that he did in fact apprise the
Governor of it when he informed him that the New-Loans were a subscribable
debt. -- It is charged, 3. "That he did not discriminate in his certification
nor in his accounts," etc. As to this certification to the Loan-officer, it was
not an official act, and the state has nothing to do with the form of it; and
as to the account raised and transmitted to the Governor, it is a decisive
answer that they were rendered in the manner which had been settled in April
1791. These accounts originated in the Register-General's office and were sent
up to the Comptroller merely for concurrence. Yet the purity of the Register's
views is not impeached, nor is he included in the accusation.

But, Sir, the absurdity of the charge is evident, for this conduct could not
have been adopted for the purpose or avoiding detection, because the species or
certificates contained in the abstracts were discoverable from the abstracts
themselves: 1. By the different dates of interest. And, 2. By the reduction of
the principal sum, which took place in no other state certificates.

Lastly, it is said that the checks of office were thereby destroyed. What
checks are there pointed out by law or former usage, which have not been
observed? There are none; and the Register-General, even after he was informed
that the abstracts comprehended New-Loans, pursued the same method as before.
There are no grounds for this flimsy charge, which seems to be thrown in merely
to swell the account! (Mr. B. made some further observations on the evidence,
and then proceeded to the fourth article.)

The fourth article depends upon the third -- "In the above delusive manner,"
etc. -- It is but another mode of stating the same thing. -- If he be acquitted
of the third charge, he cannot be convicted of this. -- The article goes on and
says, that "he certified that the New-Loans were redeemable and payable." He
had a right to do so, if by law they were redeemable -- he is excusable in
doing so, if he really thought them to be redeemable. -- As to the funds, the
Act of 1792 is not referred to, but that of April 1791. (Mr. B. then made some
observations on this Act to show that this fund for claims might be applied to
the redemption of the New-Loans.) There was no other fund than this for the
redemption of the Unfunded Depreciation. Yet the Governor did not scruple to
issue warrants for the payment of these, though it was evident from the amount
of the interest stated in the accounts that it could arise from that species of
certificates only.

Here again I may be permitted to ask, why is not the Register-General included
in the accusation, since he joined in this certification to the Governor as
well as the defendant? Since both acted alike, why this discrimination? I am
persuaded that both are equally innocent.

But I quit this article, which is of no importance if the defendant should be
convicted of the other charges -- and if he is acquitted of them, he cannot be
affected by this. -- They depend one upon the other, in a manner that reminds
us of the Indian philosophy. The world, said the Bramins, rests upon the back
of a great elephant -- the elephant on the back of a huge tortoise -- and the
tortoise on -- they did not know what. So the fourth article stands on the back
of the third -- the third on the second -- the second on the first -- and the
first on -- nothing at all.

We now come to charges of a different nature from those which have hitherto
passed in review before us. The fifth and sixth articles are, however,
substantially the same, and charge the defendant with availing himself of
certain official advantages for the purpose of speculating in certificates. To
the first of these we might have safely demurred, and admitting the fact, have
relied on the law that it is not impeachable. But this would have heen useless,
since the Senate being judges both of law and fact, will acquit the defendant,
unless the facts proved are the proper subject of legal prosecution.

Permit me to remind the Senate that impeachments must be founded on the
breaches of existing laws. Indulgence may be shown to the form, but none to the
substance of the charge: And an impeachment cannot make that criminal here
which would not be so before the ordinary tribunals of justice. (Mr. Bradford
here quoted 4 Black. Com. 256.2. H. P. C. 250, and Woodison's lectures.) Indeed
the learned gentlemen, although one of them talks of "doing substantial
justice," will not openly contend that any thing is impeachable which is not
absolutely illegal.

This honorable body therefore will recollect that they are not now to judge by
the rules of expediency. That is the province of a Legislature not of a Court.
Some things are lawful which many may think inexpedient; but while the citizen
only exercises his rights, he is amenable only to the tribunal of public
opinion. True liberty consists in being always permitted to do that which the
laws do not forbid; and a republican government has been well defined to be a
government of laws and not of men. We are, therefore, not to discuss in this
place the propriety or impropriety of the defendant's conduct; but its
lawfulness or unlawfulness. We are not to enquire whether in any instance he
has overstepped the extreme delicacy of official conduct, but whether he has
overleaped the mounds of the law. Delicacy is one thing, crime is another; and
we judge by very different rules respecting them. To mark the precise limits of
the proper and the improper is the business of criticism and taste; and the
decision will depend upon our education, habits, feelings and temper. -- But
the law is the only standard by which we can measure the conduct of a citizen
criminally accused.

There are men of so soft a contexture, that far from insisting on their
rights, they make the expedient the rule of their conduct. They will not even
eat meat, if thereby they should offend a weaker brother. They shrink like a
sensitive plant from the touch of censure -- and their minds are accustomed to
take the varying hue of public opinion. But men of more republican firmness
will stand on their rights. They will judge for themselves of the proper and
improper; and relying with confidence on the conclusions of their own minds,
they are satisfied if they find the laws do not prohibit their conduct. --
Judging therefore by these principles, the defendant must be acquitted; for
what law made it unlawful for him to purchase certificates in the manner this
article states? -- Whether such official advantages shall be allowed or not, is
a matter of positive regulation. Some states allow their officers to speculate
in articles, in which their official situation gives them manifest advantages:
Some forbid them; and the general government prohibits it more generally than
the states. Thus in Pennsylvania the auctioneers were allowed to purchase at
their own auctions until l783, when it was forbidden. The officers of the
Customs by the laws of the state mght have traded; by those of the United
States they cannot. The Secretary of the Treasury and even the clerks in the
office cannot speculate in certificate; but in all the department of our
Treasury it is different. So the officers of our Land-office may deal with
great advantage in land; and it is clearly lawful because no Act forbids it. --
If the conduct of any officer is in the opinion of the Executive manifestly
improper though not illegal, the remedy is by removal not by impeachment.

But in the case before us there were no official advantages that deserve any
consideration. He could have bought these certificates as conveniently at a
brokers as from those who came to the office; and a small advance would have
poured them into his hands. He is charged with purchasing them of many; but
only two instances of such purchases are proved; that from Oldden and that from
Biddle. If this be criminal, by what Act is it made so? -- He has broken no law
of the state, and therefore no guilt is imputable to him.

We now proceed to the sixth article, which is nothing more than the fifth
new-vamped. It charges the same facts but supposes that the certificates bought
were really the property of the state. This legal position is wholly unfounded.
Mr. Dexter stated the offer to exchange as an executed contract -- and as a
complete transfer of the certificates to the state, before an actual exchange
took place. But his reasoning on this point is fallacious. The certificates
were lodged merely for examination, and the indents, required to complete the
exchange, were not offered. How then could they become the property of the
commonwealth?

Let us bring this point to the touchstone of the law. Could the state have
sued Mr. Oldden for the indents? No, for an option is given him only on
condition of his payment of the indents. The Act of 1789 permits, but does not
compel an exchange. Again: Could Biddle or Oldden have maintained a suit
against the state for the Continental certificates without an actual tender of
the indents? Surely not; for it is settled, that where two concurrent acts are
to be done at the same time, one party must do all that on his part is to be
done before he can maintain a suit against the other. -- The property therefore
remained as before. The holders, who lodged them, might have wrested them from
the Comptroller in an action of trover; and they would have been liable in his
hands, to the debts of the individual.

Besides, it was the uninterrupted practice to re-deliver them, if required,
after they had been lodged in the office. In proof of this we have the cases of
Thomas Hale in 1791, Danniel Stroud in 1793 and Col. Porter.

If the gentlemen be right in their law, all these persons were plundering the
commonwealth, because they took back their certificates -- and yet they do not
seem conscious of any impropriety! But really this refinement on the charges is
unworthy of a state prosecution!

It has been said "that if the Comptroller delivered back these certificates to
those who lodged them, he was guilty of perfidy." Well Sir! the Comptroller
officially informed the Governor that S. Mark had withdrawn his certificates
and parted with them to others. Here is an avowal of "this perfidy" to the
Executive Magistrate who is so far from dismissing or punishing the Comptroller
that he does not express any surprise at the information. If this be a crime
you cannot convict the defendant without involving the Governor in a degree of
the same guilt.

There being, therefore, no ground to say that certificates in that situation
were the property of the state, it follows that the 6th article does not differ
from the fifth.

But we are told that responsibility of officers is the great security of
Republics. Sir, there is a responsibility of character and a responsibility of
punishment. The former we will answer in another place; the latter arises only
from a breach of the laws. Show us then the Act of Assembly that we have
broken; if there be none, show us at least some adjudged case which makes such
kind of dealing a crime. If there be such a case, it will sweep like the scythe
of time; it will cut down great and small, and many fair and unblemished
characters will come within its reach and may be brought before this honorable
court.

If there be circumstances here that require further discussion they should be
discussed elsewhere. I wave any further enquiry -- for the Senate cannot decide
upon them.

I hasten to the last article -- and rejoice that at length I see land. The
amount of this is, that he plundered the state -- that he filched from the mass
of public property a certain certificate which had been exchanged with the
commonwealth. If this be true, he must be a wretch indeed! he would not deserve
the honor of an impeachment. Such a charge brought against any man ought to be
well supported; but brought against a man of unblemished character, the proof
ought to be strong indeed. It ought to be supported by a number of witnesses,
or at the least, by the lucid testimony of one man speaking positively to the
fact, on whose memory and recollection the firmest reliance might be placed.
But what is the number of witnesses against the defendant? -- One. What the
impressions on his memory? They resemble the traces on the sand of the
seashore.

The charge is, That Mr. M'Clenachan exchanged this certificate with the state,
-- and as it was afterward subscribed by the defendant -- the inference is
that he embezzled it. -- It must therefore be first proved satisfactorily that
Mr. M'Clenachan did exchange it. Let us examine this.

It is probable that he had such a certificate so late as September 1790; --
and it is certain that Mr. Nicholson had it in July 1792. He says he did not
sell it to Nicholson; but whether he exchanged it or not he cannot tell, for he
sold to others. Such certificates as were unsold he carried to the Comptroller
to be exchanged. When the witness cannot swear that he delivered the
certificate in question to the defendant, can you, gentlemen upon your oaths
say that he did? Here is not the shadow even of presumptive proof!

Even in the case of a miserable felon indicted for larceny, it must be first
proved that a larceny was committed, before he shall be put to make any
defense. If the owner should say, I cannot say it was stolen -- " I had such
articles" -- "I sold to others." -- The candor, of the Attorney General would
induce him to direct an acquittal. Principles established for the safety of all
must not be violated. They require proof in this case as well as in that just
stated: but Mr. M'Clenachan cannot recollect what became of the certificate in
question.

But it is said although the evidence is not very perspicuous yet it is
sufficient to oblige the defendant to show how he came by it. No! They aver the
fact. They cannot stir a step till they have proved the exchange: But if any
fact can be distinctly seen through the thick mist -- the palpable obscurity
which the testimony of this witness has shed upon the transaction, I am sure it
is not the fact required. The witness will not swear that.

But it is urged "That if Mr. Nicholson bought this certificate, it is capable
of proof." Indeed! then if Mr. M'Clenachan exchanged it, it is also capable of
proof. "But the latter kept no account of his certificates!" and what proof
have we that the former did. Why, it is said, he is a regular man -- he keeps a
diary! I appeal to you gentlemen if that was fairly urged; since we offered to
produce it and they would not suffer it to be read. But that was a diary of his
official, not of his private, transactions. It commenced in March 1792. How
then could it assist us in tracing a certificate subscribed to the loan which
closed in 1791?

Again it is said, "If the person exists upon earth who sold it to the
defendant he may be produced." At present it is sufficient to ask, What if he
does not exist upon earth? Who can keep his witnesses alive? In what a terrible
situation would many be if such modes of proof are to prevail. Thousands would
be unable to trace the certificates they honestly bought. They pass from hand
to hand. Often no note made of the seller's name or of the purchase. In such
case your own oath will not be received; and a purchase of this kind will be
incapable of proof.

The danger of obliging a defendant to produce such proof even when there are
strong presumptions against him is considerable. What would Mr. Nicholson have
done, had Hans Hamilton been dead?

Once more it is said that Mr. M'Clenachan delivered him many certificates. We
answer that we bought many. The answer is equal to the proof. -- Lastly, it was
said, "What other proof could be produced?" I reply, that they ought clearly
and positively to prove the exchange or to forbear the charge. There is no
extreme difficulty in making such proof if such were the fact.

This is a sufficient answer at present. The time may come when this matter
shall be fully understood. Here, in a criminal prosecution, it would not be
proper for him to answer upon oath; but in the civil suit, he will submit to
interrogatories. They may prove his heart to the bottom and I trust they will
find it honest.

But what is the manner in which the testimony on this article has been taken?
-- The longer I live the more I perceive the necessity and advantage of viva
voce testimony in criminal prosecutions. -- Had the witness been examined
openly before you, the doubt or the certainty with which he spoke would have
evidently appeared. But when his answers are reduced to writing they appear to
the best advantage, and we can only judge from the expression. Yet even this
exhibits a recollection feeble and uncertain. Mr. M'Clenachan is known to be a
man of the most perfect integrity and uprightness. He will not swear what he
does not remember; and in his examination the burden of the song is, I cannot
recollect -- I cannot tell." (Mr. B. then read the answers to show how very
frequently these expressions occurred.)

Can we then be sure, even when he states a fact, that he has not forgotten all
the circumstances attending it which serve to explain or qualify it? If every
question that leads to an explanation is answered with, "I cannot tell," or
refused to be answered at all, what can we rely on? All that we can be sure of
is, that he carried a bundle of certificates to the Comptroller's office and
left them with him, even without counting them, having, as he says, the most
unbounded confidence in Mr. Nicholson's integrity. That the certificate in
question was one of them, we have not the shadow of proof. -- Shall the
defendant then be convicted on such flimsy evidence -- the imperfect testimony
of an unrecollecting individual? There is no proof of the exchange -- there is
not even a probability -- there is a bare possibility. Even that possibility is
answered by our producing the abstracts of the certificates exchanged by Mr.
M'Clenachan. In these, the certificate in question does not appear. -- We might
therefore venture to say that it is not possible.

Against such evidence a simple denial of the charge is enough; but when it is
aided by a fair fame and upright character, formed by a life of unblemished
integrity, every suspicion vanishes.

When I speak of character, I mean the reputation he enjoyed before the
jealousies and cruel suspicions which the manner of conducting this business
has excited against him, existed. These however will not injure him here. We
call no witnesses to prove his character because it is well known. I appeal
then to you, gentlemen, who have personally known him -- to you who have known
him long -- to you who have known him intimately -- who have looked as it were
into his bosom and seen the bottom of his heart -- I ask you, if ye have not
always found him an upright citizen -- an honest man! Put this into the scale
against that which is charged with the the accusation -- and ye will find that
the proof against him is as dust upon the balance.

Here then let us pause; and from this point as from the eminence of truth,
look back upon the field over which we have traveled. Where are the traces of
this "fraud, dishonor and perfidy," which have been so freely charged? Where
are the "spoils of his country" with which he has been loaded? Where do we
perceive the arts, the tricks, the deceit, the undue concealment of which we
have heard? Where is the peculation charged? Where the delusions by which he
accomplished it? I see them not; they exist only in the creative imagination of
the speaker (Mr. Dexter) not in the evidence. I see a conduct open, but firm,
and founded on the basis of the law. I see an honest mind acting from
conviction of judgment: I see him exercising the rights of an independent
citizen, and finally facing this accusation with that intrepidity which is the
characteristic of innocence.

We rely therefore with confidence upon your justice: -- that we shall be
judged, not by opinion but by the law and the testimony; not by reports
circulated out of doors, but by the testimony given here in court.

We feel not the weight of the accusation; but we cannot be insensible to that
of our accusers. -- The accusation of the Representatives of Pennsylvania,
cannot but inspire prejudice. To prevent the effects of that prejudice, the
Constitution contemplated this honorable Court, and placed the accused safe
under the independence and magnanimity of this high tribunal; a tribunal,
supposed to be superior to that awe which the most numerous and influential
branch of the Legislature might otherwise inspire.

As this is the first impeachment, we are now to make an experiment interesting
to republican government. We are to see if the citizen is as safe here as
before the ordinary tribunals of justice. It is to decide, whether one order of
the representatives may safely be the judge when the other is the accuser; and
whether under any circumstances it be advisable to depart from a trial by a
jury of our peers. -- As for us, we have no doubt but that this Judicial
authority is safely deposited. We have no doubt but you will weigh with caution
and decide with firmness -- that your ears will be open to the voice of truth
but deaf to the clamours of suspicion. So doing, Mr. Speaker, may you and this
honorable Court receive that best of all rewards, the approbation of your own
consciences. Adjourned.

The proceedings in the House of Representatives respecting this trial, after
this day's adjournment, were the same as in page 340.

[The express, which had been sent to Westmoreland county, by the defendant, to
the gentlemen nominated as commissioners, for the purpose of taking the
deposition of Mr. Hans Hamilton on interrogatories, (see page 313) arrived here
the 22d of March; and the papers were sent to be opened by Mr. Tilghman, and
Mr. Ingersoll: They are given in this place and will serve to relieve the
attention of the reader, and to prepare his mind for the final decision of this
important trial.]

"March 8, 1794. "GENTLEMEN,
"WE have agreed that you or any one or more of you be commissioners to take
the answer of Hans Hamilton to the interrogatories enclosed on the part of the
defendant, and the cross interrogatories on the part of the commonwealth in an
impeachment now depending before the Senate of Pennsylvania; any of you that
are Justices of the Peace will previously administer to Hans Hamilton an oath,
and if the interrogatories be taken before any of you, not Judges or Justices,
let an oath be so administered by a Judge or Justice, you will let said
Hamilton subscribe his answers at the foot thereof, and you will thereafter
certify that he having been so as aforesaid duly sworn did make and subscribe
those answers, and let this certificate be under your hand and seal, or that of
such of you as attend.

JARED INGERSOLL, JOHN NICHOLSON.
W. TODD, W. JACK, J. BRANNON, JAMES GUTHRIE, and JOHN MOORE Esqrs, or either
of them."



Interrogatories etc. of Hans Hamilton on the part of the Defendant, Mr.
Nicholson.
1st. Did you or did you not apply to John Nicholson with the following amongst
other New-Loan certificates viz. One certificate for two hundred and forty-two
pounds seven shillings and sixpence.

One other certificate for two hundred and sixty-eight pounds. -- And,

One other certificate for eleven pounds sixteen shillings.

And if you did so apply, in what year, and whether in the early or latter part
of the year, and whether you did or did not express to him your desire to have
them exchanged and the Continental certificates funded to the loan of the U. S.
and regret that you could not have that business done without delay and expense
to you, and whether Mr. Nicholson did or did not propose to you that he would
commute with you for the said certificates a sum in the funded stock of the
said U. S. equal to what you would be entitled to receive from the public, or
the value thereof?

Answer given by Hans Hamilton on his solemn oath administered to him by
William Jack, Esquire one of the Judges of the Court of Common Pleas of
Westmoreland county to certain interrogatories forwarded by Jared Ingersoll and
John Nicholson, Esqrs. and addressed to William Todd, William Jack, John
Brannon, James Guthrie and John Moore, Esqrs, or either of them, on the part of
the said John Nicholson, on an impeachment now pending against him before the
honorable the Senate of the State of Pennsylvania, and which interrogatories
are returned, herein enclosed.

Ans. 1. The said Hans Hamilton on his solemn oath deposes and says, That in
the month of February in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and
ninety-one, this deponent being then in the city of Philadelphia did apply to
John Nicholson with New-Loan certificates for the sums expressed and mentioned
in the first interrogatory, among others in order to have them funded in stock
of the United States. The whole amount of which New-Loan certificates was
1237l. 16s. 10d. as the business could not be transacted at the commissioner of
Loan's office for the State of Pennsylvania before the first day of April then
following, as this deponent had been informed by Mr. Smith the commissioner of
Loans, and expressing some uneasiness at the delay and expense he would
necessarily be subjected to on that account, requested that Mr. Nicholson would
be so obliging as to take the management of the business in his behalf upon
himself (he being a gentleman in whom this deponent had particular confidence,
and who had on former occasions been friendly to him in assisting and
expediting him in his business) giving the said Nicholson power to commute the
said certificates for such sum or sums as he would be entitled to in stock of
the United States, and in such manner as the said Nicholson might judge to be
this deponent's best advantage.

Inter. 2. If so, did you, or did you not agree to this proposition and
thereupon deliver to said Nicholson your certificates of New-Loans as
aforesaid, and did you or not, then take the private obligation of said
Nicholson to do as he had proposed -- and if so, what became of said obligation?

Ans. 2. This deponent in consequence of his own request and Mr. Nicholson
consenting and agreeing thereto did thereupon deliver up the said New-Loan
certificates amounting to L. 1237:16:10 as aforesaid to the said John
Nicholson, who thereupon gave him a certain writing or obligation to commute
the certificates in manner aforesaid or purporting to that effect as this
deponent believes, which writing or obligation, together with other papers of
this deponent was lost as this deponent believes on the 4th day of November
following, at the time of General St. Clair's defeat. The said obligation was
always considered by this deponent as a private undertaking by Mr. Nicholson
and not as given in an official capacity.

Inter. 3. Did you or did you not afterward and if so at what time return to
the city and repair to Mr. Nicholson to put you in the way to draw the interest
on your stock, and did you or not then find he had transferred to you a part of
the stock of the United States, to which by contract aforesaid you were
entitled for your New-Loan certificates aforesaid, and did you or did you not
then receive your interest, and did you or not continue your certificates of
that stock upon which you so drew interest in the care and custody of Mr.
Nicholson?

Ans. 3. This deponent says that to the best of his recollection he returned to
the city of Philadelphia in the first week or in the beginning of April in the
year A. D. 1792, and having called on Mr. Nicholson to know what had been done
in regard to the certificates with which he had been entrusted by him as
aforesaid; he was given to understand that the business had been transacted and
the papers left at Mr. Smith's office, that upon this deponent calling at the
said office -- one of the Clerks of said Loan-office told this deponent, the
papers or funded certificates had been given to Mr. Nicholson -- and upon this
deponent's returning to Mr. Nicholson and informing him what the Clerk of the
Loan-office had said. He the said Nicholson had replied, that he believed the
papers or certificates were in his possession, but that he was then engaged and
had not time to make search or examine for them. Upon which this deponent said
he did not want to lift the said certificates, so obtained for him as aforesaid
at that time or words to that effect, provided he could draw the interest due
on them; upon which Mr. Nicholson gave this deponent a writing or check for
that purpose on the bank, and upon this deponent's presenting the same to the
cashier of the said bank -- he thinks to a Mr. Shields, he this deponent was
informed by him that there was one year's interest due and desired this
deponent to subscribe his name on the books for the receipt thereof, and upon
so doing this deponent was immediately paid the sum of one hundred and
forty-eight dollars and fifty-three cents on that account, which he understood
and was informed was in full of one year's interest. The said funded
certificates being left by this deponent and still remaining in the care and
custody of the said John Nicholson until the twentieth day of January, A. D.
1794, before which time to wit, in the month of April, A. D. 1793, this
deponent received by his attorney in fact, John Moore, Esquire who was duly
constituted by him, one year and one quarter's interest amounting to L 69:12:2
or there-abouts.

Inter. 4. Did you or not after the last mentioned transaction on your going to
Philadelphia receive from Mr. Nicholson your certificates and cash for the
balance due to you for a deficiency of stock he had not transferred to you?

Ans. 4. This deponent about the 18th day of January, A. D. 1794, again
returned to the city, at request of Mr. Nicholson, expecting to be examined
upon the subject of the trial. That on the 20th of the same month, he, this
deponent received from the said John Nicholson three certificates which had
hitherto, and by this deponent's consent, remained in his care and custody. One
certificate being for 2181 dollars thirty cents, dated October 3, 1791, and
bearing interest from the first day of January, 1791, at the rate of 6 per
cent. etc. -- one of same date for the sum of 1090 dollars 65 cents, bearing
interest at the rate of six per cent. from the first of January, A. D. 1801,
inclusive; and the other certificate for the sum of 588 dollars 94 cents.
bearing interest at three per cent. per annum from the first of January, A. D.
1791, all subscribed by Thomas Smith, Commissioner loans. That the said
certificates were delivered to this deponent by the said Nicholson without any
demand or request made to him for that purpose, and had been all loaned in this
deponent Hans Hamilton's name, and this deponent was informed by the said
Nicholson at the time of his delivering up the said certificates to him, that
there was a balance due to this deponent, which he would pay him in a few days.
That in the course of the same week this deponent thinks he was paid by the
said John Nicholson the sum of two hundred and seventy-six dollars in bank
notes and specie, being the balance due to this deponent as he was informed for
a deficiency of stock which had not been transferred to him.

Inter. 5. Did or did not Mr. Nicholson give or deliver to you in commutation
for the said certificates any of the continental Loan-office certificates which
you originally had, and for which you received the said New-Loan certificates;
or did Mr. Nicholson give and deliver to you the said funded stock of the
United States in commutation of said New-Loans as far as the said stock went
and pay you for the remainder in money?

JOHN NICHOLSON,
March 9, 1794.
Countersigned, JARED INGERSOLL.

Ans. 5. This deponent did not at any time receive from Mr. Nicholson on
account of, or in commutation for the first mentioned New-Loan certificates
deposited in manner and for the reason mentioned in his answer to interrogatory
first, any other certificates than those mentioned in answer to the fourth
interrogatory a within or before mentioned, at which time or shortly after as
there mentioned, this deponent was paid the balance due to him as is there set
forth -- The entire management of this business with the calculation of the
balance due having been entrusted by this deponent to the said John Nicholson,
as well as every other part of the said transaction, further this deponent
says not.

HANS HAMILTON.
Sworn and subscribed before me, this 17th day of March, A. D. 1794, WM. JACK.

Done in presence of Us the subscribers, Commissioners appointed for this
purpose, as appears by a writing signed by Jared Ingersoll and John Nicholson,
given under our hands and seals at Greensburgh, this 17th day of March, one
thousand seven hundred and ninety-four.

WM. JACK, (L.S.) JAMES GUTHRIE, (L.S.) JOHN BRANNON, (L.S.)



Philadelphia, March 8, 1794.
WE agree to appoint William Todd, William Jack, John Brannon, James Guthrie
and John Moore, Esqrs. or any two or one of them Commissioners to take the
deposition of Hans Hamilton upon interrogatories herewith transmitted -- to be
returned under the seal of the Commissioners or Commissioner acting, directed
to Jared Ingersoll and Edward Tilghman, Esqrs. or either of them.

WILLIAM RAWLE, of counsel for the Commonwealth. JOHN NICHOLSON.


Answers given by Hans Hamilton on his solemn oath administered to him by Wm.
Jack, Esquire one of the Judges of the Court of Common Pleas of Westmoreland county
to certain interrogatories on the part of the commonwealth transmitted for the
purpose, and signed by Wm. Rawle of Counsel for the commonwealth.
Inter 1. Do you, or do you not know whether the funded stock of the United
States which Mr. Nicholson gave you in commutation of the New-Loan certificates
mentioned in his interrogatories, was the stock arising from the subscription
of those continental certificates which the state had received from you on loan?

Answer. The said Hans Hamilton deposes and says, that as the management of
the commutation of the New-Loan certificates left by this deponent with John
Nicholson, amounting to L. 1237:16:10, was entirely entrusted by him to Mr.
Nicholson. He does not particularly know whether the certificates received by
him from Mr. Nicholson were received in exchange by the said Nicholson for the
New-Loan certificates of the State of Pennsylvania left by this deponent for
the purpose of exchanging or not, but that this deponent received as such, and
has no reason to believe they were not.

2 Inter. Was the stock of the U. S. you received from Mr. Nicholson issued in
your name and for your use? Mention particularly the numbers, dates, and sums
of each certificate.

Ans. 2. The certificates received by this deponent from Mr. John Nicholson are
severally in his this deponent's name for the several sums mentioned in his
answer given to the fourth interrogatory on the part of John Nicholson (and
herewith transmitted) and respectively numbered 1017 State of Pennsylvania, and
for this deponent's use as he has regularly received the interest thereon when
demanded.

Inter. 3. Did you after your original continental certificates were deposited
on loan with the Comptroller General, and at the same time or subsequently to
your delivery of the New-Loan certificates to him to be exchanged, purchase the
continental certificates originally loaned by you to the State, or become any
way proprietor of the same? If yea, from whom did you purchase the same
continental certificates, when and under what circumstances?

Ans. 3. This deponent after having deposited the New-Loan certificates of the
state of Pennsylvania with John Nicholson, as an agent and obliging
acquaintance, and not in his official capacity as Comptroller, did not then or
at any subsequent time purchase the Continental certificates originally loaned
by him to this state, or become any way proprietor of the same. This deponent,
on the contrary, was obliged to dispose of L.1300 out of, or being part of an
original certificate for the sum of L.1969:8:2 issued in his name, for services
rendered the public as pack-horse-master, by Major Story, Commissioner
appointed for settling and adjusting such claims. And which certificate with
some others this deponent's property was commuted for New-Loan certificates of
the state of Pennsylvania; the said sale having been occasioned by the
embarrassed situation of this deponent.

Inter. 4. When you took your New-Loan certificates to Mr. Nicholson to be
re-exchanged for Continental certificates, did you receive the Continental
certificates from him, and then deliver them to him to be subscribed in your
name and for your use, as equivalent for the New-Loans deposited with him, or
did you before the receipt of the Continental certificates, and immediately
after you deposited the New-Loans request Mr. Nicholson to take the Continental
certificates and subscribe them on your behalf to the loan of the United States?

Ans 4. This deponent says that in the year A. D, 1786, he thinks he exchanged
the Continental certificates his property for New-Loan certificates of the
state of Pennsylvania, and that he occasionally drew interest which became due
thereon, and that the said certificates were in his this deponent's own care
and charge until the month of February, A. D. 1791, when they were left with
Mr. Nicholson in manner mentioned in his answer to interrogatory first, on the
part of the said John Nicholson. In order to have the same funded on the best
terms in the stock of the United States for this deponent's use.

Inter. 5. Did you re-exchange any New-Loan certificates for any of your
original Continental certificates, or did you commute all your New-Loans with
Mr. Nicholson for funded stock of the United States?

Ans. 5. This deponent says he made no such re-exchange; that he left his
certificates as before mentioned with Mr. Nicholson for the purpose of being
funded in stock of the United States. That this deponent received the first
year's interest on said stock on the 10th of April, A. D. 1792 on Mr.
Nicholson's order in this deponent's favor, as before mentioned; but that he
had not then or previous to his receiving the said certificates so funded in
stock of the United States, seen the said certificates so obtained in lieu of
his said New-Loan certificates, but had understood they were issued in his
name. But this deponent further says that he had not at any time previous to
the twentieth day of January last past, when they were returned to him. So for
as this deponent can recollect, requested or desired the said John Nicholson to
let him see the said certificates or to render him any particular account
touching the exchange of them, or his management or agency therein.

Inter. 6. If you answer affirmatively to the first and second of the
defendant's interrogatories, relate why the Continental certificates so
deposited on loan were subscribed by Mr. Nicholson to the loan of the United
States on your account?

Ans. 6. This deponent says, that the answer to this question is given in his
reply to interrogatory first on the part of the said Nicholson.

Inter. 7. Had you any other transaction with Mr. Nicholson either in
exchanging or commuting certificates of any description except that of
commuting your New-Loans for funded debt of the United States? If yea, please
to relate the same so far as such transactions respect the said New-Loans, or
the manner in which Mr. Nicholson paid you therefore?

Ans. 7. This deponent does not recollect having any other transaction with the
said John Nicholson in exchanging or commuting of certificates than before
mentioned, except the loaning of three certificates, one in the name of James
Reynolds for the sum of L. 12:15:2; one in the name of John Brisby for the sum
of L.4:4:6 and one other in the name of James Smith for the sum of L.4:19:6 in
the New-Loans, for their several uses deposited with this deponent, and for
which he holds himself accountable to them or their representatives, further
than that Mr. Nicholson at this deponent's request, gave him two certificates
one for L. 1300; the other for L. 669:8:2 in lieu of a New-Loan certificate in
his name for L. 1969:8:2, and which this deponent forthwith returned to the
said Nicholson upon receiving the said two loan certificates equal in amount to
the loan certificate by him returned as aforesaid -- and this deponent says
that his reason for requesting the said John Nicholson, as Comptroller, to
divide the said certificate, was to enable this deponent to make sale of the
certificates for L. 1300, in order to enable this deponent to discharge debts
due by him. And that this transaction of issuing and granting the two
certificates equal in amount to the one returned, was in the month of September
in the year 1790, as near as this deponent can recollect.

Inter. 8. Do you know any thing further that may be material to the
commonwealth or the defendant? If yea relate the same fully and at large as if
particularly interrogated thereto?

WM RAWLE, of Counsel for the Commonwealth in the impeachment against John
Nicholson, Esquire
Ans. 8. As this deponent has answered the several Interrogatories put to him
fully and at length he does not recollect any thing further material either on
the part of the commonwealth or the said John Nicholson.

HANS HAMILTON.
Sworn and subscribed before me, March 17, 1794, WM. JACK.

We the undernamed commissioners appointed to administer cross interrogatories
on the part of the commonwealth on the impeachment pending against John
Nicholson, to Hans Hamilton the above subscribing deponent (the other gentlemen
named commissioners not attending) do certify that having met at the house of
John Brannon, Esquire in Greensburgh this day for that purpose. The said cross
interrogatories were distinctly read to this deponent in our presence, and the
foregoing written answers were made to the same and subscribed by him.

Given under our hands and seals this seventeenth day of March in the year of
our Lord 1794. WM. JACK. (L. S.) JAMES GUTHRIE, (L. S.) JOHN BRANNON,(L. S.)



Fifteenth day of the trial. SATURDAY, MARCH 15.
THE Senate met the consideration of Legislative business being postponed for
the purpose of sitting in their judicial capacity. The members of the House of
Representatives were also (...)

Mr. Lewis rose and observed, that he was to come after Mr. Wilcocks, who was
too much indisposed to attend; and wished the Senate would be pleased to
postpone the trial until Monday. Adjourned.

In the minutes of the House of Representatives the following entry is
recorded, commemorative of this day's progress --

"In conformity to the resolutions of the 25th day of February last, the House
resolved itself into a committee of the whole for the purpose of attending the
trial of John Nicholson, Comptroller General.

"The Speaker quitted the chair and Mr. Wynkoop was placed therein.

"The committee of the whole then proceeded to the Senate-chamber for the
purpose aforesaid.

"After some time,

"The committee of the whole returned to their own chamber.

"The Chairman left the chair, and the Speaker resumed it.

"The Chairman then reported that the committee of the whole had attended the
trial of John Nicholson, Comptroller General.

"The committee appointed to manage the trial on the articles of impeachment
against John Nicholson, Comptroller General, reported further progress."

Sixteenth day of the trial. MONDAY, March 17.
Mr. WILCOCKS rose, and spoke as follows --

Mr. Speaker, and Gentlemen of the Senate,

I COME forward before you, engaged by the committee of managers of the House
of Representatives to conduct this cause; I come forward to support the charges
against the Comptroller General of the state of Pennsylvania. This cause is
very important in itself, from the nature of the charges, the high authority of
the tribunal, and the interest of the party. I trust nevertheless that this
last consideration will not influence the tribunal, but that if strong ample
evidence be produced, the conviction of the defendant will be the consequence,
public justice require that a meritorious and innocent person who should
receive an injury should be acquitted: The same principles demand the
punishment of the guilty, as an acquittal in the respect would be improper. If
the Comptroller General shall be found infringing the laws of his county, the
weight of respectability will not, it is to be expected, supply the want of
evidence.

Such State prosecutions can only exist in free governments. It is therefore
wisely and judiciously interwoven in the Constitution of Pennsylvania, it is
the duc^ of the House of Representatives to impeach; it is the business of the
Senate to try the impeachment.

We find the same Constitution denies the Supreme Executive the power of
pardoning. The Senate in cases of conviction is therefore in some degree vested
with a discretionary power to punish. The same Constitution has certain limits
which cannot be passed* but within the extremities of it are certain
discretionary powers. The punishment of the officer should be proportionate to
the nature of the offense or misdemeanor. What if an officer is found unworthy
of confidence and unfit to serve his country? In the first place he can be
removed from office; in the next place; if it it is deemed proper, he may be
rendered incapable to hold any office of profit or trust during life. (Mr.
Wilcocks then read the article in the Constitution respecting impeachments, see
page 210 of this.)

Thus we see limits which cannot be passed, but within these limits are
discretionary powers according to the different degrees of offenses; the Senate
has full power to exercise the severe or linient kind.

This cause has been so ^^lly and repeatedly traveled ever, I feel repugnance
at taking up so much of your time, as the going over it again would require. I
will however endeavor to touch on the merits of the principal parts, and will
confine myself to those points most essentially connected with the prosecution.

The two first articles can be considered in one point of view; the several
Acts of Congress and Assembly to which each of these articles refers, makes it
proper to class them together, as the observations and reasonings will bring
them into one point of view at the same time (He then read the substance of the
two first articles.)

As to the facts contained in these two articles, they are plainly proved, or
openly acknowledged and avowed. It appears from an inspection of all the
abstracts except his own large one, that they are certified to be genuine and
assumable in the hand writing of the Comptroller General. It has been remarked
on by every gentleman engaged as counsel for the defendant, but not much relied
on, that his own abstract was not certified genuine and assumable; I am clearly
of opinion, that it need not be much relied on; for if one single instance can
be proved, in which he criminally certified New-loan certificates to be genuine
and assumable, it is sufficient to support the charges.

They say he certified none of his own abstracts. When the circumstances come
to be considered, all his abstracts are in his own handwriting, and contain
all the information to the Commissioner of Loans that he could desire. Advert
to the two first articles, he is not charged that he certified on the face of
the abstracts; but he is charged with recognizing, certifying and declaring
New-Loans genuine and assumable, If there is any species of common law proof,
that he certified to the Commissioner of Loans, it is sufficient to support the
charges; then why will it not appear as well from the abstracts being made out
in his own handwriting. He was early called upon by Thomas Smith, the
Commissioner of Loans, for checks to prevent counterfeits and imposition; Mr.
Nicholson sends two certificates to him (see letters page 271-2.) What can be
more satisfactorily proven, than that the commissioner of Loans thought them
assumable, when the abstracts appeared in his own handwriting?

With regard to the certification to the Governor (see letter, page 356) it was
certainly official. This will not be disputed here as it has been elsewhere,
where they contend that he certified as John Nicholson, and not as
Comptroller General. If neither the laws of the Union, or of Pennsylvania
enjoined it on him, this is a very singular and strange doctrine indeed!

In thus certifying it is very true, that he acted in his official capacity.
Nineteen twentieths of the agency of the public officers ace not prescribed by
law, so in the departments of the Land-office, Finance or any others, there are
various instances in all of them to be discovered, which are not particularly
mentioned in the laws; the Acts generally point out only the outlines of the
different offices. To act contrary to the course of the offices, or to devise
ways and means in opposition to the rotine of the offices, are offenses against
these Acts, equally obvious as if specially and expressly pointed out by law.

Independently, therefore, the Comptroller General could not act in any other
than in his official character. The commonwealth of Pennsylvania was deeply
interested in that Act; she wished to act fairly and securely with the United
States. If the law is not expressive enough, shall nothing be done? Every
officer was to act according to the duties of his respective department and
when called upon to act with zeal in his official capacity.

We therefore find Pennsylvania deeply interested in the due execution of the
Act of the 10th of April 1792, which made redeemable the debts which were
subscribable. It was of great consequence to Pennsylvania that none should be
improperly subscribed.

How can the Comptroller General deny his official agency? That officer and the
Register-General, in their joint communication to the Governor (see letter,
page 217, 218) are conclusive on this head, wherein they point out the mode of
conducting this business with the Commissioner of Loans: "Examine the same as
to their being genuine certificates and assumable," etc.

How then can the Comptroller General say, that he was not acting in his
official department?

I now come to the consideration of the question, whether the New-Loans were
subscribable as State debts to the loan opened by the Act of Congress of the
4th of August 1790. It has ever been impressed on my mind, that independent of
the Act of Pennsylvania of the 27th March 1789, New-Loans were not subscribable
to the loan of Congress.

After the adoption of the present Constitution, Congress found herself easy in
her situation and perfectly competent to the satisfying all her domestic debt;
and then contemplated the situation of the different states; among them she saw
a number of individuals laboring under debts created by the war; she
contemplated the taking of such, as in the first instance, the United States
were not subject to be called upon, nor liable to a demand on them. This was
the motive the General Government had for opening the loan.

The gentlemen have mentioned the description of State Debts receivable in this
loan, and then ask if the New-Loans are not comprehended under this
description! It is true they are, but those are not the only prerequisites; for
in the same section we find, they must be issued for services or supplies:
These were the essential requisites, and the New-Loans being only granted for
others, they could not be within the meaning of the Act.

Now, suppose for a moment that the New-Loans were receivable, what would be
the effect? Pennsylvania was to have the benefit of subscribing 2,200,000
dollars; nay, let us suppose twice the sum if you please, for there was then
near twice the sum out, the subscription of the New-Loans would exclude the
proper State debt of Pennsylvania. This would burden the commonwealth, which
the law was designed to assist. How would Pennsylvania be cased then? Her
condition would not be meliorated, for New-Loans are in effect no more than
Continental certificates, only in another name.

The 18th section of the law of Congress was introduced not to invite the
New-Loan holders to subscribe, but from an apprehension that they would be
offered, and to guard against the consequences. This clause (18th section) has
been, and I suppose will again be urged, that these New-Loan certificates will
be received. They might by possibility, or by mistake be subscribed, but then
all interest is to cease until the Continental certificates be delivered up.
Can it be supposed that Congress would assume them, when double interest might
have been paid on the same sum?

New-Loans were never a money debt of Pennsylvania, neither were they
subscribable or redeemable under her laws. The consideration of this part leads
me to think that Congress never meant to include them in the assumption.

But a more important question arises, that is, Can they be contemplated as
subscribable after the passing of the Act of 1789?

I apprehend New-Loans were never a money debt to be paid on or before the year
1796. This will appear from the Act of 1786.

The New-Loan was a certificate of a contract or engagement between the
commonwealth and the public creditors, her citizens. The intent of which was
that Pennsylvania engaged to pay the interest half yearly, and the creditor
pledged with her his certificate as a security, the provision was intended as a
temporary relief, and to continue until Congress should be able to discharge
her own engagements, and then if Pennsylvania chose she might authorize an
exchange of New-Loans for Continental certificates, and the public creditors
have resort to Congress.

Our attention has been called to the Act of December 18th, 1780, for the
depreciation of the the pay of the army; and it is asked, why should not
Pennsylvania assume the one as well as the other? It was in order to show when
Pennsylvania contemplated a permanent debt she knew how to distinguish between
the depreciation certificates and those issued in 1786. The depreciation
certificates were issued at the earnest solicitation of Congress; this
commonwealth agreed to assume the depreciation certificates, Congress being
unable to pay the debt, called upon the individual states to pay it, promising
at the same time, that they would repay them.

Here then, are circumstances and inducements to do the one, and not the other.
All she did was to calculate the sum due to each person for the depreciation of
his pay in the army, the Act makes a provision for the redemption both of
principal and interest, and reserves the right of paying them off in specie, or
in any other current money equivalent.

I will now proceed to consider the nature of New-Loan certificates. Previous
to the passing of the Act of 16th March 1785, it is obvious to the recollection
of every person, that the war was then over, the Federal Confederation showed
itself inadequate to the purposes of good government; Congress had a great
foreign and do^^^tic debt, and not able to call on the individual (...) for
resources and revenues. In this torpid situation, the public creditors who were
citizens of Pennsylvania, labored under inconveniences, resorted to their own
government, praying relief.

The Legislature then passed the Act of the 16th of March 1785, in which she
ordered her quota L.123932 of interest to be paid into the Loan-office of the
United States, and ordered the Loan-officer to pay it to the public creditors,
citizens of Pennsylvania; this she did at the pressing solicitations of her
citizens; who were in distress, as Congress could not relieve them, this is
stated in the preamble to be their motive, the 18th section makes it temporary
until Congress could pay; this is the spirit and intention of the law of 1785,
the same motives pervade all the subsequent Acts on the subject: And her
designs were never to make any other engagements further than therein contained.

It may be asked, and I now mention it, why did not Pennsylvania assume all
this debt, as she did in the case of the depreciation of the pay of the army?
Answer. It was not done at the desire or instance of Congress, but by her own
voluntary act. If this commonwealth had waited for the recognition of Congress,
perhaps Congress would not recognize what Pennsylvania had done. She knew this
appropriation was unpleasant and disagreeable to Congress, who wanted herself
the application of the funds in her own hands. Moreover the depreciation of the
pay of the army, was an ascertained sum very moderate, and far inferior to the
other debt.

Thus the object of the act of 1785, was found disagreeable to Congress, and in
September 1785, six months afterward Congress determined to defeat the
provisions of that act, as being disagreeable to her, and gave directions to
her officer accordingly. Thus we find all the benevolence, all the advantages
intended by Pennsylvania, absolutely defeated by those resolves of Congress,
and the creditors reduced to the same difficult situation they were in before
the passing of the act of 1785. Thus circumstanced, when the Legislature met in
March 1786, she found the same cause existing as in 1785, the creditors still
craving further relief, as there had been no change in their condition since
March 1785; it was a reasonable idea, that finding the citizens, public
creditors in the same situation, she should contemplate how they might make
some other provisions for the exigencies of those creditors on the same ground,
same principles and same manners: It is presumed, that the same men called upon
to act in the course of one year would act as they did before.

It was not necessary to give more relief, but it was expedient to give it in a
different way. The Legislature reasoned a little here, they considered their
former relief was defeated by Congress. How was it to be done? It was a
perplexing thing; some other mode must be adopted without the intervention of
the public offices of Congress; some good arrangements were necessary. It would
not do to say, that every creditor should bring his bundle of Continental
certificates to the State-Treasurer to receive his interest on them; this was
impracticable and unsafe to the commonwealth; besides, where was her security,
that if she paid so, it ever would be repaid her? The Legislature knew that it
was an unpleasant business to Congress, and that she defeated the same measure
six months before.

Some other mode must therefore be devised; the idea of a loan was proposed,
and the expedient adopted; the issuing of New-Loans were devised only to give a
convenient mode to the creditor, and to continue only till Congress should do
justice to all her own creditors. How is this project to be carried into
execution? We find, Sir, to effect this business, she directs certain
certificates of her own to be issued and given in exchange for Continental
certificates: The amount of the Continental certificates, their numbers, dates
and other essential circumstances of the debt to be stated in a large margin;
it is worthy of attention to consider how it was directed to be done. (Mr,
Wilcocks then read a part of the Act of March 1786.) The preamble shows the Act
of 1786 grew out of the resolves of Congress, which defeated the Act of 1785,
and only went to secure the interest, because it was not done at the call of
Congress, but voluntarily by Pennsylvania to relieve her own citizens. It is
"inexpedient" to continue under that law, says the Legislature, but just and
reasonable that our creditors should be relieved as far as circumstances will
admit. The Treasurer is to provide certificates with a proper margin sufficient
to contain the essentials of the debt to be secured. It was calculated with
this view to make it easy to return it; they never meant an absolute
engagement, never meant to pay, else why not make a certificate for the amount
of principal and interest? Every caution was taken by the Legislature to show
they meant something beyond a purchase: Had they designed a purchase they would
have required the principal and interest to be calculated, and have directed a
certificate to issue at once for their amount, not doing it shows they did not
design a purchase; an individual would have given his bond for the amount;
therefore the case of the depreciation New-Loan certificates are very
different; in the depreciation there was no margin, they meant different
things, a special species of security, to contain the essentials of the debts
thereby to be secured, and the annual payment of interest which shall have been
made thereon, to be prepared by the Treasurer, delivered to the Count. Genesis to
be by him countersigned and delivered out.

Then, Sir, I trust from these observations, that the case of the issuing of
depreciation and New-Loans are very different, and that the Legislature meant
or intended this as the most convenient mode to facilitate the payment of
interest on the New-Loans. All these circumstances mentioned to be recorded in
the margin, and directed by the Act are as good as if they had a place in the
very body of the certificate, and are equivalent to a part of the contract.

The marginal notes and the printed part are one contract, as if they had
borrowed or received per marginal notes such a certificate and to such an
amount specified in the margin: That the Comptroller General or Treasurer might
not be at the trouble of going over and over again the Continental
certificates, but be able at one view on what sum interest is to be calculated.

Then, Sir, if these things be so, it appears by this Act of Assembly that the
New-Loans were never an evidence of a money debt but an evidence of a special
contract to pay the interest, and the principal and interest to be ultimately
paid by the United States.

The next consideration is, that of whatever nature the engagements of
Pennsylvania were, they were done away by the repealing law of March 1789.

All the laws preceding that Act were of a temporary nature, calculated to
remove the difficulties of the times, and only to continue until Congress
should provide, which provision was now made, the 27th of March 1789 being the
day so long wished for, now the temporary relief is withdrawn (Mr. Wilcocks
read the preamble of the Act of 1789) with regard to the private intentions of
the Legislature there can be no doubt of their designs, they could mean nothing
less than the doing away all obligations under which they lay by the preceding
laws.

Nothing remained but to make the provision, which is absolutely and completely
done in the subsequent sections of the Act. In the case of two individuals, one
of whom is indebted to the other, if a law is passed or a circumstance takes
place to acquit the debtor from the payment of principal and interest, can any
obligation remain? Is not the debt discharged? How then, is it possible any
thing else can be meant here, than completely to annul the debt?

The third section directs the manner in which the exchange was to have been
effected, and when that was done, they had performed all that in justice and
equity they could be called upon to do.

It was not a contract for the payment of money but only payment of interest
for four years, nothing remained but directing the manner of returning the
Continental certificates; Pennsylvania then had acquitted herself with honor
and character from any engagement she was under from the New-Loan creditors.

It is remarkable that the words pay and secure are made use of at the issuing
of the certificates by the law of 1786, which are also used in the repealing
Act of March 1789, just commensurate to the law of 1786; this precision is
worthy of attention, it makes the repeal commensurate to the obligation, and
the obligation to be annulled by the use of those words -- meaning to pay the
interest, and to secure the return of the Continental certificates; and being
used in the repealing Act designed to revoke the past.

Whether or not this law was repugnant to the Constitution of the United
States, if the above are right, the Constitution need not be attended to,
because no contract was impaired by this commonwealth, the contract being in
its origin only conditional. Therefore, Sir, I apprehend the law of 1789 is not
to be taken in the defendant's view, but as an Act of the Legislature of
Pennsylvania, intended to do good in the different means pointed out by the
same.

The Constitution of the United States, so far from deviating from, actually
concurred with the repealing Act of March 1789 in defeating the obligations of
the Act of 1786, and repealed the contract of itself: Because the funds were
thereby transferred to Congress.

Let us attend to see in what manner the contract was impaired, if at all. The
funds were a part of the contract, as much so as any other. The New-Loan
holders assented to the change, and consented that the revenues and imposts
should be taken away from this commonwealth and be for ever vested in the
United States; the New-Loan holders were represented in convention, then that
part of the contract was repealed, annulled and made void.

Therefore it may be said with more truth, that the Constitution repealed the
obligation of the Act of 1786, than that the law of 1789 is in violation
thereof, and against the spirit of the Constitution.

If then the law of 1786 was not a purchase of the certificates, but an
engagement such as I have mentioned, the State is fairly and honorably
discharged, and she disengaged herself by offering the holders the certificates
which she had received.

I will now proceed to consider whether the New-Loans are redeemable under the
Act of the 10th of April 1792.

When we come to consider that law, we shall probably find that the Legislature
intended to place all the financial engagements of the State on as simple a
footing as possible, by ascertaining the extent of all her debts, and to
discharge the most of them by payment, the means by which this was to be
accomplished was a sale of 3 per cent. stock therein enumerated.

The first section directs the payment of interest on all certificates that
bore interest to the time they became due.

The second section authorizes the sale of 3 per cent. stock as much as should
have been necessary to redeem, 1. All certificates bearing an interest of 6 per
cent. 2. Six per cent. purparts on the deferred stock of the United States. 3.
All three per cent. purparts; and 4. Dollar money.

The above section comprehended every species of State debt, the unfunded
depreciation and New-Loan debt excepted; the interest only of the New-Loans was
an engagement, and the unfunded depreciation being supposed to be in the hands
of speculators with a long arrear of interest, being bought up at a low rate,
It was thought it might as well rest to be redeemed at the Land-office.

Let us see if it is possible, they ever contemplated the redemption of any
other debts than those enumerated in the second section.

The third section provides for the sale of 3 per cent. stock, and giving
warrants for its delivery.

The fourth section directs the Comptroller and Register-General to keep the
accounts.

The fifth section provides how they are to be paid on the 1st of July, after
due notice be given, and the certificates be deposited.

In this manner and thus far, it should seem, ample provision had been made to
pay off these state debts. It was not known at this time that Congress would
absolutely open their loan.

Then comes the sixth section, which we consider and contend as a proviso, as
much as if the Legislature had said that you shall at all events have your
money, but there is an event which yet may happen, if Congress should open
their loan, we will impose an additional duty, that is, that you the holders of
certificates subcribable to the loan so to be opened, shall not be treated and
paid in the manner mentioned in the five foregoing sections, but you shall be
obliged to one thing more, namely, subscribe your certificates to the loan, and
transfer them to the State-Treasurer for the use of the commonwealth, and then
you shall receive your pay. The redemptive powers of the 6th section, were
never designed to exceed those in the 2d section, and was only a different
modification upon the event of Congress opening their loan. (Mr. Wilcocks then
read the 6th section.) All the subsequent sections of the law are eventually
provisional, in case the price prescribed could not be procured for the stock,
that the notice in the fifth section be delayed, etc -- I say every other part
of the sections are provisional.

But, Sir, we are told this 6th section is an independent clause, and conceived
so extensive as to oblige the state to redeem whatever Congress should have
assumed. Even old bills of credit must be paid by the State if Congress would
assume them. (Mr. Wilcocks was interrupted by Mr. Lewis, who said, Bills of
Credit were not included in the testimony. Mr. Wilcocks repeated that it was
given in evidence, as the opinion of the Comptroller General, that if old bills
of credit were assumed by Congress, the State would be obliged to redeem them.)

It is a good rule in the construction of statutes, to consider all together,
but how much more so in the present instance of the individual Act of the 10th
April 1792, the sixth section should not be considered independently, but
connected with the other sections of the same Act.

This is plainly and obviously militating against the defendant, and his
Counsel; they say the State committed herself to Congress; this construction is
narrow; the true and just construction is not to enlarge the bounds of
redeemability; in that case the sixth section is a proviso to the second. When
two constructions are brought into view, the one absurd and inconsistent, the
other rational and consistent, arising from a comparative view of the whole
Act, no doubt can be entertained which of them will be adopted. Shall a
construction so insulting to the integrity and understanding of our Legislature
be courted? To say, that they would commit themselves to Congress, that they
blindly threw themselves into the arms of Congress, so unrestrained, so
regardless of their duty, void of prudence and caution, as to suppose that the
sixth section was more extensive than the first and second, as to embrace every
description of State debts; we will redeem whatever Congress will assume!

No Act of Congress was then extended; it appears an unreasonable and
extravagant supposition; the idea cannot be admitted on any other ground, but
that the Legislature were remiss, and did not do their duty.

But the law of February 1795* providing for the unfunded depreciation
certificates being redeemed, shows they considered nothing redeemable but what
the second section comprised. (Mr. Lewis asked Mr. Wilcocks, Do you produce a
legislative construction after the fact happened, as a proof where many of the
unfunded depreciation certificates were redeemed? Mr. Wilcocks said he meant to
show the sense of the Legislature, that by this law of 1793, their sense of the
law of 1792 was to exclude the unfunded depreciation; therefore the New-Loans
could not be included.)

It therefore appears that New-Loan certificates were discarded by
Pennsylvania; the State had acquitted herself; the arrears of interest on them
were to be paid; consequently, it is impossible that New-Loans could be
redeemed by the Act of 1792, when in 1793 she declared that even unfunded
depreciation certificates were not contemplated to be redeemable by the Act of
1792.

Hence, then, Sir, I trust it appears evident, 1. That New-Loans never were a
State money debt, at all. 2. That they were never subscribable, and 3. That
they were never redeemable.

THIRD ARTICLE.
On this I will only make a single observation now, that is, that I will
observe on it, when I speak of the criminal intent of the defendant.

FOURTH ARTICLE -- A violation of the Constitution.
But say the learned Counsel for the defendant, there were ways and means,
there is a fund for the redemption of the New-Loan debt, under the heads of
claims and improvements, by the act of the 7th of April 1791. By this, say the
gentlemen, it is provided "to pay all warrants hereafter to be drawn for claims
and improvements by virtue of any law or laws of this commonwealth." This
appears to me one of the most singular ideas that has been started in the
whole course of this most important cause; 1. If it was liable for the New-Loan
debt, still this fund was not named, the Comptroller did not draw out of this
fund, but out of the fund created by the sale of 3 per cent. stock under the
act of April 10th, 1792. Therefore this argument and the certifications of the
Comptroller General, must be diametrically opposite. This seems opposite to the
knowledge of every person who is any ways conversant in legislative
appropriations.

This fund was a few years before limited to L. 10,000, and therefore
insufficient for the purpose; it is true, by the act of the 7th of April 1791,
the limitation is taken away, and makes it the last appropriation; every other
obligation is done away, but still holds with equal force, yet still the first
act shows their idea of its probable amount, out of this claim Mr. Rittenhouse
and others, were paid, for surveying the Lancaster road. I apprehend the idea
of the Legislature was to make it a fund on which the Legislature might draw,
but not to be drawn on, at the discretion of the Governor or other officers.
Then there is a necessity for an order of the Legislature that that fund be
drawn on, otherwise there would be no occasion for any appropriations at all,
this would be a general subsisting fund, and would answer all demands without
any specific appropriations.

That my construction of the act is a reasonable one, and their construction
unreasonable, I will mention the Act of the 4th April 1792, which directs
certificates to be granted for settled demands without interest, but no
warrants should issue, only reports to be made of them to the Legislature of
the number of unprovided debts without fund for payment; where was the
necessity of this act, where was the necessity of reporting, to the
Legislature, if the funds for claims and improvements were to answer all claims
and demands without any further order from the Legislature?

Having now arrived at the usual time of adjournment, I should be glad the
Senate would please to adjourn. Adjourned.

In the minutes of the House of Representatives the following entry is recorded
--

"In conformity to the resolutions of the 25th February last, the House
resolved itself into a committee of the whole, in order to attend the trial of
John Nicholson, Comptroller General.

"The Speaker left the chair, and Mr. Wynkoop was placed therein.

"The committee of the whole then proceeded to the Senate-chamber for the
purpose aforesaid.

"After some time,

"The committee of the whole returned to their own chamber.

"The Chairman left the chair, and the Speaker resumed it.

"The Chairman then reported that the committee of the whole had attended at
the trial of the articles of impeachment against John Nicholson,
Comptroller General.

"The committee appointed to manage the trial on the articles of impeachment
against John Nicholson, Comptroller General, reported further progress, and
that the Senate had adjourned the further hearing of the arguments on the said
trial until ten o'clock tomorrow, A.M."

Seventeenth day of the trial. TUESDAY, MARCH 18.
Mr. WILCOCKS in continuation.

Mr. Speaker, and Gentlemen of the Senate,

HAVING arrived at the consideration of that point of this business, which
respects the criminal motives and intention of the Comptroller General, and
although it is alleged that the conduct of that officer, is not wrong in
certifying the subscribability and redeemability of New-Loan certificates, and
effecting their redemption under the act of Congress and law of the 10th April
1792; and that his opinion and judgment are innocent, and he is not responsible
in a criminal point of view.

These pleas will be inadmissible, when weighed with all the circumstances
attending this transaction, consider his sentiments, and his opinion on this
subject, how extremely cautious he has been in promulgating his opinion;
consider, whether he acted in his official character, and directly contrary to
the intentions of the Legislature of his country; let us examine whether he is
criminal or innocent, let us attend to the time when he wrote on this subject,
what circumstances may favor his intentions, and see whether there are
sufficient and reasonable grounds for acquitting him, deliberate well whether
his judgment was uninfluenced; if it is possible to suppose he really did
believe that New-Loans were assumable and redeemable. Connected with all these
circumstances, it is to be called an obstinate perverse opinion, and can serve
as no excuse or apology. His former opinion, although much relied on, must have
been formed from private views, he should have taken advice.

I will recapitulate all the circumstances in his favor, and those against
him, and place them in one point of view. It has been much relied on, and is
worthy of observation, that his opinion of the subscribability of New-Loans was
long before the passing of the act of the 10th of April 1792.

In his letter to Thomas Smith (page 271-2) he writes,

"It is not presumable the New-Loans will be offered."

In his letter to the Governor (page 220-1-2) he writes, "I think too highly of
the faith of the public," etc. It is true, he did so, but this declaration was
unnecessary, being made at a time when it was connected with the subject of
difficulty, namely, that of withholding the payment of interest, in five days
afterward (see letter page 277) it was found New-Loans were not subscribed,
all the difficulty was over, consequently the Governor did not answer that
letter, nor took any notice of the opinion.

In another letter (page 223) he states the conference and shows his opinion
that New-Loans were subscribable; true, and it is equally true, that the
conference was founded on an idea, that New-Loans were subscribable.

These are all that are given in testimony that the Comptroller thought the
New-Loans were subscribable.

The Governor did not care about the sentiment, he was for another thing, he
directed the Comptroller General to confer with the Secretary of the Treasury,
instead of stating to him in an open and candid manner, he only sends him a
New-Loan certificate, and the law of 1786, under which they were issued, and
withheld the repealing law of 1789, which would have removed every difficulty
as appears from his last letters; we find that the Secretary of the Treasury
did not know the law of 1789, but as soon as that officer knew that the law of
1786 was completely and fully repealed, that moment every difficulty vanished.

But the gentlemen say, he not only held the opinion, that the New-Loans were
subscribable, but also that they were redeemable under the Act of 1792. I
request the attention of the Senate in distinguishing the particular periods to
which this evidence points, as it is of the utmost importance to determine the
degree of innocence or criminality.

After the month of February 1792 we find no intimation of his opinion, that
the New-Loans were redeemable or even assumable.

It has been said, that with regard to the Act of the 10th April 1792, the
Comptroller expected the words there made use of would include New-Loans: I
presume this was the reason of his objection, and opposition to the passing of
that law.

Mr. Griffith Evans had no other authority for his conversation, that the Act
of April 1792 would include New-Loans, than the declaration and opinion of the
Comptroller General on this head (see page 306) who told him he had been
endeavoring to convince Mr. Gallatin, that if old bills of credit were
assumed, they must be redeemed; Mr. Gallatin had just passed out of the office,
it rests on Mr. Nicholson's veracity, Mr. Gallatin was either gone or did not
hear this, but he unequivocally denies the conversation; with respect to the
unfunded depreciation, Mr. Gallatin supposed that to be included, and thought
it immaterial whether they were redeemed that way, or through the Land-office.
(see page 296.)

Again: It is said, that he subscribed New-Loans openly so as to hazard
detection and disgrace. Answer. Not so very openly, as facts and events will
show, he did not communicate his opinion to any other officer, his opinion was
singular indeed; his conduct was more secret than open, the most intelligent
brokers and others had no idea of their subscribability.

The arrangement of the business was such, that no officer of the government
saw the certificates intended to be loaned but the Comptroller General. No man
could see what he was doing, and yet these are the arguments adduced to show
the innocence of the Comptroller General, respecting his opinion of the
subscribability and redeemability of New-Loan certificates!

It will be necessary in this place to recapitulate all the circumstances,
which came within his knowledge in direct opposition to this opinion.

The Comptroller General must have known, that the Act of March 1789 repealed
all the obligations of the State respecting New-Loans. He must have known that
his opinion was wrong at least, as he was acting in direct opposition to an
express law.

The Comptroller General says, New-Loans are a State debt. They are not so,
says the Legislature; he insists upon it that they are; nay, subscribable and
redeemable too! Every department of government considered them as no longer
having an existence; but the Comptroller General in defiance of the
Legislature, persists on their existence as a State debt! The Governor in his
communications to the Legislature, referred to all the debts and engagements of
the commonwealth, but omits New-Loans among the debts, and when he mentions
them, he only adverts to the arrears of interest due on the New-Loan debt.

The committees of ways and means officially reported in like manner. His own
and the Register-General's statements were made in the same manner. The
Legislature themselves had by a parliamentary declaration provided for the
payment of the balance of interest on bills of credit; this shows, that in
doing so, they acquitted themselves of all their obligations as to New-Loans;
and by providing for the interest they had abandoned the debt.

The people, the citizens of Pennsylvania, considered the repealing Act as a
good and valid law, and submitted to it; and in conformity to it, and at the
call of the State came forward and out of L.1,819,415:18:9, they had exchanged
all under it but about L. 50,000 as appears by his letter (page 220-1-2.)

And shall the Comptroller General, an officer of high trust under the
commonwealth, with all this knowledge and information in his own breast,
pretend to say "I am innocent?" Shall he excuse and justify this, by showing,
that, he thought the year before, that the New-Loan certificates were
assumable, subscribable and redeemable? Is it reasonable, or can we suppose
after all this information in the Comptroller's own knowledge and breast, that
he could entertain an honest opinion under all these circumstances, and in
direct opposition to all this great body of information, that the New-Loans
were subscribable and redeemable? I say, in opposition to the sentiments of the
Governor, the Legislature, the committees on ways and means, and all the
officers of government.

It appears to me, that if this opinion ever existed, it must have been formed
opon principles of obstinacy and perverseness, adhered to against the dictates
of reason and good sense, and not agreeable to the better light and information
of a well informed mind.

If, then, Sir, such an affected opinion can be formed and acted upon, in
violation of law; nay, admitted, as a justification and apology; where shall we
find official duty, honor or integrity?

There is another circumstance in this case worthy of consideration, that, in
point of time; all evidences are prior to the passing of the Act of the 10th
April 1792. He never communicated to any of the official characters of the
State that the Act of April 1792 would include New-Loans. What are the
circumstances respecting his interviews with the gentlemen of the Senate and
House of Representatives? He was opposed to the passing of that law! He said it
would be injurious to the State! What were the objects of these communications!
Undoubtedly they were for for some consideration! When the law was about to
pass, we find him hastening from one public character to another. In general,
we find him manifesting great zeal for the interest of the State, as this Act
would be injurious to her interest.

At the same time we find him manifesting equal zeal for his own plan of
finance, to help it to go down; many of the witnesses do not remember his
objections, yet no man approved of his plan. What were his objections to the
bill? They are of a very trivial nature -- 1. The price too high! 2. Ordering
all the 3 per cent. stock to be sold at once, etc. I appeal to you, if these
objections were not perfectly nugatory. He urged his plan of finance with all
possible warmth: If I understand his plan right, its object was not to pay off
any of the debts of the commonwealth, but to fund them, and New-Loans amongst
the rest.

I infer from this species of opposition to the one, and zeal to support the
other, that the Senate will judge the motives; in all these conversations has
he disclosed to any of those members whom he consulted, that the bill might
injure the public, or does he produce any means whereby the commonwealth might
not be hurt? Has he mentioned to any person that any debts were assumable and
redeemable under the sixth section, other than those specified in the second
section? Certainly not.

If motives of public duty induced him to oppose the law of April 1792, if he
saw that individuals would speculate to the disadvantage of the State, why did
he not says so? Does not all this stir in favor of his own plan, and against
the bill, show that it was not for the good of the State? and because he liked
his own plan of finance better.

Further, in a conversation with Mr. Gallatin, Gallatin warned him that his
opinion was contrary to that of the Ligislature, and expressly informed him,
that although unfunded depreciation might be redeemed under the sixth section,
yet he said it was not so intended. (Mr. Morris, the Speaker of the Senate,
observed, that agreeably to his notes, the Comptroller had said, according to
the testimony of Mr. Thomas (page 287) "The bill as it stood would admit of
constructions that would open a door for speculation," and "that some
individuals would take advantage to the loss of the State," according to the
testimony of Mr. Montgomery (page 290.)

Mr. Wilcocks proceeded, and said (addressing himself to the Speaker) you have
altered my recollection. Mr. Gallatin made this observation on the Act, and yet
he (Mr. Gallatin) allowed unfunded depreciation certificates were redeemable
under the sixth section of that law.

It may be said, and it is true, that Gallatin's opinion was not to be pursued,
nor admitted as the true construction in opposition to the words of the law. It
is evident from the information of Mr. Gallatin to the Comptroller General that
he knew the sense of the Legislature, and that New-Loans were neither
subscribable nor redeemable, nor embraced under that law; he should therefore
have hesitated and applied to the Governor for advice and have consulted legal
characters for official explanation.

Had he done this, how easy would it be to prevent the subscription of these
New-Loans, and subsequent loss to the State; it ought, at least, to have
excited some doubt, and to have procured the Governor's opinion, and if
necessary, the Attorney-General's explanation.

But in order to conduct his speculation with success, he disregards all Mr.
Gallatin's observations, he did not, as his duty required of him, apply to the
Governor, he not only neglected to do this but he proceeded in a manner to
deceive the Governor.

When the Governor called for a statement of the 3 per cent. stock to be sold
and of the debts to be redeemed under the Act of the 10th of April 1792, the
Comptroller rendered only those redeemable under the second section, and to
keep his transactions further concealed, he does not specify New-Loans in his
certificate to the Governor as one of them.

But say they, How could he do it, the loan of Congress was not then open? Poor
excuse! he was not asked for a statement under a particular section of the Act,
the call was general and extended to the whole law. (Mr. Lewis asked for the
letter alluded to, calling for the statement. Mr. Morgan went for the letter
into the Secretary's office (see page 232) which being read, and not answering
the ideas of Mr. Wilcocks respecting the general call, for the letter called
for no statement; Mr. Wilcocks said, that Mr. Dallas in his testimony declared
that the call was general. This assertion was answered by Mr. Lewis with no!
no!!

Mr. Wilcocks then proceeded, -- Lastly, we find the certificate to the
Governor was not explicit enough to have decided what debt was to have been
redeemed. The New-Loans might have been subscribable, yet not redeemable, as we
contend that subscribable and redeemable were not convertible terms: After all
it must be submitted to the Senate, whether they were subscribable, and if so,
whether they were redeemable. I shall now dismiss this head, and proceed to the

FIFTH AND SIXTH ARTICLES.
By the fifth article, the Comptroller General is charged with purchasing
New-Loan certificates from those who came to his office for the purpose of
exchanging them.

In the sixth article he is charged with taking measures in his private
capacity for preventing the re-exchange of New-Loan certificates after they had
been deposited with him.

We are now arrived at that part of the subject, which is free from
embarrassing constructions, we may now even for the present admit that they
were subscribable and redeemable. Here it is not necessary to possess the
abilities of a lawyer. These last articles depend upon the principles of
MORALITY and PRUDENCE! the degree of guilt will depend upon the intent. Has the
Comptroller General acted with rectitude and propriety of intention? Has he
acquitted himself of the duties which other laws imposed on him, or not?

These charges do not depend on the violation of Acts of Assembly, or
Legislative Statutes, but they depend on moral principles interwoven with the
common law as applied to all official characters. The crime is discovered by
first ascertaining the duty of the Comptroller General, and by examining,
whether he has acted in opposition to that duty. If he has acted against it, he
is guilty, the degree of guilt is determined by circumstances. The wrong, if
done, the wilfulness, motives and inducements of the doer of the wrong, and the
degree of criminality, will depend on circumstances of aggravation or
extenuation. That he is guilty in some degree or other, appears from a
conviction that he has violated these principles of integrity, morality and
prudence, in the execution of his official obligations. This will be evident
from the testimony of Mr. Biddle and Son, and Mr. John Oldden.

It is in evidence that young Mr. Biddle deposited a certificate agreeably to
Act of Assembly, and a printed exchange was filled up. In the instance of
Oldden he rendered his certificates for re-exchange, went home, was desired to
call again the next day; in the evening the Comptroller General wrote to him,
offering him the assumable value, Oldden being a little struck with the offer,
supposed they must have been of some advantage to him, came up to his office,
the Continental certificates were not yet ready; he came up again the next day,
still the exchanges were not ready; he told the Comptroller, "give me thirty
dollars and their nominal value, and you shall have them."

Is this conduct right or wrong? Where is honor, where is integrity, where is
uprightness or equity? Is this conduct reconcilable with the principles of
duty, prudence and official agency? The council for the defendant have labored
to show that the Act of March 1789, was void, as operating against the
Constitution of the United States. Let it be admitted, yet it cannot be
pretended that that part of the Act is void, which directs the
Comptroller General to exchange the Continental certificates for the New-Loans,
many may be desirous, is an expression much relied on by them, and is cited
from the law; with this plain direction "well and faithfully to do his duty,"
under the sanction of an oath to act honestly and uprightly toward the
Commonwealth, he is directed by the Act of March 1789 to exchange when
required. Yet he steps from his station, and purchases in the New-Loans.

I say, under an oath well and faithfully to execute his office, what does he
do? These Gentlemen came forward and offered their certificates for exchange,
and deposited them for that purpose, he receives them, appoints a time for the
purpose of exchanging them, we find him stepping forward, offering to purchase,
nay, actually purchasing the same certificates.

Surely, Sir, this is an high misdemeanor, if any such thing as misdemeanor can
be found any where; although it is mentioned in the articles that New-Loans on
deposit, became the property of the State, this is not the git of the charge,
but only a circumstance of aggravation.

The charge is, his preventing the execution of the act, and heightening the
offense by purchasing the certificates, defeating the law, and speculating on
them to his own great gain, and to the loss of the commonwealth. I repeat it,
Sir, it is mentioned here only as a circumstance; but I will now say, that when
the certificates were deposited; they became the property of the commonwealth,
and the consequence was that she had a property in them, and no body had a
right to return them.

It is evidently and manifestly proved, that the certificates were in the
possession of the commonwealth; the State had a property in them. Who had the
authority to surrender the Continental certificates for them? The Legislature
spoke by its laws directing the exchange to be done. It was wrong in the
Comptroller General to do it in any instance; but we do not come forward to
impeach him for merely returning the certificates when he had no interest
himself. It was the interest which he held in these certificates, every such
interest must be connected with correspondent property. The State had a
property, and she gave no power to any person to take it from her.

I beg the attention of the Senate to the recollection of the ideas of
property, we know that bare possession gives a property in cases of larceny.

When the certificates were in his possession, they were in the possession of
the State, and not in the possession of John Nicholson: occupancy gives a
right. A horse lost or stolen from one man, and found in the possession of
another, leather from a shoemaker, or cloth from a tailor; the possession of
any of these articles is enough, the indictment is always for the property.

Here, Sir, the commonwealth had an interest and a property: The gentlemen once
made a concession, that no exchange was completed until the indents were
tendered. I rather think Mr. Oldden had no indents to pay, consequently the
balance was due to him, and Mr. Nicholson repaid it; of course the State had
them to pay, therefore the exchange should be completed when the certificates
were offered.

I apprehend then that this was a most unwarrantable and unjustifiable
proceeding in the Comptroller General, to step forward to take this property
which belonged to the commonwealth, and purchase them.

The Gentleman who spoke last, said, that Pennsylvania had not yet decided, how
far she should restrain the public officers from dealing; he mentioned that a
law was passed prohibiting vendue masters to purchase at their own sales, that
the General Government prevented the Secretary of the Treasury and the clerks
in his office from speculating in the funds, but that no law existed to prevent
the Camptroller-General from dealing in this species of property! We do not
bring a charge against the defendant for purchasing certificates through the
medium of brokers, or dealing in stock, but only in violating his trust in the
foregoing instances. (Mr. Tilghman interrupted Mr. Wilcocks in this place, and
remarked, that interest was due by Mr. Oldden, Mr. Wilcocks said, he took it as
the witness gave it in his testimony which see page 243-4-5.)

SEVENTH ARTICLE.
The last article charges the Comptroller General, that after the exchange was
actually completed, he subscribed a New-Loan certificate for thirty-two hundred
odd pounds, in his own name, and had it redeemed at the Treasury, and received
the money for it.

The history of this certificate is, that Mr. M'Connell was possessed of it on
the 30th March 1790, that it was issued in his own name for L. 3275:19:4 --
that he delivered it on that day to Blair M'Clenachan (Mr. Morris the Speaker
interrupted Mr. Wilcocks here and said, the entry was made on the 6th of March,
and not on the 30th.) He entered it at the Treasury on the 6th of March 1790,
and received interest in September 1790, from the Treasury. Mr. M'Clenachan
swears that when he went to the Comptroller's office to exchange his
certificates, he carried ALL his certificates with him, and received the
corresponding Continental certificates in exchange. He swears unequivocally,
that he never sold or commuted any certificates with the Comptroller General in
his life. It appears, the Comptroller subscribed this identical certificate.

If these facts are true, I forbear to make any further animadversions on them!
It has been attempted to raise doubts respecting the witness who supports this
charge, his veracity and integrity has not been impeached but his memory.

His deposition has been treated in such a manner, as no human testimony could
stand the test. The Gentleman did not read the interrogatories and answers
throughout. I cannot tell what evidence could stand such scrutiny.

It appears Mr. M'Clenachan swears with caution, and that he is not inimical to
the defendant; he swears with certainty where his memory serves him, where he
could refer to unerring documents, he did so; where he was uncertain, he
doubted! (Mr. Wilcocks then read the interrogatories and answers, and commented
on them, see page 253 to 260.)

His refusal to answer four interrogatories will be excused, when their nature
is considered, some of them look as if calculated to affront him (18th and 19th
read) Sir, his feelings were hurt, it excited his resentment (20th read)
perhaps he thought it implied some suspicions not very honorable (21st read.)
None of these contains a question calculated to draw an answer material to the
enquiry about the certificate, about which the enquiry was made: which induced
him to say they "did not deserve an answer," it must be confessed they were
calculated to confuse and irritate him.

Mr. M'Clenachan swears he never commuted with John Nicholson, This certificate
is subscribed by Mr. Nicholson, Mr. M'Clenachan subscribed all his
certificates. Where is there any room for any other conclusion, but that Mr.
Nicholson had exchanged it. The evidence under this last charge is striking and
conclusive; if there was a doubt, what can be easier than for the Comptroller
to bring forward information where he got it? If his brokers bought it, they
have a bill, they always keep an account.

Is it of such a nature, and so trivial, as to merit no attention? A
certificate for three thousand odd hundred pounds! Or is it so conclusive as to
deserve no answer? No attempt is made to show it came otherwise into the hands
of Mr. Nicholson.

His books of exchange are so irregularly kept, as that it is impossible to get
any thing from them: They are not kept agreeably to the directions of Council,
nor at the proper times. It is not to be pretended that the books can be
balanced day by day, but it may reasonably be supposed, that when the exchanges
are completed, then things might be known; these exchanges exhibit no receipts;
they are not in the handwriting of the party; you find only the initials of
their names. There are forty-six odd thousand dollars in two entries. No
individual certificates are identified or specified. What use can be made of
books of this sort? It was stated by Mr. Tilghman, that these books had been
laid before the SUPREME EXECUTIVE COUNCIL agreeably to their instructions,
every week, so that, they had an opportunity to judge and give further
directions if they were not kept as they ordered.


I will leave the cause with the Senate, in full confidence, that the decision
of the same will be the result of mature consideration, and consonant to the
state of facts submitted to the enlightened minds of this honorable body.
Adjourned.

In the minutes of the House of Representatives the following entry is recorded
--

"In conformity to the resolutions of the 25th February last, the House
resolved itself into a committee of the whole, in order to attend the trial of
John Nicholson, Comptroller General.

"The Speaker quitted the chair and Mr. Wynkoop was placed therein.

"The committee then proceeded to the Senate-chamber for that purpose.

"After some time,

"The committee of the whole returned to their own chamber.

"The Chairman left the chair, and the Speaker resumed it

"The Chairman then informed the House that the committee of the whole had
attended the trial of John Nicholson, Comptroller General.

"The committee appointed to manage the trial of the articles of impeachment
against John Nicholson, Comptroller General, reported further progress, and
that the Senate would proceed in the further hearing of the counsel at ten
o'clock tomorrow in the forenoon.

Eighteenth day of the trial. WEDNESDAY, MARCH 19.
THE Senate met as usual, the members of the House of Representatives in
committee of the whole attended, the consideration of legislative busin^^ being
postponed, and the Court called.

Mr. LEWIS spoke as follows --

Mr. Speaker, and Gentlemen of the Senate,

THE defendant stands impeached on seven articles of high crimes and
misdemeanors in his official capacity as Comptroller General of this
commonwealth. The Representatives of Pennsylvania have pledged themselves to
make good their charges, and to add countenance and influence to their
prosecution, they have at a very great expense to the commonwealth, abandoned
their duties else where to pay daily attendance here. To disappoint them in
their favorite object and to defend him, is the occasion of my troubling you
at present. It is to be regretted that my indisposition will prevent me from
rendering him that justice to which I deem him entitled: But it is no small
consolation to me that I have been preceded by able colleagues, and if I had
not yet that I appear before impartial judges who will be no less able than
willing to render him ample justice.

I have always thought that Mr. Nicholson was possessed of too many and too
extensive powers to be entrusted to any man, and if the question at present
turned upon this, I should have been far from advocating their propriety. If
this was wrong it was not however his fault, but it rested with those who
thought proper to entrust them to him, with so few checks or means of control.
I cannot however but consider this as the real grounds of accusation, and to
lament how degrading it is to human nature, that she affords so many instances
of men high in popular favor, becoming envied, suspected, persecuted, hunted
down and ruined, so that the old adage of hosannah to day and crucify him
tomorrow, is not yet out of date.

As the doctrine which I have advanced with respect to extensive powers
entrusted to an individual applies to the accused, there seems to be an
exception to the general rule, and my mind is much changed, since I have seen a
mountain so long in labor without even producing a mouse. The keen-eyed and
quick scented committee of investigation, of hunters and of informers, who have
probed every channel of information, and searched every corner for
intelligence, have with unwearied industry traced all the uncounted millions
and tens of millions with which he had been entrusted, and it now appears that
THE TEMPTATIONS HOWEVER GREAT COULD NOT CORRUPT HIM since nothing has been
found against him except with respect to the New-Loan certificates. Hence I am
induced to believe that the public confidence was not misplaced. Months of
laborious industry have been employed by a committee constantly sitting during
the recess of the House, with free access to his books, papers and official
documents, and yet they have been able to bring forward nothing else against
him. He has undergone this fiery ordeal of more than inquisitorial persecution;
and if he shall not be found guilty, his character must, like pure metal doubly
refined by an over severe heat, appear with unexampled luster.

The charges are of the most serious nature; -- wilful and corrupt violation of
the law! wilful and corrupt disregard of official duty! wilful and corrupt
violation of his oath! and all this from motives of private gain and sordid
lucre! and all this too, at the expense of the public who had confided in him!
If all these things are true, an unanimous vote of condemnation ought to take
place, but if they are unfounded, an unanimous acquittal should be the result.

The accused labors under disadvantages which even common culprits do not
experience. In ordinary cases an unanimous voice is necessary to a conviction;
not so with respect to him, and therefore more than ordinary proofs should be
required. Again, Mr. Nicholson is ^harged and boldly too, with a violation of
his oath of office. On this ground too, the most conclusive evidence should be
required. On an indictment for perjury two witnesses are necessary to a
conviction, because where there is but one oath of guilt, there is oath against
oath, and truth hangs in an equilibrium. 10th Mod. 194.4 Blac. Comm. 351. This
principle is surely applicable upon the present occasion, where the defendant
is charged with a violation of his oath of office, and it will be found that
this charge is at most supported by the treacherous and confused memory of Mr.
Blair M'Clenachan.

We are told, Mr. Speaker, that this prosecution merits peculiar attention from
the respectability of the accusers, and a line of distinction favorable to
them has been drawn, between an impeachment and a presentment by a grand jury.
Of this respectability and of the propriety of this line of distinction we have
not however any proof, nor am I at all satisfied with it. In public bodies heat
too frequently takes place, and passion too often bears sway. When that is the
case, the judgment is too often warped, and the innocent not unfrequently fall
victims to the rage of party. This is not the case in presentiments by grand
juries. There, generally speaking, the accused meets his accuser face to face
before the magistrate. They meet on equal grounds, the allegations against him
are heard and he has an opportunity of vindicating his innocence. This
palladium of sacred rights is it is true but seldom refused in the British
House of Commons; where it is not unfrequent for the party accused to be heard
at the bar previous to the articles of impeachment being voted against him. The
same indulgence (if an indulgence it is to be called) was upon a late occasion
afforded to Judge Hopkinson, and had the House of Representatives been worthy
of that respectability which the learned managers have been pleased to impute
to them, I cannot but think, that the same measure of justice would have been
meted to Mr. Nicholson: I nevertheless trust that clothed as he is with
conscious innocence and shielded with that coat of armor which truth and
virtue never fail to afford, he will be able to baffle the views of his
respectable but heated and misguided accusers.

We have been instructed, Mr. Speaker, by a long and labored, though rather
clumsy account of the rise, progress and necessity of impeachments in England,
and we are told that they are intended to prevent great and mighty offenders
from escaping punishment for flagitious crimes by an over-bearing influence.
However true this may be, I cannot see any necessity for its discussion here.
Our own constitution and our own laws have erected ramparts of safeguard round
the innocent, while they have provided means of chastisement for the guilty,
and to them only should our appeal be made. By the eighth section of the ninth
article of our Constitution, it is provided that "no warrant shall issue to
seize any person without probable cause supported by oath or affirmation;" and
the most solemn oath is required from every grand juror in order to prevent
presentiments of the innocent, or the crimes of the guilty from passing
unpunished. In monarchical governments where the royal favor leads to a
distinction of ranks, the reason assigned for impeachments may perhaps be a
just one, but in a republican government where no such distinction prevails, it
is as different as a beggar in his cottage wrapped in his rags can possibly be
from a monarch on his throne with his diadem sparkling upon his brow. Here the
law is supreme -- it neither admits nor knows of any influence in its
administration; an administration which is too pure to oppress the poor, or to
screen the rich; to chastise the humble innocent, or to let the haughty guilty
go free. It nevertheless admits of impeachments; not upon the ground which has
been mentioned, but upon a much more substantial one: The innocence or guilt of
a public officer may and often does depend on a variety of nice intricacies of
law, which but few jurymen are competent to determine, and therefore our
Constitution wisely declares that "The Governor and all other civil officers
under this commonwealth shall be liable to impeachment for any misdemeanor in
office." It is therefore evident that the humblest man in office is liable to
impeachment for any misdemeanor in office, and that no man however wealthy he
may be, is liable to impeachment for any other cause; and hence it results,
that all the instruction which we have received on this head was ill-timed, and
could only have been intended to mislead or to make a vain parade of learning.

There is one thing, Mr. Speaker, which my client has just cause to complain
of. The House of Representatives, (see page 108) after exhibiting their
charges, pledged themselves to offer proof of the premises; but upon what
grounds did they thus pledge themselves? Why as to the very essence of the
third article it was on the hearsay of the committee of impeachments; founded
on the hearsay of the committee of ways and means; founded on the hearsay of a
man not under oath; and they afterward materially altered that charge, on a
chit-chat conversation between the same man, and a member of the House, as it
was reported to the House by that member, and without requiring any oath from
that member or his informant, or taking any trouble to enquire into the truth
of it.

By this extraordinary procedure has the defendant been deprived of that
security to which every man is by the laws and constitution of his country
entitled; and this too by the very men who have thought proper to impeach the
defendant for a supposed violation of the law and constitution! If he is
guilty, they have certainly been so complaisant as to keep him in countenance,
and he may justly retort upon them Turpe est doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum.

When it is considered that they are the sworn guardians of the laws and
constitution of the country, they must appear but with an ill grace as the
accusers of others, at the moment of committing so flagrant a violation on
their part. I allude to the third article which charges that the defendant did
"not consult the Register-General nor the Governor," and yet those who made
this charge, knew no more about the truth or falsity of it, legally speaking,
than any man in Europe. It appears indeed that Mr. Gallatin told the House,
that Mr. Donnaldson had told him so, but it also appears, that the House upon
this information, unsupported by any oath or enquiry before themselves or a
committee, voted the charge true; and what aggravates their conduct (if it be
capable of aggravation) is, that Mr. Gallatin, a leading member in bringing
forward the impeachment, now swears that as Mr. Donnaldson was an officer of
government they thought he might be heard without an oath! A British peer, when
sitting on an impeachment, answers upon his honor; when testifying as a
witness he answers upon his oath, but the House of Representatives have
attached to the officers of government, a privilege sanctioned by no
experience, and reprobated by the laws and constitution of this country!

So much for the manner in which the impeachment has been brought forward.
Whether it is supported or not, remains to be considered.

It may not be improper however to observe, that in writing or speaking, our
arrangements should be such, as that, that which precedes, should prepare the
way for that which is to follow; and that the latter may be the result of the
former; else repetition, obscurity and waste of time will be the consequence.
Under this idea I cannot think of considering the articles in the order of
their arrangement, nor has the Counsel on either side found it practicable. My
positions will be --

First. THAT THE NEW-LOAN CERTIFICATES WERE SUBSCRIBABLE TO THE LOAN OF THE
UNITED STATES; AND OF COURSE, WERE REDEEMABLE AT THE TREASURY OF PENNSYLVANIA.

Second. THAT THERE WAS AN APPROPRIATION MADE BY LAW FOR THAT PURPOSE.

Third. THAT NO CRIMINAL OFFENSE IS SUFFICIENTLY CHARGED AND PROVED AGAINST THE
COMPTROLLER GENERAL.

Subdivisions will perhaps be necessary for the more clear elucidation of these
points.

First position. THAT THE NEW-LOAN CERTIFICATES WERE SUBSCRIBABLE TO THE LOAN
OF THE UNITED STATES; AND OF COURSE, WERE REDEEMABLE AT THE TREASURY OF
PENNSYLVANIA.

Under this position, we are so far from agreeing with our opponents the
learned managers, that the Act of March 27, 1789 abolished the New-Loan debt,
created by the Act of March 1st 1786, as to boldly contend, that it left it as
it was before, with this difference only, that it was funded by the law of 1786
and unfunded by the law of 1789, and left without the means of payment until
some new provision should be made for that purpose.

We say that so much of the Act of Pennsylvania of March 1st, 1786, as assumed
the debt due to her own citizens from the U. S. was a noble exertion of
patriotism, benevolently intended and wisely calculated to add value to their
certificates, and inspire them with confidence, when they had but little in the
funds of the United States; but that so much of it as provided the means of
payment, was originally founded on a breach of faith; was beyond the power of
the Legislature of Pennsylvania, and if not originally unconstitutional and
void, it became so by the adoption of the Federal Constitution. It was
therefore the meaning and duty of the Assembly in March 1789 to repeal one part
of the Act of 1786, but it had neither the power nor the will to repeal the
other part of it.

To determine this, a minute attention to some previous matters is absolutely
necessary, and the question will be found to be so important, that it should
not be lost sight of in any stage of our enquiries.

All debts due to foreign and domestic creditors of every description, for
moneys loaned, supplies furnished and services performed for the general
defense, were contracted on the faith of the whole Union, and each of those
creditors, whether consisting of a nation or of a private individual, had both
an equitable and legal claim on the aggregate fund, composed of the quotas of
the several states for payment. Foreign nations as well as foreign and domestic
citizens, trusted on the security of this aggregate fund and on the plighted
faith of the Union for payment out of it, and no one state had the power of
extricating herself or her quota of the public debt, from the claim of all the
public creditors, by appropriating her quota in favor of any particular class
of citizens in exclusion of others -- yet it will be found that Pennsylvania by
her Act of 1786 undertook to make a partial appropriation of her quota in
favor of her own citizens, and to the prejudice of all other public creditors
of every description. If this shall be found to be the case, and if it shall
also appear, that Pennsylvania had no such power, it will result as a necessary
conclusion, that so much of the Act of 1786 as provided the means of payment of
the New-Loan certificates, was founded on a breach of public faith and was
under the articles of Confederation unconstitutional -- It was therefore the
duty of the Legislature in the year 1789 to repeal this part of the Act of 1786
-- But in 1786 Pennsylvania had the power of assuming upon herself the payment
of that part of the public debt which was due to her own citizens, either upon
any other funds than her quota of the public debt due from the Union, or
without funding it at all -- By her Act of 1786 she did assume it, and
therefore so much of that Act as related to the assumption could not without a
breach of faith be repealed by her in 1789 -- These remarks will afford a
sufficient clue for the true interpretation of the law of 1789 and which I
shall come to consider its letter and spirit, I trust it will appear that the
Legislature of 1789 intended to restore public faith by repealing so much of
the Act of 1786 as was founded on a breach of it, but that it did not intend
committing a new breach of the public faith, by repealing that part of the Act
of 1786 which was so far from being unconstitutional as to be highly
commendable -- As a foundation for what has been said and for that which is to
follow, it is now proper to turn to the articles of Confederation which contain
the following provisions --

"ARTICLE VIII. All charges of war, and all other expenses that shall be
incurred for the common defense or general welfare, and allowed by the United
States in Congress assembled, shall be defrayed out of common Treasury, which
shall be supplied by the several states, in proportion to the value of all land
within each state, granted to or surveyed for any person, as such land and the
buildings and improvements thereon shall be estimated according to such mode as
the United States in Congress assembled, shall from time to time direct and
appoint. The taxes for paying that proportion shall be laid and levied by the
authority and direction of the Legislatures of the several states within the
time agreed upon by the United States in Congress assembled.

"ART. XII. All bills of credit emitted, moneys borrowed and debts contracted
by, or under the authority of Congress, before the assembling of the United
States, in pursuance of the present confederation, shall be deemed and
considered as a charge against the United States, for payment and satisfaction
whereof the said United States, and the public faith are hereby solemnly
pledged.

"ART. XIII. Every state shall abide by the determinations of the United States
in Congress assembled, on all questions which by this Confederation are
submitted to them. And the articles of this Confederation shall be inviolably
observed by every state, and the union shall be perpetual, nor shall any
alteration at any time hereafter be made in any of them; unless such alteration
be agreed to in a Congress of the United States, and be afterward confirmed by
the Legisla^ures of every state."

By a full and complete ratification by each of the states, those articles
became binding on all of them. They declare that all charges of war and all
other expenses that should be incurred for the common defense or general
welfare, should be defrayed out of a common Treasury, which should be supplied
by the several states in such proportion as Congress should from time to time
direct and appoint; that taxes for paying that proportion should be laid and
levied by the several states. That all bills of credit emitted, moneys borrowed
and debts contracted by or under the authority o^ Congress should be deemed and
considered as a charge against the United States, for payment and satisfaction
whereof the said United States and the public faith were thereby solemnly
pledged. That every s^ate should abide by the determinations of the United
States in Congress assembled on all questions which by that Confederation were
submitted to them; and that the said articles of Confederation should be
inviolably observed by every state; and the union should be perpetual.

These articles were proposed to the Legislatures of all the states, and
finally received an unanimous ratification in the year 1781. Hence they became
irrevocably binding, nor could any one state appropriate the whole or any part
of her quota, to any other purpose than that of forming one aggregate fund or
general Treasury for the payment of all the debts of the Union.

Having shown what powers were parted with by the several states, and vested in
Congress by the instrument just read, it will now be proper to consider what
measures were taken in pursuance thereof by Congress, or in violation thereof
by the Legislature of Pennsylvania; since this enquiry will best lead to the
true construction of the Act of 1789.

It is probable, Mr. Speaker, that the bad ^^ate of my health during the little
time which I have employed in preparation, may have prevented me from
collecting all that may be material on this subject, but I nevertheless trust
that I shall be able to bring forward matter abundantly sufficient to satisfy
the honorable Senate that my positions are just. During the long and glorious
struggles in which we had been engaged, the veins of patriotic citizens had
bled freely at the shrine of Liberty -- Their purses and the purses of foreign
citizens and foreign natives had been open to our want^* and justice demanded
the payment of interest until ^e should be able to discharge the principal --
On the 4th of September 1782 Congress resolved "That one million two hundred
thousand dollars be quotaed on the states as absolutely and immediately
necessary for payment of the interest of the public debt, and that i^ (...)
recommended to the Legislatures of the respective states to lay such taxes as
should appear to be most proper and effectual for immediately raising their
quo^^ of the above sum;" and they further resolved that the first resolution
"be referred to the grand committee to assess and report the quota of each
state." On the 10th of the same month Congress adopted a resolution of the said
committee fixing the quota of Pennsylvania a^ one hundred and eighty thousand
dollars -- It has already been shown that Congress had by an irrevocable
instrument, agreed to and ratified by all the states, been vested with the sole
and exclusive power of doing this -- In pursuance of this requisition the
Legislature of Pennsylvania by an Act of the 21st March 1783 granted her quota
of one hundred and eighty thousand dollars, which had been fixed and called for
by the resolutions of Congress already mentioned. Had she stopped here, she
would have acted in strict conformity to her federal duties, and would not have
exceeded them in any particular, but she went further; the interest which under
a former regulation of Congress had been payable to certain descriptions of
public creditors by bills drawn upon France, was by a resolution of Congress of
the 9th of September 1782 stopped, with a retrospect to the first of March then
next preceding -- Considerable arrearages of interest were due and unprovided
for -- The pressing ^alls of Congress upon the several states, to be enabled to
discharge those arrearages, had not been listened to or had been disregarded by
some of them -- The distresses of the public creditors were doubtless great,
and it is well known that their complaints had became no less so. Pennsylvania
was not I believe among the delinquent states, and as if feeling for her own
citizens only when her feelings should have been alike for the public creditors
in general, she by the Act to which I have just referred made a further grant
of one hundred and twenty thousand dollars is favor of the former, and at the
same time declared that this sum should be charged to the United States, and
deducted from her quota of the debt of the Union, when the same should be fixed
and ascertained.

Without enquiring into motives which may perhaps have been so laudable as to
entitle her to an exemption from much censure, it must be admitted, that this
last provision was beyond her power; was a violation of the articles of
Confederation and a breach of public faith solemnly plighted by Congress and by
Pennsylvania herself -- Pennsylvania might make a grant to her own citizens to
whatever amount she pleased, but she could not make it out of her quota which
she had authorized Congress to mortgage, and which Congress had actually
mortgaged to all the creditors of the Union.

These observations are proper here as preparatory to the true construction of
the Act of 1789, and when I arrive to that stage of my remarks their utility
will be more clearly seen than they can at present.

But to show these things in a still more clear and forcible point of light, if
any thing can possibly render them so, I now beg leave to turn to the Journals
of Congress of the 18th of April 1783, when with the laudable view of restoring
public credit by rendering justice to individuals, it was by nine states
resolved, That it be recommended to the several states as indispensibly
necessary to the restoration of public credit, and to the punctual and
honorable discharge of the public debts, to invest the United States in
Congress assembled with a power to levy for the use of the United States the
following duties upon goods imported into the said states from any foreign
port, Island or plantation.

"Upon all ^um of Jamaica proof, per gallon, 4-90ths of a dollar. "Upon all
other spiritious liquors. 3-90ths do "Upon Madeira wine 12-90ths do. "Upon all
other wines, 6-90ths do. "Upon common bohea tea per lb. 6-90ths do. "Upon all
other teas, 24-90ths do. "Upon pepper per lb. 3-90ths do. "Upon brown sugar per
lb. 1-2-90ths do. "Upon loaf sugar, 2-90ths do. "Upon all other sugars, 1-90th
do. "Upon molasses per gallon, 1-90th do. "Upon cocoa and coffee per lb. 1-90th
do.

"Upon all other goods, a duty of five per cent. ad valorem at the time and
place of importation.

"Provided that none of the said duties shall be applied to any other purpose
than the discharge of the interest or principal of the debts contracted on the
faith of the United States for supporting the war, agreeably to the resolution
of the 16th day of December last, nor be continued for a longer term than
twenty-five years; and provided that the collectors of the said duties shall be
appointed by the states within which their offices are to be respectively
exercised; but when so appointed, shall be amendable to and removeable by the
United States in Congress assembled, alone; and in case any state shall not
make such appointment within one month after notice given for that purpose, the
appointment may be made by the United States in Congress assembled.

"That it be further recommended to the several states, to establish for a term
limited to twenty-five y^^rs, and to appropriate to the discharge of the
interest and principal of the debts contracted on the faith of the United
States for supporting the war, substantial and effectual revenues of such
nature as they may judge most convenient, for supplying their respective
proportions of one million five hundred thousand dollars annually, exclusive of
the aforementioned duties, which proportion shall be fixed and equalized from
time to time, according to the rule which is or may be prescribed by the
articles of Confederation; and in case the revenues established by any state,
shall at any time yield a sum exceeding its actual proportion, the excess shall
be refunded to it; and in case the revenues of any state shall be found to be
deficient, the immediate deficiency shall be made up by such state with as
little delay as possible, and a future deficiency guarded against by an
enlargement of the revenues established: provided, that until the rule of the
Confederation can be carried into practice, the proportions of the said
1,500,000 dollars shall be as follows, viz.

"New Hampshire 52,708 "Massachusetts 224,427 "Rhode Island 32,318 "Connecticut
132,091 "New York 128,243 "New Jersey 83,358 "Pennsylvania 205,189 "Delaware
22,443 "Maryland 141,517 "Virginia 256,487 "North Carolina 109,006
"South Carolina 96,183 "Georgia 16,030

The said last mentioned revenues to be collected by persons appointed as
aforesaid, but to be carried to the separate credit of the states within which
they shall be collected.

"That an annual account of the proceeds and application of all the
aforementioned revenues, shall be made out and transmitted to the several
states, distinguishing the proceeds of each of the specified articles, and the
amount of the whole revenue received from each state, together with the
allowances made to the several officers employed in the collection of the said
revenues.

"That none of the preceding resolutions shall take effect until all of them
shall be acceded to by every state, after which unanimous accession, however,
they shall be considered as forming a mutual compact among all the states, and
shall be irrevocable by any one or more of them without the concurrence of the
whole or a majority of the United States in Congress assembled.

At this time Congress under the most grateful remembrance of the precious
tokens of affection shown by individuals and even by nations to the great cause
of American freedom, and wishing to manifest a proper sense of regard for the
glorious achievements of the sword of liberty under such benign auspices,
appointed an illustrious little band of exalted patriots to prepare a proper
address to the several states as a companion to the resolutions last mentioned
-- on the 26th of the same month the address was reported and agreed to. The
nobleness of principle, and grandour of sentiment which it breaths, as well as
the sublimity of diction in which it is expressed, are convincing proofs, even
if the Journals of Congress were silent, that it came from the pen of a
MADISON, an ELLSWORTH and an HAMILTON.

It is time it should speak for itself, and I will therefore turn to it.

"ADDRESS to the States by the United States in Congress assembled.
"THE prospect which has for some time existed, and which now is happily
realized, of a successful termination of the war, together with the critical
exigencies of public affairs, have made it the duty of Congress to review and
provide for the debts which the war has left upon the United States, and to
look forward to the means of obviating dangers which may interrupt the harmony
and tranquillity of the confederacy. The result of their mature and solemn
deliberations on these great objects, is contained in their several
recommendations of the 18th inst. herewith transmitted. Although these
recommendations speak themselves the principles on which they are founded, as
well as the ends which they propose, it will not be improper to enter into a
few explanations and remarks, in order to place in a stronger view the
necessity of complying with them.

The first measure recommended is, effectual provision for the debt of the U.
S. The amount of these debts, as far as they can now be ascertained, is
42,000,375 dollars, as will appear by the schedule No. 1. To discharge the
principal of this aggregate debt at once, or in any short period, is evidently
not within the compass of our resources; and even if it could be accomplished,
the case of the community would require that the debt itself should be less to
a course of gradual extinguishment, and certain funds be provided for paying in
the mean time the annual interest. The amount of the annual interest, as will
appear by the paper last referred to, is computed to be 2,415,956 dollars.
Funds, therefore, which will certainly and punctually produce this annual sum
at least, must be provided.

"In devising these funds Congress did not overlook the mode of supplying the
common Treasury, provided by the articles of Confederation; but after the most
respectful consideration of that mode, they were constrained to regard it as
inadequate and inapplicable to the form into which the public debt must be
thrown. The delays and uncertainties incident to a revenue to be established
and collected form time to time by thirteen independent authorities, is at
first view irreconcilable with the punctuality essential in the discharge of
the interest of a national debt* Our own experience after making every
allowance for transient impediments, has been a sufficient illustration of this
truth. Some departure, therefore, in the recommendations of Congress, from the
Federal Constitution, was unavoidable; but it will be found to be as small as
could be reconciled with the object in view, and to be supported besides by
solid considerations of interest and sound policy.

"The fund which first presented itself on this, as it did on a former
occasion, was a tax on imports. The reasons which recommended this branch of
revenue, have heretofore been stated in an Act, of which a copy, No. 2, is now
forwarded, and need not be here repeated. It will suffice to recapitulate, that
taxes on consumption are always least burdensome, because they are least felt,
and are borne too, by those who are both willing and able to pay them; that, of
all taxes on consumption, those on foreign commerce are most compatible with
the genius and policy of free states; that from the relative positions of some
of the more commercial states, it will be impossible to bring this essential
resource into use without a concerted uniformity; that this uniformity cannot
be concerted through any channel so properly as through Congress, nor for any
purpose so aptly as for paying the debts of a revolution, from which an
unbounded freedom has accrued to commerce.

"In renewing this proposition to the states, we have not been unmindful to the
objections which heretofore frustated the unanimous adoption of it. We have
limited the duration of the revenue to the term of 25 years; and we have left
to the states themselves the appointment of the officers who are to collect it.
If the strict maxims of national credit alone were to be consulted, the revenue
ought manifestly to be consistent with the object of it, and the collection
placed in every respect under that authority which is to dispense the former,
and is responsible for the latter. These relaxations will, we trust, be
regarded on one hand as the effect of a disposition in Congress to attend at
all times to the sentiments of those whom they serve, and on the other hand, as
a proof of their anxious desire that provision may be made in some way or other
for an honorable and just fulfillment of the engagements which they have formed.

"To render this fund as productive as possible, and at the same time to narrow
the room for collusions and frauds, it has been judged an improvement of the
plan, to recommend a liberal duty on such articles as are most susceptible of a
tax according to their quantity, and are of most equal and general consumption;
leaving all other articles, as heretofore proposed, to be taxed according to
their value.

"The amount of this fund is computed to be 915,956 dollars. The estimates on
which the computation is made, are detailed in paper No. 3. Accuracy in the
first essay on so complex and fluctuating a subject is not to be expected. It
is presumed to be as near the truth as the defect of proper materials would
admit.

"The residue of the computed interest is 1,500,000 dollars, and is referred to
the states to be provided for by such funds as they may judge most convenient.
Here again the strict maxims of public credit gave way to the desire of
Congress to conform to the sentiments of their constituents. It ought not to be
omitted, however, with respect to this portion of the revenue, that the mode in
which it is to be supplied, varies so little from that pointed out in the
articles of Confederation, and the variations are so conducive to the great
object proposed, that a ready and unqualified compliance on the part of the
states may be the more justly expected. In fixing the quotas of this sum,
Congress, as may be well imagined, were guided by very imperfect lights, and
some inequalities may consequently have ensued. These, however, can be but
temporary, and as far as they may exist at all, will be redressed by a
retrospective adjustment, as soon as a constitutional rule can be applied.

"The necessity of making the two foregoing provisions one indivisible and
irrevocable act, is apparent. Without the first quality, partial provision only
might be made where complete provision is essential; nay, as some states might
prefer and adopt one of the funds only, and the other states the other fund
only, it might happen that no provision at all would be made: without the
second a single state out of the thirteen might at any time involve the nation
in bankruptcy, the mere practicability of which would be a fatal bar to the
establishment of national credit. Instead of enlarging on these topics, two
observations are submitted to the justice and wisdom of the Legislatures.
First: The present creditors, or rather the domestic part of them, having
either made their loans for a period which has expired, or having become
creditors in the first instance involuntarily, are entitled on the clear
principles of justice and good faith, to demand the principle of their credits,
instead of accepting the annual interest. It is necessary, therefore, as the
principal cannot be paid to them on demand, that the interest should be so
effectually and satisfactorily secured, as to enable them if they incline, to
transfer their stock at its full value. Secondly; if the funds be so firmly
constituted as to inspire a thorough and universal confidence, may it not be
hoped, that the capital of the domestic debt, which bears the high interest of
six per cent. may be concelled by other loans obtained at a more moderate
interest? The saving by such an operation, would be a clear one, and might be a
considerable one. As a proof of the necessity of substantial funds for the
support of our credit abroad, we refer to paper No. 4.

"Thus much for the interest of the national debt: for the discharge of the
principal within the term limited, we rely on the natural increase of the
revenue from commerce, on requisitions to be made from time to time for that
purpose, as circumstances may dictate, and on the prospect of vacant territory.
If these resources should prove inadequate, it will be necessary, at the
expiration of twenty-five years, to continue the funds now recommended, or to
establish such others as may then be found more canvenient.

"With a view to the resource last mentioned, as well as to obviate
disagreeable controversies and confusions, Congress have included in their
present recommendations, a renewal of those of the 6th day of September, and of
the 10th day of October, 1780. In both those respects, a liberal and final
accommodation of all interfering claims of vacant territory, is an object which
cannot be pressed with too much solicitude.

"The last object recommended is, a constitutional change of the rule by which
a partition of the common burdens is to be made. The expediency and even
necessity of such a change, has been sufficiently enforced by the local
injustice and discontents which have proceeded from valuations of the soil in
every state where the experiment has been made. But how infinitely must these
evils be increased, on a comparison of such valuations among the states
themselves! On whatever side indeed this rule be surveyed, the execution of it
must be attended with the most serious difficulties. If the valuations be
referred to the authorities of the several states, a general satisfaction is
not to be hoped for: If they be executed by officers of the United States
traversing the country for that purpose, besides the inequalities against which
this mode would be no security, the expense would be both enormous and
obnoxious: If the mode taken in the Act of the 17th day of February last, which
was deemed on the whole least objectionable, be adhered to, still the
insufficiency of the data to the purpose to which they are to be applied, must
greatly impair, if not utterly destroy all confidence in the accuracy of the
result; not to mention that as far as the result can be at all a just one, it
will be indebted for the advantage to the principle on which the rule proposed
to be substituted is sounded. This rule, although not free from objections, is
liable to fewer than any other that could be devised. The only material
difficulty which attended it in the deliberations of Congress, was to fix the
proper difference between the labor and industry of free inhabitants, and of
all other inhabitants. The ratio ultimately agreed on was the effect of mutual
concessions; and if it should be supposed not to correspond precisely with the
fact, no doubt ought to be entertained that an equal spirit of accommodation
among the several Legislatures, will prevail against little inequalities which
may be calculated on one side or on the other. But notwithstanding the
confidence of Congress, as to the success of this proposition, it is their duty
to recollect that the event may possibly disappoint them, and to request that
measures may still be pursued for obtaining and transmitting the information
called for in the Act of the 17th of February last, which in such event will be
essential.

"The plan thus communicated and explained by Congress must now receive its
fate from their constituents. All the objects comprised in it are conceived to
be of great importance to the happiness of this confederated republic, are
necessary to render the fruits of the revolution a full reward for the blood,
the toils, the cares and the calamities which have purchased it. But the object
of which the necessity will be peculiarly felt, and which it is peculiarly the
duty of Congress in inculcate, is the provision recommended for the national
debt. Although this debt is greater than could have been wished, it is still
less on the whole than could have been expected, and when referred to the cause
in which it has been incurred, and compared with the burdens which wars of
ambition and of vain glory have entailed on other nations, ought to be borne
not only with cheerfulness but with pride. But the magnitude of the debt makes
no ^^^t of the question. It is sufficient that the debt has been fairly
contracted and that justice and good faith demand that it should be fully
discharged. Congress had no option but between different modes of discharging
it. The same option is the only one that can exist with the states. The mode
which has after a long and elaborate discussion, been preferred, is, we are
persuaded, the least objectionable of any that would have been equal to the
purpose. Under this persuasion, we call upon the justice and plighted faith of
the several states to give it its proper effect, to reflect on the consequences
of rejecting it, and to remember that Congress will not be answerable for them.

"If other motives than that of justice could be requisite on this occasion, no
nation could ever feel stronger; for to whom are the debts to be paid?

To AN ALLY, in the first place, who to the exertion of his arms in support of
our cause, has added the succors of his treasure; who, to his important loans,
has added liberal donations; and whose loans themselves carry the impression of
his magnanimity and friendship. For more exact information on this point we
refer to paper No. 5.

"To individuals in a foreign country, in the next place, who were the first to
give so precious a token of their confidence in our justice, and of their
friendship for our cause, and who are members of a republic which was second in
espousing our rank among nations. For the claims and expectations of this class
of creditors we refer to paper No. 6.

"Another class of creditors is, that illustrious and patriotic band of
fellow-citizens, whose blood and whose bravery, have defended the liberties of
their country, who have patiently borne, among other distresses, the privation
of their stipends, whilst the distresses of their country disabled it from
bestowing them; and who, even now, ask for no more than such a portion of their
dues as will enable them to retire from the field of victory and glory into the
bosom of peace and private citizenship, and for such effectual security for the
residue of their claims, as their country is now unquestionably able to
provide. For a full view of their sentiments and wishes on this subject, we
transmit the paper No. 7; and as a fresh and lively instance of their
superiority to every species of seduction from the paths of virtue and honor,
we add the paper No. 8.

"The remaining class of creditors is composed partly of such of our
fellow-citizens as originally lent to the public the use of their funds, or
have since manifested most confidence in their country, by receiving transfers
from the lenders; and partly of those whose property has been either advanced
or assumed for the public service. To discriminate the merits of these several
descriptions of creditors, would be a task equally unnecessary and invidious.
If the voice of humanity plead more loudly in favor of some than of others,
the voice of policy, no less than of justice, pleads in favor of all. A wise
nation will never permit those who relieve the wants of their country, or who
rely most on its faith, its firmness and its resources, when either of them is
distrusted, to suffer by the event.

"Let it be remembered, finally, that it has ever been the pride and boast of
America, that the righ^ for which she contended, were the rights of human
nature. By the blessing of the author of these rights, on the means exerted for
their defense, they have prevailed against all opposition, and form the basis
of thirteen independent states. No instance has heretofore occurred, nor can
any instance be expected hereafter to occur, in which the unadulterated forms
of republican government can pretend to so fair an opportunity of justifying
themselves by their fruits. In this view the citizens of the United States are
responsible for the greatest trust ever confided to a political society. If
justice, good faith, honor, gratitude and all the other qualities which enoble
the character of a nation, and fulfill the ends of government, be the fruits of
our establishments, the cause of liberty will acquire a dignity and luster
which it has never yet enjoyed; and an example will be set which cannot but
have the most favorable influence on the rights of mankind. If on the other
side, our governments should be unfortunately blotted with the reverse of these
cardinal and essential virtues, the great cause which we have engaged to
vindicate, will be dishonored and betrayed; the last and fairest experiment in
favor of the rights of human nature will be turned against them, and their
patrons and friends exposed to be insulted and silenced by the votaries of
tyranny and usurpation.

"By order of the United States in Congress assembled."

These important truths were listened to by Pennsylvania; and, like the sacred
voice from on high, they commanded her respect.

Pennsylvania at all times hitherto attentive to her federal duties, except
when the tardiness of other states, or the sufferings of her own citizens, led
her into weaknesses in some degree perhaps excusable from her motives, though
far from being justifiable, passed a law which after reciting the requisitions
already read, authorized Congress for the term of 25 years, to levy for the use
of the United States on the enumerated articles mentioned in that requisition,
the particular duties which it called for, and also upon all other goods a duty
of 5 per cent. ad valorem. The same Act, after reciting that Congress had by
their Act of the 18th of April 1783, resolved that it be further recommended to
the several states to establish for a term limited to twenty-five years, and to
appropriate to the discharge of the interest and principal of the debts
contracted on the faith of the United States for supporting the war,
substantial and effectual revenues, of such nature as they may judge most
convenient, for supplying their respective proportions of one million five
hundred thousand dollars, annually, exclusive of the abovementioned duties to
be fixed according to the articles of Confederation: Provided, that until they
should be so fixed, the proportion of Pennsylvania should be two hundred and
five thousand one hundred and eighty-nine dollars; DECLARED AND ENACTED, that
the said proportion of one million five hundred thousand dollars, annually, for
the term of twenty-five years, should be raised and levied on the persons and
estates of the inhabitants of this state, for the uses and purposes aforesaid;
and the same Act explicitly declared, "That the money to be raised by virtue of
it, should be and it thereby was appropriated to the discharge of the interest
and principal of the debts contracted on the faith of the United States for
supporting the war;" with a proviso, nevertheless, that that Act should not
take effect until each of the United States should make laws conformable to the
Acts of Congress on which that Act was founded.

Although it is admitted, Mr. Speaker, that this Act was not to operate as a
law until similar ones, at least in principle, should be enacted by all the
other states; yet nothing can, I apprehend, be more clear than that as the
object of it was to provide for the quota of Pennsylvania for the term of
twenty-five years, and as it contained a conditional grant, of it for that
period, that grant could not, even independent of the articles of
Confederation, be withdrawn within that time, since it contained no such
provision, and the whole of that time was allowed for other states to pass
similar laws -- On this head I shall have occasion by and by to remark more
fully, and therefore I will forbear doing it at present.

The next material step taken by the Legislature (...) Pennsylvania, and
connected with the object of our present enquiries, was, the passing of a law
on the 16th of March 1785. This law formed the revenues of the state into an
aggregate fund for several purposes, and among others for that of paying the
state's estimated quota of the annual interest of the debt of the United States
contracted during the late war, and supposed to amount to L. 123,932. But such
payment was not to be made into the Treasury of the U. S. for the benefit of
all the creditors of the United States, but it was specially provided, that the
said estimated quota should be for the sole and exclusive benefit of such
creditors of the United States as were citizens of this state -- These payments
were directed to be made through the medium of the Continental Loan-officer; he
was ordered to keep fair and proper accounts thereof, in order that this state
might have proper credit therefore in account with the United States; and the
Act was to continue in force until the United States should make and carry into
execution other effectual and permanent provision for paying the annual
interest and arrearages of interest due on the debt of the United States to the
public creditors thereof.

No comment can be at present necessary upon this Act; it speaks for itself,
and its language is that of perfidy -- It was so considered by Congress, and on
the 27th of September following they took measures which completely defeated
its operation -- on that day it was "resolved that the commissioner of the
Continental Loan-office in any state, should not on any pretense whatever
settle or issue any certificate for the interest due on any Continental
Loan-office certificate, or other certificate of liquidated debts, unless as
hereafter provided, until the state for which he is Continental Loan-officer,
should have passed a legislative Act complying with this requisition, (to wit,
a requisition from the several states of their respective quotas) nor shall he
issue any certificate or take any other measure whereby the interest may be
paid by the state in any mode not pointed out by this requisition; nor shall
the Commissioner of the Continental Loan-office in any state, that shall have
complied with this requisition, issue any certificate or take any other
measure, whereby a discrimination may be made by such state between the holders
of Loan-office certificates issued from his office, who are citizens of that
state, and foreigners or the citizens of any other state that shall have
complied with this requisition" -- And Congress on the same day, further
resolved that if any such commissioner should disobey or neglect to carry into
execution any resolution or order of Congress, the board of treasury should
suspend him from his office and appoint another in his room.

The clamours of the public creditors at home and abroad, who had been excluded
from their just rights by discriminating Acts of legislation, in favor of a
particular class of creditors, loudly demanded from Congress this firm tone of
conduct, and by adopting it, they showed their abhorrence of principles to
which I will not give a name.

What I have hitherto dwelt upon, Mr. Speaker, may be considered but as the
follies of Pennsylvania, when compared with that which is to follow. When she
found herself baffled, and her system of discrimination defeated by Congress,
she in the fatal moment of some unpropitious influence, adopted the bold and
desperate measure of enacting the law to which I shall now turn -- It could not
be erased from her records in the year 1789, and there was no way of removing
the disgrace which it had brought with it, but by repealing its obnoxious and
baneful parts -- It was passed on the 1st of March 1786 -- and by it
Pennsylvania assumed upon herself payment of the whole of the debt due to her
own citizens from the United States for moneys loaned, supplies furnished or
services performed during the late war; she provided for the payment of the
interest thereof half yearly, until the first day of March 1796, and then for
the payment of the principal; she mortgaged for securing the payment of the
interest the aggregate fund provided by the Act of the 16th of March 1785; and
that aggregate fund was made up in part of the very fund which she had before
vested in the United States for the payment of her quota to all the creditors
of the Union.

This Act was unconditional and it was without limitation as to time -- It
therefore merits a very different consideration from any of the former Acts,
nor do I conceive any tolerable apology which can be fairly made for the
framers of it -- That part of it indeed which contained the assumption, I am
not disposed to find fault with, and if I was, perhaps my objections would
appear groundless; but that part of it which mortgaged the quota of this state
for payment to he^ own citizens only, is perhaps unexampled by legislative acts
even in the worst of times.

In the year 1788 the Constitution of the United States was adopted and
ratified -- It provides that "The Congress shall have power to lay and collect
taxes, duties, imposts and excises; to pay the debts and provide for the common
defense and general welfare of the U. S.

"That no state shall without the consent of Congress lay any imposts or duties
on imports or exports, except what may be absolutely necessary for executing
its inspection laws, and the net produce of all duties and imposts laid by any
state on imports or exports, shall be for the use of the Treasury of the United
States."

"That no state shall pass any bill of attainder, ex post facto law, or law
impairing the obligation of contracts."

"That all debts contracted and engagements entered into before the adoption of
this Constitution shall be as valid against the United States under this
Constitution as under the Confederation; and it concludes with declaring that

"This Constitution and the laws of the United States which shall be made in
pursuance thereof, shall be the supreme law of the land."

On the 27th of March 1789 the Legislature of Pennsylvania passed a law, which
after some recitals, unnecessary to be read at present, though they may be
proper to be observed upon by and by, enacted that "the interest due and to
become due and payable upon all and every the certificates issued by the
Comptroller General in pursuance of the said recited Acts or either of them,
shall be paid up, so as to complete the payment of interest to four years; and
that so much of every Act or Acts of General Assembly, as directs or secures
the payment of the principal sum or sums in the said certificates or any of
them mentioned, or of the interest thereof, beyond the term of four years,
shall be, and the same is hereby repealed, and made null and void."

The first position, Mr. Speaker, which I have proposed maintaining is, That
the New-Loan certificates were subscribable to the loan of the United States;
and of course, were redeemable at the Treasury of Pennsylvania;" and I have in
an early stage of my remarks ventured to state as the ground of this position,
that "the Act of the 27th of March 1789 was so far from abolishing the New-Loan
debt created by the Act of the 1st of March 1786, as to leave it as it was
before, with this difference only, that it was funded by the law of 1786, and
unfunded by that of 1789, and left without the means of payment, until some new
provision should be made for that purpose; and I at the same time added, that
it was the meaning and duty of the Assembly in March 1789 to repeal so much of
the Act of 1786 as provided the means of payment; as was originally founded on
a breach of faith, and as was beyond the power of the Legislature to enact; but
I denied that the Legislature of 1789 had either the power or the will to
repeal that part of the Act which assumed the debt.

Most of the materials necessary to a decision of these questions are now
before the honorable Senate. As I proceed in my argument I shall occasionally
have recourse to the rest of them.

The ground which I have hitherto taken is intended to show, that the New-Loan
debt as it is called, created by the Act of 1786, continued to exist
notwithstanding the law of 1789 -- If it did not continue to exist, I must
admit that the New-Loan certificates were not subscribable to the loan of the
United States; and if it did continue to exist, it follows as a necessary
consequence that they were subscribable -- The establishing of the point is
therefore of so much importance to the defendant as to afford a sufficient
apology for my endeavoring to draw the attention of the honorable Senate to a
short review of the ground over which I have passed.

It has been shown, that all debts due to foreign and domestic creditors of
every description, for moneys loaned, supplies furnished and services performed
for the general defense during the late war, were contracted on the faith of
the whole Union, and of course that each of these creditors whether foreign or
domestic, and whether consisting of a nation or of a private individual, has
both an equitable and a legal claim on all the states for payment -- It may
have sometimes happened, that nations in all the pride of power and imaginary
omnipotence, have been so regardless of character and of the sacred voice of
justice, as to substitute that power as the only measure of right, and by
adopting a conduct which in the humble walks of private life, would consign an
individual to deserved disgrace and infamy, have undertaken to cancel their
engagements. Admitting for a moment, that Pennsylvania was willing to appear as
a prostitute among nations, yet she had no authority to legislate for foreign
nations or foreign citizens, and of course she could not annul her obligations
with them -- Again, Pennsylvania was but an Integral part of the United States,
and she could have no pretensions to the right of annulling their contracts or
extricating herself from their binding obligations on her.

It has been shown, that the articles of Confederation were proposed to, and
ratified by all the states; that every state thereby bound herself to abide by
the determinations of the United States in Congress assembled, on all questions
thereby submitted to them; that each state by a solemn compact declared that
they should be inviolably observed by every state, and that no alteration
should at any time be made in any of them, unless it should be agreed to in a
Congress of the United States, and be afterward confirmed by the Legislatures
of every state; that all the charges of war and other expenses incurred for the
common defense or general welfare, should be defrayed out of a common Treasury
supplied by the several states in such proportion as should be fixed by
Congress, and that for the payment and satisfaction thereof the United States
and the public faith were thereby pledged; that the quota of Pennsylvania was
fixed in the manner prescribed by the articles of Confederation, and that
therefore, unless a part is greater than the whole; unless the power of
Pennsylvania singly, is greater than that of all the states collectively;
unless she had a right to legislate for foreign citizens and foreign nations,
and unless she could at pleasure withdraw her faith and cancel her engagements,
her quota could not be applied by her in favor of one class of creditors, and
to the exclusion of others.

It has been shown that Pennsylvania by her law of 1783 granted her quota,
which had been fixed and called for by Congress for the payment of the interest
due to the public creditors until provision should be made for the discharge of
the principal, and that by this additional ratification of her former
obligations she became doubly bound to a faithful compliance with them.

It has been shown that Pennsylvania by another Act of the 23d of September
1783 authorized Congress, when the other states should come into the same
measure, for the term of 25 years to levy certain duties; and that she herself
provided for raising certain taxes; at the same time, and in the most explicit
manner she appropriated them to the discharge of the interest and principal of
the debts contracted on the faith of the United States for supporting the war.

After all these engagements, surely no rational man will seriously contend,
that the quota of Pennsylvania was not irrevocably mortgaged to all the public
creditors, or that Pennsylvania had the power of lessening the claims of any of
them upon her for retribution -- The Constitution of the United States is the
supreme law of the land; it declares that "all debts contracted and engagements
entered into before its adoption, shall be as valid against the United States
as they were under the Confederation; the sovereign people of Pennsylvania by
adopting that Constitution, agreed that those debts should be so -- Under the
articles of Confederation Pennsylvania was bound and her quota was mortgaged
for their payment; by her Act of March 1786 she undertook to say, that the
debts contracted and engagements entered into should not be as valid against
her as by the articles of Confederation they had been declared to be, and that
her quota should no longer be liable for the payment of them.

In what situation then did Pennsylvania find herself in the year 1789? She
found among her records an Act stamped with the name of a law, but part of it
disfigured by features which showed that it rather merited the name of an
arbitrary and despotic edict -- That part she considered as a monument of her
disgrace, and she determined to repeal it, and by doing so to restore her
credit and the rights of all the creditors of the Union; but she saw another
part of it, which infringed the rights of no one; interfered with no former
engagements, that she had an unquestionable right to enact it; that she had
enacted it* that she had thereby pledged her faith where she had a right to
pledge it, and that it could not be repealed without a breach of that faith;
that part therefore she determined not to touch, and with the delicate hand of
a skilful surgeon, she probed the wound; she separated the rotten from the
sound, and she repealed so much of the Act of 1786 as funded the New-Loan debt
on her quota, in favor of her own citizens only, when it belonged not to them
alone but to them in common with every other class of creditors; b^t so much of
the same Act as assumed, without funding the New-Loan debt she could not
without a manifest breach of faith repeal, and she therefore left it as it was.

I have said, Mr. Speaker, that she had neither the power nor the will to
repeal this part of the Act.

That she had not the power, will, I think, evidently appear from a
consideration of the constitution of the United States -- "NO STATE SHALL PASS
ANY EXPOST FA^^O LAW, OR LAW IMPAIRING THE OBLIGATION OF CONTRACTS."

By the law of 1786, Pennsylvania proposed to receive from such of the
creditors of the United States as were her own citizens, their Continental
certificates, and to give them her own certificates in lieu thereof; she
proposed this but she did not command it; she offered that it might be done,
but she did not enact that it should be done; she therefore appeared in the
character of a person willing to contract with such persons as might accept of
her terms -- many persons did accept of them; she received their Continental
certificates; she issued new ones in lieu thereof, and through the agency of
her Comptroller General made as full and complete a contract, as can be
expressed in any form of words.

We have been told indeed that it was "a loan and not a contract;" that it was
"a proposal and not a bargain;" that it was "a receipt for the old certificate
to be returned at her pleasure, and not an obligation to pay the new one." But
we have not been told, how there can be a loan without a contract! nor how a
proposal when agreed to and accepted, can be any thing short of a bargain! nor
by what rule of construction it is, that a certificate, signed by the proper
officer, and expressed in the following words, to wit, "The commonwealth of
Pennsylvania has received on loan from (...) the (...) of (...) to be paid to
the said (...) or bearer, on or before the first day of March, 1796, with
interest from the day of (...) at the rate of of 6 per cent. per annum, to be
paid half yearly at the State Treasury, according to the direction of an Act of
General Assembly passed on the day of (...)," is to be considered only as a
receipt for the old certificate, to be returned at the pleasure of the
commonwealth, and not an obligation to pay the new one; more especially when it
is considered, that by the Act for issuing the certificates, the interest is
payable half yearly, and the certificates are receivable at the land-office to
the whole amount of the principal!

It has also been said, Mr. Speaker by the honorable managers and the learned
counsel, that "The clause in the Constitution of the United States, prohibiting
the passing of ex post facto laws, and laws annulling the obligation of
contracts, does not relate to states, but to private persons only." But before
I shall attempt a serious answer to this serious objection, I must wait to be
informed by some of those Gentlemen how "private persons" can pass a law of any
kind!

Again, it has been said that "The clause in question does not extend to the
conduct of a state toward her own citizens, but that it leaves her to act with
respect to them, as she may think proper." -- To this I answer,

1st. That the clause in question, contains no such exception, and that I am
far from being satisfied of the gentlemen's right to add it to the Constitution.

2d. That, foreign citizens and foreign states are interested, and that
therefore, if the proposition were true, yet that the conclusion would be
unwarrantable.

3d. That the reason is much stronger, for the clause applying to the conduct
of a state toward her own citizens, than toward any body else; since she has
no right to legislate, but for her own citizens, and the clause could not
therefore be necessary to preserve the rights of other citizens or foreign
nations.

We are also told that "The clause refered to, only relates to contracts, and
not to laws," but before I can possibly give any other answer to this
objection, than by laughing at it, I must be informed how it is possible that
these words, "NO STATE SHALL PASS ANY EX POST FACTO LAW, OR LAW IMPAIRING THE
OBLIGATION OF CONTRACTS," do not relate to laws, but only to contracts.

Again, supposing the proprosition to be true; I ask if it has not been
incontestably proved, that a state is as capable of making a contract as a
private individual can possibly be? If Pennsylvania had not made contracts? If
they were not as binding on her, as they could be on an individual? and if so,
need I to add, that she could pass no ex post facto law, or law impairing the
obligation of contracts, more especially in her own case; in her own favor, and
to the prejudice of her own creditors!

Hence I conclude, that the Legislature of 1789 had not the power, even had it
been so weak or so wicked as to have the will, of repealing that part of the
Act of 1786 which assumed so much of the debt of the United States as was due
to the citizens of Pennsylvania. Independent of the unconstitutionality of such
a measure, it would have been so extremely unjust, that the intention is not
fairly imputable, without much stronger proofs, than are furnished by the
language of the law of that date.

We have, it is true, been told that "Considering the proceedings which took
place under the law of 1786 as but merely an exchange of one certificate for
another, a re-exchange might with great propriety be ordered by a subsequent
law, since this would only be putting matters as they were before, and leaving
them in statu quo, so that no harm could possibly be done" -- But surely this
kind of reasoning is altogether inadmissible, and without even the merit of
plausibility -- In the year 1786 the United States, with the best of wishes
toward their creditors, were, owing to the delinquency of some of the states;
without the means of rendering them justice -- This was so well known as in a
great measure to destroy all confidence in them, and a state security was by
most people deemed preferable to a continental one. Pennsylvania therefore by
assuming so much of the debt as was due to her own citizens, added confidence
to them, enhanced the value of their claims, and stamped them with a curr^ncy
which they had not before -- This brought them i^^^ circulation, and they were
in hundreds, perhaps (...) ^housands of instances, purchased for valuable
conside^^tions upon the faith of the State, and which would not have been given
upon the faith of the United States -- To destroy the new certificates
therefore in the hands of such bona fide purchasers as might choose to retain
them in preference to giving them up for the old ones, would not have been
"putting matters as they were before, and leaving them statu quo," but would
have been the extreme of injustice and of despotism -- It would have been an
undertaking to judge, where Pennsylvania alone had no right to judge, nor to
act, but with the concurrence of those who held her certificates -- upon them
it was hard enough that the funds provided for payment by the law of 1786
should be taken away by that of 1789, but as they had known, or had the means
of knowing when they received the certificates, that these funds were not at
the disposal of Pennsylvania, but were the property of others, they acted with
their eyes open; they took upon themselves the risque of her restoring them in
her more virtuous days to the true owners, and when she did so, they had no
cause to complain. Not so would have been the case, had she undertaken to
destroy the debt -- The debt due from the United States was either not funded
at all, or it was funded on the quotas of the several states. -- In the former
situation, were the New-Loan creditors placed by the law of 1789, with the
liberty, if they thought proper of being placed in the latter, by exchanging
their new certificates for the old ones. This far it was the duty of
Pennsylvania to go, but she could not have gone farther without a violation of
that duty, and it will presently appear that she had no such intention.

It can hardly be necessary to again remind the honorable Senate of the Act of
the 23d of September 1783, whereby Pennsylvania, by a full and complete grant,
authorized Congress to raise and levy the whole of her quota of the debt of the
United States, to take effect as soon as the like powers should be given by all
the other states. By the Constitution of the United States, the like powers
were delegated to Congress by all the states, and therefore by its adoption
this grant became absolute and irrevocable. In proof of this, I must again have
recourse to the following clause, "The Congress shall have power to lay and
collect taxes, duties, imposts and excises, to pay the debts and provide for
the common defense and general welfare of the United States."

As this clause transfers to Congress the identical duties upon which the
New-Loan debt had been funded, it may with more propriety be said, that it
became unfunded by the adoption of the Constitution in 1788, than in by the law
of 1789, since that law only renders the one of 1786 conformable to it.

That may idea of the New-Loan debt continuing as a debt of Pennsylvania,
though it should become unfunded is not a novel one, I will now afford the most
irrefragable proof, and my authority shall be no less than that of the same
Legislature which by the Act of 1786 created that debt.

It must be fresh in the memory of every man who hears me, that when the
delinquency of some of the states in their federal duties, had arisen to such a
height, as to almost menace a dissolution of the Union, Congress stood firm at
their post, and exerted every nerve to preserve, or rather to rescue the
tainted honor of the country -- On one of these trying occasions, they sent a
committee consisting of Mr. King and Mr. Monroe to confer with the Legislature
of Pennsylvania. This event took place in the year 1786, and the Journals of
the Assembly of that year show what took place on that occasion.

(Mr. Lewis then read the report, which see page 319, 320.)

By this it appears that a report was made by a committee of the same House of
Assembly that passed the law of 1786; it was adopted by the next succeeding
House, composed of nearly the same members, and it recognizes several of the
principles which I have advanced -- "It consider the debt of the U.S. in one
aggregate point of view" -- It states that the "principles of justice require,
like payment of every part, whether the same be due to foreigners or citizens"
-- It appears that the Legislature of 1786, as well as that of 1787, thought
that a "compliance with the requisition would involve a breach of the faith of
this state pledged to her own citizens, UNLESS AT THE SAME TIME SOME FURTHER
AND OTHER FUNDS WERE PROVIDED FOR THE PAYMENT OF THE INTEREST DUE AND WHICH
SHOULD BECOME DUE TO THEM" -- And this surely implies that when such other
funds were provided, it would be no breach of faith to take away those which
had been subscribed -- This clearly separates the assumption of the debt from
the funding of it -- By the Constitution of the United States, ample means of
other funds were provided, and therefore the Legislature of 1789 distinguished,
as those of 1786 and 1787 had done, between the assumption of the debt and the
funding of it; and as they had proposed, permitted the former to remain, but
took away the latter.

This report states the necessity which the State had been under of "assuming
the debt," and it speaks of the assumption as being unconditional in its
nature, and unlimited in point of time; but it assumes a very different
language when speaking of the funding of the debt, for the expression there is,
that "This House cannot divert the funds until such solid provision be made for
all the public debts, as that the annual interest payable to Pennsylvania, will
be a certain and sufficient fund for discharging those sums, which she is bound
to pay to her citizens" -- By the Constitution of the United States such "solid
provision" as is here spoken of was amply secured, and therefore the law of
1789 is in this particular conformable to what the Legislature in 1786
considered as proper under the like circumstances.

To determine however, whether there is any thing in the letter or spirit of
the Act of 1789, showing an intention^ destroy the New-Loan debt, a nearer view
of the subject must be taken. When the bill was before the House in its
original shape, it proposed no more than to repeal so much of the law of 1786,
as directed the payment of the interest half yearly, and had it retained this
form it would hardly be contended that the debt itself was destroyed -- The
cause of the alteration may however be easily traced, and when that is known,
there will appear no more reason for concluding the intention to have been to
destroy the debt, than if no alteration had taken place. That cause was as
follows -- As the interest was funded upon and made payable out of the quota of
Pennsylvania; and as it was proper to repeal this part of the Act, the
Legislature at first proposed to do nothing more -- It was however in the
progress of the bill observed, that the principal was receivable at the
Land-office, in order to form a charge against the United States, and to be
deducted from the quota of Pennsylvania. Hence this part of the Act was also
exceptional, and a very proper object for a repealing clause. These
circumstances certainly afford strong grounds for the conclusion, that in 1789
nothing more was intended than to prevent any part of the quota of Pennsylvania
from being applied to partial purposes, and to leave to her future
consideration, what funds she would provide for the payment of these debts, or
indeed whether she would provide for them at all.

We have been told, Sir, that "The long and labored preamble to the law of
1789, shows the anxiety of the Legislature to afford a justification for what
was about to be done, and that this proves a total destruction of the debt to
have been intended." But were I to admit, that it is not the substance but the
length of the preamble, which affords a key for the interpretation of the
enacting clause, yet a very strong conclusion might fairly be drawn in favor
of my construction, since not one world is to be found in any part of the
preamble, in favor of destroying the debt, while every sentence of it, is
calculated to show the propriety of rendering it an unfunded one.

The preamble says, "And whereas Congress having the power to provide for the
payment of the debts of the United States, no doubt can be entertained but they
will with all convenient speed make due provision for the same" -- and this has
been relied on to show, that the intention was to destroy the New-Loan debt
altogether, but to me it appears that a very different inference is deducible.

The preamble recites that "Congress have power to lay and collect taxes,
duties, imposts and excises; to pay the debts of the United States; that no
state can without the consent of Congress lay any imposts or duties on imports
or exports, and as that part of the aggregate fund created by the Act of March
the 16th 1785 which arises from the duties and imposts therein mentioned, will
shortly cease to come into the Treasury of this state, it is reasonable and
just that the temporary relief which by the said recited Acts was granted, etc.
should also cease."

In these recitals we discover no intention to annul the debt, but we see very
strong ones for withdrawing the funds and providing no others at that time;
Congress had the power, and therefore, there could be no doubt of their having
the will; -- the proper funds were withdrawn from the state and vested in
Congress; -- the quota of Pennsylvania was restored to the proper channel, and
therefore the plain language of this preamble is, that as we are under no
obligation to provide other funds, we will not do it at present, but we will
give you an opportunity of receiving back your old certificates, in order to
apply to your original debtor for payment before you shall look to us who are
but the guarantee.

Again, the preamble after reciting the law of 1786 and some former ones, says
"It is reasonable and just that the alterations of the said recited laws herein
after mentioned, should be made." Can any thing show more clearly than this,
that they were to be altered, not destroyed; amended, not repealed? and if so,
that part was to remain, and that part is so much thereof as was assumed debt.

But further says the preamble; "It is reasonable and just that the temporary
relief granted by the said recited Acts should cease." Let us see, Mr. Speaker,
what this temporary relief was, and when we know this we shall have the
Legislature's own declaration of what was deemed reasonable and just to do --
The principal was made payable at the end of ten years, but it was not secured
on any grounds; this was hard upon the creditors, who had long sought in vain
for their just rights -- The finances of Pennsylvania did not admit of her
promising payment of the principal at an earlier period, nor of fixing on any
funds even for that time; -- but in consideration of their distresses, she
granted them temporary relief, and that temporary relief was,

1st. The payment of the interest half yearly during ten years but no longer;
and,

2d. As she wished to dispose of her back lands, and found much difficulty in
doing it, she agreed to receive New-Loan certificates at the Land-office in
payment for her back lands.

And she provided that both of these should be charged against the United
States and be deducted from her quota -- We now see what this temporary relief
was, which it was reasonable and just should cease; we find that it had no
relation to the validity of the certificate; that it was confined to payments
out of the quota of Pennsylvania; and after this, the construction must be a
very strained one indeed, which supposes that the Legislature thought it
reasonable and just that the certificates should be cancelled and the debt
abolished! -- Had such been the intention, would not the preamble have said so?
Or could such be the intention, when the language is so very different? -- To
cease, and to abolish, are different things, in the one case the thing which
ceased may begin again: in the other it is destroyed and gone forever. -- But
if this were not so, yet it is only the temporary relief which was to cease,
and we we have seen what that temporary relief was. The words temporary relief,
can with no kind of propriety be applied to a debt made payable at the distance
of ten years, without any funds being provided for its discharge at that time,
or means of compelling the Legislature to provide them at all. The words future
relief might be applicable to such a case, but I have not a very clear idea of
that kind of temporary relief which I must wait ten years for, and I therefore
conclude that it was not intended to abolish the debt itself. The reason
assigned for repealing certain parts of the Act of 1786, may be a good one, but
it is no reason for a total silence respecting that part of the law of 1786,
which assumed the debt, if a repeal of it was really intended.

I say a total silence, respecting the assumption, for I can find nothing at
all respecting it, in the clause in question. -- Let us, Mr. Speaker, pay a
little more minute attention, to these all-powerful words, -- "So much of every
Act, etc. as directs or secures the payment of the principal sum or of the
interest, beyond the term of four years, shall be, and the same is hereby
repealed, and made null and void."

Unless these words destroy the debt, it is not pretended, that there is any
thing in the Act of 1789 which can have that effect -- The words "so much as
directs the payment of the principal or interest," can with no kind of
propriety be said to have the least operation in the way contended. --
Pennsylvania by her Act of 1786 directed her proper officer, to pay the
interest half yearly, until the end of the ten years, out of her quota of the
debt of the United States; she also directed her proper officer to pay the
principal out of the same quota at her Land-office, to such persons as might be
willing to accept of payment in that way; but she directed no other payment to
be made, nor did she make any provision for it. In 1789 she directed that these
payments should cease, and she did this with great propriety, because these
payments in the manner directed, and out of a fund not at her disposal, were at
all times so improper, that no Act of hers could render them legal.

It is therefore clear that this part of the clause, does not afford even the
semblance of reason, for the strange supposition that the law of 1789 meant to
destroy the debt, or to do any thing more than to unfund it, because, if the
expression be allowable, it had been funded, on funds, which she had no right
to fund it upon.

But it is said, that the Act of 1789, not only repealed so much of the Act of
1786, as directed payment, etc. but also so much of it as secured payment; and
it is contended that whatever the construction may be of the former expression,
that the latter will admit of nothing less than an absolute annihilation of the
debt.

This seems, Sir, to be considered by our enemies as their strong ground, but I
nevertheless believe that they may without difficulty be driven from it by
regular approaches and fair argument, and I shall proceed in this way, with
full confidence of success and of complete victory.

"SO MUCH AS SECURE PAYMENT" -- What do these words imply? Why that so much of
the Act of 1786 as provided the means or afforded security for payment should
be repealed. But how far did it provide the means or afford security or give a
pledge for payment? Why it gave and it pledged as security for payment of the
interest for ten years, the quota of Pennsylvania of the debt of the United
States -- The repeal of this part of the law of 1786 which only related to the
interest, has surely nothing to do with the destruction of the principal -- But
it may be said, that it also gave as a pledge or security for redeeming the
principal, the right of paying the New-Loan certificates at the Land-office in
exchange for vacant lands. -- Admitting that the payment of the principal was
in this manner not only directed, but secured, what is the consequence of a
repeal of this provision of security? Why surely not an annihilation of the
debt; or any thing more than a legislative declaration that however just, legal
and lasting the debt may be, the payment of it shall not be secured in this
particular way, because it was not in the power of the Legislature of 1786 to
secure the payment out of her quota, and therefore so far as that Act secures
the payment we repeal it because it secured payment from funds not belonging to
or at the disposal of Pennsylvania.

Did the Act of 1786 secure payment in any other manner than has been
mentioned? surely not -- It must I think be admitted, that an assumption of a
debt by a sovereign and independent state, without funding it, or providing any
means for payment, does not secure its payment; since there is no office to
apply to for payment; -- no officer directed to make payment; -- no funds
provided from which payment is to be made; -- no means of compelling the
commonwealth to provide such funds; no process by which she is ameanable to her
own citizens; or in short any possible mode whereby the creditor can,
independent of the will and pleasure of the state, be secure in his payment
under such circumstances. If this is really the case, and I can perceive no
room for doubting it, the conclusion necessarily follows, that the payment of
the New-Loan debt was only secured by the law of 1786 on the quota of
Pennsylvania, and that the withdrawing of that security did not destroy the
debt, although it was left without the means of payment until some other means
should be provided -- Whether such means were afterward provided or not, will
be a question of subsequent enquiry.

If the payment of the principal and interest of the New-Loan debt was secured,
other than has been mentioned, it must have been secured in some particular way
or manner; for to say that a thing is done, but that it is not done in any
particular way or manner; would be to talk a language which no rational man
will do. -- We very well know in what way and in what manner, the payment of
the interest was secured; and we also know in what way, and in what manner the
payment of the principal at the Land-Office was secured; but we know of no
other way or manner in which either of them was secured, and of course they
were not secured at all.

It is contended indeed, that the issuing of the certificates, was securing the
payment of them; and we admit the truth of of the position so far as funds were
provided and pledged for that purpose, but beyond this we say it is not
tenable. There is surely a wide difference between evidence of a debt, and
security for its payment, and the one may exist without the other. This
doctrine may be well exemplified by cases which have been determined under the
statutes of limitation. If I have a note of hand of so long standing, as that a
recovery is barred by any of these statutes, it is evidence of my debt, but it
does not secure the payment, because I can have no remedy to enforce a
recovery. The debt is not however destroyed under these circumstances, but
still exists, and if the debtor by his will provides a fund for the payment of
his debts generally, and directs his executor to pay them out of that fund,
without making any particular mention of such as are barred by lenghth of time,
I am now entitled to payment. Just so it is, I apprehend, with respect to
certificates in the case put by our opponents. The certificate is evidence of
the debt, and if it be a funded one, it is security for its payment; otherwise
not, until future means of payment are provided, because until then there is no
possible mode of compelling payment, and without this, it is idle to talk, of,
the certificates securing payment! -- Just so was the case with respect to the
unfunded depreciation certificates -- It is admitted that they were evidences
of a debt, although they did not secure the payment of that debt, for the reasons
mentioned. Just so was the case too with respect to the old paper-money or
bills of credit if they were not funded; and just so it is with respect to all
unfunded debts of every description. The debt exists and the certificate, etc.
is evidence of it, but it does not secure its payment.

It has been relied on, Sir, as a conclusive and unanswerable argument against
the defendant, "That the Act of 1786 authorized the doing of but three things.

"1st. The receiving the certificates of the United States upon loan.

"2d. The issuing of State certificates in lieu of, or exchange for them; and,

"3d. The payment of the New-Loan debt, or the sums mentioned in the State
securities.

"And that as the first and second of these things had been done, there was
nothing for the Act of 1789 to operate upon, but the destruction of the
New-Loan debt, and therefore that its destruction must have been intended."

Whether this reasoning is ingenious or not, is not worth an enquiry, since if
it is not valid, it cannot affect the defendant, and his counsel have no
objection to yielding the palm of ingenuity to their learned friends but
adversaries.

That it is not solid, and I wish to prove nothing else, will I think appear
from the following observations -- However true it may be, that the Act of 1786
directed but three things; yet it is equally true, that it directed and secured
the last of them to be done in a way which it had no right to do, and
therefore, the Act of 1789 with great propriety repealed so much of the Act of
1786 as directed or secured payment; since that direction and that security,
were founded on a breach of faith, and were beyond the power of Pennsylvania to
give.

Nor is it true, that in the year 1789 the Legislature had nothing to do, but
to destroy the New-Loan debt altogether, or to permit its continuance, by
suffering payment to be made in the manner, and out of the funds provided by
the Act of 1786 -- In 1789 the following questions presented themselves to the
Legislature:

1st. Shall the payments directed and secured by the Act of 1786, our of a fund
which did not belong to Pennsylvania to be continued, out of that fund? And the
answer was; no.

2d. Shall such payments cease for the present, inasmuch as they can no longer
be made out of that fund, which by her voluntary Act she is now deprived of?
and the answer was yes.

3d. Shall so much of the debt as shall remain due in the year 1796 be now
funded and provided for? and the answer was that as Congress have the power and
the means of payment, there can be no doubt of their compliance, and therefore,
that Pennsylvania, deprived as she is, of the revenues arising from imposts, on
imports and exports, will stop payment at present, and consider in future the
propriety of its revival, or finally; Shall the debt be cancelled and destroyed?

This last; this bold and desperae; this scandalous and perfiduous; this
unconstitutional and impious measure, the Legislature of 1789, did not dare,
nor was it so currupt as to adopt -- but it adopted a measure not only free
from perfidy and impiety, but in strict conformity with its federal duties; --
that of withdrawing the stolen funds provided for payment, and it carefully
avoided the commission of a new breach of faith, by cancelling the assumption,
at the very moment of attoning for a former one, by restoring the pilfered
property.

Had the Legislature of 1789 contemplated the imputed nefarious design, its
language would have been plain and explicit, and the abolition of the New-Loan
debt, would (in case of a non re-exchange) have been declared in terms clear
and unequivocal; unless indeed we are to suppose the Legislature of 1789, to
have been no less corrupt than one branch of the present Legislature, seems to
suppose the Legislature of 1786 to have been -- but of this hereafter.

In order to prove, that a total destruction of the New-Loan debt was intended
by the Act of 1789, and that this was within the power of the Legislature, it
has been warmly urged, that the Act of 1786 was originally intended to be, of
but short duration; and to give color to this doctrine, the words "temporary
relief," which appear in the Act of 1789 have, without being understood, been
perverted to answer this purpose. The gentlemen tell us that these words
furnish a Legislative construction in their favor, and that this being the
case, the honorable Senate have nothing to do but to abide by that
construction; a construction say they, which shows that Pennsylvnnia meant to
reserve the right of abolishing the New-Loan debt at pleasure, and of demanding
the new certificates in exchange for the old ones.

I am sorry, Mr. Speaker, to have occasion for observing, that white the
Representatives of Pennsylvania, affect so much anxiety for her rights, as to
give daily attendance here, they are so careless of her honor, as to remain
unmoved, while that honor is so deeply wounded by their honorable managers and
learned counsel! Do these words appear in the law of 1786? They do not. Is not
the construction of a law to be sought for in the law itself? It certainly is.
Would not this kind of reasoning authorize the passing of "an ex post facto
law, of law impairing the obligation of contracts on every occasion? It
certainly would, by declaring the former one, to have been intended but as a
temporary one! Does the law of 1786 contain a single word which can possibly
lead to such a construction? It does not. Does every certificate issued under
that law, contain an absolute and unconditional promise for payment, at all
events? and does that law expressly direct that they shall contain such a
promise? These things cannot be denied. Are not all such certificates
transferrable and made payable to bearer? They are, If Pennsylvania meant to
reserve the rights contended for under the benign auspices of the House of
Representatives, was it honorable? was it candid? was it fair? or to make use
of more proper language; if she had such covert views, was it not fraud;
perfidy; baseness in the extreme! to direct the issuing of certificates, which
on the face of them contained an absolute and unconditional promise for
payment? Let those who countenance such a construction answer these questons!
But the words "temporary relief," used in the Act of 1789 only relate, as has
already been shown, to the temporary payment of interest, and the temporary
discharge of the principal and interest at the Land-office. This temporary
relief only, was to cease; no other temporary relief was afforded; and
therefore nothing can be more clear, than that every thing beyond this
temporary relief was to continue.

But the gentlemen tell us "That the Act of 1786 was but a substitute for the
Act of 1785, and as one was temporary so was the other." -- This kind of logic
may perhaps do very well in the House of Representatives, when Mr. Nicholson is
the object, but it will not go down here -- If it should prevail it will prove
that no subsequent law can be of longer duration than a preceding one! It will
prove that the law of 1785, being a substitute for that of September 1783,
could be of no longer continnuance! It will prove, that the law of Sept, 1783,
being a substitute for that of March 1783, could be of no longer continuance!
and of course that the law of 1786 only granted one years interest! The truth
is, Mr. Speaker, that all new laws on the same subject, are intended to make
different provision, of some kind or other from the former ones, and it
generally happens, that the first law is limited to a short period, but that
after experience has manifested its utility, the limitation is taken off, and
it is, with the necessary alterations, made perpetual. On this principle we
find that when Pennsylvania meant to afford temporary relief only; she said so;
but that when she meant that her law should be perpetual, she did not think
proper to limit it, as she had formerly done.

The same kind of logic, Sir, makes its appearance again, and we are next told,
"That as the public creditors had no more merit in the year 1786, than they had
in the year 1785, there could be no reason for granting them greater relief in
the last year, than in the former one, and that it may be therefore fairly
concluded, that it was not intended." -- To this it may be answered, that they
had no more merit in the year 1786 than they had in the year 1783, and that
therefore this argument, if it proves any thing at all, proves that the law of
1786 was only intended to make provision for one year's interest! If all
Legislatures, at all times, thought precisely alike, on the same subject; and
if the situation of the country, the finances of the State, and all other
circumstances, were at all times the same, this argument might claim some
attention; but as this is not the case, it would be but a waste of time to
enter upon its serious refutation.

The truth is, that Pennsylvania only contemplated the payment of so much of
the debt of the United States, as was due to her own citizens, but her finances
did not admit of it; she therefore at first afforded temporary relief, and in
the year 1786 made an absolute engagement; and that absolute engagement
remained, although from the circumstances already mentioned, the holders of the
certificates were deprived of the temporary relief provided for them.

(Here Mr. Lewis read several passages in the minutes of the Assembly of the
24th of December, 1784, page 97-8-9-100-1, in order to prove that Pennsylvania
at that early period, contemplated the assumption of the debt due to her own
citizens; and then proceeded as follows) --

We have also been told, Sir, that the Act of December 1780, making up the
depreciation, did not require the old certificates to be given up, as the Act
of 1786 did, and that therefore it was intended in 1786, that the old
certificates should be delivered to the State, to be held until she might think
proper to demand a re-exchange; but to this the answer is easy and must
satisfactory; that the Act of December 1780 did not assume the debt, but only
provided for making up the depreciation, and of course, the certificates ought
to remain in the hands of the holders, and could with no propriety be asked for
by the State.

Only one argument more, Mr. Speaker, connected with the present question,
remains to be answered, and a most extraordinary one it is.

In February 1793, when the game had been started, and the House of
Representatives were in full chase, they, if the manager's construction be
right, provided themselves with an instrument of destruction, and a dreadful
one it will be, unless we can disarm them of it. At that time they passed a
law, proving as the managers say, that the New-Loan debt was abolished by the
Act of 1789, and no longer existed as a debt due from Pennsylvania. This was
long after all the transactions had taken place on which the impeachment is
found, it was after they had commenced their enquiries and the charges; it was
at a time when they were maturing them for his conviction; and this act of his
accusers is now brought forward as a Legislative construction in order to
insure his conviction! Had such an Act been passed by any other set of men than
his accusers, and if such was their intention, it might have been imputed to
the wantonness of power merely; but when it is considered that Mr. Nicholson
could not know that such a law would pass; that it is sufficient for a man to
square his actions according to the existing law; that this Act was passed by
his accusers themselves; after the accusation had commenced, and is now relied
on by them, in order to ensure his conviction, the English language affords not
a name for such a proceeding.

The Roman history is a history of the tyranny of tyrants; of the despotism of
despots; but it is some apology for them, that they were unacquainted with
liberty, and that slavery appeared in a form less haggard from being familiar
to than from the cradle. But in Pennsylvania law is a rule prescribed,
commanding what is right, and prohibiting what is wrong; not only prescribed
but promulgated made known. Catigula wrote his laws in small characters, and
hung them on high pillars to ensnare his people, yet with trouble a knowledge
of them might be obtained; not so with respect to an ex post facto law,
interpreting that to be a crime, which at the time of the commission was
innocent -- against such weapons, prudence is no security; circumspection no
safeguard; innocence no shield -- The placing such a weapon therefore in the
hands of the honorable managers and learned council, if intended for the
purpose for which it has been used, can only be equalled by these champions of
justice and of law, voting one of the articles of impeachment, upon being told
of what a person had said when not under oath! When doubts arose upon the
construction of the Roman laws, the case was stated to the emperor for his
opinion, and his answers or rescripts had in succeeding cases, the force of
laws -- This, says Doctor Blackstone, was certainly a bad method. To
interrogate, (says he) the Legislature to decide particular disputes, is not
only endless but affords great room for partiality and oppression.

It was abolished by the Emperor Macrinus, but according to our opponents
doctrine we now see it revived in Pennslyvania, even in a criminal case; after
the accusation; and by the accusers!

If, Mr. Speaker, my principles are hitherto sound, it will I think follow as a
necessary consequence, "That the New-Loan certificates were subscribable to the
loan of the United States, and of course were redeemable at the Treasury of
Pennsylvania."

It is stated, I think, by one of the Managers, that the Act of Congress of the
8th of May, 1792, is but a continuation of that of the 4th of August, 1790, so
far as relates to the present question, and that the construction of both must
be the same -- That of the 4th of August 1790, enacts that "The sums which
shall be subscribed to the loan, shall be payable in the principal and interest
of the certificates, or notes, which prior to 1st of January last, were issued
by the respective states, as acknowledgments or evidences of debts by them
respectively owing, (except certain ones of the state of North Carolina) with a
proviso, that none such should be received, but such as had been issued for
compensations and expenditures toward the prosecution of the late war." --
What were the New-Loan certificates? Surely they were issued by Pennsylvania as
evidences or acknowledgements of debts.

But, say the gentlemen, however true this may be, yet that they were not
issued for compensations and expenditures toward the prosecution of the late
war, but in lieu of other certificates.

What argument can be more fallacious than this? were they not issued for
payment of such compensations in lieu of other certificates, on which payment
could not be obtained? and do they not therefore come within both the letter
and the spirit of the Act of Congress? The debts of the description already
mentioned, were due from the United States; they were unable to pay them, and
Pennsylvania said to her citizens; give us your certificates, that we may be
reimbursed, and we will give you new ones for the payment of your
compensations, and expenditures during the late war. -- This was only a change
of the security and of the person who was to pay; but the debt was the same; it
was due to the same persons, and from the same cause, and the only alteration
which took place was, that payment was to be made by Pennsylvania, instead of
the United States. Does this alter the nature of the debt, or the cause from
which it arose? surely not. Does one person becoming security for the debt of
another, change the rise or origin of that debt? No man of common sense, will
in the moments of serious reflection advance so wild a position.

If proofs in support of this reasoning are required, they are furnished by,

1st. The implied admission of the House of Representatives, and it is
therefore reasonable to conclude, that we are beholden to the ingenuity of
their ingenious managers, or perhaps still more ingenious counsel, for this
ingenious objection.

2d. The opinion of the Secretary of the Treasury, expressed in his circular
letter to the Commissioners of Loans throughout the U. S. (See p. 272-3) in the
most clear, pointed and unequivocal terms, in our favor on this subject, --
Great as that illustrious character is, I do not quote his opinion as any
evidence of the law; but as it appears that Mr. Nicholson knew of this letter,
and as criminality of intention, is essential to the commission of a crime, it
is certainly material to consider, that he knew that he was acting conformably
to the opinion of the distinguished head of an important department; who in
addition to his great law abilities, seems to embrace a large portion of the
circle of science, at a single glance, and as it were by intuition to
penetrate, develope, comprehend, and to be able in a moment to elucidate every
minute part of each of them. -- If however opinion is to be resorted to; I ask
of what weight can the opinion of the whole House of Representatives be, when
weighed against that of Colonel Hamilton? Alexander the coppersmith, if
compared with Alexander the great, would not form so striking a contrast.

And 3dly. Congress by their law of the 4th of August 1790, expressed
themselves in such clear and pointed language in this particular, as must
entirely obviate the objection and force conviction, even on the minds of
infidels -- In declaring what debts should be subscribable, they by the 13th
sect. of that law enacted, that "The sums which should be subscribed to the
said loan, should be payable in the principal and interest of the certificates
or notes, which prior to the 1st day of January last, were issued by the
respective states as acknowledgments or evidences of debts by them respectively
owing, for compensations and expenditures, for services or supplies toward the
prosecution of the late war, and the defense of the United States;" with an
exception as to certain ones, issued by the state of North Carolina; but, (17th
and 18th sect.) as certain states had respectively issued their own
certificates, in exchange for those of the United States, whereby it might
happen that interest might be twice payable on the same sums; it was further
enacted, that the payment of interest, whether to states or to individuals, in
respect to the debt of any state, by which such exchange should have been made,
should be suspended, until it should appear to the satisfaction of the
Secretary of the Treasury that certificates issued for that purpose by such
state had been re-exchanged or redeemed; or until those which should not have
been re-exchanged or redeemed should be surrendered to the United States."

Could language be more explicit than this? Were these certificates not issued
as acknowledgments or evidences of debt? Were they not issued, in lieu of
others, for such compensations and expenditures as are here mentioned? Or if
not; are they not such as were specially provided for by the 17th and 18th
sections of the law just read? And yet say the gentlemen, they were not
subscribable, even independent of the repealing Act of 1789! But why not
subscribable? Why say our opponents, because the 17th and 18th sections were
inserted lest a very few of the New-Loan certificates, might be subscribed by
mistake. -- But is any such reason assigned, or can any thing like it be
discovered in either of these sections? Surely not; but on the contrary, the
reason, the letter and the spirit of the law are general, and there is nothing
but ingenuity to restrain it, to a very few cases happening by mistake.

But it is objected, that none were subscribable but such as were recognized
and acknowledged by the state, and it is added, that these were rejected by the
law of 1789, and could not therefore be subscribable, even though that Act were
void.

To this I answer; that in no part of the Act of Congress, do we find, that to
render a state debt subscribable to the loan of the United States; it must be
recognized and acknowledged by the state. The words are, "Shall be payable in
certificates, issued by the respective states, as acknowledgments and evidences
of debts by them owing" -- These certificates were issued by the state of
Pennsylvania, as acknowledgments and evidences of debts by her owing, and if
these debts still continue, they are acknowledgments and evidences thereof, and
of course are subscribable, whether she now chooses to recognize and acknowledge
them or not. Can a debtor, by refusing to recognize and acknowledge a debt,
alter the nature of that debt, or lessen his obligation to pay it? Let us, Mr.
Speaker, examine this doctrine a little further -- The gentlemen say, that
these debts were not subscribable, even though the law of 1789 were void;
because the passing of it, showed, that it was not the will of the state to
recognize and acknowledge them -- The law of the state is the will of that
State. and nothing short of that law, can manifest that will. The law is the
only organ by which the state can express her will, and she cannot do it in any
other way -- she can recognize nothing; she can acknowledge nothing, but by her
law -- By the law of 1786 she recognized; she acknowledged the New-Loan debt,
and her will being manifested upon that occasion, cannot be withdrawn, nor can
her recognition or acknowledgment cease, unless she had power to repeal, and
actually did repeal the assumption of the New Loan debt -- yet we are told that
the Act of 1789 even if null and void, and not the law of the State, manifested
the will of the State! -- It has been added, Sir, "That the late House of
impeachment, by voting, that the law of 1789 rendered the New-Loan certificates
no longer a debt, or evidence of a debt due from Pennsylvania, showed that
Pennsylvania did not acknowledge the debt, and that therefore it not
subscribable:" If, Sir, that House (but a single branch of the Legislature)
passed that vote, with the intention, that this use should be made of it, the
guilty Members ought to have stood, where Mr. Nicholson now does, and received
at least as heavy a punishment as can be demanded upon him -- I freely aquit
them however of any such intention, while I must express my astonishment, at
the attempt which has been made!

But we are told that "The Governor and the other officers of government do not
recognize the debt, and therefore the debt was not subscribable." -- What
strange doctrine, Sir, have I now to encounter! What right has the Governor, or
any officer of government, to recognize or to reject any thing, but what is
recognized or rejected by the law? -- If by a solemn existing law, the debt is
recognized, can that be prevented by the Governor's will? -- Suppose his will,
and the will of the state, expressed by her law, to be different, which must
prevail? If the doctrine contended for is true, the defendant should have been
impeached, for acting, not against law, but against the opinion or will of the
Governor -- or perhaps, against the opinion or will of the Attorney General,
which in questions of law, directs the opinion or will of the Governor, and who
is now of counsel against Mr. Nicholson!

Let us next, Sir, examine the opinion of the late Attorney General of the U.
S. since it has been given in evidence, and relied on by the prosecutors. (See
p. 81-2.)

Without taking the objection, as I certainly might, that in point of law, this
opinion is not legal evidence, I shall wave the objection; since it will
presently appear, that the opinion is so harmless, as to be of no consequence
either way -- The public discussion of the propriety of an opinion, of a
brother practitioner, is an unpleasing task, but when it is given in evidence,
in order to show what the law is, it becomes as fair an object of free
examination, as the opinion of a Judge when under examination upon a writ of
error.

The late Attorney General was "of opinion that the New-Loan certificates were
abolished by the Acts of the 27th March, 1789, and the 20 th of March, and 1st
of April, 1790," but as no Act of any kind was passed on the 20 th of March,
1790, except one for the sale of the barracks at Lancaster, and another for
reducing the tax upon writs, it is fair to conclude, that this opinion was
given, without much enquiry, and upon but very little consideration. This
supposition is rendered more than probable, when we consider, that in the
course of the trial, it has been often stated and never denied, that the same
gentleman afterward gave and I presume on more mature reflection) an opinion
on the same point, on the other side of the question! The last opinion, though
often called for, does not appear. -- We have traced it to the hands of the
committee of impeachments, and as it is stated without contradiction to be in
favor of Mr. Nicholson, it may not perhaps have been thought worth preserving.

In the opinion which does appear, he begins with saying -- "What may be the
result of a contest between the holders of those certificates, and the state of
Pennsylvania, I presume not to determine -- But that between the United States,
and that State I have no difficulty in deciding," and he concludes by saying --
"I am of opinion, that the Acts of the 27th March, 1789, and of the 30th of
March, and 1st of April 1790, abolished these certificates as debts of the
state, except for the purpose of being re-exchanged for Continental
certificates, and therefore that the former, as wanting the due recognition
from that State, cannot be legally received upon loan."

It is not easy to comprehend, and it is still more difficult to reconcile the
various parts of this opinion -- Mr. Randolph seems not to have been able to
establish the premises either way, but to have been very capable of drawing his
conclusion, with great clearness. If a conclusion without premises, is to be
regarded, the weight of his authority is against us, but if premises are
essential to a conclusion, it will be found that his opinion can be of no
weight at all.

I have said, Sir, that Mr. Randolph drew his conclusion without determining on
the premises, and that this was the case will sufficiently appear from the
following remarks -- "What may be the result," says he, "of a contest, between
the holders of those certificates, and the state of Pennsylvania, I presume not
to determine," and I undertake to prove that without first determining this, or
at least forming an opinion of the law on the subject, it was impossible for
him to give an opinion on the question submitted to him, or to draw any
conclusion whatever. The question of law was precisely the same, between the
then holders of the certificates, and the state of Pennsylvania, as it would
be, between the United States, (should they become the holders) and
Pennsylvania -- The certificates were transferrable and payable to bearer; if
therefore they were valid in the hands of the then holders, they would be
equally so, when in the possession of the United States; but if they were not
valid in the hands of the then holders, neither could they be so, in the
possession of the United States. Mr. Randolph however finds the question so
difficult, as between the then holders, and the state of Pennsylvania, that he
cannot, or will not presume to determine it, but he is nevertheless clear in
his opinion in favor of Pennsylvania, on the question between her and the
United States, should they become the holders or bearers of the certificates.
Nothing can I think more fully expose the impropriety of this opinion than the
case which I am about to put.

In Pennsylvania a bond is transferrable by assignment; these certificates were
transferrable by delivery. Suppose I have a bond from my debtor, who refuses
payment on the ground of its having been already discharged -- This he alleges
to be the case; as Pennsylvania does with respect to the certificates under
consideration, and I deny it, as is done by the certificate-holders. -- If I am
right, I have a legal claim upon him; and so have the holders of certificates
if they are right, upon the state; but if I am wrong, I have no such legal
claim; in like manner if the holders of the certificates are wrong, they have
no such legal claim -- If I assign the bond, my assignee has as good a claim as
I had, and in like manner, if the holders of the certificates transfer them to
the United States, the United States cannot be in a worse situation than the
holders were -- There are many cases in the law, where the assignee or indorsee
is in a better situation than the original payee was, but there is no case in
which that situation can be worse: yet Mr. Randolph determines against the
transferree, though he cannot undertake to say, what the law may be between the
original parties!

Again, Sir; he is of "opinion, that the Acts already mentioned, abolished the
certificates as debts of the State, except for the purpose of being
re-exchanged," and yet he will not presume to determine the question! How can
he be of opinion that they are abolished, if he can give no opinion between the
holders and the State! Since the question of abolition, altogether depends on a
right opinion being formed as between the holders and the State!

In short, Sir, the different parts of this opinion are entirely at variance,
and the learned gentleman who gave it, appears to have had "no difficulty in
deciding" while he "could not presume to determine!"

It concludes by saying, "and therefore the former, to wit, the New-Loan
certificates, as wanting the due recognition from the State, cannot be legally
received upon loan!" -- What is meant by these words, "as wanting the due
recognition from the State" I cannot possibly say, since the gentleman who made
use of them, "will not presume to give an opinion on the existing law of the
State, as between her and the holders of the certificates -- She cannot, as
already observed, recognize them in any other way than by law, and without
forming an opinion on the law, it is to me inconceivable how an opinion can be
formed, that they want her due recognition -- If the former parts of the
opinion were at variance, this seems to be altogether incomprehensible!

Had the Secretary of the Treasury been vested with unlimited discretionary
powers, to admit of, or reject such subscriptions as might be offered, and had
this opinion been intended to direct a prudent exercise of such powers, it
might perhaps have been less exceptionable -- But no discretion was left to
him; the law of Congress was express and mandatory upon him, to admit of the
subscription of all such debts as were within its meaning.

Caution in doubtful cases was necessary, and the takof legal advice was
prudent, but if he erred, and under any advice whatever, refused subscriptions,
which the law authorized, he would have been compelled by a mendamus from the
Supreme Court of the United States, to admit of such subscriptions.

Nor had the State of Pennsylvania, as has been pretended, any thing to do with
the New-Loan certificates being subscribed or not; any more than a person, who
subscribes a note, or executes a bond, has the right of ordering, or preventing
an assignment.

Wherever the security is by law transferable, it belongs to the holder of it,
and to him only, if he can find a purchaser, to say, whether he will part with
it or not -- If the supposed debtor means to contest payment, he may do it
after the transfer, as well as before, and in most cases on the same
principles. The subscribing of the the New-Loan debt, to the loan of the United
States rested entirely with them, and the holders of the certificates -- If the
debt was not due by Pennsylvania, such subscription could not affect her; if it
was due, she could not prevent the subscription, and of course the reason
assigned for the New-Loan debt not being subscribable to the loan of the United
States, because it wanted the due recognition of the State of Pennsylvania, is
altogether unfounded. I therefore think, that the opinion of the late
Attorney General, may with great propriety, be thrown into the old ^ard-room of
the Senate, as mere useless lumber!

I shall take no notice Sir of the Act of the 1st of April, 1790, because, though
relied on by the late Attorney General, as one of the Acts which abolished the
New-Loan debt, I do not see how it can possibly affect the question in the
smallest degree. What he has said respecting that Act, as well as a supposed
one of the 30th of March, 1790, sufficiently shows however, that he did not
think, the New-Loan debt was abolished by the Act of 1789. His words are "I am
of opinion that the Acts of the Pennsylvania Assembly of the 27th March, 1789,
and of the 30th March, and 1st of April, 1790, abolished these certificates as
debts of the state, etc." -- This surely amounts to a declaration that they
were not abolished, as has been contended by the Act of 1789, only; for if they
were abolished by that Act, they could not possibly be abolished by the three
Acts taken together, nor could either of the two last operate in the smallest
degree toward abolishing a thing which had been abolished before -- It follows
then, that unless two last Acts operate in some degree toward abolishing the
certificates, they are not, on Mr. Randolph's construction of the Act of 1789,
abolished at this day; but as the only Acts which were passed on the 30th of
March, 1790 related to the sale of the barracks and reducing the tax upon
writs, they could have no effect in the way contended. The Act of the 1st of
April, 1790 is altogether silent on the subject, and no man who reads the whole
of it, can fix on any part, which tends in the smallest degree, to abolish
either the certificates or the debt. If then it is true, as admitted by Mr.
Randolph, that the Act of 1789 did not of itself the debt, and if neither that
of the 30th of March, nor of the 1st of April, 1790, came in aid of it, Mr.
Randolph's opinion should, on his own principles, have been, that the
certificates were not abolished.

It has in the next place been alleged, that "The New-Loan certificates, even
though not abolished, were not subscribable to the loan of the United States,"
because, say the gentlemen, "They did not bear interest" but unfortunately for
them, they are no less mistaken here, than in any of their former points: The
certificates and the law under which they were issued declare, that they shall
bear an interest of six per cent. and although the law of 1789 prevented the
holders from receiving the interest for the present, yet if it did not abolish
the debt, the interest ran on, until means of payment should be provided -- a
debt does not the less bear interest, because whether owing to its not being
payable till a future day, or to the inability of the defendant, or any other
cause, the creditor cannot procure payment for the present, and is obliged to
wait for both principal and interest, until some future day. These certificates
bore interest, and the interest as well as the principal would form a sett-off
between the United States, and the state of Pennsylvania.

It has also been said Sir, that no part of the New-Loan debt was subscribed
under the first Act of Congress, and as the last Act is, in this particular,
but a continuation of the former one, it has been concluded, that the debt is
not subscribable under either. To this I answer, that under the first Act, it
was not the interest of any man to subscribe the New-Loan debt, because at that
time, means of redeeming it at the Treasury of Pennsylvania were not provided,
and that therefore no one was so silly as to do an act from which he could
derive no benefit; but that such means of redemption were afterward provided,
and therefore such subscriptions took place, when they were found to be
beneficial. The conclusion, that the New-Loan debt, was not subscribable under
the last Act of Congress, because no part of it was subscribed under the first
Act, is certainly then without foundation.

The honorable Senate have now Mr. Speaker, heard my reasons for thinking that
"THE NEW-LOAN DEBT WAS SUBSCRIBABLE TO THE LOAN OF THE UNITED STATES," and I
proceed to prove, what seems to me to be a necessary consequence; -- namely,

That "IT WAS OF COURSE REDEEMABLE AT THE TREASURY OF PENNSYLVANIA.

Before turning to the particular law of Pennsylvania, on which this question
depends, it may not be amiss to obviate some objections, which have been made
on ge-

The first of them is; "That Pennsylvania at the time of passing the law in
April 1792, for the redem^neral grounds, and which may as properly be
considered here as after reading the Act. (...) ^tion of her debts at the
Treasury, only wished to free herself from her embarrassments, by providing for
the discharge of such debts as were funded, and by the existing law could be
demanded from her; but that as the New-Loan debt, admitting its existance, was
not funded, and could not by the existing law be demanded from her, she was not
embarrassed by it, and of course did not mean to provide for its redemption."

If, Sir, I could pay Pennsylvania so poor a compliment as to suppose, that in
April 1792, when her situation was flourishing, and her means were great; she
was mindful of her own embarrassments only, and careless of all others; when
those others had been occasioned by her non-fulfilment of her assumption, I
might perhaps admit the propriety of this reasoning; but as I do not believe
this to have been the case, it must meet with my hearty opposition -- on the
same very honorable principles, and from the same very honorable motives, she
might at once have got rid of all her embarrassments, by unfunding all her
debts! Why do business by halves, if she was not restrained by principles of
virtue and morality? Why at this time, when from the proposed loan of the
United States, and change of circumstances, she was enabled to perform, what
she had solemnly assumed to do, and that too, without the smallest injustice to
herself, or any thing more than justice to her creditors, are we to suppose her
capable, of the low and grovelling ideas! the higgling, chafering and peddling
conduct imputed to her, by her honorable guardians! -- If she owed these debts,
she was bound by her plighted faith; by every principle of virtue and morality
to discharge them, at the very moment when she could do it with safety to
herself, and when she was enabled thereto by her circumstances -- That moment
had arrived, and when the means were in her power, I believe it to be an
unmerited reflection, to suppose that she had not the will.

I have said, Sir, that "Pennsylvania might redeem these debts, without the
smallest injustice to herself, or any thing more than justice to her
creditors;" and she herself shall testify to the truth of this doctrine -- The
United States had done much for their creditors, but such were their
arrangements, with respect to the sit per cent. the three per cent. and the
deferred stock, that they had not, at least in the opinion of Pennsylvania,
done ample justice. -- Pennsylvania therefore by an Act of the 9th of April,
1791, after reciting; "That Congress had by their Act of the 4th of August,
1790. proposed a certain loan; that a compliance with it would greatly benefit
this commonwealth, promote the plan of the general government, and facilitate
the settlement and liquidation of the accounts depending between Pennsylvania
and the United States; and that in order to induce the creditors of this state
to subscribe to the said loan, and at the same time, to preserve the faith and
honor of the commonwealth, by indemnifying them for the injury which they might
sustain in consequence of such subscription, IT SHOULD BE ENACTED AND IT
THEREBY WAS ENACTED, that "Every creditor of this State, who should subscribe
to the said loan certificate whereon interest should be by law payable
annually, at the treasury of Pennsylvania, should, besides the said
certificate, which such creditor was thereupon entitled to have and receive
from the United States, in pursuance of the said recited Act, be entitled to
have and receive from the commonwealth, certificates purporting that the state
stands pledge from the first of January next, to pay six per cent. interest
annually, on that part of the subscribed debt, which is termed the deferred
debt, until the United States should make provision for the payment of the said
interest, and also that the state stands further pledged to pay an additional
interest of three per cent. annually, from the 1st of January next, on that
part of the subscribed debt, which bears an interest of three per cent. which
said three per cent. should continue to be paid half yearly, unless the said
United States should at any time thereafter increase the rate of interest of
the said three per cent. stock; in which case the interest to be paid by the
state should be proportionably reduced; and six per cent. interest, on that
part, termed the deferred debt, should be continued to be paid, half yearly,
until the United States should provide for the payment of the interest on the
said deferred debt." -- I think nothing can be more evident, than the will of
Pennsylvania, manifested by this law, that full justice should be done to her
creditors, by making up the deficiency, unprovided for by the United States;
and that she deemed it unjust for any of them, to be left without the right of
participating in some shape or other, of the like advantages which this Act
afforded -- Those of them who subscribed the New-Loan certificates, to the loan
of the United States, had this justice and no more. The supposition therefore,
that Pennsylvania did not mean to afford them the right of redemption at her
Treasury, carries with it a high charge of partiality and injustice with
respect to her own citizens. If admitted, it would in fact amount to a
declaration on her part, that although the pretensions and the rights of her
creditors were alike, she meant to administer justice to them by different
weights, and unequal measures; and that while she amply provided for a part of
them, she intended, that those who subscribed to the second loan, under her own
invitation should sustain a heavy loss.

But exclaim the gentlemen; -- were these subscribers to have the enormous sum
of twenty shillings in the pound! No Sir; they were not to have the enormous
sum of twenty shillings in the pound; -- They were only to have the just and
reasonable sum of twenty shillings in the pound; and that that sum was just and
reasonable, but not enormous, appears,

1st, From that sum being originally and incontestably due, and so acknowledged
by Pennsylvania by her Act which has just been read; and

2d. From her making up by that Act, to a part of her creditors, the same
measure of justice which we now claim for another part of them; all of whose
merits are admitted to be the same.

Hence it follows, that on principles of equal justice, there is every reason
to conclude, that Pennsylvania really intended by her Act of April, 1792, to
render the New-Loan debts, subscribed to the loan of the United States,
redeemable at her Treasury.

But the gentlemen exclaim again; -- "Is it possible to suppose, that
Pennsylvania really intended, by her Act of April, 1792, to put herself
entirely within the power of the United States, by providing for the redemption
of every species of pretended debt, which they might think proper to assume! --
I answer, that nothing can be more certain, than that she did not; and I freely
admit, that if the New-Loan debt was not a real, but only a pretended one, I
should be so far from contending that it it was redeemable, that I should have
taken no trouble to prove its existence, or that it was subscribable.

We are again told Sir, that the objects of redemption are enumerated in the 2d
section of the Act of Pennsylvania of the 10th of April, 1792; and that, at the
New-Loan debt is not among them, it is not within the provisions of that Act,
nor redeemable.

If the premises were admitted to be true, the conclusion might perhaps be
incontrovertable, but if they are false, it is certainly unwarranted. An
examination of them is therefore necessary.

To me it appears, that THAT section of the Act of April, 1792, does not
enumerate all the objects of redemption. -- I admit that it enumerates all the
objects of immediate redemption from the particular funds specially provided by
the early part of that Act; and I think that I may safely make this admission,
without weakening, or detracting from my opinion, that the same Act makes
eventual provision for cases not enumerated in the 2d section: -- At the time
of that Act being passed, the first loan of the United States was closed, and
it could not possibly be known whether it would or would not be opened again --
eventual provision might therefore be very proper, but, immediate and certain
provision for the redemption of the New-Loan debt, must have been very improper
at that time.

Pennsylvania then knew that she had certain debts to provide for at all
events, and these she enumerated in the 2d section and took care to make
special and particular provision for; -- but she also knew, that she owed
certain other debts, which she deemed it proper to provide for the payment of,
or not, as the United States should, or should not open or extend the loan --
If they should not, she did not think proper to provide for their redemption,
but if they should, she deemed it proper, and I think that, if we carefully
attend to the 2d and 6th sections, it will appear that the first was intended
to make certain and immediate provision for the discharge of certain debts; the
latter to make eventual provision for certain others, if the loan of the United
States should be again opened -- That the 2d section does not enumerate all the
objects of redemption at all events, is I think evident both from its letter
and spirit.

After providing, in part, an aggregate fund for the immediate discharge of the
enumerated debts, we find the preamble to the 2d section, to be worded as
follows -- "And in order to provide effectually for the redemption of CERTAIN
public debts herein after specified, upon just and reasonable terms, "BE IT
ENACTED," etc. -- The law then proceeds to increase the funds and to direct the
order in which certain debts shall be discharged -- Now, Sir, what is the
meaning of these words, "In order to provide for the redemption of CERTAIN
public debts?" Certainly not that all of them were to be provided for by the
section, which is introduced by these words, and the expression clearly shows,
that Pennsylvania acknowledge other ones, besides the CERTAIN ones referred to
in the preamble, and enumerated in the enacting clause. Had not this been the
case, the expression would have been, In order to provide for the redemption of
THE public debts, instead of providing for certain of them -- The expression;
THE public debts, would have been the same with that of all of them, but the
words CERTAIN of them have certainly a more confined meaning, and the using of
this language, shows, that she recognized and acknowledged other ones besides
those enumerated in this section -- But it is not pretended that she owed any
other debts than the enumerated ones, except the New-Loan debt, and the debt
due on the unfunded depreciation certificates. If then the expression used in
this law, shows that Pennsylvania acknowledged other debts, than the enumerated
ones, it also shows, that she acknowledged the New-Loan and unfunded
Depreciation-Debts, to which, and to which only, they clearly implied, and
strongly marked exception could relate. The truth is, that all the debts
enumerated in the 2d section, were originally contracted by, and were due from
herself -- she therefore by the first and second section provided a fund for
their immediate discharge, and by the 2d section, she directs the order in
which they shall be discharged out of it; and this necessarily lead to their
enumeration -- But as she did not intend that the New-Loan and unfunded
depreciation debts, should be paid out of this fund, she could with no
propriety enumerate them, as coming within this provision, for immediate
redemption. -- These debts she considered as not being originally and properly
speaking her own debts, but the debts of the United States, and she therefore
thought proper to let them rest as they were, until the United States should
extend or again open their loan, and that their redemption at the Treasury of
Pennsylvania, should depend on this event taking place or not. This will
clearly appear from the 6th section of the same law -- "Be it enacted," says
that section, "That if Congress shall on or before the first of July next,
renew and again open the subscription to the loan heretofore proposed to the
State creditors, or shall in any other manner or upon any other terms, provide
for the assumption of the non-subscribed debts, owing to such State creditors,
the holders of any certificates, subscribable to the subscriptio^ so renewed,
or entitled to the benefit of such other provision, shall be entitled to
receive the nominal value of the said certificates, from the state Treasurer,
upon this condition that they shall and do subsribe to the loan so renewed, or
acquiesce in the terms of such other provision, and shall on or before the said
first of July next, transfer to the state Treasurer, for the use of
commonwealth, every certificate which they shall receive from the United States
in consequence of such subscription, or all the interests and benefits to be
derived from such other provision, together with the proper evidences thereof."
-- Congress did within the time here mentioned again open their loan, and
therefore this section which was at first but conditional, now became absolute.
If Pennsylvania did not acknowledge other debts, besides these enumerated and
provided for by the 1st and 2d sections; what use was there in inserting this
clause? none at all. -- Its insertion however clearly shows, that Pennsylvania
did acknowledge other debts, besides the certain first enumerated ones, and
that she intended to provide for their redemption, if the loan of the United
States should be again opened -- But she owed no others, except the New-Loan
and unfunded depreciation debts, and therefore, she could not by this clause
recognize or mean to provide for the redemption of any others but these.

It has been warmly contended, that "The second section is equally extensive
with the sixth, and that the latter does not embrace a single object which is
not included in the former." Can any thing more clearly show, the futility of
this objection, than by considering that* if it was true, there could be no
occasion for the sixth section; nor can it possibly have any object in view;
and by considering further, that the second section, makes immediate and
certain provision, for the cases therein mentioned, and that the sixth section
only makes distant and conditional provision, for the cases mentioned in it.
Can therefore the cases be the same?

Again; -- The words "certain debts," cannot by any just construction, extend
to all debts; but the words

"The holder or holders of any certificate or certificates," is the same with
every, or all, without an exception of a single one; and that they were so
understood by the Legislature of April 1792, is clearly deducible, from their
adding the sixth section; which could not be necessary unless my construction
is right. -- In answer to this it is true, Mr. Gallatin is brought forward to
prove, that the sixth section was intended as a proviso to the second, and to
restrain, but not to extend it -- He seems fond of appearing in the double
capacity of counsel and witness, but I think that neither his evidence nor his
arguments, have answered the purpose for which he was called. -- If the sixth
section was intended as a proviso to the second, it would have formed a part of
it, or at least been attached to it, instead of being placed where it is -- He
tells us indeed that this was the case originally, but that before the passing
of the bill into a law, the alteration took place -- This may perhaps have been
so, but if it was, it only proves that an alteration of intention also took
place, and that it was finally concluded that instead of its being a proviso to
the second section, it should be a separate, distinct, enacting clause. What
Mr. Gallatin meant or intended, or indeed what one branch of the Legislature
meant or intended, is immaterial at present -- The law must speak for itself,
and if this were not the case, we might have as many clashing constructions, as
there are branches of the Legislature. -- We have heard much; Sit, of
Legislative constructions, but it has been reserved to Mr. Gallatin, to fix a
construction on this law, by proving what one branch of the Legislature, or
rather what he himself intended! If this be admissible, we must look, not into
the statute book to know what the meaning of the law is, but must endeavor to
penetrate into the hidden recesses of Mr. Gallatin's mind, and there grovel for
it in the dark!

The business of a proviso, Sir, is to restrain and limit, that which has gone
before, but there is not a single feature of this kind, in any part of the
sixth section. It is not the business, Sir, of a proviso, to enlarge and
extend, but the sixth section is a new, independent clause, enlarging,
extending and making further provision, without a single condition, or
restriction, on any thing which had been before enacted -- If intended as a
proviso, upon the second section; and if intended to relate to the objects
contained in it, and to no others, proper terms of reference would have been
made use of, to connect them together, and to show the dependence of one upon
the other -- The language of the sixth section would not have been that the
"Holders of any certificates" shall, etc. but it would have been the holders of
the said certificates; or of the aforesaid certificates; or the certificates
herein before mentioned, or some expression of the like import and meaning,
would have been made use of, so as to confine the provisions of the sixth
section, to the cases mentioned in the second.

Nor is it possible, Sir, for that to be a proviso, which is more extensive
than the enacting clause.

Also that the sixth section has never been considered as a proviso upon the 2d
section, nor confined to the cases mentioned in it, is clear from what I am now
about to say -- It is admitted that the unfunded depreciation certificates, are
not included in the second section, and that that section makes no provision
for their redemption at the Treasury of Pennsylvania, and yet it is in proof,
that it has been the constant practice, for them to be so redeemed under the
sixth section.

Among others who have understood the law as I do, and whose old unfunded
depreciation certificates, were redeemed in this way, were Mr. Rittenhouse: The
late Mr. Powell, Speaker of the Senate, at the time when the redemption law of
April, 1792, was passed; and Judge Addison and Judge Yeates, who were very
competent to the true interpretation of the law; -- The Register-General
certified the payment to be due; the Governor drew his warrants for payment,
and payments were actually made by the State Treasurer -- Why then is
criminality imputed to the Comptroller General and to him only? and why do not
these mighty avengers of the law, direct its sword against all these other
officers of government!

They perhaps have not the misfortune to have fallen under the displeasure of
the House of Representatives!

But further Sir; it is in evidence, that Mr. Gallatin himself, in a
conversation with Mr. Donnaldson expressed his opinion, in clear and pointed
terms, that the old unfunded depreciation certificates, were, under the 6th
section, redeemable at the Treasury of Pennsylvania. -- He therefore, at least
at that time, thought the 6th section was more extensive than the 2d; that the
one was not a proviso on the other; and that other cases than those mentioned
in the 2d section were intended to be provided for by the 6th.

But say the gentlemen, is it possible to suppose, that the State meant to
sacrifice her three per cent. stock, in order to redeem the New-Loan debt,
which was properly the debt of the United States?

Whether such a supposition is possible or not, I do not think worth
considering, since we have made no such supposition, nor is it at all necessary
to our construction -- The 2d section directs the sale of the three per cent.
stock, for the redemption of the debts enumerated in that section, and we
admit, that the New-Loan debt is not enumerated in it, nor entitled to
redemption out of the fund which it provides.

We have been told Sir, by the learned counsel, "That if the 6th section is not
to be taken as a proviso to the 2d one, or if it is interpreted to extend to a
single new object, it must extend to all the debts, due from all the states in
the Union, to their own citizens! and that agreeably to our construction,
Pennsylvania has provided for their redemption at her own Treasury!"

This is to be sure a fine flight in the regions of fancy and imagination, and
supposing it to have been so intended. I shall rest satisfied with gazing with
admiration and wonder at the pleasing phantom!

I have done with this point Mr. Speaker, and shall proceed to the

Second position; -- Namely, THAT THERE WAS AN APPROPRIATION MADE BY LAW, FOR
THE REDEMPTION OF THE NEW-LOAN CERTIFICATES, AT THE TREASURY OF PENNSYLVANIA.

The Constitution of Pennsylvania provides, that "NO MONEY SHALL BE DRAWN FROM
THE TREASURY, BUT IN CONSEQUENCE OF APPROPRIATIONS MADE BY LAW." and one of the
articles charges, that the defendant "with a view to his own emolument, did
under color of his office, certify to the Governor, that certain debts,
including the said certificates, but not naming or describing the same, were
redeemable and payable when, no fund was by law provided for paying the same."
-- This charge is certainly a pretty high one, but if it shall appear, as I
trust it will, to be without foundation, it must fall.

The Act of March the 1st, 1786, created the New-Loan debt and funded it as to
part.

The Act of the 27th of March, 1789, unfunded it altogether.

An Act of the 7th of April, 1791, for "appropriating certain funds and
revenues for the support of government, and the payment of the public debts,"
after making certain specific appropriations, provides by the 12th
appropriation, that the residue of the aggregate fund therein mentioned, shall
be applied "to pay all warrants thereafter to to be drawn for claims and
improvements, by virtue of any law or laws of this commonwealth."

And the 6th section of the Act of the 10th of April 1792, provides that "The
holder or holders of any certificate or certificates, subscribable to the loan
of the United States, if it should be again opened, shall be entitled to have
and receive the nominal value of the said certificate or certificates, from the
State-Treasurer, upon subscribing to the said loan, and transfering to the
State-Treasurer, for the use of the commonwealth, the certificates which they
should receive from the United States, in consequence of such subscription."

The certificates certified to the Governor by Mr. Nicholson in the manner
already mentioned, were the New-Loan certificates; they had been subscribed to
the loan of the United States; such transfer as is in this Act mentioned had
been made, and if I have proved, that they were subscribable to the loan of the
United States, and redeemable at the Treasury of Pennsylvania, I think hardly
any thing can be more clear than that, "an appropriation was made by law for
that purpose."

It has been objected, Sir, "That Mr. Nicholson certified these debts to be
payable out of the funds provided by the Act of the 10th of April, 1792; that
he ha^ been guilty of prevarication: has been shifting his ground; flying
backwards and forwards; uncertain what to fix upon, so as to save himself; that
he began with the Act of 1792, and finding that source to fail him, he was
reduced to the necessity of employing ingenious counsel, more ingenious than
himself, to find funds, which he never thought of; that he concludes with
saying, that an appropriation was made by the law of April, 1791;" and our
opponents conclude with saying, "That even if an appropriation was made by this
Act, Mr. Nicholson is nevertheless guilty," because say^ they "he neither knew
or dreamed of an appropriation having been made for this purpose, by the Act of
April, 1791, at the time of his certifying to the Governor."

The first answer which I shall give to these assertions is, that no one of
them is true; and the next; that if Mr. Nicholson's counsel are more ingenious
than he is; yet that he himself is in this particular, more solid than the
adverse counsel are.

The 12th appropriation of the Act of April, 1791, is for "The payment of all
warrants thereafter to be drawn for claims and improvements, by virtue of any
law or laws of this commonwealth," and the Act of April, 1792, declares that
the holders of certificates, who should subscribe to the loan of the United
States, and make a transfer to Pennsylvania, should be entitled to payment at
the Treasury of Pennsylvania, The Act of April, 1791 therefore contained an
appropriation for all claims against the commonwealth, and the Act of April,
1792 directed payment to be made -- It was therefore by the Act of April, 1792,
that payment was to be made, out of an appropriation made by the Act of April,
1791. -- Payment could not be made by the Act of 1791, because the Act of 1789
had prevented payment, and therefore, until the Act of 1792 directed payment to
be made at the Treasury of Pennsylvania, payment could, ^ot be made at all --
Mr. Nicholson in all his certificates to the Governor certified "payable per
Act of April, 1792," (Here Mr. Lewis called for the warrant book and showed
that Mr. Nicholson had certified in the manner which he now stated) and I shall
^^t I hope to be called upon to prove, that if the debt was "payable per Act of
1792," it was payable by the Act of 1792, though that payment was to be made
out of funds provided by an appropriation contained in the Act of April, 1791
-- Th^s ground was originally taken by Mr. Nicholson, as ^^proved by every
certificate which has been produc^^ from this ground he has never departed, nor
has he varied in the smallest degree -- Instead of his ingenious counsel
finding out this ground for him, he pointed it out to them, and had the House
of Representatives; the managers or the opposite counsel, understood the
subject as well as Mr. Nicholson did, all these severe observations might have
been spared. -- There is not a single word in a single instance, of all the
cases certified to the Governor by Mr. Nicholson, which has the smallest
semblance to what has been imputed to him, nor which warrants in the smallest
degree, any one of the assertions on which I at present animadvert.

That the New-Loan debt was payable by the Act of April 1792, and not by the
Act of April 1791, will clearly appear when we consider, that after the passing
of the first, and until the passing of the last, it was not payable at all. It
was a claim against the commonwealth it is true, but as payment of that claim
had been stopped by a former law, it could not take place, until it was
directed by a subsequent law. This was directed by the Act of April 1792, and
not before, and of course it was by this Act and by no other that it was
payable.

Here, Sir, it is material to recollect, that in every instance of the old
Unfunded Depreciation certificates, Mr. Nicholson certified to the Governor in
the same words as he has done with respect to the New-Loan debt; that the
Register-General joined with him in certifying in like manner; that warrants
were thereupon issued by the Governor, and payments were made by the Treasurer,
to able law judges, without any person supposing it to be wrong, until the
discovery was made by the House of Representatives. The question as to an
appropriation having been made by law, or not, was precisely the same in both
cases, and what was right in one of them, cannot be wrong in the other.

But we are told "That the Act of the 26th of March 1789, set apart only L.
10,000 annually for claims and improvements, and as that sum was too small to
satisfy the New-Loan debt, the fund could not be intended for that purpose."
This I admit to be true, and I have no objection to furnishing our opponents
with a much stronger reason in support of their argument. That law was passed
the very day next preceding the passing of the law which stopped payment of the
New-Loan debt, and while the bill for that purpose was before the House, so
that payment could hot have been then intended out of any funds.

This does not however operate against us, since insufficient to this purpose,
the annual sum of L. 10,000 may have been in March 1789, when all the New-Loan
certificates were in circulation, the residue of the aggregate fund set apart
for claims and improvements by the Act of April 1791, was abundantly more than
sufficient. At this time there were but few of the New-Loan certificates in
circulation, and the sum set apart by the 12th appropriation for claims and
improvements, was so great, as, among many other things, to furnish the whole
of the State subscription to the Pennsylvania bank.

It is further objected, "That the law of April 1791, did not contemplate the
payment of the New-Loan debt, since in none of the enumerated appropriations is
that debt mentioned." This may perhaps be true, since I can hardly suppose,
that the Legislature of 1791, could contemplate providing for the payment of a
debt, which was not at that time payable at all, nor until more than one year
after, and this sufficiently accounts for there being no special appropriation
for that purpose. There is not however a shadow of pretense for the objection,
since the clause specially appropriates all the residue of the aggregate fund
"To pay all warrants hereafter to be drawn for claims and improvements by
virtue of any law or laws of this commonwealth" -- This surely supercedes the
necessity of a special appropriation upon every occasion, for claims then due
and payable, but not otherwise provided for, or which should be made due and
payable by subsequent laws. The Constitution does not require a special
appropriation on every particular occasion, mentioning the object and the fund
at the same time: or if it does, the whole of the 12th appropriation is
unconstitutional, inasmuch as it mentions no particular object to be provided
for, but creates a fund for the payment of all warrants issued under any law
for claims and improvements -- In 1791 Pennsylvania owed certain debts, and the
Legislature provided for their payment, and enumerated certain funds for that
purpose; but she also owed many others, of various descriptions, and she knew
that she would, under her future laws, be liable for their payments -- She
therefore by the 12th appropriation, provided a fund "To pay all warrants to be
drawn for claims and improvements by virtue of any law or laws." What the then
existing claims were, she did not think it necessary to determine; what claims
might be due under any future law or laws, she left to the consideration of
future Legislatures, but she provided and appropriated a fund for the discharge
of all such claims as were then payable or should be made so; "By virtue of any
law or laws of this commonwealth. -- By a law of March, 1786, the New-Loan debt
was created; by a law of the 10th of April, 1792, it was made payable, and of
course it was payable out of a fund provided "to pay all warrants drawn for
claims by virtue of any law of this commonwealth." -- Unless therefore the Act
of the 10th of April, 1792, is not a law of this commonwealth; the law of the
7th of April, 1791, provides and appropriates a fund, for whatever is payable
under that of April, 1792. -- The constitution only requires, that there should
be an appropriation; but there may be one appropriation, for ten thousand
purposes; -- as well for the future, as the present, and it may be left to
future Legislatures to say, what debts shall be contracted or made payable, but
when they are contracted and made payable, it will be from this previous
appropriation, without an additional one being made. If any thing need be added
on this subject, permit me to remark, that if a sufficient appropriation has
not been made in the manner already contended for, I am at a loss for language
which can be more clear or expressive of an appropriation, than that to which I
have endeavored to draw the attention of the honorable Senate. -- A fund,
says the law of April, 1791, "To pay all warrants hereafter to be drawn for
claims or improvements by virtue of any law or laws of this commonwealth!" By
virtue of a law of the 10th of April, 1792, the claims of the holders of the
New-Loan certificates were, as we say, entitled to be paid -- could I suppose,
Sir, that any Legislature after April, 1791, had thought that the Legislature
of that time, had made use of language not sufficiently expressive of an
appropriation, and to have wished to make use of language more clear, pointed
and expressive than this; "To pay all warrants hereafter to be drawn for claims
and improvements, by virtue of any law or laws of this commonwealth;" -- I ask
what expression more clear; -- what terms more perspicuous; what language more
strong and expressive of an appropriation could possibly have been used! -- If
our language affords them, I have no conception of it, nor can I perceive how
an appropriation could by any subsequent law have been made, if it was not
already done.

I have admitted, Sir, that the Legislature of April, 1791, may not have
contemplated the New-Loan debt, but if this proves any thing, it proves what
has not, and I am sure will not be contended; -- namely, that nothing made
payable by any law, subsequent to that time, and not then in the contemplation
of the Legislature, was payable out of the 12th appropriation: The question is
not, whether it was in the contemplation of the Legislature of April, 1791; but
of the Legislature of April, 1792. What adds considerable weight to the idea
that the Legislature of April, 1791, intended the 12th appropriation as a fund
for the payment of all the un-enumerated debts of the commonwealth, whether
funded or not, so soon as the latter should be by law made payable, is a report
of the committee of ways and means, on the 8th of February, 1791, adopted by
the very House which passed the law of April, 1791. In that report I find these
expressions; -- "They have taken into their serious consideration, the
situation of this commonwealth, with respect to the various engagements for
which the faith of the government stands pledged, and the resources to satisfy
the same. They conceive that at this period, it is peculiarly incumbent upon
the Legislature of Pennsylvania, by reforming what has hitherto been erroneous,
in her policy, and by introducing what may hitherto have been wanting in her
measures, to restore and to establish upon a pure and permanent basis, public
credit, as a foundation of political prosperity! -- "That the present
embarrassments of the finances of the commonwealth, chiefly crose from her
large unfunded debt; the whole amount whereof is an actual demand against the
Treasury; whilst her internal resources can only supply it by slow degrees. A
question therefore arose in their deliberations, whether the State ought to
submit to the inconveniences and mortifications of an emberrassed Treasury, and
depreciated name, or resort to her general credit, and the security claims
which she possesses against the Union for the necessary relief from her
difficulties. The necessity of restoring public credit; the justice due to the
creditors of the State, and a full conviction of the disgrace in which a free
nation involves herself, that either directly or indirectly forfeits her
engagements, were considerations too obvious and too forcible to permit your
committee to hesitate in their decision." "The large amount of public
securities of the United States, which are the property of the State, obliged
your committee to take into consideration, the terms of the loan proposed by
Congress to the domestic creditors, in the Act, "entitled an Act making
provision for the debt of the United States." And although, in their opinion
those terms are not commensurate with the just claims of those creditors, yet,
unwilling to embarrass the measures of the Federal Legislature, they recommend
an acquiescence to the terms offered by Congress in the Act aforesaid. Upon
these grounds, therefore, the committee beg leave to offer the following
resolutions to the Legislature, for their consideration and approbation, with
this prefatory remark, that considering the great inconveniences which have
hitherto accrued in consequence of the special appropriations of spec^fic
funds, which have been from time to time, diverted to other purposes, they have
thought it proper, for the present year, to form all the revenues of the State
into one aggregate fund, charged with the payment of all the public debts and
engagements.

This report, Sir, having been adopted by the Legislature, is not only
indicative of its sentiments, but is expressed in its own words and language.
-- I read it for several purposes. The shameful imputation has been made
against Pennsylvania, that she only meant to free herself from her
embarrassments; and as she was not embarrassed by her unfunded debt, she did
not mean to provide a fund or make an appropriation for its discharge. -- If
the answers already given to this objection, are not sufficient, I hope that
they are afforded by this report -- It was adopted in February 1791 by the some
Legislature, which in April 1791, created and set apart the fund out of which
we say the New-Loan debt is, under the law of April 1792, payable, and it is
therefore worthy of peculiar attention. In it we find nothing in support of the
assertion, that Pennsylvania only intended to free herself from her
embarrassments, by providing for the discharge of her funded debts -- on the
contrary we find her saying, that "The embarrassments of her finances, chiefly
arose from her large unfunded debt, the whole amount whereof was an actual
demand against the Treasury." What was this large unfunded debt? Nothing that I
know of, except the New-Loan Debt, and the debt due upon the old Unfunded
Depreciation certificates. Is not this therefore a full acknowledgment of the
New-Loan debt? But how it may be asked could she be embarrassed by it? In
promptu est responsio; and that answer is, that as interest was accumulating
and pay-day must come, she felt herself as much embarrassed by the prospect of
future evils as by the existence of present ones.

Again, Sir; -- she felt an embarrassment from her faith being prostrated and
her honor tainted, and from this embarrassment she wished to be freed. That I
may avoid repetition I will not again read any part of the report, nor be
guilty of useless quotations from it, but shall rest satisfied with asking, if
its great; nay, its principal object does not appear to be, to restore public
faith, by making either immediate or eventual provision for the discharge of
the unfunded debt? If this question is answered in the affirmative, how futile
must the objection be, that she only wished to free herself from her
embarrassments by providing for the funded ones! That she did not make
immediate and certain provision for its payment is true, because she did not
know whether the loan of the United States, on which that provision was to
depend, would or would not be again opened. But she nevertheless provided a
fund and made an appropriation for the payment, if it should be opened, and the
Act of April 1792 fixed the payment upon that fund and appropriation, upon the
terms and conditions contained in the last mentioned Act.

The adoption of this report proves,

1st. An acknowledgment of the existence of the New-Loan debt.

2d. The obligation and the will of Pennsylvania to discharge it, if a future
Legislature should so direct under a loan of the United States; and,

3d. That the 12th appropriation of the Act of April 1791 was intended to
answer all claims against the commonwealth, not particularly provided for,
which were or should be by law payable. I say to answer all claims, except as I
have already excepted, for in the report are these remarkable words -- "To form
all the revenues of the State into one aggregate fund, charged with all the
public debts and engagements." This report was as has been already observed,
adopted by the same House, which very soon after, passed the law of April 1791,
and if it is not clearly expressive of the will of that House, that the 12th
appropriation should be for the discharge of "all the public debts and
engagements of the commonwealth," I am really at a loss to know in what words
that will could be expressed!!!

But, Sir, the most important part of this report remains to be mentioned -- It
offered, for the adoption of the House, a resolution which was adopted by the
House in the following words, to wit: That the residue of the aggregate fund
should be appropriated to the payment and discharge of "THE ARREARAGES OF
INTEREST NOW DUE ON THE NEW-LOAN CERTIFICATES."

This resolution was passed before the transactions took place which are
imputed to Mr. Nicholson as criminal.

It was passed by the same House, which passed the law of April 179^, making
the 12th appropriation, out of which we say the New-Loan debt was by the law of
April 1792 made payable.

It shows that that House was so far from being of the opinion, that the
New-Loan debt had been abolished by the Act of March 1789, that it not only
acknowledged its existence, but thought that the interest due upon it, should
be paid independent of the loan of the United States.

It shows that the 12th appropriation was intended for this purpose, and
although the law passed soon after by the same House, left the same
appropriation to satisfy all claims which future Legislatures should make
payable.

After all this, can it be necessary to say any thing more to prove, that when
by the Act of April 1792, the New-Loan debt was made payable, the Act of April
1791 contained an appropriation for that purpose?

Yes! say the gentlemen; for that the words "To satisfy all claims" are not
descriptive of the New-Loan certificates, since they formed no claim against
the commonwealth; but were only receipts for the return of the certificates at
the pleasure of the commonwealth." With what dexterity do the gentlemen shift
their ground? In order to get rid of one difficulty, they warmly contended,
that the New-Loan certificates did not create a debt, but only a claim against
the State. Lord Coke was our authority that the word claim includes debts and
is of more extensive meaning than the word debt. They now abandon their former
ground, and say that the New-Loan certificates were only in nature of receipts
for the old Continental ones, but that they did not amount to a claim against
the State. They are driven to this subterfuge, by our showing, that the residue
of the 12th appropriation is for the payment of all un-enumerated claims
against the commonwealth; and they can find no way of getting rid of this
difficulty, but by contending, that that which they had before said was a claim
against the commonwealth, is not a claim against the commonwealth!

It may therefore I think be fairly concluded, that there is not a shadow of
ground for this charge, of a violation of the Constitution; and that if the
House of Representatives had understood the law but half as well as Mr.
Nicholson did, they would hardly have committed themselves by making it. If
they were impeached for this part of their conduct, there is perhaps one ground
on which they might be acquitted. -- I will proceed, Sir, to my

Third and last position; namely -- THAT NO CRIMINAL OFFENSE IS SUFFICIENTLY
CHARGED AND PROVED AGAINST MR. NICHOLSON.

I say charged and proved, because neither is material if the other is
insufficient, and they must both come home to the defendant in his official
conduct, or the prosecution must fail. The evidence must support what is
sufficiently charged, and it will not be sufficient for it to support any other
matter. I need not take much trouble to prove, that there is no ground for the
impeachment, unless an offense has been committed by Mr. Nicholson in his
official capacity. "The Governor," says the Constitution, "and all other civil
officers under this commonwealth, shall be liable to impeachment for any
misdemeanor in office."

This surely excludes all ideas of an impeachment, for what was done in any
other capacity. If this is attended to, many of the charges must vanish, and
unless his certificates are stated and proved to have been given under color
of his office, and of matters relating to his official duty he must be
acquitted.

The first article charges that the defendant "Did under color of his office
recognize certify and declare, the said certificates, commonly called New-Loan
certificates, to be subscribable, as debts due and owing by the State of
Pennsylvania," to the loan of the United States.

Did under color of his office. It is surely not sufficient to state that he
did it under color of his office, without also stating, that it belonged to
his office to certify one way or the other, or at least showing it, by some
public law, of which the Senate can take notice. But the truth is, the
certifying in the manner he did, had no connection whatever with the duties of
his office and it will presently appear, that neither he nor any body else,
ever supposed that it had -- It is not stated to have been any part of his
official duties to certify at all, and unless the managers can show that it was
connected with his official duties, ^he Senate must, without resorting to
evidence, know that the prosecution is without foundation.

Was there any law of Pennsylvania which imposed this upon him as a duty? It
will not be pretended. Was there any law of the United States which required it
of him? No such laws can be shown, and if there could, and he had abused his
trust, he would be ameanable in a tribunal of the United States; but not in the
tribunal of Pennsylvania,

If this is the case say the gentlemen, here is a bold and daring usurpation of
power, and of course the defendant is doubly guilty! It seems to be their
determination I think, that whether he is guilty or not, he shall if possible
be convicted, but it is rather too much to expect that he is to be convicted
without a charge. If he is guilty of usurping power, why is he not impeached
for it? or if this discovery was neither known nor thought of before, why do
not his honorable accusers retire to their own room and vote an additional
article against him? -- They might do it in a few minutes on the information of
some one of the managers, and without wasting time in swearing the witnesses,
or even in examining them -- would not this be better than to condemn a man
without a previous accusation. It is better that there should be an accusation,
though made in the most irregular manner, than a condemnation without a charge.

But if I admit for a moment that the defendant had certified in the manner
alleged against him, that the New-Loan certificates were subscribable to the
loan of the United States, what has Pennsylvania to do with this or how could
she be thereby injured? we are told that they were not redeemable at the
Treasury of Pennsylvania. If this is the case, and if the United States
trusting, which it is in proof that they did not, to Mr. Nicholson's
certificate, admitted of subscriptions not by law admissible, the United States
might be injured though Pennsylvania could not -- The prosecutors must
therefore admit of the redeemability, or give up this charge -- If the
certificates were redeemable they must of course have been subscribable,
because no certificates were redeemable that were not subscribable. I believe
the accusers will find some difficulty in extricating themselves from this
dilemma.

The crime imputed to the defendant by this article is, that of recognizing,
certifying and declaring the said certificates to be redeemable -- To
recognize, is to acknowledge, but what offense is it against law, for a man to
acknowledge any thing? But suppose it to be an offense, for Mr. Nicholson to
recognize, certify and declare this to some proper officer, yet to constitute
the offense, the impeachment must state this to have been done to that officer;
but it is not charged that he did it to any body, and of course no criminal
charge is made against him by the first article -- But if there is, yet there
is no evidence in support of it -- The committee of impeachments knew, or might
have known, that Mr. Nicholson did not certify in his official capacity; --
they also knew, or they might have known, that he did not certify to any
officer whatever, that the said certificates were subscribable -- If they did
know these things, it is really too bad, to charge it to have been done under
color of his office; and if they did not know these things, they were guilty
of a culpable neglect of duty, when the means of information were at hand by
enquiring of Mr. Smith.

These, Sir, are not objections to mere form, but they go to the very essence
of the first article. If they are solid, that article is insufficient, and no
weight of evidence could authorize a conviction; -- or if it could, it will be
found, that the evidence brought to support it, cannot possibly affect the
defendant.

It appears in evidence, to be an uniform practice with Mr. Nicholson, to
authenticate his official acts, by subscribing his name at length, where he
transacted business with any other officers. It appears that in all the cases
which this article states to have been done by him, under color of his office,
he did no more than write on the back of the New-Loan certificates, these words
"Genuine and assumable," with the initial letters of his name subscribed, and
without adding the words "Comptroller-General's office." This sufficiently
shows, that he did not consider these acts as being official, and it will next
appear, that no body else considered them so.

But why, it is asked, did Mr. Nicholson certify at all, if it was not in his
official capacity, and intended as an authentic document in the proper offices,
to show that the New-Loan certificates were subscribable to the loan of the
United States? The gentlemen who have asked the question, have heard the
evidence of young Mr. Smith, and cannot I am sure be at any loss for the proper
answer. This young gentleman is the son of the late Commissioner of Loans, and
his evidence is so clear and satisfactory, that if all prejudices, either in
favor of or against Mr. Nicholson, are laid aside, as I trust they are, it
will appear, that the evidence adduced, if any there is, against Mr. Nicholson
under this charge, is no less insufficient, than the charge itself. He swears,
that "it was thought for the benefit and safety of individuals, that, they
should first apply to Mr. Nicholson for their certificates, lest they might be
locked up until the end of the loan in 1793, when the Secretary of the Treasury
was to decide, and if any should be rejected, as not being subscribable, the
holders might have lain out of the interest in the mean time; and for this
reason if they brought their certificates to the Commissioner, without being
first shown to Mr. Nicholson, they were sent to him for examination, although
his certification was of no consequence to the Commissioner; the receipts given
by him for the certificates being purposely so worded, as that the vouchers in
the State offices might be examined at the end of the loan, and that from them
he might learn whether the certificates were genuine and assumable or not;" --
but he expressly declares, "That his father took no notice of Mr. Nicholson 's
certification, as to what respected himself." -- We have here, Sir, a full and
complete statement of this "certifying, recognizing and declaring" by Mr.
Nicholson, "under color of his office, and to promote and procure his own
emolument," and I now ask, if ever a charge was more groundless! an imputation
more scandalous! If the honorable accusers voted this article of impeachment
without enquiring into its truth or falsity, their criminality is not less than
that which they are pleased to impute to Mr. Nicholson! And if they voted it
after enquiring, and knowing that it was not true, they have sinned in a still
greater degree. In the one case, ignorance is no excuse; in the other,
knowledge aggravates the crime. What can be more clear than that the
Commissioner of Loans, neither wished for any information from Mr. Nicholson
nor relied upon that which he gave to the certificate holders? What can be more
clear than that it was reserved for the Secretary of the Treasury to determine,
at the close of the loan, in the year 1793, whether the certificates were
subscribable or not; and this too, not from Mr. Nicholson's certification, but
from authentic documents in the proper offices? and that the Commissioner of
Loans purposely gave his receipts accordingly? What can be more clear, than
that the Commissioner of Loans sent the certificate holders to Mr. Nicholson
for no other purpose, than that he, being an experienced and well informed
person, should examine their certificates, left at the close of the loan in the
year 1793 they might sustain a loss by lying out of the interest in the mean
time, if the certificates should then be rejected? Nothing, I apprehend; and
yet for these manifold, but disinterested acts of kindness and benificence,
flowing from a heart of benevolence, and a disposition to oblige, Mr. Nicholson
is impeached for a high crime and misdemeanor! On the same principles might the
charitable man, whose good deeds are recorded in holy writ, be impeached for
helping the claud! directing the blind! comforting the widow! cherishing the
fatherless! or relieving the beggar at his door! The motives of Mr. Nicholson
appear to have been equally free from sordid views or private gain.

I have not approved of his politics, Sir, but his well known kindness and
benevolence of disposition are virtues which command my respect, and I cannot
but feel for the degraded honor of Pennsylvania, when I find these amiable
virtues converted into a crime! If this has arisen from a disregard or culpable
neglect of duty, by an omission of proper enquiry, it merits severe
animadversion; -- if from the more ignoble cause of answering party purposes,
that animadversion should be limited by no restraint.

If Sir, the evidence of young Mr. Smith stood in need of support, which will
not be alleged, it is afforded by the form of receipts constantly given by his
late father, the former commissioner of loans -- "RECEIVED FOR EXAMINATION."
What form of words could have been used to show more clearly than these do,
that Mr. Nicholson's certificate was not considered as an official act or
regarded as such by Mr. Smith? surely none.

Again; That the Secretary of the Treasury, who at the close of the loan, was
finally to decide on the subscribability of all certificates that might be
offered, had no idea of taking the least notice of Mr. Nicholson's little
memorandum, given for the satisfaction of individuals, appears from his letter
of the 8th of June, 1791, to the Commissioner of loans. (See page 273) In it he
says, "It will not be proper that you commit the examination, and checking of
the certificates of the assumed debt, to any person, who does not actually
belong to your office. It cannot be deemed a legal execution of your duty, to
rely upon any person not duly authorized. You will receive these certificates,
and give on the delivery of them to you, and before comparison with the checks,
a descriptive receipt for them, which will amount to no more than an
acknowledgment that such certificates are placed in your hands, with a view to
the loan. The subscribers will be sensible, that the receipt cannot be deemed
final, because the subscriptions may exceed the assumption, and the
certificates may prove counterfeit or forged," After hearing this, will any man
suppose that the Secretary of the Treasury, was so little mindful of the trust
reposed in him, as to commit it to others, or to have a single thought about
Mr. Nicholson's memorandum? After hearing the evidence of young Mr. Smith, will
any man suppose, that his father did not act in exact conformity with those
directions; or that the Comptroller General, ever imagined, that he was doing
any more than obliging individuals in his private capacity? and not under
color of office and with a view to his own emolument, endeavoring to defraud
the public? That he did not act with a view to his own emolument, will if
possible, appear still more clearly when we consider

1st. That he did not in a single instance of his own, certify at all; -- and

2d. That he certified in like manner under the first loan, when no body
subscribed the New-Loan certificates, because it was not their interest so to
do.

Hence I conclude that the first article contains no criminal charge, and if it
did, yet that it is not supported by a shadow of evidence.

But, Mr. Speaker, I have strong grounds of defense against this article, still
to bring forward, and which would be abundantly sufficient to ensure an
acquittal, even if the first charge were admitted to be sufficient in point of
law, and if it should be further admitted, that Mr. N. had in his official
character, certified the New-Loan certificates to be subscribable, when they
were not so.

The article under consideration charges that the defendant recognized,
certified and declared, etc. corruptly, and illegally, "as he the said John
Nicholson well knew." His accusers knew this to be essential, to the
constituting of the offense, and it has been admitted that proof of it is
equally essential.

Guilt can only flow from the corruptions of the heart, not from the errors or
mistaken opinions of the head. The former are essential to guilt; the latter
never constitute it where the intention is pure. It it incident to man to err,
and therefore the law makes allowance for the frailty of human nature. The
honorable accusers may in some things have mistaken the law, and this rule
might perhaps be very applicable in their case. The learned judges upon the
bench frequently differ in opinion -- The most upright and the most enlightened
officer of government may mistake the true construction of confused, clashing,
contradictory and ill penned laws, which in the business of his office he may
have occasion to act upon -- If however be acts honestly and uprightly -- if he
acts according to what he really believes the law to be, he at most commits an
error not a crime* Did Mr. Nicholson then really believe the New-Loan debt to
be subscribable to the loan of the United States? If he did, an acquittal must
be the consequence, whether that opinion was right or wrong. We undertake to
prove, not only that he was of this opinion at the time of his certifying, etc.
but that it was uniformly held and avowed by him from the commencement of the
first loan in September 1790, up to the close of the subscription to the second
loan in July 1792, and that it is not changed.

It has appeared in evidence, Sir, that on the 30th of April 1790 the
Commissioner of Loans wrote a letter to Mr. Nicholson, desiring to be informed
of the several kinds of State certificates then in circulation, as books were
about to be opened for the receiving of subscriptions to the loan, and also
desiring to be furnished with such checks as would enable him to do the
business with safety to the United States (see page 271.) It is evident that
Mr. Smith, made this application to Mr. Nicholson, as being the person most
capable of furnishing the necessary information, and not as a person, who in
his official capacity, was to give directions to be followed by Mr. Smith.

Mr. Smith says, "Such checks as will enable me to do that business with safety
to the United States."

And it has further appeared, that on the same day, Mr. Nicholson wrote to Mr.
Smith in answer, "Until I can give you a complete check, have enclosed herewith
a blank form of a depreciation certificate, and one of funded debt, the only
two kinds receivable by you, under the funding law of the United States granted
by this State, as it is not presumable the New-Loans will be offered, subjected
to the restrictions in that law prescribed" -- You will be able to check those
left with you more particularly hereafter."

This letter fully proves, that he had no idea of the right of checking or
determining on the assumability of the certificates himself, since he speaks in
unequivocal terms, of that being done hereafter by others, and it also proves
the opinion of Mr. Nicholson at that early period to have been, that the
New-Loan debts were so far from being abolished by the Act of 1789, as that
they were subscribable to the first loan of the United States; which differs
not in this particular from the second one -- It was not at that time the
interest of the holders of New-Loan certificates to subscribe them, since
Pennsylvania had not passed, nor was it known that she would pass the law for
making up the loss on the three per cent. and deferred stock. Mr. Nicholson
assigned this as his reason for not sending to Mr. Smith, the blank form of a
New-Loan certificate, and he also assigned this as a reason for its "not being
presumable that the New-Loans would be offered, subjected to the restrictions
in the Act of Congress prescribed." -- This shows his opinion of the existence
of the New-Loan debt notwithstanding the Act of 1789; it shows his opinion
that, the New-Loan debt, though at that time unfunded, to be of greater value
than an equal sum in six per cent. three per cent. and deferred stock would be;
and from his thinking it not presumable that the New-Loans would be offered,
subjected to the restrictions prescribed; and it is evident, that he believed
other people judged of the existence of the New-Loan debt, and of its being
subscribable, as he himself did: -- If these were his sentiments, as they
unquestionably were, he cannot, whether they were right or wrong, have
committed any offense, by acting conformably to them.

But, say the gentlemen, "This was mere pretense, a copy of his countenance
only, and intended to deceive." But why mere pretense; why a copy of his
countenance? Mr. Nicholson offered none of the New-Loans for subscription under
the first loan, and therefore his conduct accorded with his language expressed
in his letter, and this surely shows that he expressed his real sentiments --
Nor could he possibly have any motive for deception -- He could not possibly
know in September 1790 that another Legislature would in the year 1791 make up
the loss on the three per cent. and deferred stock; nor that the loan of the
United States would be extended or again opened in the year 1791; -- nor that
Pennsylvania would in the year 1792 provide for the redemption at her Treasury
of the New-Loan debt, which should at a future period be subscribed and
transferred -- And yet without his possessing the power of looking into
futurity, and having a pre-science of all these things, there is no room for
talking of a mere pretense in the year 1790, or supposing that he had any
intention to deceive!

The gentlemen finding the opinion of Mr. Nicholson, at a time when he could
have no inducement for disguising his real sentiments to be, that the New-Loan
debt was not abolished by the Act of 1789, and that it was subscribable to the
loan of the United States. -- Exclaim what have we to do with his private
opinions! If this exclamation has not received a sufficient answer already, it
is certainly afforded by the first article, which charges, that the New-Loan
debt was abolished and that it was not subscribable as he the said John
Nicholson well knew; and yet when we prove that he was so far from knowing or
believing this to be the case, that he was really of a contrary opinion they
exclaim; -- what have we to do with his opinions! If this answer will not
satisfy the managers and the learned counsel, they themselves have afforded,
one, which they cannot, without the most palpable inconsistency now controvert.
It must be fresh in the recollection of the honorable Senate, that it has been
fully admitted, that if Mr. Nicholson has acted conformably to his opinion of
the law, he cannot be guilty, even though that opinion may be wrong; -- and
yet, when we prove what his opinion really was and that he has acted in
conformity with it, the same gentlemen exclaim; -- what have be to do with his
opinions!

But "out of the defendants own mouth," says brother Dexter "shall he be
condemned," and he then produces, what he calls a condemnation, not from the
defendants mouth, but from his pen. It is contained in a report, made in
October 1790, (see page 389,) by the Comptroller General, to the General
Assembly, on the funds of the state, and the debts to be provided for* In that
report he brings into view, all the debts of the state, as well the unfunded as
the funded ones; as well those which were redeemable by the then laws, as those
which had been excluded from redemption, and of course would not be redeemable,
until they should be made so. He shows what funds were then provided, and what
further ones would be necessary to defray the expenses of government and
discharge such debts as were then redeemable at the Treasury -- In doing this,
he makes a deduction of the old unfunded depreciation certificates, because
they were not then redeemable, although they have since been made so, and also,
of the remainder of the New-Loan debt, because that also was not redeemable. He
of course did not propose providing funds for the payment of either of them;
and it would have appeared strange indeed if he had, since neither of them was
at that time payable at all. To distinguish them however and to point out such
as were then redeemable, and as it would require funds to be provided by the
Legislature, he mentioned the situation of the old depreciation certificates,
and he then mentioned the amount of the New-Loan debt remaining on hand, and
"excluded from redemption by the Act of March 1789;" and these words we are
told contain his sentence of condemnation. If they do, it is expressed in
language which looks more like a decree of acquittal. The New-Loan debt had by
the Act of 1786 been made redeemable at the Treasury and at the Land-office. By
the Act of 1789 it was no longer redeemable at either of these offices, or at
any other office, and of course was in the Comptroller-General's own words,
"excluded from redemption by the Act of March 1789." This being the case, no
provision was then necessary for the payment of that, which was not then
payable at all, and the defendant, therefore, with great propriety brought into
one view, all the debts of the State, but at the same time, with equal
propriety distinguished between their various situations.

His conduct upon this occasion therefore, instead of affording his
condemnation, affords the most convincing grounds for his acquittal, since the
bringing of the New-Loan debt into his report and ranking it among the debts of
the State, clearly shows, that he considered it as a still existing debt. If he
did not; why would he have brought it into view at all, and been so particular
as he was, in showing by calculations the amount of it, which still remained on
hand? Why should he, an any other principles than those which I have stated,
have taken any more notice of it, than of any of the former debts of the State
which had been abolished or discharged? Or if he considered this debt as
abolished, why did he not say abolished, by the Act of 1789, instead of
EXCLUDED FROM REDEMPTION by it?

The next piece of evidence to which I shall advert is, the letter of the 6th
of June 1791 (page 272) from the Secretary of the Treasury to the Commissioner
of Loans, in which, he says, "In consequence of an enquiry made of me, I think
necessary to inform you, that I consider the holders of certificates, received
from the government of any State, in lieu of certificates of the Federal debt,
as having a right to subscribe those certificates to the loan of the assumed
debt, and I consider the State, as having a right to subscribe the Continental
certificates, which, they have obtained by the exchange, to the loan proposed
by the Act of the 4th of August, 1790; but no interest is to be paid on the
assumed debt of the State, either to the State, or to individuals, until you
shall be informed that I am satisfied, that all the certificates so issued by
the State, have been re-exchanged or redeemed, or that all those, which which
shall not be re-exchanged or redeemed, have been surrendered to the U. S. --
And in order, says he, "to distinguish in a clear and striking manner, this
description of N. L. certificates, from all others, I have determined to have a
hole, of about one fifth of an inch, cut through a part, near the center." He
then directs, that when the stock represented in these certificates, should be
transferred from and to the Loan-office or the Treasury, the transfer
certificates should have this central hole, cut or punched through them in like
manner." And he concludes with saying, that "in order to full information on
this subject, I request you to transmit to me a copy, or sufficient extracts
from any laws passed by the Legislature of the state in which you reside,
relative to the exchanges of Federal certificates, for those of the state, and
to the re-exchange of those of the state for federal certificates; in doing
which, you will be careful to collect whatever there may be."

The words in the beginning of this letter, "In consequence of an enquiry made
of me," sufficiently shows, that Mr. Smith had applied to the Secretary of the
Treasury for information, respecting the subscribability of the New-Loan debt,
and it can hardly be presumed, that so industrious and well informed an
officer, as the Secretary is, in all things relating to the duties of his
office, was not at this time in possession of the Act of March 1789. That he
was in possession of it, is more than probable, from what he says in this
letter respecting the re-exchange of certificates -- An exchange of
certificates took place under the law of March 1786, but there could be no
re-exchange of them, but under the Act of March 1789. The Secretary could not
therefore have known, nor would he have talked of the re-exchange of
certificates, had he not known of a law for that purpose; but he did speak of a
re-exchange, and therefore he must have known of the law of 1789 -- But he went
further, Sir, and ventured to act upon that law, for he tells the Commissioner
of Loans that no interest was to be paid on the New-Loan certificates until he
should be satisfied, that all of them had been re-exchanged or redeemed, or
that all such as were not re-exchanged or redeemed, had been surrendered to the
United States." and as they could only be surrendered to the United States, by
being subscribed, these last words show, as clearly as he had before expressed
himself in the some letter, that HE THOUGHT THEM SUBSCRIBABLE.

But, Sir, in the latter part of this letter, he calls upon the Commissioner of
Loans, to transmit to him, a copy, or sufficient extracts, from all the laws of
the State relative to the exchange of Federal certificates for those of the
State, and to the re-exchange of those of the State, for Federal ones. This
call would hardly have been made, had he not known that there was a law for
re-exchange; which law he was probably possessed of, but as there might
possibly be further laws on the same subject, containing alterations or
amendments, he very prudently called for copies or extracts of all laws
relative thereto.

If however it should be thought, that there is not sufficient proof of his
knowing at this time, of the law of 1789, it must I think be admitted, that
before writing his next letter, he had received it from the Commissioner of
Loans -- We find him by the last letter, calling upon that officer, for all
laws on the subject; -- in order to full information thereon. The great
accuracy and unwearied attention of that officer, to whatever related to the
duties of his office, are so well known, as to forbid the idea, of his not
having shown the most prompt compliance with this call from the head of the
department.

On the 8th of the same month, the Secretary again wrote to the Commissioner as
follows; -- (page 274) "I do not consider you as justifiable, in refusing the
certificates of the State of Pennsylvania, which are in all other respects
assumable, because they have been received of the State, in lieu of Continental
certificates. It will not however be improper, to use your endeavors, to
persuade the holders to exchange them, but you cannot, if they persist to
offer, refuse to receive them." In addition to the reasons already given for
believing, that the Commissioner as early as possible furnished the laws which
had been called for, permit me to remark, that after Secretary Hamilton, had
called for all the laws, etc. "in order to full information on the subject,"
the supposition, that he decided in the very positive manner, which appears
from this letter, without having received the law, and all the necessary
information for forming a decision, is too improbable, to be admissible. That
Mr. Smith had written or sent to Col. Hamilton in answer to the first of these
letters, before the second was written, appears from a clause in the letter,
approving of Mr. Smith's proposal, of stamping the certificates, instead of
punching a hole near the center, as Col. Hamilton had proposed. If so, can it
be imagined, that the laws which had been called for, did not accompany the
message? or that, as the opinion now given, does not vary from the former one,
it was not given on the same law?

But we are told that "These letters were not directed to the defendant, and as
it is not in proof that he knew of them, they furnish him with no apology." By
the death of Mr. Smith we are deprived of his evidence, or this objection would
not have been made. -- It may nevertheless be answered.

1st. That the habits of intimacy, which prevailed between the
Comptroller General of Pennsylvania and the Commissioner of Loans of the United
States, as well as their daily intercourse in business, between Pennsylvania
and the U. S. and which in a great degree related to certificates of various
kinds, furnish strong proof of the defendant's knowledge of these letters; --
or,

2d. If they do not; yet, by proving that the defendant was not singular in his
opinion, but that many other well informed persons were of the same opinion, we
have no room for a criminal intention being imputed to him -- That this was
really the case, I shall find no difficulty in establishing.

The Secretary of the T. it is true, tells us, that he cannot now say, whether
at the time of writing these letters he did or did not know of the Act of 1789;
but as he also tells us, that he has not an accurate recollection of what
passed in the early stages of the business, his want of recollection does not
weaken the force of the observations intended to show, that he must have then
known of that Act. Or if he did not then know of it, yet if there is sufficient
reason for believing, that Mr. N. knew of these letters, without knowing that
they had been written, without a knowledge of that law, the case is not altered.

I believe, Sir, that I omitted to answer in its proper place, an objection
which has been made; "That if in June 1791, the Secretary of the Treasury did
know of the Act of 1789, yet that the question did not present itself to him,
in "a prominent point of view." -- This I can readily believe, since I can
hardly conceive, that he saw much difficulty arising from it; or if he did, how
could the defendant, or any body else know, of the degree of prominency, in
which the question had presented itself to the Secretary, but from his letters,
in which he expressed himself with great clearness and decision?

It is seriously contended, Sir, "That the defendant, in violation of his duty,
and in violation of his oath, neglected to inform Col. Hamilton of the Act of
March 1789."

If this were the case, let the defendant, for the sake of justice, be
impeached for this offense, before he is condemned! The objection however
proves one thing, and that is, that no arguments are too desperate and
groundless to be made use of, in order to affect the defendant's destruction!
Will those who make use of this argument, venture to tell us, that it was the
official duty of the Comptroller General; an officer of Pennsylvania, to inform
the Secretary of the Treasury; are officer of the United States, of the laws of
Pennsylvania! or that the defendant, had ever taken an oath to do so! -- If
not, will they have so much of the hardihood of veterans as to gravely contend,
that a man can violate a duty, which never existed; -- or an oath, which was
never ta^e^!

Although it was not incumbent on any officer of Pennsylvania, at least when
not called upon, to give any information in this particular, to any officer of
the U. S. it will ^^^^n^ly appear, that in this respect, the defend (...) it is
candid and obliging, than he had been to individuals, by examining their
New-Loan certificates, before their subscription was offered to the loan of the
United States.

It is further objected "That if the Secretary of the Treasury was once of the
opinion, that the New-Loan certificates were subscribable to the loan of the
United States, yet that he afterward altered his mind." -- I shall in the
sequel have occasion to examine into the truth of this objection, and I will
therefore only observe at present, that were this the case, it militates,
naught against the defendant, who could not possibly know, that such a change
would ever take place.

By answering these objections, I have in some measure been diverted from my
regular chain of observation, intended to show, that the defendant really
believed, and that many others, most likely to know, also believed, the
New-Loan certificates to be subscribable to the loan of the United States; and
of course, that no criminality is fairly imputable to him, even if that opinion
were wrong. This chain of argument shall now be resumed and in tracing it I
hope to prove, that Mr. Nicholson's opinion was as already mentioned, upon all
occasions heartily, openly and uniformly avowed; that it was recognized by
others, whose acquiescence or explicit approbation confirmed him in it, and
that if there has been any omission, in not giving the necessary information to
the Secretary of the Treasury, it is not imputable to the defendant, but to a
man much higher in office.

It is in evidence; that on the 27th of June, 1791, the Secretary of the
Treasury wrote to the Governor, (page 275-6) that "The United States had
directed, that the payment of interest should be suspended, in respect to the
debt of any state, which might have issued its own certificates for those of
the United States, until it should appear to the satisfaction of the Secretary
of the Treasury that certificates issued for that purpose by such (...), had
been re-exchanged or redeemed, or until (...) which should not have been
re-exchanged or redeemed, should be surrendered to the United States, and
requesting his attention to the subject;" concluding by saying, that "It would
give certainty to the operations of the Treasury, and might prevent delays
inconvenient to the public creditors, if the Governor would direct the proper
officers, to cause the state of the fact as it regarded Pennsylvania, to be
made appear to the Secretary." -- This is the first call that appears to have
been made by the Secretary of the Treasury, upon any officer of Pennsylvania,
for information respecting the state of her New-Loan certificates, and if the
Governor believed, that such of them as had not been re-exchanged were
abolished by the Act of 1789, he had nothing to do, but at once to say so, to
the Secretary of the Treasury, unless by his high office, he was exempt from an
obligation, to be acquainted with those laws which he was swore to execute. In
this letter, the Secretary of the Treasury, speaks of the New-Loan
certificates, as being evidence of a debt of Pennsylvania, which might be
surrendered to the United States, or in other words, subscribed to their loan,
and if the Governor thought the debt was abolished, he had nothing to do but to
say so. Did the Governor at all contradict this idea, so clearly expressed by
the Secretary of the Treasury? certainly not; but rather gave countenance to
it, as appears by a letter written on the 1st of July, in the same year, by Mr.
Dallas to the defendant (page 276) -- "It is written," says Mr. Dallas, "In
obedience to instructions from the Governor," -- a "Copy of the letter from the
Secretary of the Treasury was transmitted with it," and it requested, that the
defendant would "with all convenient speed, make a report upon the subject to
the Governor, accompanied with such statements as he should deem necessary, to
satisfy the enquiry of the Secretary of the Treasury, and the object of the law
to which he referred."

In this letter, Sir, there is not a single expression, which could possibly
lead the defendant, to dou^^ of the propriety of his own opinion, but on the
con^^^y, it came from the highest source, and was, with (...) from the
Secretary of the Treasury, calculated to confirm him in it -- It contained no
directions to send the law of 1789 to the Secretary of the T. or to inform him,
that by that law the New-Loan debt was abolished. On the contrary, as the
Secretary's letter admitted the New-Loan debt to be subscribable, and as that
written by Mr. Dallas in obedience to the Governor's direction, was so far from
contradicting this idea, as to desire a report, as to what part of the New-Loan
debt had not been re-exchanged, and might therefore be surrendered to the
United States, it was surely confirmatory of the defendant's opinion. What did
the defendant do in consequence of these two letters? why he on the next day
reported to the Governor, that he had "Through the Secretary of the
commonwealth, received a copy of a letter from the Secretary of the Treasury,
on the subject of certificates of state debt, issued in lieu of Continental
ones, and relative to the assumption thereof;" and the report then proceeds as
follows, "As the regulations and provisions of this state, enable such
creditors to re-possess themselves of continental certificates, received for
them by the United States, I apprehend, the case of such certificates of
Pennsylvania are fully provided for. However, if the Secretary of the Treasury
wishes to be informed of the quantity issued by Pennsylvania, and now out, of
this kind, and your excellency should choose to lay the same before him, I beg
leave to represent, that the whole quantity so issued was 5,167,695 33/99
dollars, of which 316,864 30/90 were redeemed by the state, and upwards of two
thirds of the remainder have been returned in exchange for the Continental
certificates, and that the residuary sum is diminishing daily by further
applications and exchanges." Here we find the defendant in his report made in
his official capacity to the Governor, declaring in the most explicit terms, as
he had before done, that the New-Loan debt still existed, as a debt of the
commonwealth. The Secretary of the Treasury, had endeavored to call the
attention of the Governor to the subject; admitting at the same time, that the
New-Loan debt was subscribable to the loan of the United States, and also
desiring that he "would direct the proper officers to cause the state of the
facts mentioned in his letter to be made appear to the Secretary." This the
defendant did in his official capacity, in such clear and pointed language,
that the Governor could not possibly misunderstand his meaning. At the same
time he expressed his reason for being so particular to be, least "the Governor
should choose to lay the same before the Secretary of the Treasury. Whether this
report was or was not communicated to the Secretary of the Treasury, does not I
believe appear. If it was not, the violation of duty and of oath, which has
been mentioned, is not imputable to the defendant, since he was not called upon
by the Secretary of the Treasury, and if he had, the call would have been
improper. The Secretary called upon the Governor; he called upon the
Comptroller General, and the Comptroller General immediately answered that call
in so particular a manner as to give the fullest information. This was the
proper channel in which the business ought to be conducted; the
Comptroller General when called upon by his superrior, paid obedience to that
call, and if his answer was not made known by that superior, to the Secretary
of the Treasury, upon whom ought this heavy charge to fall? If upon either,
certainly not upon the defendant. This evidence, Sir, must not only acquit the
defendant of the imputed charge of "a violation of his duty and of his oath,"
has it must do much more; -- The Secretary of the Treasury had in his letter to
the Governor, taken it for granted that the New-Loan debt still existed, and
was subscribable, to the loan of the United States, -- the Governor had
acquiesced in this opinion by not controverting it; the Comptroller General
had, in his report to the Governor openly avowed it; this avowal did not meet
with the Governor's disavowal, and as one of the managers tells us, that the
Governor is an extremely attentive and vigilant officer, the defendant had
surely reason to suppose, that he was not guilty of so extraordinary a neglect,
as not to communicate to the Secretary of the Treasury, that report which had
been called for, and which in consequence of that call, the defendant had sent
to the Governor. The defendant had therefore every reason for supposing, that
the Governor also thought, that the New Loan debt still existed and was
subscribable. If he was of that opinion, the defendant is guilty of no other
offense, than that of being of the same opinion; and if the Governor thought
otherwise, but remained silent, and without expressing any disapprobation,
either to the defendant, or to the Secretary of the Treasury, the fault should
rest with him, attentive and vigilant as he is. Be this as it may, the
Comptroller General had every reason for supposing, that his opinion was
confirmed by that of the Governor, as well as by that of the Secretary of the
Treasury, and there is surely no room to suppose, that the former was ignorant
of the law of 1789, since at the time of that law being passed, he filled an
important station in the councils of Pennsylvania. -- In observing, Si^, upon
the report of the Comptroller General, I ought to have observed, that when
speaking of the holders of New-Loan certificates, he makes use of these words,
"such creditors," and the "case of such certificates of Pennsylvania," and I do
it now that the learned and ingenious gentleman who is to follow me, may have
an opportunity of explaining to us, how it is possible, that they could be
creditors, in the opinion of the defendant, if he thought, their claims were
abolished, or the debt anihilated!

From ought that appears, matters remained, I think, in this situation, till
the 21st of December following when the Secretary of the Treasury, again wrote
to the Governor (page 102) as follows -- "It appearing to me, that the
attention of the Legislature of Pennsylvania, may be necessary to the removal
of an inconvenience, under which the subscribers of the debt of the state now
lie, I do myself the honor to make the requisite communication to your
excellency.

The 18th section of the Act, making provision for the debt of the United
States, suspends the payment of interest, in respect to the debt of any state,
which shall have issued its own certificates, in exchanged for those of the
United States, until it shall he made to appear, that the certificates issued
for that purpose by such states, have been re-exchanged or redeemed, or until
those which shall not have been re-exchanged or redeemed, shall be surrendered
to the United States.

It is understood that the measure contemplated in this section, was adopted by
Pennsylvania; that is, that a sum of state certificates, was issued in
exchanged for a^ equal sum of certificates of the federal debt, and that
although a part of those certificates has been redeemed, others to a
considerable amount have not been re-exchanged or redeemed; it will therefore
conduce, as well to the order of the finances, as to the convenience of the
public creditors, the payment of interest to whom must otherwise be suspended*
if measures can be taken by the government of Pennsylvania, to make the balance
unredeemed and unexchanged to appear, and if they should direct the surrender
of the amount of such balance in certificates of federal debt in their old
form." This letter relates to the New-Loan debt, and to nothing else. It goes
on a supposition, most clearly expressed, that that debt not only existed as a
debt against Pennsylvania, but was subscribable to the loan of the United
States, and from the whole complexion of it, nothing can be more clear, than
that the Governor had so far agreed in opinion with the Comptroller General, in
his report of July in the same year, as to have never taken any pains ^o
co^^ince the Secretary to the contrary -- I say the Governor so far agreed in
opinion; for as the Secretary had in his letter to the Governor of the 27th of
June, stated the difficulty, arising from part of the New-Loan debt, being
neither redeemed nor re-exchanged, and had at the same time informed him, that,
interest must be suspended, in respect to the debt of any state, which had
issued its own securities for Continental ones, until it should appear, that
the New-Loan certificates had been re-exchanged or redeemed or until they
should be surrendered to the United States, I cannot suppose, that the Governor
was so regardless of his duty, in a case so interesting to Pennsylvania and to
her citizens, as to have neglected the business during all this time -- and yet
we are compelled, either to admit this to be the case, or to conclude, that he
was of the same opinion with the defendant -- be this as it may, the defendant
certainly had every reason for thinking so, since he could not impute the
Governor's delay and silence to any other cause -- it appears by this letter,
that the Secretary considered the subject so interesting to Pennsylvania, as to
be worthy of the attention of the Legislature -- yet it could not (...)
interesting at all, nor worthy of the least attention, of the debt was
abolished. Had the Governor considered this to be the case, he might with
almost a single dash of his pen have told the Secretary so; and might have
added, that since this was the case, the difficulties which you suggest cannot
possibly arise, nor can the attention of the Legislature, be at all necessary
-- or if he had even doubted, he would, as in other cases, have consulted the
Attorney General, who is the proper law officer, and not the defendant on a
question of law!

Instead of doing either of these things, he on the 23d of December, ordered
Mr. Dallas (page 220) to send to the defendant the letter from the Secretary of
possible* make a full report to the Governor, on the subject to which it
referred." -- What was the subject to which It referred? suerely not the law
question of the New-Loan debt being abolished or not, for that question would
have been submitted to the proper law officer. On the contrary, the letter of
the Secretary of the Treasury, went on the supposition, of that debt being not
only in existence, but subscribable to the loan of the United States; but it
stated certain difficulties, arising from its subscription in its then
situation, and it suggested certain modes to be pursued, in order to obviate
them. -- These were the subjects and the only subject in which it referred, and
it was therefore upon these and upon these only, that the Governor wished, as
soon as possible, to have a full report. Upon these things an report at all
could possibly be necessary, if the debt was abolished -- I am therefore
warranted in saying, that if from the creation of the world to the present day,
a combination of circumstances ever occurred, in the whole course of human
events, sufficient to demonstrate, the acquiesience of one man in the opinion
of another, it is afforded upon the present occasion!

On the next day, the 24th of December 1791, the Comptroller General made his
report to the Governor (page 220) in which he says "The whole of the
certificates of this State, granted for a like sum of certificates of the U.S.
amounts to L. 1,937,885 15 3 Of which there was redeemed 118,470 6 6 Balance
1,819,415 8 9 1,937,885 15 3

"By an Act passed in March 1789, the holders of this balance are entitled, on
presenting their certificates and liquidating the interest received thereon, to
receive back their former ones, or an equivalent; this has taken place to a
great amount, insomuch, that there does not at present remain, much unexchanged
on a comparison of the whole, the exact amount at present unexchanged I cannot
tell, a number of exchanges to the amount of 40 or 50 presented, are pending
for want of the parties paying the indents due, the remainder I estimate from
40 to 50 thousand pounds, if absolute precision be necessary, I will have the
additions and selections made, so as to give the sum exactly.

"When I read the letter of the Secretary of the Treasury, I was doubtful,
until I consulted it again, whether it really imported, that the interest
payable quarterly, on the certificates granted on the assumed debt of this
State, would be suspended, until the certificates of the Federal debt, not yet
exchanged, for the New-Loans as aforesaid, should be surrendered, or an
equivalent in stock under the funding system, as such a case would prostrate
the faith of the U. S. to the will of the Legislature of this state, if they
should refuse to surrender them, then the U. S. without any fault on the part
of the original subscribers or the present holders, would not pay the interest
they had issued their obligation for, in which they promised payment. It
appeared to me, that if such were the law, the public credit of the U. S. might
be shaken by it, and rendered precarious, but on turning to the law it will
appear, that the provision for returning the certificates of the U. S. was to
prevent the U. S. from paying the interest twice on the same debt, and that in
conformity thereto, if any of the New-Loan certificates of this State, had been
before the 1st of October last, when the loan closed, subscribed to the said
loan, it would have been requisite, before the stock had issued therefore, that
an equal sum should have been surrendered by the State as aforesaid. The State
would thus have redeemed her certificates, through the U. S. in the same manner
at present practiced for individuals. But no such certificates of this State
were subscribed. -- Consequently the U. S. are entitled to none of the
Continental certificates, which are demandable by the persons holding the
New-Loans. If they should be delivered to the U. S. this State might have to
pay the New-Loan certificates, without having this resource to do it with. I
think too highly of the faith of the public to suppose, that the holders of
New-Loans are compellable either to subscribe them to the U. S. or to
re-exchange them for the Continental certificates, or that to such as do not,
the State is absolved from payment both of principal and interest, but the
market value, and the irredeemable quality of the Continental stock, and the
present funds of the U. S. are generally sufficient to induce the change as is
evinced from the great quantity already so exchanged. Of the remainder some
part is exchanged almost every day, and if the loan should be opened by
Congress, the exchanges would be increased thereby." Every part of this letter
is so material to prove, the opinion of the Comptroller General, that the
New-Loan debt was in existence and subscribable to the loan of the U. S. that
had I not read it, I should have been under the necessity, of endeavoring to
draw the attention of the honorable Senate to its various parts, by observing
upon them at large, but this will now be unnecessary, since no arguments can
place these truths in a stronger point of light than the letter itself does. If
it were possible, as it certainly was not, for the Governor to have
misapprehended the defendant before, it cannot be alleged, that he could do it
now -- This report was made near three months after the first loan was closed;
it was made more than five months before the law for opening of the second loan
was passed; it was made more than three months before the law for the
redemption at the Treasury of Pennsylvania was enacted, and it is therefore
impossible for even credulity itself to imagine, that it does not express the
defendant's real opinion.

What is it natural to suppose, the conduct, of the Governor on receiving this
report would have been, if he was not clearly satisfied that the defendant's
opinion was right? Why he would, have put an end to the business, by telling
both the defendant, and the Secretary of the Treasury, that the New-Loan debt
was abolished, by the Act of 1789, but instead of this, he transmitted to the
Secretary of the Treasury, "That part of the report, which stated the amount of
the New-Loan certificates issued, and redeemed, and the probable balance of the
unexchanged certificates." (Page 277.) Why do this, if he thought that balance
no longer a debt? Or why keep back the rest of the report, if he thought it at
all questionable, whether that balance was a debt or not? Surely no other
reason can be assigned for either than that he had no doubt of the existence of
the debt. That he really did think so, appears from his "giving instructions to
the defendant on the 27th of the same month (page 277) to confer with the
Secretary of the Treasury, in hopes that the difficulty suggested might be
removed, without claiming the interposition of the Legislature." The difficulty
suggested arose from the danger of interest being twice payable by the U. S.
that is to say, once on the New-Loan certificates, which could not be, if they
were abolished, and also on the Continental certificates, which the State had
received in exchange for them; the Secretary of the Treasury had suggested
different modes of obviating that difficulty, and he thought it worthy of the
attention of the Legislature. The Governor knew, that if the New-Loan debt did
not exist, the difficulty suggested could not exist, and therefore, by
instructing the defendant to confer with the Secretary of the Treasury, in
hopes that that difficulty might be removed, he certainly expressed the same
opinion, to the defendant, which the defendant had expressed to him.

In compliance with those instructions from the Governor, the defendant, on the
29th of the same month, wrote to the Secretary of the Treasury, proposing a
conference with him on the subject contained in his letter to the Governor. A
conference took place, and the defendant in a letter to the Governor of
February 29th, 1792, after informing him that all obstacles were removed,
expressed himself as follows; -- (page 223) "The subject was an important one,
and to have required the Continental certificates from Pennsylvania, while the
New-Loans for which they were given, were out, and the State responsible for,
without these means of redemption, would have placed her in an unpleasant
situation. To take off the appearance of this hardship, it was suggested that
in case the New-Loans, not exchanged, would not be subscribed to the loan of
the U. S. by the holders, which on the proposed terms of the loan might be
done, yet still, that the State would by the terms of the same loan, be in the
receipt of a sufficient sum from the Union, to meet the interest due to these
creditors. But to this it was objected, that this receipt of interest by the
State, would be temporary, and would cease when the sentiment of our accounts
with the U. S. should be effected and the balances provided for, agreeably to
law, whereas the demand against the State would be perpetual, and could only be
discharged by payment of the debt."

This letter, like several of the communications o^ which I have last observed,
was written after the first loan was closed, and long before the law for
opening of the second one was passed. The defendant could have no motives for
deception, and it therefore affords the most conclusive evidence, that it
contains his real opinion.

We have been told, Sir, that if this were the defendant's real opinion, he
ought to have made it known to the Governor; that he concealed it from him,
when it ought to have been communicated, and that he is therefore at all events
criminal. If I were to make the extraordinary admission, that it is the duty of
every officer of government, to tell the Governor his opinion, on all the laws
of the State, and that every one who does not, is guilty of a criminal neglect!
Yet, after this piece of evidence and several others which preceded it, the
objection, though strongly urged by several gentleman, would be unworthy of a
serious refutation.

Here then, Sir, we have the fullest evidence, of an opinion, uniformly held
and openly avowed by the defendant, on all occasions, in his public and private
capacity, from the commencement of the business, up to the period at which I
have arrived; and at times too, when it was impossible for him to be interested
either way, or to have the least inducement to express sentiments which were
not his own. We find this opinion, not only acquiesced in by the Commissioner
of Loans, but we find him during all this period, countenanced and confirmed in
it by repeated acts, both of the Secretary of the Treasury and the Governor of
the commonwealth.

I will now go further and show, that he not only continued to be of the same
opinion, but that he was candid, open, and even assiduous in making it known to
the Governor, and to the members of both branches of the Legislature, while the
law of April 1792, for the redemption of the state debts was under
consideration. In doing this, I shall also show, that his ^^^ion was not
discountenanced by any of them, that it was countenanced by many if not by all
of them, and that he had not the least hint from any body of his being wrong,
until the transactions had taken place, which gave rise to the present
prosecution. If I do this, I may add, that it is almost a crime, to impute
criminality to him.

The law for the redemption of the state debts, as ^^s already been shown, was
passed on the 10th of April 1792. While the bill for that purpose was depending
before the House, the defendant drew up a proposed plan of finance. It
enumerated the various debts of the state, proper and necessary to be redeemed,
^^d among others we find the New-Loan debt, placed in a conspicuous point of
view. It is entitled "A (...) for modifying the present debt of Pennsylvania,"
and the 8th enumerated debt (page 280 and 284) is spoken of in the following
words,

"The New-Loan certificates and arrearages of interest, about, say L. 20,000

It is proposed that these certificates should be received, with the arrears of
their interest, on the same terms on the other preceding debts of the state.
The holders nevertheless to be continued in the privilege of exchanging them
as at present. But it would seem proper, that after due notice, so as not to
extend to the period of the next loan by Congress, a limitation should by law
be put to such power of exchanging, that hereafter, the Continental
certificates should be subscribed for the use of the state, and that the state,
having provided for the redemption of such as might remain un-exchanged,
unsubscribed to the loan herein proposed, or unsubscribed to the assumption of
the state debts, should declare, that interest should thenceforth cease
thereon, unless payment were demanded. No sum is extended in this case, as the
Continental certificates will be in the possession of the state, to be
appropriated to this debt, as far the same may be subscribed as herein
proposed." -- That this proposed plan of finance was laid before the Governor,
appears by a letter to the defendant from Mr. Dallas of the 21st of March 1792,
(page 286) in which, after mentioning the plan, he says; "The Governor has
considered the subject, and will probably determine tomorrow, how far it would
be proper, to transmit the plan to the Legislature." At this time another plan
of finance was before the House, it was so far advanced, and so nearly matured,
and the end of the session was so near at hand, as to account for no
interference, for we do not find that any took place, on the part of the
Governor; but however this may be, it certainly appears, that at this important
crisis, the defendant again avowed the opinion which he had uniformly held, and
the propriety of which the Governor did not upon this, any more than upon any
former occasion, think proper to controvert. -- Mr. Dallas indeed tells us,
that he never had an idea, or heard an idea, for I do not recollect which was
his expression, of the New-Loan debt being subscribable to the loan of the
United States, until June 1792, when he learned that it had been subscribed by
the defendant. This may be true for ought that I know, and yet if he had any
ideas at all I can hardly conceive it possible, since it has appeared, that he
was privy to the correspondence between the defendant, the Governor and the
Secretary of the Treasury, in which this opinion was clearly expressed and
openly avowed without the least contradiction. He wrote and he transmitted to
the defendant the Governor's directions on that subject; accompanying the
letters of Secretary Hamilton, and I suppose him to have had the copying, and
recording of all the correspondence on that occasion -- If other proof be
necessary, it is amply afforded by his letter to the defendant of the 21st
March 1792 (page 286) in which he says, "I find from consulting Mr. Gallatin,
and several other gentlemen, that your plan would not at this time, meet with
any chance of success, though its principles appear to me to be good."

If Mr. Dallas, in whose hands this plan of finance was, never read it, how
could "its principles appear to him to be good!" If he did read it, how is it
possible, that until he heard of the New-Loan debt being subscribed by the
defendant in June 1792, he never had an idea, or heard of an idea of its being
subscribable! This is not however worth dwelling upon, and I shall therefore
proceed to what is much more material. -- It is in evidence Sir, that copies of
this plan of finance were, at about the same time communicated to several
active and intelligent members of each branch of the Legislature. The evidence
has been heard, and I will not waste time in an useless enumeration of a long
string of names, but I must remark, that not one, of them, ever signified the
smallest disapprobation of that part of it, which proposed a provision for the
redemption of the New-Loan debt. Hence the conclusion was warrantable on the
part of Mr. Nicholson, that they too, as well as the Governor, had no doubt of
the existence of the New-Loan debt, and of the obligation of the state to
redeem it.

I am now arrived Sir, at a most important stage of the business; -- At the
time when the bill for, the redemption law, as it is called, was pending before
the House, and we find at this time the defendant declaring to each branch of
the Legislature as he had upon all former occasions done, the existence of the
New-Loan debt, that it ought to be redeemed, and so far are we from finding any
disapprobation of this sentiment, from any one of them, that we find it
acquiesced in by all, and condemned by none.

Their evidence is before you, Sir, and without spending time in repeating it,
permit me to remind the honorable Senate, that, it is as full as evidence can
possibly be, not only to show the real opinion of the defendant, but the pains
taken by him to make that opinion fully known, and that wherever it was known
it was approved of, since we do not find it contradicted by any one of those,
whose peculiar province it was to do so, if its propriety was at all
questioned. -- Nay the honorable Mr. Thomas of the Senate tells us, that Mr.
Nicholson in a conversation with him, objected to the plan of finance then
before the House, because it would injure the commonwealth, by opening a door
for speculation at her expense, and we find him at the same time offering
another which was so plain; so simple and so easy to be understood, as to
preclude every thing of this kind. -- Was this also cant and hypocrisy too? was
it also a mere copy of his countenance, and intended to deceive, when it is
well known, that the law for extending the loan, did not pass until the 8th of
May following! And yet Sir, the defendant is again charged with secrecy and
covert views! But upon what grounds is he so charged? why say the gentlemen; we
do not know what deep designs of speculation, at the expense of the public,
were concealed under this plan of finance!" And if after so may months of
laborious industry, they have not been able to find them out, will they
seriously say, that the honorable Senate are to presume them, and on
presumption only, without either a charge, or evidence, to condemn the
defendant! Forbid it virtue! forbid it justice! forbid it patriotism! or to
include them all, forbid it law!

But say Mr. Nicholson's accusers; "he never thought of the New-Loan debt being
subscribable, until after the passing of the redemption law of the 10th of
April 1792."

Need I after all which has been shown, answer this objection? Certainly not;
unless it be to observe, that of itself, if true, it does away all his former
imputed sins and iniquities, since in that case every thing which had been
imputed to him before, must be groundless.

Again, Sir, we are told, "That while the bill for the redemption law of April
1792 was depending before the Legislature, Mr. Nicholson satisfied himself with
mentioning little, trifling objections, but that he never told any body that
the New-Loan debt would be redeemable under it." -- To this I could, were it
necessary, give many answers; but I shall satisfy myself with observing,

1st. That had he made no objections whatever, he would not have been liable to
impeachment on that account, any more than those who state this objection are,
and that if this is a criminal omission, they are no less liable to punishment
for it, than he is, since they were under no less obligation than he was.

2d. That at the time of the objections, which are now called trifling, being
made by the defendant, a report of a committee (see Journals of Congress of the
2d April 1792) was under consideration, which if it had been adopted by
Congress, would have rendered the old unfunded bills of credit subscribable to
the loan of the United States. When the bill for the redemption law was before
the House, the defendant very properly objected, that should that report be
adopted in its full extent, and should the bill then pass in its then form,
these bills would be redeemable at the Treasury of Pennsylvania, However
trifling this objection may now be thought, it was considered as of so much
weight at that time, that this part of the report was rejected, and if it had
not, the law of April 1792 was so framed as in its then form to admit of their
redemption. And,

3d. That if the defendant did not state as an objection to the proposed law of
April 1792, that the New-Loan debt would be redeemable under it, it was because
he then did, and always had believed in the existence of that debt; because his
own plan of finance proposed its redemption; -- because he had every reason for
believing that the Governor and each branch of the Legislature thought as he
did in this respect; and that therefore, it would have been madness in the
extreme for him, to object to what he himself proposed in his own plan of
finance, and which he not only highly approved of, but had every reason for
supposing to be equally approved of by others.

I will not, Sir, attempt any further answer to this objection, lest in
combating such ground, I may be led into an intemperate warmth.

It is said, Sir, that "The Governor could not have been of the opinion, that
the New-Loan debt was redeemable at the Treasury of Pennsylvania, or that it
existed at all, since in none of his addresses to the Legislature, one or more
of which have been read, has he mentioned this debt to be provided for,
although he has particularly enumerated all that were to be provided for." This
argument, though much relied on, will be found to be altogether fallacious. The
New-Loan debt was not redeemable at all, until the passing of the redemption
law of the 10th of April 1792, nor then, unless the loan of the United States
should be again opened -- It was not again opened until the 8th of May 1792,
and of course no provision for its redemption, could be required before that
time. The addresses which have been read, were all anterior to this period --
Their object was to enumerate the amount of the debts which were redeemable,
and of course demandable at the Treasury, and to call upon the Legislature, to
furnish the necessary means; but as the New-Loan debt was not then redeemable
nor demandable, at the Treasury, it would have been strange indeed, if our
vigilant Governor, had so far forgotten himself, as to call for means to be
provided, for redeeming a debt, which at that time was not redeemable at all!

Of a similar nature is another objection which has been made; "That in no
instance have the committee of ways and means proposed any provision for the
redemption of the New-Loan debt," from which it is inferred, that it had been
abolished, or if not abolished, that it was not redeemable." To this the answer
must certainly be satisfactory, that the reports of this committee were, like
the addresses of the Governor, made before the New-Loan debt was redeemable,
and of course the proposing of ways and means for its redemption would have
been folly in the extreme -- It is the business of that committee, as appears
from its very name, to propose ways and means, for discharging such debts as
are redeemable, but it would be a great departure from its duty, to propose a
law for any other purpose, unless under a particular reference from the House.
It is the business of that committee, to find out ways and ways for the
redemption of funded debts, not unfunded ones!

Equally unsubstantial is another objection, which has been made; namely, "That
the defendant could not believe the New-Loan debt to be redeemable, because his
own statement, made at, or soon after the passing of the Act of the 10th of
April 1792, mentioned so small a sum, as a proposed estimate, of what would be
necessary for the redemption of the public debts, as shows that it was not
intended to provide for the discharge of the New-Loan debts." Nor was it; and
this I freely admit, without allowing that there is any weight in the
objection. These estimates bear date the 28th and 30th of April 1792 (page
224-5) and mention a "sum estimated to be necessary for the redemption of the
State debt, according to law." But the New-Loan debt was not redeemable until
the 8th of May following, when the Act of Congress for opening the second loan
was past, and therefore, when these estimates were made, the New-Loan debt was
not payable "according to law," nor would it ever have been payable under the
then existing laws, had that loan not again been opened. If this is not a
complete answer to the objection, I hope the following one will be -- It will
be remembered that the second section of the Act of the 10th of April 1792
provided for the payment of certain debts therein enumerated, and we have
admitted that the New-Loan debt was not one of them, although it was, as we
say, within the provision of the sixth section and eventually became payable
under the 12th appropriation of the Act of April 1791. The 2d section of the
Act of April 1792 provided funds for the debts enumerated in that section, and
in order thereto, it enabled "The Comptroller General and Register-General,
under the direction of the Governor, to fell so much of the three per cent.
stock as should be necessary to pay and redeem the debt in that section
mentioned." On the 13th of April 1792 (page 232) Mr. Dallas by order of the
Governor, wrote to the Comptroller General and Register-General as follows --
"The Legislature contemplates the payment of certain debts on the first of July
next, by the sale of three per cent. stock, at a certain rate, with a power
however, to suspend the sale until the stipulated price can be obtained, you
will be pleased therefore, to take that Act into immediate consideration, and
report what arrangements will be necessary in your opinion, for carrying the
redemption of the debt into effect."

The three per cent. stock was not directed to be sold for the payment of the
New-Loan debt, nor was provision made for the payment of that debt on the first
of July next, nor at all, unless the loan should be again opened; the Governor
could only call for an estimate of what would be necessary to discharge the
debts, which were payable on the first of July; the estimate furnished was
confined to that object, and could not be extended to any other; the three per
cent. stock could not be sold to satisfy any other object. When gentlemen are
driven to such objections as this, their situation must be desperate indeed!

Oh! but say the gentlemen, "The defendant did not inform Mr. Gallatin as he
ought to have done, that the New-Loan debt was redeemable under the Act of
April 1792." If I admit for a moment, that there was something so peculiar in
the character of Mr. Gallatin, as to entitle him to more information than other
members could justly claim, let us see how well the objection is supported by
facts.

We find Mr. Dallas's letter to the defendant of the 21st of March 1792, that
he found on consulting Mr. Gallatin, and some other gentlemen on the
defendant's plan, that it would not at that time meet with any chance of
success, "though its principles appeared to be good," Mr. Gallatin was
therefore informed of the defendant's opinion while the bill for the redemption
law was pending, and if he thought it wrong, he ought to have said so, and
guarded against it. -- Let us now see what took place after the law was passed?
-- It was passed as we have seen on the 10th of April 1792 -- the House
probably rose on that or the next day, as no law was passed after that day, in
the same session; and as Mr. Gallatin tells us, that he remained in town but
about eight or ten days after the rising of the House, the conversation which I
am about to mention, must have taken place within that time -- It is related by
Mr. Donnaldson, who swears "That shortly after the House rose, Mr. Gallatin,
the defendant and himself, had conversation together, in which they all agreed,
that the Act of the 10th of April 1792, embraced the Unfunded Depreciation
debt, and the defendant then said, it would extend to the old bills of credit
if Congress should assume them, upon which Mr. Gallatin said the 6th section
was more extensive than he had intended. And Mr. Gallatin tells us, that on
reading the 6th section he agreed with the defendant in his construction of it
as to its including the Unfunded Depreciation debt -- If this was so, it could
not be a proviso to the second section, since it is admitted on both sides,
that that section does not include that debt; of course we have here the
opinion of Mr. Gallatin in our favor, be it of the importance or not, which
upon another occasion has been contended for. Mr. Gallatin does not at present
recollect any thing having been said about the old bills of credit being
redeemable, if Congress should assume them, but Mr. Donnaldson, who speaks
affirmatively, swears that the defendant did say, that they would be within the
sixth section if Congress should assume them, and that Mr. Gallatin then said,
the sixth section was more extensive than he had intended, which certainly
looks very much like assenting to what the defendant had said -- Mr. Donnaldson
does not, it is true, remember, that the New-Loan debt was spoken of, and the
defendant has been pretty severely handled for not mentioning that also; but to
this it may be answered, that Mr. Gallatin having heard of some objections to
the Act, went to learn what they were, and to endeavor to obviate them -- This
being the case, the defendant mentioned only such things as he deemed
exceptionable, and it would have been wonderful indeed, if he had mentioned as
an objection to the Act, that it might eventually provide for the redemption of
the New-Loan debt, when he himself had just before proposed a plan, which
provided for its immediate redemption, and which he had every reason for
believing, was approved of by the Governor and the members of both branches of
the Legislature. To show that he has been candid and uniform in every thing
relative to this business, it is but justice to remember, that while the Act of
April 1792 was depending before the Legislature, he thought it his duty to give
it every decent opposition, and that he did so, by mentioning his objections in
the fullest manner to many members of each branch of the Legislature, and more
especially as it would in its then form, if the resolutions then under the
consideration of Congress had been adopted in their full extent, have put the
state in the power of the United States, by making her liable to redeem
whatever Congress might choose to assume. To prevent this, his plan enumerated
the specific articles of redemption, and surely nothing could be better
calculated than this, to preserve the rights of the State, and to preclude all
opportunity for speculation -- To the honorable Mr. Thomas be objected "to the
bill as it stood, (page 287) because it would admit of constructions that would
open a door for speculation, and for speculations injurious to the State." To
the honorable Mr. Montgomery he mentioned nearly the same thing; (page 290) and
if after this, the Legislature chose to leave the door open, every man had a
right to enter at it, and none more so than he, who had advised that it should
be shut.

If the law left it open, the law gave a free passport of entrance to every
man, and it is an affront to common sense to suppose that for availing himself
of it, any man can be punishable!

We are told, Sir, "That at all events the defendant was highly culpable for
certifying to the Governor in favor of the holders of the old Unfunded
Depreciation certificates, because Mr. Gallatin had told him that it was not
his intention when the law of April 1792 passed, that they should be
redeemable." Be it so; but if it is, what is the consequence? Was the defendant
to construe the law agreeably to what a single member of a single branch told
him was his meaning at the time, or according to what appeared on a view of the
law, to have been the meaning of all the members of both branches and of the
Governor! Mr. Gallatin's conduct, and where he happens to be right, I have no
objection to quoting him, forms a sufficient answer to this objection -- It is
in evidence, that he said, he had not intended that the sixth section of the
Act of April 1792 should be more extensive than the second section; but that on
perusing it, he found that it was, and that it included the Unfunded
Depreciation certificates. -- He also tells us, that finding this to be the
case, he procured the redemption of one for his friend Ephraim Douglass -- He
adds with much good sense, that if he had known that agreeably to the true
construction of the law, the New-Loan debt was redeemable, he should, let the
intention of the Legislature be what it might, have done the best that he could
for his friend -- All this is past over as perfectly innocent, so far as it
re^ates to the conduct of one of the members of the Legislature, who is the
author, and the fautor of this prosecution, and yet, the defendant is held up
as a great criminal, for certifying to the Governor in favor of the holders of
the old Unfunded Depreciation certificates, although that member, and the
Register-Genetal had agreed that it was right! although that member had
procured a certificate of this kind in favor of his friend; and although it
was first done, in favor of the Speaker of the Senate at the time of passing
the law, and afterward in favor of able law judges!

But, say the gentlemen, "Let the defendant's opinion have been one way or the
other, it was imprudent in him to subscribe the New-Loan debt, without first
informing the Governor of his intentions." The Governor may perhaps be a very
proper person to consult in a case of prudence, but if he is so, and if, which
I am far from admitting, prudence required that he should have been consulted;
is a mere act of imprudence a sufficient ground for an impeachment? If it is, I
am afraid that a thousand articles would be maintainable against the best man
among us, and that even some of the managers might stand high on the list of
criminals! If the accusers are obliged to have recourse to this ground, the
defendant should not have been impeached for violating the laws of the State,
but for transgressing the rules of prudence!

But, say the prosecutors, "Whatever may have been the defendant's opinion, the
commonwealth has sustained much damage by the subscription of the New-Loan
debt, and that he is therefore responsible." Even if this position were true,
it could at most but apply in a civil action and not in a criminal prosecution,
where the rule is, actus non sit reus nisi men's sit rea. But I deny the truth
of the assertion altogether. Twenty shillings in the pound were justly due?
Pennsylvania by the Act of March 1786 was solemnly pledged to pay twenty
shillings in the pound, and that right and justice required that this sum
should be paid, is acknowledged by the Act of April 1791 for making up the loss
to the full amount of that sum, to such of her creditors as should subscribe to
the loan of the United State Again, Sir, if by law the New-Loan deb^ was
redeemable, no damage could arise from its redemption, or if there did, it was
damenum absque injuria. Adjourned.

The Editor has been under the necessity of deviating from his usual mode of
giving each day's argument by itself. On Wednesday Mr. Lewis, owing to
indisposition, broke off in the middle of an argument, on one of his points;
and he resumed it on the following Friday, and the Speech is given as if that
circumstance had not happened. However so far as relates to the transactions on
Wednesday, Thursday and Friday, let it be remembered, that Mr. Wynkoop was each
day placed in the chair, the committee of the whole attended as usual in the
Senate chamber, the Chairman reported attendance, and the managers reported
further progress on Wednesday, no further progress on Thursday, Mr. Lewis being
sick; and further progress on Friday.

Twenty-first day of the trial. SATURDAY, MARCH 22.
THE Senate met as usual; the House of Representatives in committee attended.

Mr. Ingersoll observed, that he held a document in his hand which he intended
to read, and wished that the defendant and his counsel would take notice, that
they might make their defense accordingly. -- Mr. Lewis desired him t^ ^ead it.
It was a notification published in Dun^^'s American Daily Advertiser of June
8th 1792; the date of the notification was 16th May 1792; being the Governor's
proclamation for the sale of stock.

Mr. Lewis then proceeded --

In order still further to show, that the defendant conceived his construction
of the law to be right, and that he believed other gentlemen to be of the same
opinion, permit me now to remind the honorable Senate, of the evidence of the
Secretary of the Treasury. He swears that "all the difficulties on which he so
often wrote to the Governor; on which the Governor ordered the conference, and
on which the conference was held and conducted, entirely arose on the
supposition, of the New-Loan debt being subscribable, and that they could not
have existed, but on this point being acceded to." That in the conference Mr.
Nicholson appeared to be of this opinion, and the Governor afforded abundant
reason to suppose that he was of the same opinion.

After hearing this evidence, no man can doubt of what the opinion of the
Secretary of the Treasury was; -- no man can doubt what the opinion of the
Governor was, no man can doubt what the opinion of the defendant was, nor, but
that he believed these gentlemen to be of the same opinion, since if they had
not, as the Secretary tells you, the difficulties could not have arisen, nor
could the conference have been necessary. The defendant must have perceived
this as clearly as the Secretary did, and unless, which is not presumable, he
supposed the Governor to be destitute of common sense, or totally regardless of
all sense of duty, he could not imagine that he would have called for reports,
talked of calling the Legislature, or directed a conference without being of
the same opinion.

But, again, Sir, it appears, that Judge Addison had applied to have a New-Loan
certificate subscribed and redeemed, and that the defendant from mere kindness
undertook to get it done for him -- That while that application was depending,
Mr. Dallas objected to the defendant, that it was not authorized by law, and
this was the first time of such an idea being suggested by any one. The
defendant answered him, that he was sure he was right; and what clearly proves
that he thought so is, that as Judge Addison was going out of town, the
defendant, after this objection had been made, paid him the full amount of his
certificate, as if it had been actually redeemed, and this too, without any
deduction for his trouble, or asking for an indemnity. Can there be a stronger
proof than this of conscious integrity? Or can it believed, that if he thought
the matter at all doubtful, he would have voluntarily taken the risk upon
himself? This surely shows, that he considered Mr. Dallas's present opinion, so
contrary to what it had formerly appeared to be, as not worthy of the least
regard, when opposed by a conviction in his own mind of the propriety of a
contrary one, and that too, supported by opinions entitled to much more respect.

I have already given an answer so much at length, to the objection "That the
defendant did not, as he ought to have done, consult the Register-General or
the Governor," that I shall only take notice of it at present, for the sake of
drawing a well warranted conclusion in favor of the defendant. The active,
virtuous and discerning mind of the Register-General is too well known to be
questioned, and it is also well known, that circumstances have occurred, which
leave no room for the supposition, that he has much partiality for the
defendant; or if he had, it will not be insinuated, that he would be swayed by
it on the present occasion. He tells you, Sir, as I have already observed, that
the defendant did tell him and Mr. Gallatin, that the old Unfunded Depreciation
certificates, were redeemable under the Act of April 1792, and that on perusing
it they were both of them of that opinion -- He tells you, that from the
certifications made to the Governor, and which passed through his office, in
the cases of the old Unfunded Depreciation debt, it might, both from the amount
of the interest, and the time of its commencement, be easily known, that the
certifications related to that debt, and could not possibly relate to any
other. Thus far then, there was no want of due communication, both to the
Register General and to the Governor. It also appears, that the defendant had
in his letters and reports repeatedly informed the Governor, that the New-Loan
debt was subscribable, and if it was subscribable, no man can doubt of its
being redeemable. Here then the objection again fails -- But in addition to all
this, the Register-General tells you, that after knowing of the objection made
by Mr. Dallas, and after considering the law, he was of the same opinion with
the defendant, and joined with him, in making several certificates to the
Governor, in cases of the New-Loan debt, in order that warrants might issue for
its redemption at the Treasury, and that as he had no doubt at all about the
law, he did not think it necessary to speak to the Governor on the subject --
Hence it appears, that there is not the least ground for any part of the
objection -- Oh! but say the gentlemen, the defendant did not in his
certifications to the Governor, in cases of the New-Loan debt, describe it in
such manner, as that it could be known, that the certifications related to that
debt." To this I answer, that the certifications were exactly, as appears in
evidence, agreeably to the form settled and established by the different
officers, as proper to be observed under the Act of April 1792, and that they
did not differ, from the form made use of on other occasions; and further, that
the Register-General used the same form in cases of the New-Loan debt which the
defendant did.

But we are told that "That this business originated with the defendant; that
he transacted it privately, and that it was unfair in him, not to inform others
of the same speculation!" This objection puts me in mind of a story, which I
have heard related by my friend General Wayne. Early in life, he was engaged in
surveying lands in Nova Scotia. On one Sunday morning, he saw a large flock of
wild ducks in a pond near to his cabin, and immediately took up his gun, in
order to get a shot at them. -- An Indian who saw the ducks, and wished to have
the speculation to himself, came running to the General, and asked him, what he
was going to do? -- Upon the General telling him, that he intended to have a
shot at those ducks, the Indian exclaimed with uplifted hands; -- shame! shame!
for you white men, to shoot on the Sabbath; -- we poor ignorant Indians are not
so bad as you, for we would not do so. -- Struck with this seemingly serious
admonition from a savage, the General almost concluded to return back and lay
aside his gun -- While the Indian was detaining him, and endeavoring to
prevail upon him to do so, he heard the report of a gun, and saw several of the
ducks knocked over; upon which the Indian, leaping from the ground, and
laughing very heartily, exclaimed again; -- you white people think we savages
are fools, but you are not so cunning as we are -- That is my squaw, who has
shot the ducks, and I came to keep you back, till she should get the first
shot! -- I believe, Sir, that this is pretty much the case with most people,
who see an opportunity for a fair speculation, and that but few are so silly,
as to cry roast beef, until they themselves are satisfied. -- We find that Mr.
Nicholson objected to the bill, because it would afford an opportunity for
speculation. It did not enumerate all the articles of redemption, as his plan
of finance did; several of these articles, might be unknown to the people at
large, while they would be well known to some. This would give to a few,
advantages for speculation, which many would not have. This the defendant had
endeavored to prevent, but could not; and if the law left a door open for
speculating in the New-Loan debt, the defendant should at most have been
impeached for speculating according to law! not against it.

As a further answer to this objection, we have proved, that many other people
knew the same thing, and speculated in the same way, and that among them, were
men of unblemished character. Upon hearing this, the gentlemen immediately
shift their ground and say, that "The business originated with the defendant,
and that be led others into it, to the great injury of the commonwealth." How
is this objection reconcilable with the last one? If he did the business
privately, and did not inform others of it, how could he lead others into it?
Or if he led others into it, how is it possible, that he did not inform others
of it? -- In short, the accusers advance contrary positions, either of which if
true, is a refutation of the other, and yet they contend, that he is guilty on
both grounds!

But it is not true, that the business originated with him, or that he led
others into it. Every man who thought of the matter, judged for himself, and
acted accordingly -- By the evidence of Mr. Evans it appears, that he found,
upon reading the law, that the New-Loan debt was redeemable. By the evidence of
Mr. Boggs it appears, that he discovered it in the same manner. Mr. Rittenhouse
and others also subscribed the New-Loan debt and had it redeemed. They derived
no information from the defendant, nor did he take a single step to conceal any
thing from them -- So far was he from intending to conceal any thing, that he
did the whole of the business in his own name, although he well knew, that at
the end of the second loan, a scrutiny would take place, as there had at the
end of the first, and that if he had acted wrong, he would be detected, and
compelled to refund. If his views were improper, how easily might detection
have been prevented, by making use of the names of others? Criminality has been
imputed to him, but a deficiency of intellectual faculty has not, and yet
without such deficiency, it is impossible to account for his not making use of
a cloak for his views, if any he had, which would have afforded ample security,
without costing him any thing. The charge in one of the articles, that the
defendant acted in the secret manner therein mentioned, in order to avoid
discovery and detection, until he should get the money into his possession,
must excite our indignation; -- not against the accused, but at the accusation.
To avoid detection until he should get the money into his possession! He knew
that at the end of the second loan a scrutiny would take place, as there did at
the close of the first; he knew that on that scrutiny, all certificates which
were not by law subscribable would be rejected; he knew that if he was acting
illegally, he would on that scrutiny be detected, and compelled to refund with
disgrace what he had wrongfully received. Let me ask then, Sir, if it was
possible for any one of the defendant's accusers to believe, that the paltry
consideration of a temporary possession of the money, could have prevented him,
as the article charges, from consulting the Register-General or communicating
to the Governor, until he should get the money into his possession? It is
impossible for them to have believed this, unless they also believed, that he
intended to run away with the money, before the scrutiny should take place, at
the end of the loan! His situation and circumstances in life sufficiently
prove, that a mere temporary possession of the money could be no object with
him, independent of the disgrace attending the detection, which he knew must
await him, and yet as if guilt must always be proportionate to the coloring,
or the want of evidence may be supplied by a wanton exaggeration of the charge,
we find this paltry motive gravely imputed to the defendant! If I express
myself with some warmth, the occasion demands it, and I cannot be so obsequious
to the honorable accusers, as to suppress my feelings on considering this
charge.

But further, Sir; it is impossible that when the defendant certified the
New-Loan certificates to be genuine and assumable, he could have been
influenced by the motives imputed to him. The United States had taken no risk
upon themselves. A scrutiny was to take place at the end of the loan, when all
certificates not subscribable would be rejected. Nor did Pennsylvania run any
risk under the law of April 1792 -- That law only provided for the redemption
at the Treasury, upon transfers being made to the State-Treasurer for the use
of the commonwealth, of the certificates which the subscribers should receive
from the United States, in consequence of such subscriptions. Had this law been
observed, no subscribed debt could have been redeemed at the Treasury of
Pennsylvania, until the subscription had been approved of by the United States,
and of course, no improper redemption could have happened -- Some difficulties
attended the execution of this law, and the Governor made an arrangement (page
97-98) for the redemption before the issuing of certificates, in consequence of
the subscription, and of course subjected the state to all losses arising from
any of the certificates which were deposited with the Commissioner of Loans,
being forged, counterfeited or not subscribable from any other cause. Although
there is no reason to suppose, that the Governor did not intend well, yet it
must be admitted, that this arrangement was unauthorised by law. When the
defendant certified the certificates to be genuine and assumable, he could not
know, that any such arrangement would be made. Without it, no payment could
have been made at the Treasury, until the Secretary of the Treasury should have
decided on the subscribability of the certificates, and it is therefore
impossible, for any rational mind to suppose, that the defendant could have had
the motives for concealment which have been imputed to him.

But says the same article, "The defendant did not consult the Register-General
touching the above transactions, nor communicate the same to the Governor, nor
discriminate," etc. "and thereby all the checks of office, provided by law were
destroyed." What were these checks of office? They were the Register-General
and the Governor, and no other checks were provided by law.

If he has destroyed them, he should have been indicted for murder; -- not
impeached for a misdemeanor.

The gentleman tell us, that "The Secretary of the Treasury, on seeing the law
of 1789, altered his opinion, and determined, that the New-Loan debt was not
subscribable to the loan of the United States, and that he rejected it
accordingly."

If this were really so, I do not see how it could affect the question at
present, but the fact is otherwise. When an objection was made on the part of
Pennsylvania, the Secretary of the Treasury considered the question on its true
ground, to wit -- Is the New-Loan debt a still existing debt? If it is, it is
subscribable; if it is not, it is not subscribable -- This question he did not
determine either way, but wished it to be determined by the state -- The time
for receiving subscriptions to the loan of the United States, elapsed without
any such determination taking place, and of course the New-Loan certificates
were excluded; not because the Secretary determined that they were not
subscribable, but because the time for receiving them had expired and they
could not be received whether they were otherwise subscribable or not. This
appears partly from his letter of the 8th of February and 21st of August 1793
(page 76-7-8, and 218) but more fully from the evidence given by him in the
course of the trial.

I will now dismiss the first, second, third and fouth articles, which for the
reason mentioned in an early stage of my remarks, I have not thought it proper
to consider seperately -- my objects have hitherto been to prove, that the
defendant acted conformably to law; or if not, yet that he really thought so --
If on either of these grounds I have been successful, it is sufficient for my
present purpose, and I will now to proceed to consider the

FIFTH AND SIXTH ARTICLES, which charge,
1st. That the defendant did by himself or his agents, purchase a number of the
New-Loan certificates, as well from persons who came to exchange the same at
his office, as from others; and

2d. That the defendant received of sundry persons, certain New-Loan
certificates to be exchanged, whereby the said certificates became the property
of the commonwealth, and ought to have been delivered to the Register-General,
in order to be cancelled; yet the defendant, well knowing the same to be the
property of the commonwealth, subscribed them to the loan of the United States,
in his own name and for his own use and benefit.

These two articles appear to me to depend on a proper solution of the
following questions.

1st. Was it criminal in the defendant to buy New-Loan certificates out of his
office, in like manner as other persons might? and,

2d. Was it criminal to buy such as were brought to his office to be exchanged,
but which the holders of them concluded not to exchange but to sell?

The first of these questions has been very properly given up by the worthy
gentleman who spoke last, but as his colleagues have been so far from showing
an equal degree of candor, as to warmly contend, for the affirmative of the
question, I am obliged to enter upon its discussion.

The ground which has been taken in order to show, that it was criminal in the
defendant to purchase New-Loan certificates, at any place or from any person is
this -- although say the gentlemen, the holders of such certificates had not
brought them to be exchanged, they might perhaps have done so, if the defendant
had not bought them, and as his buying them, may possibly have prevented their
being offered for exchange, it must be criminal -- and one of the gentlemen has
exclaimed -- What! will the defendant's counsel contend, that what is lawful
for other persons is also lawful for public officers? and they have concluded
by amplifying very much at large, on the duties of public officers, in order to
show that there is one law for them, and another for other people.

"There are," says Lord Mansfield, "some positions so plain and clear in
themselves that nothing can make them more so, and therefore one is greatly at
a loss how to reason upon them." The truth of this observation will be admitted
by every man who attempts to reason in support of a self evident proposition,
since he can make use of no arguments more clear, than the proposition is,
which they are intended to maintain. Precisely in this situation do I find
myself when called upon to show, that it was no less lawful for the defendant
than for any other person, to purchase the New-Loan certificates. They were by
the law of 1786 made payable to bearer, and there is no exception in that law,
or in any subsequent law, to prevent the defendant or any other person from
becoming the bearer. If the clause is general, no person is excepted, and it
necessarily follows, that it extends to all persons. It at all times rests with
the Legislature to say, whether any particular officer shall or shall not
bargain or deal in commodities, which may have some kind of relation to his
office -- In some instances it is prohibited by express provision made for that
purpose, but these instances are but few, and until now, no man ever dreamed
that without such prohibition the dealing was unlawful.

In order however to prove it to be unlawful, without any such express
prohibition, the gentlemen have said that there are cases of such prohibition
and exclusion being specially made, both by the laws of Pennsylvania and of the
United States, and under the former, they have instanced vendue masters; --
under the latter, the Secretary of the Treasury. -- But to me it appears, that
these instances of express prohibition, afford the fullest refutation of the
doctrine, which they are quoted to maintain; since a special provision must be
entirely useless, if without such special prohibition on particular officers,
there is by law a general prohibition on all officers. The Legislature of
Pennsylvania has not thought fit to prohibit the officers of the Land-office
from dealing in land, and they have done so as freely as other people without
any body supposing it to be unlawful. What the law does not forbid, it permits,
and where the law has not distinguished, the judges have no right to do so.
Without taking particular notice of the many handsome things which have been
said on the duties of public officers, these duties may be summed up in a few
words to be; -- to discharge with fidelity, whatever the law enjoins; -- to
abstain from whatever it forbids. A public officer must learn his duties from
the laws of his country, and where he can find no prohibition in them, he has a
right to say that none exists. I have said, Sir, that one of the gentlemen has
exclaimed, What! will the defendant's counsel pretend, that what is law for
other persons, is also law for public officers? To this I answer, that they
certainly will and boldly too, in all things where the law does not impose
certain restrictions, or enjoin certain duties upon them. In all other cases,
the public officer and the private citizen are alike; their rights and their
obligations are the same, and there is not one law for the one and another law
for the other.

Oh! but we are told, "It was indelicate in Mr. Nicholson to be concerned in
the purchasing of certificates," and on this ground too, has his conviction
been warmly urged. If he has not acted up to the nice notions of delicacy,
which the accusers possess, they should have given us their creed of delicacy
at length; they should have impeached him for indelicacy, and not for a
violation of law, and instead of bringing him for trial before a tribunal bound
to determine according to law, the managers should have been erected into a
court of honor, to determine according to the nice feelings of your pretty,
delicate gentlemen, and then perhaps, one puisne judge would have appeared to
as much advantage, as he does in the character of a manager -- If the defendant
acted indelicately, the Governor might have dismissed him, but in this
tribunal, no European system, formed out of the fanciful reveries of delicate,
visionary men, can form the rule of decision.

If Sir it was criminal in the defendant to purchase New-Loan certificates out
of his office, because the holders of them might perhaps, have brought them to
his office to be exchanged, it was from the passing of the law of 1786 equally
so in him, to purchase Continental certificates, since his office was the
proper place for exchanging them for New-Loans, and perhaps the holders of them
might have brought them the^e for that purpose. I do not mention this as an
answer to the objection, for I think it deserving of none, but merely to show,
that as on the same principles, the defendant has sined from the beginning, his
accusers may have an opportunity to bring forward an additional article against
him.

The next question is; -- Was it criminal in the defendant to purchase
certificates brought to his office to be exchanged, but which the holders of
them afterward concluded to sell.

The sixth article states, that "The New-Loan certificates by being brought to
the office to be exchanged, and by virtue of the Act of March 1789, became the
property of the commonwealth, and ought to have been delivered to the
Register-General to be cancelled," yet that the defendant subscribed the same
in his own name and to his own use, to the injury and loss of the
commonwealth." If these certificates upon being brought to the office to be
exchanged, became the property of the commonwealth, without any exchange being
made, the defendant has acted against law, but if they did not so become the
property of the commonwealth, this objection does not differ from the one last
mentioned -- Before adverting to the evidence, it will be proper to consider
the law, since if it has been entirely mistaken by the honorable accusers, this
charge also, must lose its sting.

They say that the certificates, immediately upon being brought to the officer,
became the property of the commonwealth, and we say, they did not until the
New-Loan certificates were delivered to the state by the holder, the balance of
interest settled, that balance paid and the old Continental certificates
delivered up by the state, and that until all these things were done, it was
but a proposal, not an exchange, and of course there could be no change of
property. That it may be seen which of us is right, I must turn to the law of
the 27th March 1789.

It has already been observed, that that Act was not compulsory on the holders
of New-Loan certificates, to exchange them for the old Continental ones, but
that it was left at their election to do it or not, as they might think proper.
Although this is a material consideration at present, I will not at this time
make observations to prove it. It is a matter to which I have already spoken
pretty much at large, and if my principles were sound, repetition cannot be
necessary; -- if unsound it would be useless. The third section of the Act,
after mentioning that "difficulties might arise in equalizing the interest paid
by this state, to the holders of the New-Loan certificates, with the interest
received by this state from the United States, authorized the President or
Vice President in Council, to cause the New-Loan certificates, on the holders
thereof applying therefore, to be returned through the office of the
Comptroller General, provided that no certificates should be so returned, until
the interest paid by this state on the New-Loan certificates, should be
equalized, and the overplus or balance, beyond what had been received by this
state from the United States, should be repaid in indents of the United States,
to the Comptroller General, for the use of this state, and in every case, where
this state should have received more interest from the United States, than
should have been paid on the New-Loan certificates, the Comptroller General
should pay such overplus in indents to the holders of such certificates. --
After attending to this part, and on this question it is the only material
part, of the law of March 1789, it is difficult to conceive, on what principles
the honorable accusers, in all their laudable zeal for accusation, could have
imagined, that the New-Loan certificates became the property of the
commonwealth immediately on their being offered for re-exchange, and without
any of those requisites being complied with; and what must greatly increase our
wonder is, that we see their honorable managers and learned counsel throwing
down the gauntlet, and appearing as champions in vindication of the position!
Our armor consists of the defensive weapons of argument only, but we hope not
to be found recreant.

Although there might perhaps have been a very few exceptions, yet very
generally speaking, the state had paid to the holders of the New-Loan
certificates, more, frequently much more interest than she had received from
the United States -- She therefore very prudently provided by the law of March
1789, that no re-exchange should take place nor return of certificates be made,
until the interest paid by this state on the New-Loan certificates, should be
equalized and the overplus or balance be repaid -- By this provision she
declared, that her right and property in the Continental certificates should
not cease or be divested, until New-Loans to an equal amount should be
delivered to her, and until the interest paid and received by her, should be
equalized, and the balance paid to her -- If then the right and property of the
state in the certificates which she had received upon loan, was to continue
until all these things should take place, is it possible to imagine, that the
right and property of the holders of the New-Loan certificates, could be
divest^^ before that period had arrived! If it is, it follows, that the state
was at the same time owner of both the old Continental and the New-Loan
certificates, and that the humble individual was owner of neither! What, would
the consequence of this doctrine be? Why that a holder of a New-Loan
certificate, who had no other property in the world, might be told that it
would be best for him to have it re-exchanged for the old Continental one. He
believed so and carried it to the Comptroller General for that purpose -- The
Comptroller General tells him, it shall be exchanged, but as you have received
one, two or three year's interest from the state, more than the state has
received from the United States, you must pay the difference before an exchange
can take place -- The individual replies, I have no property in the world save
this certificate, and I therefore cannot do it; give me my certificate that I
may do with it, as well as I can; no, replies the Comptroller General, by
offering your certificate for exchange, your property in it is divested, and it
now belongs to the commonwealth. Give me then says the other my old Continental
one in lieu of it. -- No replies the Comptroller General I cannot do that,
until the balance of interest is equalized and paid -- This says the individual
I shall never be able to do, because I have no other property, and if you keep
both certificates, I am reduced to beggary. -- It is so, must the defendant, on
his accuser's principles, reply, but I cannot help it; your property in one
certificate is divested by your offering it for exchange, while you are
property in the other is not revested, because you are not able to comply with
the necessary terms! -- I now ask, Mr. Speaker, if any thing can be more true,
than that these consequences result from the doctrine contended for? I further
ask, if the doctrine contended for is not a very high article of impeachment on
the honor and integrity of Pennsylvania? If an answer to both these questions
must be given in the affirmative, it will be an ample refutation of the
objection. Exchange is the act of giving and receiving reciprocally; it is
traffic by permutation; it is the giving of one thing for the sake of another,
and to talk of an exchange without a mutual transfer of property, is to
misconstrue the meaning of a word, which no schoolboy is at a loss to
comprehend -- In a good old book of the law, in which nothing but truth is to
be found, it is recorded that "In every exchange there are two grants, for that
each party grants to the other in exchange;" and yet the defendant's accusers
have discovered, that there may be an exchange, although one party parts with
nothing, and although the other, does not comply with the terms on which such
exchange had been proposed! I might dilate on this subject, as I might at the
meridian hour of a clear day, to prove to a man of perfect vision, that the sun
shines, but lest I might become the object of ridicule, I will forbear. So much
for the law, and now for the evidence relating to this question.

It appears that several persons, whose names or number it would be useless to
mention, withdrew their New-Loan certificates, after carrying them to the
defendant's office to be exchanged. A change of mind in the holders of them,
was occasioned by various circumstances, which have been given in evidence, and
which it is needless to relate. The acquiescence of the defendant in that
change of mind, nevertheless proves, that he thought the right of re-exchanging
or not, rested with the party, until the re-exchange was completed -- nor was
this the opinion of him, only, but of the Governor also. It is neither stated
in the charge nor proved by the evidence, that the holders of the certificates
offered to be exchanged, tendered the balance of interest due from them. It is
neither stated nor proved that they were prepared with indents for that
purpose. If this was not the case, an exchange could not be made agreeably to
the terms of the law, nor was the defendant authorized to make such exchange.
-- But say the gentlemen, when terms offered by one party, are agreed to by the
other, the bargain is complete, and that, as the state offered to exchange the
old certificates for the new ones, a change of property took place, the moment
the latter were brought to the office for that purpose. I may admit the first
part of this argument to be just, without conceding the latter, since it is not
true, that the state offered to exchange the old certificates for the new ones;
but for the new ones and the balance of interest due from the holders of them.
By a letter of the 24th of December 1791, (page 221) the defendant informed the
Governor, that a number of exchanges to the amount of forty or fifty presented,
were pending for want of the parties paying the indents due, and by the same
letter he mentioned, that the holders of the new certificates were, on
presenting them, and liquidating the interest received thereon, entitled to
receive back their former ones or an equivalent; and it also appears, that by
another letter, he informed the Governor, that some certificates brought to be
exchanged, had afterward been withdrawn by the parties. This the Governor very
well knew, cou^^ not have been legally done, if immediately on being brought to
the office, they had became the property o^ the state, but he was so far from
entertaining so idle a notion, as to express no disapprobation of the
defendant's conduct. From Mr. Oldden no less a balance of interest than L.
194:8:5 was due. No part of it was either paid or offered, nor does it appear,
that Mr. Oldden was prepared with it. Without offering it, (...) was not
entitled to the old certificates, nor was his property in the new ones lost..
The certificate purchased from Mr. Biddle, had been stolen from Mr. Thompson
and it afterward came into the hands of Mr. Biddle for a valuable
consideration. This occasioned some little hesitation with the defendant at
first, and he proposed writing to Mr. Thompson, but he afterward wrote to a
more proper person, namely the Governor, for his directions.

From Mr. Biddle, a balance of interest was also due, but as that balance was
neither paid nor tendered, the observations which have been made, respecting
Mr. Oldden's certificates apply here, and need not be repeated -- I have now
done with the fifth and sixth articles and shall proceed to the

ARTICLE SEVENTH; which charges,
That the defendant, after "Receiving from sundry persons, certain New-Loan
certificates, in exchange for Continental ones, subscribed the same in his own
name, and for his own use and benefit," and the instance relied on is that, of
one to the amount of L 3275:19:4 said to have been received in exchange from
Mr. Blair M'Clenachan.

I have now arrived, Mr. Speaker, at the most interesting, the most serious and
the most important part of the whole business, since if this charge be true,
the defendant has committed a crime of the darkest die, and (...) deserving of
the most exemplary punishment -- He ^^d been largely confided in by his
country, and this article charges him with a violation of the trust! he ^^d
taken an oath to execute that trust with fidelity, and this article charges him
with a violation of that ^^th* The property of the state had been committed to
his care, and this article charges him with a perfidious, and more than
felonious appropriation of that property to his own use! a man capable of all
these things will stop at nothing! he must not only have drank deep of the cup
of iniquity, but he must have swallowed the last dregs of corruption! If this
article does not enumerate the whole catalogue of vices, it boldly charges the
defendant with a capital one, of such an hue, as to be indicative of a mind
capable of "The oldest crimes the newest ways;" -- of a mind so abandoned and
corrupt as to be under the restraint of ^ moral or religious principle, nor
likely to stagger at the perpetration of any iniquity, from the humble grade of
a pitiful, petit larceny, up to the fullness of the black chapter of hardened
villainy! The probability of its commission is therefore diminished, in
proportion to its magnitude, and before a being of rational intelligence can
say upon oath, that the charge is true, it must be verified by evidence,
affording a much stronger probability of guilt, than the probabilty of
innocence, arising from the character of the accused, and the enormity of the
charge can possibly be. We are told by the celebrated HUME, whose enlightened
mind, and close concatination of argument, is surpassed by nothing in ancient
lore or modern erudition, that a wise man proportions his belief to the
evidence, and that when the evidence is, from any cause whatever, less probable
than the thing which it is intended to verify, it ought to be rejected. Save on
some subjects, on which I presume not to speak, because I am incapable to
judge, I might almost observe, that naught bur truth ever came from the pen of
this great man. He tells us, as others had before done, that "It was a
proverbial saving in Rome, even during the lifetime of that philosophical
patriot; -- I SHOULD NOT BELIEVE SUCH A STORY WERE IT TOLD ME BY CATO; the
incredibility of a fact, it was allowed, might invalidate so great an
authority! -- To apply this principle of reasoning, fanctioned as it is by so
great an authority, to the present case, permit me to ask; -- Whether it is
most probable, that the defendant has committed the imputed crime, or that Mr.
M'Clenachan's memory fails him? To determine this question, the character of
integrity, supported by the one, and of inaccuracy in point of recollection
sustained by the other, merits our most serious consideration.

Political opinions are not the test of virtuous principles, nor should the
heart of a neighbor be questioned, because he does not adopt our political
creed, which may perhaps be more erroneous than his own.

I have no right to set myself up as an arbiter between us, nor to suppose,
that his motives are impure because our opinions are not the same.

The defendant's charity; his benevolence; his liberality are equalled but by
few; perhaps surpassed by none; -- they do not show themselves in an
ostentatious parade, calculated to raise and to emblazon a name, but in the
private and humble walks of indigency relieved, they are inscribed in tablets,
not to be effaced by the malice or teeth of time. He has been censured for his
political conduct; whether deservedly or not, is immaterial at present, and
cannot be worth an enquiry -- That political conduct however raised up
political enemies against him, and such is human nature, as to leave but little
room for doubting, that if aught of corruption in private life could have been
found against him, it would have been laid hold of by some of them to effect
his ruin -- Pennsylvania by entrusting him for more than ten years with almost
unlimited powers, without check or control, affords the most ample testimony;
that of the voice of the whole people of Pennsylvania, in favor of the
integrity of an old, faithful and long-tried servant. It has without
contradiction been stated, that within that period more than thirty millions of
pounds have passed through his hands -- The late Supreme Executive Council were
authorized and required, and they once a month did by themselves or a
committee, examine his books, his papers and his vouchers, respecting the
exchange and re-exchange of certificates. Though monthly weighed in the
balance, he was never found wanting. The same books, papers and vouchers, as
well as all others relating to his official conduct, have from time to time
been examined with the searching eye of severe scrutiny by different committees
of the honorable Assembly; and what has been the result? No discovery of fraud
of any kind.

Is not this, Sir, an almost unanswerable argument that it did not exist? If it
is not, permit me to observe, that long and laborious researches were made by
the committee of ways and means, without a discovery of any thing like guilt,
if we do not find it here. Their report may therefore be considered as strong
evidence of innocence in all other respects. Again, Sir, another committee were
busily employed during a long recess of the House, with powers to send for
persons and papers, if such powers could be given by a single branch of the
Legislature, in beating up every bush and cover, where it was possible for
fraud to lurk, or guilt to be concealed; -- And what have they discovered? Not
a filchered mite, from all the glittering millions entrusted to the defendant's
care, if he is innocent of this charge. -- His character then appears to have
been, without blot or blemish; his conduct on all former occasions, free from
dishonesty of ever kind -- If this is the case, is not the incredibility of the
fact, sufficient to invalidate the charge, and could we believe such a story
were it told us by Cato? -- A perfidious appropriation of property, in
violation of a sacred trust, and in violation of his oath! No juvenille sinner*
no raw, unfledged stripling in the paths of vice, would begin the career of
villainy with so bold a leap! -- It is not in human nature, for the human heart
to become so corrupt at once! It begins with little things and proceeds
gradually, as it becomes more hardened, to greater ones, until it reaches that
desperate length when it boldly spurns all laws, human and divine. It starts
back with horror at first from those crime which, when long hackneyed in
iniquity it is prepared to perpetrate with eagerness. If such be the nature of
the mind of man, it is almost a violation of the law of nature, to suppose the
defendant guilty of the crime imputed by this charge, since we do not find his
mind prepared for it, by those of a less grade -- Reasoning on these
principles, I can see no sufficient ground for the defendant's conviction, even
if I should admit Mr. M'Clenachan's memory to be so perfect as that it could
not fail him. His integrity is unquestionable, and independent of this charge,
I believe the defendant to be equally so. The defendant cannot be guilty
without a ^^olation of his oath, and I know of no rule by which it could be
determined, whether the defendant or the witness considers the obligation of an
oath as more sacred. The probability is, that they hold it in equal veneration,
and that no consideration could lead either of them to its violation. The
defendant cannot however be guilty, unless he has wilfully violated his oath;
but he may be innocent, although the witness has paid the most sacred regard to
his. That this is the case, I shall endeavor to establish by many additional
circumstances, tending to show, that Mr. M'Clenachan's memory has failed him.
That the defendant subscribed in his own name, and for his own use and benefit,
such a certificate, as is mentioned in this charge, is not denied; but it is
denied that he received it in exchange for the use of the commonwealth. On this
the whole charge depends.

It is peculiarly worthy of consideration, Sir, that the certificate mentioned
in this charge, was subscribed in the defendant's own name -- He knew that at
the end of the loan a scrutiny would take place; he knew that that scrutiny,
together with such as had been set on foot by the Legislature of Pennsylvania
would lead to his detection, his disgrace and his punishment, if he subscribed
the property of the commonwealth in his own name, and for his own use and
benefit; he knew that this might easily be prevented by the subscription being
in some other name. The wicked flee when no man pursues, while the righteous
is bold as a lion. -- Is it then credible that the defendant, whose
intellectual faculties cannot be called in question would, if he was a guilty
man, have furnished the certain means of his conviction, when they might have
been so easily prevented? Certainly not, and hence arises a strong presumption
of his innocence.

If my recollection is right, Sir, the evidence affords another ground of
defense, which must, I think conclusively show the defendant's innocence, and
the inaccuracy of Mr. M'Clenachan's recollection -- There does not I think
appear, to be any deficiency in the amount of New-Loan certificates, received
by the state, in exchange for Continental ones. If I am right in this, and I
think the contrary has not appeared in evidence, nothing can be more clear,
than that this certificate did not belong to the state, else a want of
certificates to a like amount, belonging to the state, must have appeared,
which I think is not the case.

But the evidence of Mr. M'Clenachan, like the club of Hercules, is relied on
to beat down all opposition. It is, "That he never sold any certificates to the
defendant, or exchanged any with him, in his private capacity." -- The
character of integrity, deservedly maintained through life by this good man,
forbids an idea of his saying what he does not believe. There are occasions
however, in which something more than integrity is required, to entitle a
witness to full credit. If he is in all things hurried and confused; if his
memory is at all times remarkably defective; if he deals largely, without
keeping any accounts or memorandum; if he speaks negatively; if he relates a
story, not to be believed, though told by Cato; if he speaks doubtfully on many
things, where accuracy and pos^tive recollection might be expected; and
finally, if he appears to be mistaken in other things wh^re a mistake is hardly
possible, such a man is not entitled to full credit, however good his heart may
be; nor should a man of fair character be forever blasted on his evidence* Let
the evidence of Mr. M'Clenachan be weighed by these rules.

That he is a gentleman of this description cannot be denied; that his memory
is so extremely defective as to disable him to give an accurate account of even
recent transactions is equally true; and that his evidence is liable to all the
other objections which have been mentioned will presently appear. Our
adversaries rely on his integrity, and we admit that his integrity may be
relied upon, although his evidence cannot -- If he really sold the certificate
in question to the defendant, it would be rather extraordinary if he should
remember it; quite natural for him to forget it. But independent of what has
been said, there are many strong grounds for the supposition, that he is
mistaken -- In the first place he speaks not affirmatively but negatively, and
this amounts to nothing more, than that he does not remember it, and this I can
readily believe.

When a man of integrity speaks affirmatively, we are induced to believe him,
however bad his memory may be, although we must suspect his relation to be
inaccurate; when negatively, his evidence can amount to but little, either way.

That these observations apply with great force to the evidence of Mr.
M'Clenachan will appear, when it is considered, that he dealt very largely in
certificates of various kinds, for a number of years, but never kept any
account or memorandum of them, because, as he himself tells you, it was of no
consequence of whom he bought them, nor to whom he sold them -- If then he
considered it as of no consequence from whom they were bought, nor to whom they
were sold; if he never kept any account or memorandum of their quantity or
amount, nor of the names of the persons with whom he exchanged; from whom he
bought, nor to whom he sold; and if he dealt in them for a number of years and
to a prodigious amount, does it follow, that he did not part with this
certificate to the defendant, because he cannot recollect it? And is it not
more probable, that he has forgotten, than that a man of fair character, has
committed the black crime imputed to him? -- He is not able to tell from whom
he bought, nor to whom he sold other certificates, and why may not his memory
have failed him with respect to this as well as to others? He does not remember
from whom he bought this certificate, and why should he remember to whom he
fold it? He does not remember that he ever had it, and why should he remember
any thing about it? He does not remember any thing about it, and how can he
recollect exchanging it with, or selling it to the defendant! The honorable
managers and learned counsel very well know, that the prosecution must fail,
unless they prove, that this certificate became the property of the state, by
being received in exchange from Mr. M'Clenachan; but his memory is so
treacherous, as to reduce them to the necessity of calling upon Major M'Concel
and the State-Treasurer to prove that it ever belonged to him; -- they prove
this, but they prove no more, and is it to be expected, that these gentlemen
should be able to prove all the transactions which ever took place between Mr.
M'Clenachan and the defendant? It is not; and if there ever was cruelty in a
prosecution, it certainly exists, where those who conduct it, on finding that
he who must ones have known every thing respecting its grounds, has now
forgotten them altogether, endeavor to supply his defect of memory by
witnesses, who cannot be supposed to know any thing which might operate in
favor of the defendant. That Mr. M'Clenachan once owned this certificate is in
full evidence from two gentlemen of respectable character; from him the
honorable Senate can learn nothing respecting it. Is it then extraordinary,
that he who once owned this certificate, but does not recollect it; nor is able
to tell from whom he received it; nor to say one word about it; should forget
parting with it to the defendant? Nay, would it not be more extraordinary, if a
man who does not recollect to have ever had a certificate, should tell you,
that he recollects parting with it to the defendant!

Innocence of conduct, Mr. Speaker, I have always been taught to believe,
afforded ample security, but on the principles contended I find, if they are
found, that that security does not depend on innocence, but on the scanty
portion of the faculty of memory, which may have been bestowed on an
individual. -- Again, Sir, what aspect will this business wear, if I make the
extraordinary admission, that Mr. M'Clenachan is remarkable for his retentive
memory, and accuracy of relation; and if I go further and admit, that he never
did sell this certificate to the defendant, nor exchange it with him in his
private capacity? Not any aspect unfavorable to the defendant, because all such
certificates were payable to bearer and transferrable by delivery. The witness
dealt largely in them, but does not know from whom he bought nor to whom he
sold. -- Although he does not recollect it, he received this certificate from
Major M'Connel, as appears by the evidence of that gentleman. That Mr.
M'Clenathan not only bought, but sold certificates, appears from his own
testimony. Whether he sold this certificate to some other person or not, he
cannot tell, since he has forgot that he ever had it. May it not then be, that
if he did not sell it to the defendant, yet that he sold it to some other
person? And if so, may it not have come fairly into the defendant's hands in
the course of his extensive dealings in certificates? It surely may, nor can
any thing be more likely. Mr. M'Clenathan was we find, in the habit of selling
certificates, but he cannot say to whom, or this certificate might perhaps be
easily traced to the defendant's hands. If he cannot say to whom he sold, why
are we to expect that the defendant can prove, from whom he bought? Because say
his accusers, "He is an accurate man." -- That he is an accurate man, in
matters wherein accuracy is required, or can be useful, is admitted; but what
occasion could there be for accuracy in keeping an account of the names of
persons, from whom he bought, or to whom he sold certificates? Or how could it
be useful? Mr. M'Clenachan says, he kept no such account, because it was of no
consequence. Most other people reasoned I believe in the same way, and I very
much doubt, if many instances can be shown, of such accounts being kept by
dealers in certificates. Mr. M'Clenachan was asked if he could tell the names
of all the persons from whom he bought, and to whom he sold certificates, but
he deemed the question so unreasonable, that he refused to answer it, and yet
the guilt of the defendant is strongly urged, because he cannot prove from whom
he got this certificate. On the same principles might he be called on to prove,
from whom he received every certificate, of every kind and description which he
ever owned; on the same principle it might be concluded, that wherever he
could not furnish such proof, he had stolen them; and on the same principle,
might the same conclusion be made against every other man under the like
circumstances! But say the gentlemen, the defendant kept a diary of all his
transactions, and if he had bought this certificate, an account of it would
appear in that diary. Sir that diary lies on the table, and if the gentlemen
will permit it to be read, it will be found, that it does not contain an
account of all his transactions, nor of any single transaction of any kind
whatever, except of the public business of his office, transacted by him for
other people as Comptroller General. If the gentlemen will permit the diary to
be read, they will find this to be the case, and if they will not, its contents
should not be misrepresented. The defendant thought it of no more consequence
than Mr. M'Clenachan did from whom he bought, nor to whom he sold certificates,
nor did he ever keep any accounts thereof -- On the same ground, then, might he
be impeached on account of every other certificate subscribed by him, and which
had been issued in any other name than his own; on the same ground, might all
other persons, under the like circumstances be impeached; on the same
principles might their guilt be presumed. This doctrine would also extend to
Continental certificates, subscribed under the first loan, since with equal
propriety it might be urged, that the state had received them in exchange for
New-Loan certificates, as it is now urged that this New-Loan certificate was
received in exchange for a Continental one. I believe I have already observed,
that a strong presumption of innocence ^rises, from the defendant having
subscribed this certificate in his own name, since he must have known, that if
he had pilfered it from the state, a deficiency in the New-Loan certificates to
the same amount would appear, and also, that he had subscribed this
certificate, the property of the state, in his own name and for his own use.
But few men, when in the commission of crimes, are so careless of consequences,
as not to take some pains to avoid detection; none so silly, as to furnish
evidence against themselves -- The defendant, if he be really guilty, forms a
strange exception to the rule, since he might have avoided detection, by
subscribing in the name of some other person, or fixing on other certificates,
received from persons who are since dead, or from strangers who could not now
appear against him.

The great doubt with which Mr. M'Clenachan answered many of the
interrogatories, his total forgetfulness of several things, which he must once
have known, and which are of such a nature, as to be not easily forgotten, and
his own account of his manner of transacting business relating to certificates,
will best show, how far his memory is to be relied on, when speaking negatively.

He tells you, that he did not make out any account or list of his
certificates, when he delivered them to Mr. Nicholson to be exchanged, nor can
he say whether he received their full amount in return, as he did not know the
amount of either, though the amount was very considerable. Was such a
carelessness in business; such an indifference about property ever manifested
by mortal! (vide page 26) and is the negative testimony of such a witness after
a long lapse of time, sufficient to prove that a thing did not happen because
he does not remember it? He tells you that it is probable that he had a
certificate of that amount, but he cannot be certain thereof -- If he cannot be
certain, that he had it, he cannot be certain that he gave it to the defendant
to be exchanged, and if he does not know, nor pretend to say this, how can the
honorable Senate learn it from him? It is not in proof that he ever had the
certificate after March 1790, and if so, it cannot be in proof that at a period
long after, he delivered it to the defendant to be exchanged. He was in the
habit of selling certificates; but what certificates or to what amount or to
whom he cannot now inform you, and why may not he have sold this as well as
others?

When called on to give an account of his transactions with Matthew M'Connell,
he says, that he never, to the best of his knowledge, either sold or lent to,
or deposited with Matthew M'Connell a certificate to the amount of L. 3275:19:4
and that as he did not lend him such a certificate he could not receive it from
him in return.

This is not saying it is true, that he never received one from him to that
amount, but when called upon to relate, what had passed between them in their
dealings in certificates, it is impossible to suppose, that a man of Mr.
M'Clenachan's fair character, would have played upon words in this manner, or
endeavored to conceal the truth, if he had remembered receiving such a
certificate from Mr. M'Connell, and yet, that he did receive such a certificate
from him on the 23d of April 1788 is proved by that gentleman and by his books.
Here then is full evidence of Mr. M'Clenachan's memory failing him, as to the
buying of this very certificate from one gentleman, and is it more
extraordinary for him to forget the selling of it to another?

He says Sir, that he lent Mr. M'Connell a number of small certificates,
amounting in the whole to upwards of L. 3000 -- and that he made a memorandum
of them in a book. This entry of them in the book was, because they were to be
returned -- It has since been produced, and among these small certificates we
find, besides several to a larger amount than L. 200 each, one to the amount of
L. 328:9:9 another to the amount of L. 398:8:9 and another to the amount of L
1350:0:0 -- Surely the witness would not have called the last one, a small
certificate, if he had recollected it. He must therefore have forgotten,
notwithstanding the entry made in his book. Had it not been for that entry, it
is probable, that the whole transaction would have forgotten, and that his
memory, though aided by it before giving his evidence, was so extremely
treacherous as to fail him, when giving it without having the books before his
eyes at the very moment of doing so. Here he speaks affirmatively, that they
were all small. He is mistaken, and why not so, when speaking negatively, and
without the help of a memorandum to refresh his memory? Another very
extraordinary circumstance attending the evidence of this gentleman is, that
although from the help of his memorandum, he is enabled to recollect, lending
to Mr. M'Connell on the 30th of March 1789, certificates amounting in the whole
to upwards of L. 3000 -- yet when called upon to give an account of all their
dealings in certificates, he mentions no others (page 251) although Major
M'Connell, when asked whether, the certificates for L. 3275:19:4 was paid or
sold to Mr. M'Clenachan; tells you, "That it was delivered to him agreeably to
an engagement or contract. That Mr. M'Clenachan delivered him some
certificates, for which he was to deliver him a certain quantity of another
kind, and that he delivered him more certificates besides this at the time
alluded to, and afterward." This transaction happened in April 1788, (page
250) and it cannot therefore be the same with that which Mr. M'Clenachan's
entry enables him to recollect having happened (page 254) in March 1789. It
proves that Mr. M'Clenachan parted with certificates to Major M'Connell besides
these mentioned by him to more than the amount of L. 3275:19:4 and that in
April 1788, he was partly repaid by one certificate to that amount, and partly
by more certificates at the same time, and fully by more certificates
afterward -- yet every trace of this transaction is entirely erased from the
memory of the witness -- Impressions made on his mind by objects of distress,
or a sense of religious or moral duty are lasting; all others are but
momentary, and like a bird in the air leave not a trace behind.

If this is not sufficient to prove, that no other conclusion is to be drawn
from Mr. M'Clenachan's not being able to recollect a fact, than that he has
forgotten it; demonstration of its truth will afforded by that which is to
follow -- The whole amount of certificates which he mentions, as having been
receive by him from Major M'Connell is upwards of L. 3000, which was returned
to him in consequence of the loan of March 1789 -- I have already showed, that
besides that sum, he received from him to more than the amount of L. 3275:19:4.
Let us now attend to the evidence of Major M'Connell, supported by an accurate
list made at the time, and furnished from his books -- It amounts to no less a
sum (page 191) than L. 16035:11:5 in certificates delivered by him to Mr.
M'Clenachan! It follows that the sum of L. 13000 or thereabouts has escaped the
witness' memory, besides much more than L. 3000 parted with by him to Major
M'Connell in April 1788!

After such astonishing proofs of a treacherous memory, permit me to ask, if it
would not be cruelty in the extreme; barbarism almost unexampled, to condemn
even a rat to be ducked, because such a witness may not remember, that the poor
animal had counseled its companions, against an invasion of our stack, or our
mow!

In short, Sir. notwithstanding the large dealings in the certificate business,
which took place between the witness and Major M'Connell, the mind of the
former is a mere blank, except where his memorandum made an impression, but
even that impression was so fugitive, as to be gone, the moment the book was
out of his hands!

I have said, Sir, that he expresses himself on many occasions, as to be sure
an honest man who doubts would do, with so much hesitation as to show, that he
is certain of nothing. His answers afford ample testimony of this, and I need
not go through them to prove it. It has been objected, that as Mr. M'Clenachan
tells you, "He took all the New-Loan certificates that he possessed, and which
were to a very considerable amount, to be exchanged." This must have been
amongst them. To this I answer, that this evidence can only apply to the
certificates which he then had, not those which he had parted with, and of
course it proves nothing at all, since it does not appear that he then had the
certificate in question.

"I took no account," says Mr. M'Clenachan, "of either the number or value of
the certificates, nor of the rhyme of delivering them to be exchanged." How
little must he then know respecting them!

Whether the certificate in question was exchanged or not, or whether the
witness received Continental ones in lieu thereof, he cannot tell (page 255-6.)

Whether he received Continental certificates in exchange for his New-Loan ones
altogether and at one time, or at different times he does not remember (page
256)

Mr. Nicholson obliged Mr. M'Clenachan at his request at different times with
indents, but to what amount the witness cannot say (page 257.)

On a final settlement of the account of the witness with the state, a balance
appeared against him, of 4446 dollars and 24 cents, which at his request the
defendant paid in the summer of 1793 (page 257.)

I might perhaps Mr. Speaker, with great safety to my client, close my
observations here, but I still rest on one strong ground of defense, surrounded
by impregnable ramparts of truth and safety, from which it will never be in the
power of the well organized and arranged, the well trained and disciplined band
of veteran assailants to displace me. The charge is, that this certificate had
been received in exchange for another one, and it thereby became the property
of the state -- If this is not proved, there is no evidence of the defendant's
guilt and he must be acquitted. It is not incumbent on him to prove, than it
was not the property of the state, but on the state it is incumbent to prove,
that it was. What is the proof which the state afford of this? Why that in
March 1790 it was owned by Mr. M'Clenachan, and that at a subsequent period, he
cannot tell us when, he delivered all the certificates which he then had,
without being able to mention their amount or number to the defendant to be
exchanged; that he received in exchange, certain others, the amount or number
of which he cannot tell; nor did he ever know, whether the certificate in
question was among them or not; -- he cannot say nor does be know that he ever
saw it. Although we cannot learn it from him, we learn from others, that he
owned it in March 1790, but as he was in the practice of buying and selling
certificates, upon a very large and extensive scale, without keeping any
accounts whatever respecting them, he may have parted with this certificate, in
April, May or June of the same year. Upon whom then does the burden of the
proof lie? The prosecutors tell us that when stolen goods are found upon a man,
he can only be acquitted, by proving that he came honestly by them, and they
have endeavored to apply that principle to the present case. The principle is
certainly a good one, but before it can be applied, it must appear, that the
goods were stolen -- Before an enquiry respecting the thief can take place, it
is necessary to prove that a felony was committed, and until that appears, the
party accused may safely remain silent -- So here; until it is proved that this
certificate became the property of the state by being received in exchange, the
defendant is under no necessity of proving that he did not purloin it from the
state. If it never belonged to the state, it is impossible for the state to be
defrauded by its abstraction. It is therefore incumbent on the state before
this charge can be maintained, to establish a property in this certificate. Of
this, though essential to a conviction, and without which it is impossible
where truth and law prevail, for a conviction to take place, not a particle of
proof has been offered -- It has only been shown that Mr. M'Clenachan owned it
in March 1790, and that more than two years afterward he delivered all the
certificates which he then had, to the defendant to be exchanged; -- but as he
had been in the habit of selling certificates, and knows nothing at all about
this, there is no more evidence, of his having parted with it to the state,
than to any private individual whatever. Unless this ground is supported by
evidence, the prosecution must fail, but in support of this ground there is no
evidence. -- Evidence in support of its truth must be home against the
defendant, or he has a right to demand an acquittal -- The evidence adduced for
that purpose, is in the language of an ancient orator, no less feeble than
would be an attempt to put but the sun, by fanning in his face with a peacock's
feather. -- Here then, Sir, permit me to pause and to make a serious and
determined stand; -- a stand on ground so sure and solid as to afford perfect
safety wherever evidence is attended to; -- truth respected; law regarded or
innocence presumed until guilt appears.

I said, Sir, in an early stage of my remarks, that to a conviction on a charge
of perjury, the evidence of two witnesses is required. The law is the same on a
charge of high treason, because an oath of fealty is supposed to have been
taken, even though owing to age or sex it was not by law required. Having
mentioned my reasons and quoted my authorities then, they shall not be repeated
now. I only request that they may be remembered, and that it may be seriously
considered, whether the same principle is not applicable on the present
occasion. -- The consequence of a conviction will be a removal from office; --
it may be a "disqualification to hold any office of honor, trust or profit
under this commonwealth." Of this I should not have taken any notice, had not
the supposed mildness of the punishment, been strongly urged as a reason for
conviction. -- Let your men of delicacy, who urge a conviction, because to
their delicate feelings it appears, that the defendant has not acted delicately
say whether to a man of honor such a punishment is not worse than death!

Mr. Speaker and Gentlemen of the Honorable Senate,

Circumstances, of which my present appearance, affords too ample a proof, have
entitled me to some indulgence, but I have received it in such a degree, that I
will not abuse it by taking up time in a recapitulation.

Before you, appears a man in the open and erect form of innocence; -- a man
whose integrity was till now never questioned; -- a man in whom Pennsylvania
for a series of years, reposed more confidence than she ever did in any one of
his accusers; -- not less than in any one of his honorable judges; -- a man
whose benevolence and kindness of disposition are converted into crimes! And
you see him charged with not only the summit of human, but the depth of
infernal wickedness! and this too upon the evidence of a man, who is not able
to relate with accuracy to day what happened yesterday.

To what or to whom shall the defendant under these circumstances appeal, in
vindication of his abused innocence? Not to his honorable judges, as benign
dispensers of mercy; -- for her favors he disdains. The feelings of conscious
integrity, will not permit a man, who has not sinned; to accept so degrading a
boon. -- But his appeal is to justice, and he is too proud to accept of any
thing else; -- to justice not in the haggard form, in which she appeared in
another place; where upon a sale related by one man, of what had been told him
by another, a very high charge was made and voted to be true! Where this was
deemed sufficient, because the information was said to have come from one of
the officers of government; where it was not thought worth while to send for
that person before the House, and to examine into the truth of falsity of the
charge? But the justice to which he appeals, is that which reigns supreme
within these walls; -- in form celestial; -- in nature divine. Her smiles he
will not court; -- her frowns he does not dread -- She is the protectress of
innocence; and if that has appeared, justice will pronounce WILL DONE THOU GOOD
AMD FAITHFUL SERVANT.

The Editor is under the necessity of recording, that the last Speaker was, to
all appearance, in a sick and weakly state during the time in which he spoke
for his client.

Same Day.
Mr. INGERSOLL spoke as follows --

Mr. Speaker, and Gentlemen of the Senate,

THE honorable but arduous task of concluding the arguments falls to my lot. I
have to lament the disparity between my abilities and the magnitude of this
business; the latter circumstance I doubt not however will secure me your best
attention.

There are circumstances in this cause sufficient to excite the curiosity of
the most dull, and to affect the feelings of those least attentive to the
interest of the community.

More than 60,000 dollars have been issued from your Treasury, in stock of the
United States. The expected compensation cannot be obtained; and if it could,
it would be on terms that would render the acquisition, no gain; and the
Comptroller General, your confidential agent, has gained more than L. 5000 by
the transaction.

A transaction so injurious to the commonwealth and derogatory to the character
of the defendant, requires a discussion. The reputation of the state, and
character of the defendant, are implicated in this investigation; the enquiry
is of great importance, as it respects the defendant, or the conduct of the
Assembly. If the House of Representatives made use of expressions authorizing
what has been done, let their intention have been what it might, the fault is
imputable to them alone. It is necessary, the import of their language should
known; or, if the Comptroller General managed his official duty with art and
design, and misconstrued laws to serve his private emolument, he ought to be
the object of public disapprobation.

Whether, therefore, you consider the defendant, or the nature of the subject,
no place can be so proper for the investigation as the Senate, inasmuch as
character and station can have no weight before this high tribunal. The result
of experience induced our ancestors, in another country, to prefer trials by
impeachments to the ordinary tribunals, to prevent a defect of justice, as the
influence of the accused often bias and sway the minds of a jury. Some pains
have been taken by the counsel for the defendant to prejudice the Senate
against this mode of proceeding. They say this ought to be referred to courts
of justice! One gentleman said, "popular bodies are easily warped by an artful
individual, when he meditates the ruin of his neighbor." And the gentleman who
spoke last attributes it to a gratification of humor.

I do not recollect in England any abuse of this process; a salutary use has
been made of it in this country. In the United States, and in the different
states, we find, when they reject bills of attainder, they adopt the mode of
trials by impeachment.

I presume every Senator hearing me perfectly understands the different kinds
of debts.

Funded debt includes certificates issued for services or supplies on
Continental account, not including Depreciation certificates issued for the
depreciation of the pay of the Pennsylvania line. The Act of the 21st of March
1783 makes the distinction between funded and unfunded depreciation
certificates. When the depreciation certificates were originally issued, they
were only funded in the Land-office, and on forfeited estates; these funds were
found insufficient to keep them from depreciating; the excise was therefore per
Act last alluded to, appropriated to those not alienated. Hence the
distinction. Now, the unfunded debt is an object of our enquiry. This debt,
strictly speaking, originated lately, had been issued on Continental account,
and unconnected with this cause, being contracted between the individuals and
the state; and although contracted on Continental account, they were state
debts; the creditors had no other debtor but the state, and being possessed of
3 per cent. stock of the United States sufficient to redeem and pay off this
debt, the law of the 10th of April 1792, whose meaning we are endeavoring to
ascertain, was passed.

It may also be proper here to mention that the amount of the New-Loans was
about five millions of dollars, that L. 118,470:6:6 had been redeemed, and that
the remainder had been reduced by exchanges to the sum of L. 50,000. and no
doubt had been entertained but that the whole would be exchanged without the
expense of a single farthing to the state.

The first great question of the cause now offered for consideration: What
debts were redeemable under the Act of the 10th of April 1792?

I answer in the words of the law, 1st. Certificates on which an interest of 6
per cent. was payable annually: 2d. 6 per cent. purparts. 3d. 3 per cent.
purparts; and, 4th. Dollar-money. As matter of explanation I must here imitate
the example of the counsel for the defendant, by referring to the Journals to
ascertain the law. (Mr. Ingersoll then read the report of the committee of ways
and means of the 22d of February 1792, page 157, in which the debts to be
redeemed are stated; and that those under the sixth section were only to be
redeemed on condition Congress should again open the loan. Mr. Ingersoll also
enumerated the certificates on which the state were paying interest; that
New-Loans were none of those mentioned in that section, which was contrary to
the defendant's position, page 161. The committee contemplate the event of
opening the loan, and declare on what grounds they will place unfunded
depreciation. In page 160 the amount of the debt subscribable is carried out
L.73,935 3:2. Mr. Ingersoll then read the report of the Comptroller General of
the 30th November 1791; in which he mentioned the debt which was entitled to
purparts, and which excludes Unfunded Depreciation and New-Loan certificates;
and observed that it was clear that the committee of ways and means did not
consider the New-Loans as a state debt, and they did not forget all the debts,
for they enumerated the several kinds.)

In page 188 of the same minutes the report was read the second time, and no
alteration was made. The same idea is preserved in the Act as it is in the
report. It is apparent the Legislature did not contemplate New-Loans as a
subsisting debt. I will only refer to the rules for construing and expounding
statutes. It is a maxim in the construction, haeret in litera, haeret in
cortice, that the life of a statute does not consist in the words but in the
sense and meaning of it; that general words of statutes shall receive a
particular interpretation when the intent of the maker is particular; that
things out of the letter may be within the intent, and things within the letter
may be without the intent; that the intent is to be collected sometimes; by
considering the cause of making the Act, sometimes by comparing one part of the
Act with the other, and sometimes by foreign circumstances. General words in an
Act are not to be, construed to extend to what is repealed or annulled by
previous Acts, such constructions ought always to be made, that one part of the
Act may agree with another: Finally, an Act of Parliament as a last will is to
be construed by the intention of the maker, that one part of it is to expound
and explain the other.

I will show that all their arguments refer back to a literal meaning, and that
it is, as improbable that the sick sailor mentioned in 1st volume of
Blackstone, (page 61) should be entitled to the property as that the New-Loan
certificates should be within the provision of the law of the 10th April 1792.
It is universally acknowledged that the ship and lading did not in the last
instance belong to the sick passenger, nor could it be within the meaning of
the statute. So we say in this case, the New-Loans could not be within the
purview of the Act, so that they must be eventually paid. The idea was never
suggested that interest must have been paid at the Treasury on five millions of
dollars, of which there remained about fifty thousand pounds unexchanged. No
man entertained a doubt but that the whole sum should have been exchanged in a
short time. Why then should an expense of 20 or 25 per cent. be incurred, when
the whole might be exchanged and in a very little time no New-Loans would be
remaining?

It has been stated by Mr. Morgan, that if the Act was to have been construed
literally, Pennsylvania, would have to redeem all the debts of the several
States in the Union. True; but does not this show that a literal construction
is inadmissible, for then the debt of Pennsylvania, not owing on continental
account would be also redeemable. This shows the words State debt were used in
an appropriate, and not a general sense. How then are the New-Loan certificates
noticed? Is there a law or resolution of the General Assembly? Is there a
report of the Committees of ways or means? Is there an address from the
Governor to the Legislature? Is there a report from the Comptroller General
himself, recognizing them as a debt or giving any intimation that the State
meant to redeem them, from the passing of the Act of March 1789 to the passing
of the Act of 10th April 1792? If therefore the Legislature had received no
account for three years of the state of the exchanges on what proportion of
them were out: When, then, the whole system is changed, without a line written
or a word spoken on the subject by the Comptroller or Register-General, the
whole business being unknown to the Assembly, what have they done?

Thus far we agree, that on the 27th of March 1789 the Legislature declared,
saying, we will not pay the New-Loan certificates, we will return the
continental ones, you must look to Congress for your pay. The Legislature of
1789 made this declaration, when did they declare a different sentiment? Why,
Sir, the counsel for the defendant allege, that all on a sudden without a
single word said or written about it, on the 10th of April 1792, the
Legislature provided a fund commensurate with the objects to be redeemed? Is it
to be supposed that they would extend the redemption without enlarging the
fund? Would they abandon their prudent plan to open their arms so wide as to
embrace even old Continental bills of credit, and this even without being
furnished with an estimate of the cost? -- (Mr. Ingersoll then read the 2d
section of the Act of 10th of April.)

As it appears the first leading motive with the Legislature was to get rid of
their debts, what reason can be given why we should not pursue the same idea
through, and apply the same motives? The Legislature did not undertake to redeem
all that are subscribable -- In the law of the 9th April 1791 the State debts
are assumable, although not redeemable, the unfunded debt is mentioned by the
committee on ways and means as subscribable, although not redeemable, and it is
payable at 20. in the pound, while its only receivable at 16.; -- Their only
intent was to compel a subscription of the debt they meant to redeem, and
therefore they imposed it on the holders as a consideration, that they should
subscribe. Therefore if our construction is adopted, the system is complete and
consistent; if on the other hand the defendant's construction should prevail,
there is a fund in one, and none in the other. Here was a condition imposed as
necessary to a redemption, you shall subscribe to the loan, and assign to the
state treasurer for the use of the commonwealth; the legislature presuming that
they had provided a fund, directed an order to be drawn by the Governor on the
Treasurer who shall immediately pay, etc. --

Consider for a moment the consequences. If the New-Loans were included, the
amount indefinite, what a predicament would the Legislature be involved in.
Their plea is extravagant, their only resource is the fund for claims and
improvements, this fund was restricted to L. 10,000 and L. 5000 of that were
annually appropriated for the improvement of roads. They have therefore put a
construction on this act that would dishonor the State, dishonor the first
Magistrate; the consequences of redeeming the New-Loans without providing funds
would manifest the extreme ignorance and inconsideration of the Legislature --
Why adopt a construction whose consequences are so absurd, so extravagant? They
say, the State shall redeem whatever Congress will assume, shall Congress
assume, because the state will redeem? Does Congress assume the debts, which
the state will not pay? They will not.

It cannot be pretended that the redemption law of the 10th of April, 1792,
created a debt; the New-Loans were excluded from redemption by the Act of 27th
March 1789, there the Legislature declare the New-Loans shall never be redeemed
by us; we will not redeem them otherwise than by an exchange; does Congress
say, they will assume, what Pennsylvania says, she will not redeem. If the
New-Loans are not redeemable by the State, they are not assumable by Congress.
Their construction will not do, except they can show the will of the
Legislature fully expressed since the 27th of March 1789; at that time no
divisions of parties prevailed, as they did when the Act of the 10th April,
1792, was passed. Is it to be imagined, that they would leave it to Congress to
say, what debts Pennsylvania was to pay?

No, Mr. Speaker, we are to take it upon the existing acts; from the complexion
of the house at that time, it is presumed that they would not throw themselves
into the power of Congress. In the official statements of the
Comptroller General to the Legislature, in which he included all the debts of
the commonwealth, he expressly states these New-Loans as excluded by law from
redemption. I confess, I thought these few observations would have been
sufficient for minds open to conviction, in as much as all parties acquiesced
in the Act of 1789, no objections were made to it, nor were any difficulties
started; all parties concurred, when the state had declared her will, and none
referred to the New-Loans -- strange, to hear curious disputes about the
constitution, -- for in August the same year the creditors applied to Congress
as to their only hope. As much pains have been taken to obscure what is in
itself plain and self-evident, and left I should be thought to have neglected
my duty, I am obliged to be more particular, I will therefore proceed to show
--

1st. The New-Loan certificates were not assumable.

2dly. They were not redeemable.

3dly. That the defendant knowing that they were neither assumable, nor
redeemable, from interested motives, acting as Comptroller General, to derive a
benefit to himself to the injury of the State, certified them to be assumable,
and redeemable in some instances; and in others procured them to be assumed,
and certified they were redeemable

The express arrived this evening with the dispatches from the Commissioners
appointed to take H. Hamilton's deposition on interrogatories. -- Which see
from page 487 to page 496.

Adjourned.

In the minutes of the House of Representatives the following entry is
recorded: --

"In conformity to the resolutions of the 25th February last, the House
resolved itself into a committee of the whole, in order to attend the trial of
John Nicholson, Comptroller General.

"The Speaker quitted the chair and Mr. Montgomery was placed therein.

"The committee of the whole then proceeded to the Senate-chamber for the
purpose aforesaid.

"After some time,

"The committee of the whole returned to their own chamber.

"The Chairman left the chair, and the Speaker resumed it.

"The Chairman then reported that the committee of the whole had attended the
trial of John Nicholson, Comptroller General.

"The committee appointed to manage the trial of the articles of impeachment
against John Nicholson, Comptroller General, reported further progress, and
that the Senate would proceed in the further hearing of the counsel at ten
o'clock on Monday next, in the forenoon."

Twenty second day of the trial. MONDAY, MARCH 24.
Mr. INGERSOLL, in continuation.

Mr. Speaker, and Gentlemen of the Senate,

MY first position is, that the New-Loan certificates were not assumable; and
it is worthy of attention to consider the manner in which it has been brought
before the Senate. The Comptroller General, a principal officer of government
is endeavoring to bring forward a law consigned to everlasting oblivion; to
assist his views, he is trying to give a construction to the Act of 10th of
April, 1792, a construction which did not prevail at that time, and it is but
of late that the discovery was made.

If laws are to be construed in this manner the best plan may be rendered
abortive; but it has been shown that the Legislature have left on their
records an indubitable evidence that they considered the Act of 1789 as
perfectly annihilating the certificates in question. They bore an interest of 6
per cent. for four years, if they were State debts they must have borne
interest until paid off; why then were they omitted in the enumeration of the
debts of the state? Why were they omitted in the sixth section if they were
subscribable as a debt of Pennsylvania? Would it then be contended as an
operation of the law, or was this inferrable from the Comptroller-General's
report of December 1790 -- Wherein he adds that he was then stating all the
debts of the commonwealth on which interest was payable by the state, and adds
600l. interest on the New-Loans being a part of the four year's interest --
That the Comptroller General is wrong, it is sufficient to say, that if they
are assumable they must be within the assumption of Congress. If I can satisfy
the Senate that these debts are not within the assumption of Congress, if so,
and the Comptroller is defeated, is it a sufficient apology for him to say?
"Such was my opinion. I was mistaken." A public officer ought to tread on sure
ground; gross negligence and inattention is fraud; extravagant rashness ought
to be checked in any well regulated commonwealth.

Although it is his fault then if it shall pass unnoticed now, the blame will
rest elsewhere. How does it appear; is it not clear proof that they are not
assumable? The Secretary of the Treasury has declared to the world they are
not assumable, the commissioners for settling the accounts of the United States
with the individual States, have declared the same opinion, because the
New-Loans are not charged to Congress in the account of this State, therefore
not considered as certificates issued for services or supplies, Pennsylvania
cannot obtain certificates from Congress, if she could, she must refund the
amount in continental certificates, and pay the same in addition; the United
States do not undertake to assume and charge the state with debts, which they
have refused to pay. The Attorney General of the United States declared them
not assumable, but that firm texture of mind which one of the counsel for the
defendant has attributed to him is hardly a sufficient apology. If this had
taken place, the whole subscription would have been lost to the state, I will
show this to mathematical demonstration. The amount of the subscription of
Pennsylvania was 2,200,000 dollars, when the state had subscribed her quota
65,000 dollars, Mr. Nicholson's subscription would have been charged to her
until she had delivered continental certificates to that amount, besides the
difference between 16 and 20 shillings in the pound. But it will be asked, why
does not this mistake happen in all the other subscriptions, because
Pennsylvania previously charged the same amount to Congress, and the only
difference to Pennsylvania is the difference between the balance of cash and
stock; but we are told that we can charge Congress with every thing of this
kind, I answer, let any gentleman look at the books, and there is not a single
New-Loan certificate charged to them, but the whole is sunk at the loss of this
state. Either the Comptroller General knew this would not be received, or what
is most probable that he knew it was not payable out of the public Treasury, or
if payable, it must have been sunk as before.

But, again, it may be said that all these mistakes might be rectified, and the
time for the settlement might be extended by Congress, I answer, that it is not
expectable that such an indulgence could be granted, such a privilege might be
obtained by an humble petition to Congress. In this critical situation she
could not obtain a single farthing of stock until she lodged her continental
certificates for it.

But if it is necessary to recur to the words of the law, we will see if
Congress had countenanced this extravagant idea, we will see that Congress did
not assume the debts of Pennsylvania which she did not determine to redeem,
they say, they will assume the debts of the different states, but will they
determine for the states their debts, or say, they will pay what the states say
they will not pay, (Mr. Ingersoll then read the 13th section of the law of
Congress, of August 4,1790.) Here, sir, is certainly no intimation that
Congress meant to determine what that debt was. (The letter page 81-2 was then
read and commented on.) This is perfectly consistent with the law, and the
Attorney General of the United States construes the Act exactly as I do. If any
dispute should arise between an individual and the state of Pennsylvania,
Congress will not undertake to determine. "It is nothing to us, settle it among
yourselves, we will not intermeddle." From the character and situation of the
writer of this letter we must acknowledge that he determines the question of
assumability, not redeemability. Now, Sir, we have the opinion of the Secretary
of the Treasury, and the declaration of the Attorney General, the first
law-officer and the United States, that if there be an Act in form of a law,
declaring them not payable, they are not assumable. Have any dispute arisen
that there is such a law? The law is dated 1 April 1790, page 790, this shows
the Legislature did not consider the continentale certificates the property of
the state, until the New-Loans were redeemed. But again, we are told that
Congress speaks of the New-Loans as assumable; this is strange, is it improper
that Congress should provide not to assume twice the same debt? therefore they
have introduced a clause which the Secretary by his construction has rendered
intelligible. (Mr. Ingersoll then read the 18th section of the Act of Congress
of August 4, 1790.)

Now, Sir, there is not a syllable in this section about surrendering up the
counterparts to the United States; therefore agreeably to the literal common
construction, had a New-Loan holder subscribed 6d. Pennsylvania must restore
the same, or the subscription on her account must be suspended; it is however
true, that the Secretary of the Treasury has put a much more rational
construction on the Act. If you subscribe L.100 of New-Loans to the loan, an
hundred pounds of Continental certificates must be surrendered to the United
States, both certificates being evidences of one debt. But is that determining
what are state debts, and what not? that would be to encourage the New-Loan
holders to controvert the Secretary's construction. If there are New Loans
issued and are subscribed, then you must deliver up an equal amount of
Continental certificates. The Secretary of the Treasury tells you in his letter
(page 76-7-8-9, which Mr. Ingersoll read and commented upon.) It was presented
to the Secretary as if the Act of 1786 had not been repealed. No doubts were
ever suggested to him that there had been any law declaring them no debt.

The business lay in this manner until August 21, 1793, when the Secretary
wrote to the Governor (page 218-9, which was likewise read and commented upon
by him.) Here were six months at least, from February to August, a sufficient
time to make up their mind, and then the New-Loans were rejected totally as not
subscribable. It was the closing of the account with the state of Pennsylvania
which excluded them, and not the lapse of time. Now, what doubt remains? It
said, that it was not stated to Mr. Hamilton in a prominent point of view, that
the law of 1789 was passed after the Federal Constitution was adopted. I ask,
would it affect the business if it had? O heavens! had we no principles of
legislation until 1788 and 1789? Were we born yesterday? Were we novices? Let
us not entertain an idea so degrading. If we entered into a contract before
that period, could we abrogate that contract? It is true the United States in
this as well as in other respects decline to meddle with contracts; but, Sir,
were not the same principles held before that time? Yes; they were argued at
the bar, and in the House of Representatives; and the House decided they might
constitutionally repeal the law of 1786. The Secretary of the Treasury says, if
you have a difference, settle it between yourselves. The Judiciary of the
United States have no right to decide between Pennsylvania and her own
citizens; I cannot see with what good reasons they adduce a comparison
respecting the suability of states but in regard of their being existing debts.
Mr. Randolph tells us, it is enough that your laws do not recognize them as
debts. But to put this in a more prominent point of view, the Secretary of the
Treasury, a member of the Grand Convention, a gentleman so acute and
enlightened, can it be supposed that it escaped him? Nay, the Attorney General
and the Commissioners of accounts!

Does not the history of the assumption show their sense? The reasons no more
apply to the New-Loan certificates than the most remote subject which the mind
of man can contemplate. (Mr. Ingersoll then read 3d vol. debates of Congress,
page 41, 485.) Were the New-Loan holders clamorous at the door of Congress?
What was it to the New-Loan creditors in Pennsylvania that Shays made his
appearance in Massachusetts? Were not the five millions exchanging without a
murmur, and reduced to fifty thousand pounds? Was the principal or interest
then payable? We have it from our learned opponents themselves that the funds
were withdrawn. We will by and by consider that that debt was never to be paid
by this state, and unless they should be lost or by some other casualty, not a
New-Loan would have been out in the course of time allotted for exchanging
them. There is no reason to believe that Congress should be induced to pay the
New-Loans, for the United States do not any where say, we will pay that debt
whether Pennsylvania will redeem it or not; but in cases where the creditor
could call on the state, it never entered into their contemplation to assume
such debts. No idea is suggested that Congress would pay less than that
mentioned on the face of their contract, and of course no reason to believe
Congress would assume them. But we have it in proof that all the confidential
officers of the United States were directed to keep clear of them, if they
wanted the due recognition of the state as existing debts.

Then, Sir, the laws of Pennsylvania are the test to determine whether they
were or were not subscribable. I will therefore ask, whether the New-Loans are
recognized as an existing debt on or about the 10th of April 1792, and whether
they were payable at that present, or at a future period, or at an indefinite
time? This brings me to the laborious task of showing by tracing through the
laws, what I think the Senate have already seen, that the law of 1789 rendered
them no longer a debt or evidence of a debt.

It has been said, and I subscribe to it, that statutes must not be judged of
by the opinions of members, but must be expounded by the common and usual
rules. Adhering then to this principle, it will not be difficult to
demonstrate, that after the passing of the Act of March 27, 1789, they were no
longer a debt or evidence of a debt due by the state. In the first place it is
necessary to know what the law meant; then let us try it by the Constitution,
and see whether it will abide that test. (Mr. Ingersoll then read the title.)
The title of this law is prepared, and affixed after the whole scope is gone
through, and the law is for repealing a former one, and by that, to repeal the
payment of principal and interest. Passing on then, in order to know the
reasons, and of consequence the extent of the repeal, we must suppose the law
consonant with the intention and declared views of the Legislature without
examining them. If the law of 1786 was not temporary, and this law says so, it
is a coincident circumstance, and must be so taken. (Mr. Ingersoll then read
the preamble.)

The aggregate fund was the foundation of the contract, and the leading
circumstance; now the motive comes -- "It is reasonable and just;" this is
putting the Acts of 1785 and 1786 on the same footing, and all agree that the
former provision was temporary. Having assigned these reasons they proceed to
the enacting clause (first section then read.) This, it is said was only
withdrawing the funds. Were there any funds by the Act of 1786? The funds were
created by the Act of 1785: No. Therefore, there is something more; they speak
of more Acts than one. The reason assigned by the counsel for the defendant,
the most inapplicable of all others, that is, suspense and delay. Was this a
time to seek for suspension, when the state was receiving the sums due her from
the Continent? She then had the immense fund of a Land-office, the arts,
manufactures and agriculture flourishing, this fo^^^ the time when Pennsylvania
like a pauper is p^^^^g time of payment as represented by the opposite ^^^y! If
she was impressed with an idea so base as to have no other motive for
subtracting the funds, which we must never suppose, and unless she was
infatuated, she must instantly have substituted other funds in lieu of them
taken away. I have said that the recital if true, was in fact what repealed
this law. It is sufficient for my purpose, if in their understanding they
entertained the same view, it had the same effect on them, whether well or ill
founded. When they speak of repealing the law of 1785 as well as the law of
1786, they apply it to the principal and interest; when they make the provision
temporary, they apply that to the interest only, but it is not so; there is not
a single letter in the law which makes the distinction. I think it safer to
take their view from the Acts themselves, than at second hand. (Mr. Ingersoll
then read the section.) As the funds were temporary the provision ceased also.
If the provision will cease, will not the funds also cease? Is it possible to
wink so hard as not to see? What relief is to remain if the funds established
by the Acts of 1785 and 1786 are to cease? If the tedious road so often trod
must again be traveled over, although I do not think it necessary, I think
these plausible reasons for withdrawing the funds; foreign as well as domestic
creditors were to be paid. This House cannot forget the difference between that
and the present day. A dissolution of the Confederacy was apprehended, that the
debts of the Union would never be discharged, or at least not until a very
distant period, each state to take care of its own people. Under this aspect of
public affairs, the Act of 16th of March 1785, the first law on this subject,
was passed, to continue until Congress should provide; notwithstanding these
aspersions, it reflect eternal honor on the authors of it. She used the funds
which were not applied to the creditors generally. This was not her fault -- it
was attributable to some of the eastern states, but Pennsylvania was never the
original debtor; she was only surety for the United States. Why not hunt the
lion more generously? Why search up these sleeping Acts?

The Legislature of 1785 instead of seeking an excuse to evade the requisitions
of Congress, contributed every farthing required of them. It can be shown by
the statements of the defendant himself, that there was a balance in her favor
in specie, and in indents, necessarily possessing as she did so large a portion
of certificates; the law of 1785 provides for creditors of Pennsylvania, and
also for the requisitions to Congress. The manner how this payment was made
through the agency of the continental officers has been already sufficiently
explained. Congress was afraid lest the excise would be suspended, and for fear
of offending foreign states or foreign creditors in Sept. 1785, for the reasons
before mentioned, passed their resolution, 11 Volume, page 328-9, to defeat the
operation of that law, it will appear that it was not a complaint that the
requisitions were not complied with; but that notwithstanding they should not
pay the citizen creditors of any State in preference to the foreign creditors:
The honorable Senate, no doubt, recollect the difference between that time and
the present day.

I shall endeavor to show, although I do not think it necessary, that the Act of
1786 was intended as a temporary relief only. To understand these laws, it is
necessary to be reminded of the situation of the United States, the debilitated
State of the confederacy, and the distressed situation of the public creditors.
A dissolution of the confederacy was apprehended, that the debts of the Union
would never be discharged, or, at least until a very distant period.

Under this aspect of public affairs the first law of this subject was passed
on the 16th March 1785, and to continue until Congress should provide; this Act
provides for the annual requisitions of Congress, besides taking care of its
own people, the creditor citizens of Pennsylvania. Notwithstanding the
reflections against this law, it reflects eternal honor on the authors of it,
she used the funds which went not to the creditors generally, the delinquency
was not attributed to her, but to the Eastern States; she never was the
original debtor, she was only surety, and not the principal; it was her duty to
bring it forward in some manner to make it a charge against the United States,
the object was considered the same, although the mode of obtaining it was
different, then when the principal had been ready to pay why should we hunt up
these sleeping Acts with a view to embarrass this business? Although Congress
admitted the purity of the motives which actuated Pennsylvania, she
nevertheless resolved that any interest which should be paid after the first of
January, 1786, should not be allowed.

But as Congress defeated the operations of the Act of 1785, it became
necessary to carry that law into effect, in such a manner, as to make it a
charge against the United States; this, Sir, was the whole motive, although the
mode of doing the business was different, the substance was the same; and the
better to save appearances, the certificates purported to be for so much money
received on loan; did this bring the New-Loans within the term of State debts?
State debt has a definite meaning, including debts on a continental account,
and debts contracted on her own proper account. Yet, as every person well knew,
a definite meaning, when the creditor had only recourse to the state, and not
to Congress. The defendant's counsel have been diametrically opposite on this
subject; Congress would never have complained of the law of 1786 had the
Legislature confined themselves to the redemption of their proper state debt,
and yet we find them deputing a committee from their body to endeavor to
effect the destruction of the law of 1786, (see report, page 319, 320 of this.)
What was the reasoning of the state on that occasion? The Legislature had no
design to separate the contract from the fund, they considered the fund as the
essence of the contract, they say, we are ready to pay our quota, and to comply
with our requisitions, and until that is done we cannot withdraw the funds, the
law of 1786 must remain until a general provision is made by Congress -- When
the period had arrived, mentioned in the Act of 1785, so far as it respects the
payment of principal or interest of the New-Loan debt, a repeal took place;
this we contend had extinguished the debt, our opponents insist it only
withdrew the funds.

This shows the compact was not to be final and complete until all the states
should agree. Here are principles in which we and our opponents agree; let us
see how far. Cannot you, says Congress, withdraw the funds? "Withdraw the
funds," says the Assembly spurning at the idea, and leave our contract a caput
mortuum; at present we cannot withdraw these funds without substituting others
in their place, but when halcyon days will come, then we will withdraw them;
you will know that taking these funds would be leaving our own creditors
disappointed; this is perfectly consistent, and agreeable to our construction,
the measure is not precipitate; (other paragraphs of the report was then read.)
I will not prostitute the dignity of my profession by evasion, had I understood
it as the defendant's counsel, I would not have attempted to reconcile it with
the constitution, or the eternal rules of justice. I admit the intention of the
state was to make a provision commensurate with the funds. -- But I contend
here as I did elsewhere, that they did not separate the contract from the fund,
nor did the state continue to owe after they were discharged from the payment.

Therefore I contend, that when the period had arrived, and Congress were under
an efficient government, it then became necessary for Pennsylvania to "modify
the payment." Grant me this and it leads to all that I contend for; for it is
necessary to show that the funds made use of on this occasion were not taken
after they had been given up to Congress. (Mr. Ingersoll then read some
passages from the 8th volume or the Journals of Congress, page 187, to show
that the execution of the resolutions were expressly suspended until they
should be acceded to by every state in the Union.)

Pennsylvania, in September 23, 1783, complied with the requisition, with a
proviso that the Act was not to take effect until each state in the Union had
passed similar laws. In page 194, Pennsylvania by a long address sympathized
with Congress, and as Mr. Lewis observed, she copied the resolution into her
Act, and concluded that it should be suspended until the twelve other states
should comply with the same. Now where is the foundation for reproach? How did
the state by the Act of 1786 pass an Act which was void? No funds were taken
away from Congress; no requisitions were neglected; but they were anticipated.
The Comptroller's own statements for December 6, 1786 -- November 3, 1787, and
November 4, 1788, show that the state complied punctually with all the
requisitions of Congress.

On the 27th July 1786 there remained a balance in the Treasury of Pennsylvania
of above sixty thousand dollars, and the Comptroller adds, that a balance
upwards of 30,000 dollars remained due to her in October 1787; not to mention
the amount of indents, of which I need not take up your time to show it; for
she always had indents enough. It is however true, there was another
requisition then made, but never complied with, that is, two year's interest to
the foreign creditors, and one year's ditto to domestic creditors, who were
citizens. This I will dismiss, as no other state complied, the requisition
being unreasonable.

Is Pennsylvania then criminal? she was eminently in advance before 1786.
Surely there is no reason for suggesting that the law of 1786 was void with
respect to the funds. (Mr. Morris, the Speaker of the Senate, interrupted Mr.
Ingersoll, and suggested, that the enquiry was, whether "the form of the
certificates binds the state, and if it is admitted a debt by the Act of 1786,
whether it makes the obligation permanent, this state consenting by that Act to
be a creditor of the Union, no doubts could preclude the creditors from their
rights." Mr. Ingersoll replied, My answer to that will be this, If I receive an
obligation payable to bearer, I agree, that I am not to look farther than the
face of the writing, but these certificates refer to the Act, and it is as much
an intimation to the holders of the nature of the contract, as if the whole Act
had been transcribed and embodied into them, because they are referred to the
Act. Mr. Ingersoll then read the form of a New-Loan certificate, see page 317.)

As to the observations made respecting the minutes of Council of Feb. 3, 1785,
these refer to the law of 1785, which is clearly of a temporary nature, and the
law itself expresses it so. It contradicts the defendant's leading principles
and contends that unfunding the debt is a violation of the contract; the one
cannot cease, unless the other ceases; the fund and obligation must go
together; these, Sir, are some of the arguments applied to the Act of 1785, and
yet that law speaks a language which no sophistry can confound. (Mr. Ingersoll
then read the 18th section of that law, page 467.) Now, Sir, these reasonings
of the Supreme Executive Council destroy the idea, that contracts may exist
without funds. I do not know why these were read unless to pass censure on the
Assembly of 1785.

How does this agree with the reasoning imputed to the Assembly of 1789? The
funds are withdrawn, and no others are substituted; but I have said, and it
must be again noticed, although they have given a reason for withdrawing the
funds at March 1789, yet no reasons are given for cancelling the debt, was it
not for not paying the debt? A CURIOUS DEBT INDEED! It is agreed, that the
funds were withdrawn, no other funds were substituted or promised, and the
state were not compellable to give any, depending altogether on will and
pleasure, not obligatory in conscience, neither moral nor political obligation,
a strange debt! a contract never to be executed cannot be a debt. This puts me
in mind of Martin and Crambe; -- Crambe swore that he could frame a conception
of a Lord Mayor not only without his horse, gown and gold chain, but even
without statute, feature, color, hands, head, feet, or any body, which he
supposed was the abstract of a Lord Mayor.

A certificate remains as blank paper, is it obligatory because it enables the
possessor to come to the Comptroller General and to get back his continental
certificate? Is it a debt payable at the present time, or at any future period?
Does not a debt exist ex vi termini? Does it not imply an obligation? True it
does, if "desirous" or optional, a choice; yes, the law gives a choice, but it
is Hobson's choice, that or none, and when one says, it is not to be paid, it
is in other words, saying "I am not indebted;" in name, optional; in effect,
obligatory.

"Directs and secures," -- directing and securing were included in the
assumption, it was that and more too, the certificate itself secured the debt,
as they allege, but the debt was not secured, there existed no obligation to
provide a fund, what assume a debt not payable? that is, in other words to say,
that the commonwealth is not in debt.

It was attempted to distinguish between principal and interest, and that
temporary funds only apply to interest. Does the Act show it in this manner? Do
the resolutions point it out thus? has this circumstance escaped the notice of
the Assembly? -- No -- But the minutes show that the business was pointedly
brought before them; first, the interest was only attended to, then it was
postponed, and the clause was added, every Act or Acts directing or securing
the payment of principal and interest. (Mr. Ingersoll then read the motion,
page 184.) Here then the Assembly have brought the principal and interest fully
into view, this shows the Legislature meant the principal also, as they did not
design to distinguish. Now as to the interest not to be perpetual, it was to be
temporary, if Congress should provide; if not, it was to be final. Mr. Lewis
observed that temporary was meant to be partial; but no words are less
synonymous than temporary and partial. They meant the payment of principal and
interest until Congress should provide.

Much reliance has been placed on the word "many," this word was introduced
without any pointed attention, there was no use for it, the clause first stood
without it, and regarded only the interest. (Mr. Ingersoll then read the
minutes to the Act of 10th April 1792.) This was only necessary as it regarded
the equalizing the interest and the exchange. Another reason offers for
consideration, this funding system in Pennsylvania was the symbol of party, and
was looked upon by some as sound policy, by others it was looked upon the very
reverse. At the time this law passed, Congress had not begun to pass their
laws, many supposed the Act of 1789 might be repealed, and of consequence the
law of 1785 might be revived with all the debt, of cours^ they provided for the
exchange, and with a view to get rid of the question left the choice with the
party, it being then not known what provision Congress would make.

But, these things, like general rules, have their exceptions: Bills of credit
are barred by particular Acts to come forward as contracts, which the state
cannot control. Contracts are destroyed when the party is excused from
carrying it into effect; therefore the New-Loan holders on agreeing to the
Constitution of the United States, and withdrawing the funds, discharges the
state from the performance of the contract. There is no analogy between these
and the North Carolina certificates; there they were issued in collusion, and
not for Continental certificates; there they are not binding on that state;
reasons of that kind may occur here, where the certificates are only temporary
in their duration. How will the contracts of the United States stand this test?
Are not the continental bills contracts? Are New-Loans contracts? Are they not
continually reducing by exchanges? Are the bills of credit of Pennsylvania to
revive as contracts? These particulars show that the principle was established,
and as old as government, that contracts must be abided by, and held sacred,
and that some of them can be controuled?

If I enter into a contract with my neighbor, and he prevents me from doing
part, shall I by that be compelled to do another part? Was there ever a
circumstance where the party is excused from carrying it into effect, if the
contract remained irrevocable? The contract ceases wholly, or remains
altogether to be carried into effect. How were we circumstanced in 1789? Why,
the social compact takes out of the hands of the state certain funds. The
New-Loan holders represented in Convention, and acquiescing to the adoption of
the Federal Constitution, agreed to the transaction and excused the Assembly
from a performance of their former agreement; and it is conceded that
Pennsylvania by good faith might surrender these funds, and were under no
obligation to substitute others. Is this faith? Is this justice? Is this a good
principle? Where is the substance or reason for this procedure? Why! either the
funds are pledged for ever, or the contract is temporary. I mean by this,
either these funds must remain or others must be substituted in their room.

If I had understood the Act of 1789 as contended for by the defendant, I would
never have appeared here. To say that the Act of 1786 was perpetual and not
temporary, and yet to say Pennsylvania may take away those and not substitute
others, is imputing to her such fraudulent inconsistency, that I cannot believe
it.

Either the debt ceased to be such by the Act of March 1789, or the Assembly
was bound by every principle of honor and justice to substitute other funds
immediately.

There is a short test to try this. If the funds are taken away, the interest
at your Treasury is not paid half yearly. If the contract is not affected, the
holders may always draw the interest. (Mr. Ingersoll then read the form of a
New-Loan certificate.) But they say the obligation remains; then let them turn
to page 63, Act April, 1791, where they will find that the certificates come
within the purpart law of that date. (Part of the law then read, and a
repetition of the calculation of the parts of stock as in page 329 of this.) If
they were evidences of debt, they were payable under the Act of April 9, 1791)
although it was never attempted to introduce them thereunder as redeemable. The
Act for the relief of Sarah Caldwell only authorizes a subscription of the
Continental certificates in trust, in the domestic loan of Congress; and only
amounts to putting her in the same situation as if she had New-Loans. There is
no analogy between this case and that of the certificates of North Carolina.
Re-issuing the paper money was for the purpose of encouraging the exchange. It
is disagreeable to have an obligation abroad, though it be paid. The holders of
New-Loan certificates naturally wished not to exchange, as this was their
interest; for L. 100 in New-Loans produced 6 per cent. interest; but if
exchanged it only produced 3 per cent. This of course introduced the practice
of encouraging the New-Loan holders to exchange their New-Loans for the
Continental certificates. (Mr. Ingersoll then read the preamble and sundry
passages of the law of the 7th of April 1791, to enforce his arguments, that
the obligation was discharged although outstanding, and although it was not
obligatory, the state wanted it to cease being in existence, in order to have
the care and custody of her own property.)

It has been suggested, that the state paid interest on certificates between
September 1777 and March 1778, calculated on a reduced value, and charged
Congress at the specie value. Trace the circumstances of public affairs, and
you will find the repealing law was founded not on affected, but real
necessity, and see if the period had not arrived, when the law of 1786 ceased.

The grand convention ended the 17th September 1787. Pennsylvania adopted the
constitution the 13th December same year. The ninth state adopted it on the
21st of June 1789, and in July 1789 Congress passed a law imposing duties to
operate the 1st of August; of consequence, they might well say, it "would soon
cease."

It it true the Assembly might have waited until the funds were actually taken
out of their hands by Congress, that they did not, was the principal cause of
complaint with the New-Loan holders. Therefore the New-Loan debt ceased, and
was no longer operative, but to get back the continental certificates, and the
arrears of interest.

But, let us turn to the Act of 1786, and see what part of it will remain after
the repeal. (Mr. Ingersoll then went over the different sections and clauses of
that law, to point out the import of the words and the meaning of the Act, and
concluded by observing that it was indifferent to him what time the Senate
would adjourn to, but earnestly requested to have the privilege of finishing
that evening.)

Adjourned to four o'clock same day.

In the minutes of the House of Representatives the following entry is
recorded: --

"In conformity to the resolutions of the 25th day of February last the House
resolved itself into a committee of the whole in order to attend the trial of
John Nicholson, Comptroller General.

"The Speaker quitted the chair and Mr. Nevill was placed therein.

"The committee of the whole then proceeded to the Senate-chamber for the
aforesaid purpose.

"After some time,

"The committee of the whole returned to their own chamber,

"The Chairman left the chair, and the Speaker resumed it.

"The Chairman then reported that the committee of the whole had attended the
trial of John Nicholson, Comptroller General.

"The Committee appointed to manage the trial of the articles of impeachment
against John Nicholson, Comptroller General, reported further progress, and
that the Senate had adjourned until four o'clock in the afternoon for the
further hearing of the counsel."

Same day 4 o'clock. P. M.
THE Senate met as usual, the members of the House of Representatives in
committee of the whole attending.

Mr. INGERSOLL, in continuation.

Mr. Speaker, and Gentlemen of the Senate,

In addition to the observations made by me this forenoon, by which I have
shown that the debt was extinguished, a debt never to be paid principal or
interest, and that this debt was not assumable, nor subscribable to the loan,
after the passing of the Act of March 27, 1789, it will be recollected that the
question for general enquiry and consideration, will be, whether under these
circumstances was or was not this law constitutional? Congress will not
consider the constitutionality of the law; it is a dispute between the holder
and the state of Pennsylvania. She neither could nor will determine such
disputes; it is sufficient that they ceased to be a debt; they are not
assumable; the defendant is unwilling to meet the question; his counsel now
urge that the law is unconstitutional: It is agreed the state might suspend the
payment of interest, withdraw the funds and modify the payment of the principal.

The funds were a part of the contract, they acquired the credit, they induced
the loan. The counsel for the defendant have conceded a principle which leads
to all the consequences we deduce. Pennsylvania can alter the terms of her
contract; the principles are established from which they can never retrieve
themselves. The state of Pennsylvania has the same rights as a private person.
My creditor prescribes an alteration on agreement; I cannot do it nor can he do
it singly. If the state authorizes to alter the contract, she may authorize the
abolition of it. Will the gentlemen contend, that a conference had been held
between the state of Pennsylvania and the holders of New-Loan certificates? The
state speaks only by her laws, where the contract might be altered. The degree
and extent of alteration must be left at discretion, subject only to a sense of
right and wrong, and is therefore not a case within the Constitution. (Mr.
Ingersoll read the 10th section of the first article of the Constitution.) The
New-Loans are out of the spirit and letter of the Constitution of the United
States; the law of 1789 impairs no contract. If it is but of the reach of the
letter, it cannot be in the spirit.

Let us recollect the comments of my learned colleague from Massachusetts (Mr.
Dexter) on the eternal principles of right and wrong obviously opposed to the
principles of "perfidy," fraud and chicane, and I will not pretend to say how
far it might stand in a court of judicature.

The limitation and discretion relative of such alterations are never to be
ascertained by the constitution. The Comptroller-General's own plan of finance
proposes a limitation that would not be consonant to the constitution. Shall my
creditor say, unless I call at a certain time I cannot have payment at all,
this is surely more repugnant to the constitution than any thing in the Act of
1789. Congress is also restricted in the exercise of their legislative power, a
variation from the original contract is proposed by the Secretary of the
Treasury in his plan for the redemption and funding the public debt, instead of
whole 6 per cents. some are at 3 per cent. The same spirit of variation has
induced the strained construction of the Act of the 10th of April 1792. The
New-Loan creditors construing the Act as we do, had applied to Congress and
remonstrated against the conduct of the Secretary, I do not design to cast any
reflections on the Secretary, I am satisfied, he was impelled by the purest
motives for the public good. To excuse therefore the conduct of an individual,
which is at least excusable, ought to be our duty; but I expect to be able to
show that the New-Loan holders remonstrated to Congress against this deviation
from the original contract.

But it should be remembered that the Comptroller as a member of the community,
a holder of New-Loan debt, and a creditor of the United States dissolved in
part the contract between Pennsylvania and her creditors by acceding to the
adoption of the constitution of the United States; he has also acted for years
as a servant of the public in the execution of this very act -- no matter
whether a man shows his mind from words or actions.

August 2, 1789, (see debates of Congress, 2 vol. page 280) the New-Loan
holders applied to Congress, and in strong language they call them "our only
hope." Here, Mr. Speaker, you may preceive their silence, their acquiescence, O
charming infancy! their silence first, then their application to Congress, and
all this correspondence is to be no proof of their acquiescence! Five millions
of dollars were all exchanged except fifty thousand pounds. The defendant
purchased of persons who had waved their claims as they had acquiesced in the
law; witness Biddle and Oldden; by their conduct they waved it; it is therefore
possible they transferred their rights to the defendant, or that he derived it
from them. The meaning of the law of 1789 cannot be doubted, but at any rate it
is unreasonable to suppose that those who have acted under a title for a course
of years in a community can impeach it. Is the agent at liberty to dispute the
commission under which he had acted so long?

If, therefore, the New-Loans ceased to be a debt, they were not assumable, and
there was no necessity for the certification of the defendant. Why then did the
Comptroller General certify them genuine and assumable, and then recognize them
as debts, and pass them as assumable and redeemable? It is denied that the
Comptroller General certified New-Loans to be assumable, or if he did, it was
but in a few instances, not in his own case, and not in his character as
Comptroller General. It is also said, that it is not alleged, he certified them
so; that therefore the proof is insufficient, and the charge unsupported. I
will show that the articles of impeachment are sufficient in substance and
form, and supported by the evidence. (Mr. Ingersoll then read the first
article.) I have given notice to the defendant's counsel, that I would refer to
observations well expressed by Federalist, 2d vol. page 210, on the propriety
of impeachments -- What is not criminal on an indictment is not so on an
impeachment; the less certainty is requisite in the latter than in the former.
Certifying in a few instances is as really criminal as in many, although not
injurious in the same degree. If he certified to any, he is criminal. It has
been said, that he is not charged in the articles, to whom he certified,
whether to the Loan-officer, to a private person, or to a man in the country;
he is excused by not signing officially! If the Comptroller General, not John
Nicholson acting as such, certified New-Loans to be genuine and assumable, he
well knew it was to the loss and risque of the commonwealth. It is said, that
he did not add the title of his office, but only the initials of his name. I am
sorry to find the defense of the Comptroller General resting on such flimsy
subterfuges. Has not the subscribing the initials the same effect? is not the
object the same? If so, is it different whether the initials are written or the
whole name? Are not the reports to (...) Assembly signed in the same manner?
And if he should have misled them he would be punished.

But it has been said, that the evidence do not support the charge, and that
he did not sign his own abstract genuine and assumable: If he certified for any
one it is sufficiently proved. Let us examine how his own business was managed,
a long roll in his own handwriting, and intended to make the same impression as
if he had certified it genuine and assumable; How would Mr. Smith reason on
this? Would he separate those abstracts which were certified genuine and
assumable from that in the Comptroller's own handwriting? We find some
circumstances in his subscription of a bad impression, which do not alleviate
the charges, he subscribed in blank in the month of June, how was this filled
up? Is he to sit on the watch in his office, that this blank subscription
continues open to the 7th or 8th of July, then the blank is filled up and the
receipt anti-dated to the 30th of June? Is not this conduct most exceptionable?
Was not this done in his official capacity? If this is denied his
correspondence on this subject must be forgotten! (Mr. Ingersoll then read the
letter, page 215-6; ditto page 217; ditto page 96-7; ditto page 97-8 of this
work, commenting as he went along, to prove that the defendant acted in his
official capacity when he certified the abstracts genuine and assumable.)

It can therefore admit of no controversy that the Comptroller General acted in
his official capacity, we have proved he violated the law, the excuse must come
from him, if no other excuse comes from them, but an error of judgment, Humanum
est errare, an error of judgment is certainly no ground for an impeachment; but
if facts are strong, and evidence conclusive, however painful it is to
pronounce the sentence, it is inevitable; he must be declared guilty. We
consider him as acting from improper motives, and it should be remembered that
when we probe the secret motives, and fathom the sentiments of the heart, truth
does not appear in matters of evidence which must necessarily end in
probability only, with that resistless conviction with which it presides in the
mathematical sciences, it is not to be expected that it should operate with
resistless force.

But if after 1789 he states nothing of the New-Loan certificates as being a
State debt, which before the passing of the Act of 1789 he uniformly and
repeatedly did; if to go farther, from motives of private interest he has
endeavored to defeat the operations of a law, has taken money out of the
treasury upon a pretended consideration, then no one can hesitate and his guilt
cannot be denied.

Did not the Comptroller General know, that the stock of the U. S. could not
issue, unless the continental certificates the counterparts of the New-Loans or
an equal value was previously surrendered to the United States; Mr. Donnaldson,
the Register-General you find, thought so. In his letter to the Governor (page
220-1-2) he repeats the same idea. I have but little to say on this point; Mr.
Donnaldson first heard of this out of doors, and concurred in opinion with the
defendant, he was never consulted; he passed some abstracts after he knew them
to contain New-Loans, being pressed further, he acknowledged that he delivered
one to Judge Addison in a mistake; there is no law of Pennsylvania authorizing
the surrender of the continental certificates, the whole amount would be lost
as the New-Loans could not be charged against the United States.

I ask how will Pennsylvania get the stock back, I presume it will not be said
that the Comptroller will give it up. Suppose now an Act was to pass this
session, it is too late. The accounts between the United States and the
individual states are now settled, they cannot be again opened; but it was
hinted and but hinted by the Comptroller to the Register that he had or would
settle that business with the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States.
What! and no law on the subject! The subscription was prevented by the
interposition of the Governor. Had the subscription of the New-Loan
certificates been received, not only the difference between the stock and 20.
in the pound would have been a gain to the Comptroller General, but the whole
sum of 65,000 dollars subscribed, would be a loss to the commonwealth; and this
was well known to the Comptroller General.

But it is asked, why not pay 20. in the pound? I answer for many reasons -- 1.
the New-Loans were not a state debt. 2. It was a debt of Congress. 3. If
Congress deviated from their contract, we ought not to suffer, nor ought their
creditors to trouble us, when Congress was ready to pay them? there was a time
when they might have had more than 20. in the pound from Congress. 4.
Pennsylvania had said she would not pay them, and it is hard and humiliating
that the Comptroller should control the Assembly. And 5. Because Congress did
not intend to assume any certificates but what had issued for services or
supplies toward the prosecution of the late war, and the defense of the United
States; and the New-Loan certificates are not charged by the Comptroller in the
account.

But it is said, the Assembly is not to deal in stock -- This is a mistaken
idea of the dignity of government; I conceive that even the difference between
the value of stock is not unworthy of Legislative interposition; that
Legislature which disposes of a single dollar but to what it thinks to the best
advantage of the public weal, betrays the trust of its constituents, whether it
be stock or cash, property of one species or another. We are now on sure
ground, our Treasury is full and overflowing, but there are difficult times in
view, and probably the time is not far distant when we may want every shilling,
and all our resources may be required to save the state from further taxes.

I will take the liberty to draw the attention of the Senate to the statement
made by the defendant in 1788, this mentions the New-Loan debt. That being the
year preceding the annihilating Act; but from the year 1789 the Legislature and
Comptroller concur that the New-Loans were no longer a debt, or evidence of a
debt; whereas they were a part of the state debt the year before. Whatever may
be said of the views or the objects of the committee on ways and means, the
duty of the Comptroller General was as much to lay the same statements before
the Assembly after the Act of 1789 as it was before, except so far as the same
was varied by the repeal. On the 4th of November 1788, in the Comptroller's
statement, page 7, we have the following entry: --

"The New-Loan debt,
"Amount whereof in specie and in certificates, on which an interest in specie
is payable on the nominal amount, but the principal is to be reduced by a scale
of depreciation L. 1,938,109:14:8. Of the above there have been redeemed by the
sale of the city lots and Land office at last annual statement L.57705 10 0
"Redeemed since by the same means 29261 0 0 "Balance on interest from different
periods 1851143 4 8 L. 19381109 14 8"

In his statement, November 4, 1787, he mentions the New-Loan debt, but we find
no charge of this debt in the statement of the finances from this officer to
the year 1790 -- Then the Governor in his speech to the Legislature, page 43,
December 28, gives a statement which is not confined to demands requiring
immediate payment, but for all the debts for which the state stands pledged,
and mentions "balance of interest on the New-Loan certificates." Here can be no
pretense, the whole aggregate of the debts of the commonwealth and only the
balance of interest on the New-Loan debt. Where is the defendant's letter to
the Governor informing him of his mistake? This supposes his acquiescence as he
did not contradict it; but in a few days after the Comptroller made his report
to the Assembly, and being the first Assembly under the constitution, he
enumerated all the debts and gave a history of the finances; if the Governor
had made a mistake was it not the Comptroller-General's duty to rectify it? In
page 389 of the minutes, the New-Loans are stated expressly as excluded from
redemption, except for the purpose of being re-exchanged; the Comptroller does
not think it of importance to state what quantity had been re-exchanged,
because he did not consider the state as liable for them.

The Legislature could not suppose that the Comptroller thought the law of 1789
to be void, or the law of 1786 to be in force, except as to the funds, as he
mentions all the items, funded, unfunded, etc. -- and yet with regard to the
New-Loan certificates, he states them as excluded from redemption, except the
arrears of interest.

On the 8th of February 1791 the committee on ways and means reported a
statement of all the debts of the commonwealth, in which they mention all the
claims and demands, an universal expression embracing every species of debt;
yet where that is expressed, neither the committee nor the Legislature consider
the New-Loans as included. The Comptroller General must have been acquainted
with the Governor's statement in December 1790; and with the report
abovementioned in February 1791; and if he differs in his statement therefrom,
it is a proof that we are right. On the 30th of November 1791 there was a joint
report of Mr. Nicholson, Mr. Donnaldson and Mr. Febiger, upon a reference to
which Pennsylvania proceeded when she prepared the law of the 10th of April
1792. (See appendix to the minutes of that year, the last page but one.) Here
all the claims against the commonwealth are enumerated, and only the balance of
interest on the New-Loan debt. If we are not determined against conviction, we
must believe this to be the true state of the case.

I confess for my own part I am at a loss to think how language could be less
doubtful and more plain or explicit. A very long course of correspondence was
brought forward to show, that whether ill or well founded, the Comptroller
thought them subscribable in December 1791; what circumstances might have
induced a change, I cannot tell, sufficient it is that they were not mentioned
the 30th November 1790. And on the 30th of December 1791, he shows the
Legislature he was o^ a contrary opinion.

I will dismiss this subject with a few remarks on the conference. Perhaps the
attention of the Governor and fiscal officers were never called to the point
because no New-Loans were subscribed under the first loan; under this Act then,
the question was not fairly litigated, as none were subscribed. True it is,
that the Comptroller in some conversations spoke of them as being assumable,
but it is sufficient to observe that had he communicated the Act of 1789 to Mr.
Hamilton, his mind would have been clear, and all his doubts would be solved.
He never suggested to any body, neither in writing nor conversation, that the
New-Loans were redeemable under the Act of the 10th of April 1792.

He had some conversation with Mr. Evans, in which he stated that the stock was
to be sold; but never mentioned to him that the New-Loans were redeemable. Mr.
Gallatin says he went no farther than to say the Act included unfunded
depreciation, and that afterward when they were subscribed, he was surprised.
This shows he designed to shelter himself under the letter of the law, contrary
to what he knew to be the design of the Legislature.

Surprising, that when he hesitated about the depreciaton certificates, he did
not hesitate about the New-Loans! I will dismiss this point, and proceed to the
charge which concerns -- WITHDRAWING MONEY FROM THE TREASURY WITHOUT A PREVIOUS
APPROPRIATION, etc.

This is proved beyond all possibility of controversy, the correspondence
between the Comptroller General and the Governor respecting the debt to be
redeemed, and the stock to be sold prove this, for he furnishes an estimate of
the whole; here he prevaricates, for being called upon in a general manner he
answers in a restricted sense, surely it was his duty to render a just
statement, but that rendered by him was covert and deceitful, the Governor's
proclamation of the 16th of May 1792, which had been shown to the
Comptroller General, founded on his estimate which enumerated the debts to be
redeemed by the Act of 1792, and his not mentioning the error, is a proof that
he acknowledged the statement to be right.

By the constitution no money is to be drawn from the Treasury but by previous
appropriations made by law: this is a principle of great importance, ^he only
security against the improper use of public money, and introduced by the
principles of liberty at the revolution in England. The Comptroller General was
paid, and relied on to preserve order in the finances. By the Act of the 4th
April 1792 the Comptroller is directed to certify to the Governor out of what
fund the Money is to be drawn. (Mr. Ingersoll then turned to the Act page 219)
when there are several funds in the same Act, it is necessary to specify the
fund, but when there is but one fund, the practice is only to certify payable
under such or such an Act. When the Governor draws his warrant he pursues the
words of the certificate, the Governor by implication makes it payable
accordingly, then what is the necessary result? Why! If the Comptroller and
Register have not drawn their estimate accurately, the warrants of the first
magistrate must be dishonored, for just so much as 60,000 dollars take from
that fund, just so much it falls short; and how do they get over this? Why!
Forsooth no other way than, by the extreme and monstrous, I would say,
absurdity, by taking the greater from the less, then apply this to the present
case, it will be shown that the Comptroller certified them to be payable out of
the fund provided by the second section of the Act of 10th April, 1792, and it
was acknowledged on all hands that there was no fund appropriated under that
Act; then the Governor considered this as payable out of the fund provided by
the second section, if then the funds were not provided by the Act, the
Governor's warrants must be dishonored. -- The funds for claims and
improvements which have been stated, only contained L.10,000 and L.5,000 of
that were annually appropriated for roads, then as I said before, the greater
must be taken out of the less -- Surely this is so big with inconsistencies,
such conduct cannot be reconciled with the duty of the Comptroller General.
(Mr. Ingersoll then read passages from the law of the 26th March, 1789, which
created the funds for claims and improvements, and observed that it underwent
an alteration by the subsequent Act of the 7th April 1791) -- from this time to
the present, the Assembly, in every instance when they directed payment of any
claim, always appropriated or created a fund for the purpose. Let us now
examine the instances produced as furnishing the meaning of claims. (Mr.
Ingersoll then cited the cases mentioned in pages 152-3-4 of this work, and
some other of the same kind, as referring to special laws which directed the
manner of payment.) The Act of April 4, 1792, directs the Comptroller to give
the party a certificate, and to inform the House of it, when no funds were
provided. I now proceed to the

FIFTH AND SIXTH ARTICLES.
(The articles last mentioned being read, Mr. Ingersoll proceeded, saying.) --

Here, Sir, as in the consideration of the article just past, are no
circumstances to raise a doubt, no objections to unconstitutionality under the
mask of patriotism. Whatever arguments may be brought up to support the
redeemability of the New-Loans, here is no pretense; the evidence is so clear
that it has forced an acknowledgment. Whenever the holder was willing to
surrender to the commonwealth, the Comptroller General could not deem it
improper. When he undertook the trust he knew the terms of it; he was bound to
do it under all the ties and solemnities of office. What are the facts? There
are instances, Biddle's and Oldden's. No doubt can be entertained but his
conduct here disappointed the state of the exchange, which she intended and
wished to make.

Purchases in the market would in a degree interfere with the ultimate design
of his agency. This perhaps would be carrying the rule too far. (Then Mr.
Ingersoll went over the testimony of Mr. Oldden and Mr. Biddle, which see pages
243-4, and 230-40-41.)

What is malum in se. is contrary to the common law, and if it is of notorious
evil, is indictable. There is no statute on the subject, but an indictment is
maintainable. The property was vested in the state on its delivery to the
Comptroller General; neither party could be off, the indents being tendered or
not could make no odds, while the price was uncertain no person could tell what
he had to tender, until the Continental were brought out and the interest
calculated, when they were returned, they were to be cancelled. It was not
necessary to pay the indents to complete the exchange and to vest the property
in the commonwealth. I appeal to the gentlemen present, and affirm, that the
certificates of Oldden could not be recovered from the Comptroller General by
an action of trover, and if burnt or destroyed whilst in his custody, would
they not be lost as the property of the state? The moment they were returned,
the commonwealth became a trustee for him, and Mr. Nicholson was the officer to
carry the agreement into execution. (2 B. C. 447.)

I might enlarge on this argument by putting many cases relative to the
exchange of horses, bonds, etc. This I will decline, and must acknowledge that
I am glad to find myself so near the end.

SEVENTH ARTICLE.
This charge is supported in the first instance, by the testimony of John
Oldden. It is supposed that one evidence is not sufficient to convict. I
contend than one witness is sufficient in all cases except treason and perjury,
4 B. C. 451. That the reason for insisting on two witnesses in high treason, is
principally designed for another purpose; in prosecutions for extortion, which
imply an oath of office, one witness is sufficient.

(Mr. Ingersoll touched upon the testimony of Blair M'Clenachan, and insinuated
that the onus probandi lay on the defendant, endeavored to excuse Mr.
M'Clenachan from the charges of loss of memory, adding that no man in the
Senate could answer so many interrogatories better than he did, had they been
involved in so many long and complicated series of incidents; he adverted to
the directio^s of Council, page 267, which he read, and said these were prima
facie evidence, and must be considered as conclu^^ve, except the
Comptroller General would come forward and show how he came by the certificate
for L. 3,275:19:4. That he endeavored to discharge his duty, that he had
steered a middle course and hoped the Senate would judge with candor, and
decide with firmness.)

As the last Speaker seemed to lay particular stress on the directions of
Council, Mr. Gibson rose and remarked, that these instructions were regularly
attended to, and no alterations being suggested, the defendant could not be
liable to any censure on that point.

Mr. Morris observed that the deposition on interrogatories of Hans Hamilton
had been received. Whereupon Mr. Ingersoll remarked that one of his colleagues
would attend to the conclusion, and that the rest of the gentlemen would resume
their stations in the Supreme Court.

Adjourned.

In the House of Representatives the following entry is recorded: --

"In conformity to the resolution of the 25th day of February last, the House
resolved itself into a committee of the whole in order to attend the trial of
John Nicholson, Comptroller General.

"The Speaker quitted the chair and Mr. Nevill was placed therein.

"The committee of the whole then proceeded to the Senate-chamber for the
aforesaid purpose.

"After some time,

"The committee of the whole returned to their own chamber,

The Chairman left the chair, and the Speaker resumed it.

"The Chairman of the committee of the whole then reported that they had
attended the trial of John Nicholson, Comptroller General.

"The Committee appointed the manage the trial on the articles of impeachment
against John Nicholson, Comptroller General, reported further progress, and
that the Senate had adjourned until ten o'clock tomorrow morning for the
further hearing of the counsel."

Twenty-third day of the trial. TUESDAY, MARCH 25.
THE Senate met, the consideration of Legislative business being postponed, and
the House of Representatives attending as usual.

Mr. Morris, the Speaker, informed the gentlemen concerned in the trial, that
it was agreed on by the Senate, that the arguments should be concluded by, and
confined to one gentleman on each side. After which Mr. Tilghman arose and
spoke as follows --

Mr. Speaker, and Gentlemen of the Senate,

I WILL state on my part, what appears to me to be the true state of the case,
with respect to the evidence. (Mr. Ingersoll interrupted him, and observed,
that he had to answer to the charge respecting the certificates of Hans
Hamilton; whereupon Mr. Tilghman waved going over the testimony, as he appeared
to be about to do, and read the interrogatories of Hans Hamilton, and then the
answers, and afterward, read the interrogatories and answers alternately. Mr.
T. then said,) --

The counsel for Mr. Nicholson will rest this business without any further
observations than this, that the whole testimony of Hans Hamilton, negatives
the inference, and repugns the idea of any exchange.

Mr. Rawle rose, and said,

IT falls to my lot to add a few observations on the testimony adduced to prove
the charges against Mr. Nicholson; and I trust that it will appear to every
clear headed man, that these charges are amply supported, and that the exchange
was negociated for Hans Hamilton by his agent. It claims peculiar attention, as
it confirms one of the most serious charges, in which the official delinquency
is aggravated by the extreme confidence reposed by the state in the defendant.

I must recall the attention of the Senate to the recollection of the
preliminary introduction of this business by the learned manager, in which it
had been stated from the New-Loan book A, (page 129,) that three certificates,
No. 4,151, for L. 11:16:0; No. 4,152, for L. 268:0:0; and No. 4,153, for L.
242:7:6, were issued by the Comptroller General under the Act of March 1786, in
the name of Hans Hamilton.

From the book of Continental certificates received in exchange for New-Loans
(page 230) it appears that sundry Continental certificates were received in
exchange for them, agreeing exactly with the total amount of the three former
certificates.

It appears by the certificate of the Register of the Treasury of the United
States, dated March 4, 1794, that the Comptroller General subscribed each of
those identical certificates and individual numbers for, and in the name of
Hans Hamilton. It likewise appears from the large abstract, No. 262, that these
identical New-Loan certificates were subscribed by Mr. John Nicholson for his
own use.

It therefore followed from the first impression, that the property of the
state had been violated, that as she must have a property either in the
New-Loans emitted, or in the Continental certificates received, as it never
could be in abeyance, but if it ceases in the one, it must at the same time
commence in the other. Either her New-Loans or her Continental certificates had
been converted to private purposes.

Time has been applied for and granted, and I trust the Senate will see, that
the deposition of Hans Hamilton will be found to clear up the deposition, and
to prove not how far the defendant is innocent, but in what manner he is
guilty. It will be proved beyond a controversy, not that neither of them were
the property of the commonwealth, but that the New-Loans were. That they were
so rendered by an Act which he could only have performed by being
Comptroller General; it will be shown, that precisely in the terms of the
seventh article of impeachment, her New-Loans have been fraudulently converted
by the Comptroller General to his own private use and emolument.

First, By depositing Continental certificates under the Act of March 1786, the
state acquired a qualified property in them -- 1. For safe-keeping. 2. To
receive indents, this property might become absolute by the holders of
New-Loans purchasing lands.

Secondly, After the 27th of March 1789 the holders of New-Loans had a right
to, and acquired a property in the identical Continental certificates deposited
by them. But this was not always practicable on account of the practice of
exchanging, consolidating or cutting up certificates. To remedy, therefore,
this inconvenience, other certificates, as the state had a large share of her
own, were allowed to be returned in such cases. This was implied by the Act of
March 27, 1789. Like optional powers were given in the instructions of the
Supreme Executive Council, (see page 267) and by an Act of the first of April
1790. But where the New-Loans originally issued, and continued the same, where
the Continental certificates originally deposited had not been delivered out to
others, and where one remained to meet the other, the law and the instructions
required the exchange to be specific; and it will not be disputed that where
there existed no necessity of giving others, the Comptroller General was to
give the same, and no fair purpose could be answered by making it otherwise.

In the present instance they correspond precisely; the original certificates
issued by the United States were deposited by Hans Hamilton. He Hans Hamilton
had received New-Loan certificates in lieu of them. I trust then, there can be
no doubt under this point of view, but the New-Loan certificates became the
property of the commonwealth. (The answers to the 1st and 2d interrogatories
were then read.) If a commutation had been meditated it could be done
immediately; How then is this commutation effected? Ans. The
Comptroller General takes the identical continental certificates, which were
deposited with the state, and remained in her coffers, and subscribed them in
the name of Hans Hamilton. Then, Sir, this was an unlawful or a lawful act. If
it was intended to be subscribed for his own use, and not with a view to
effectuate the re-exchange, which Hamilton desired, it was an unlawful and
attrocious depredation of public property.

His counsel deny this. --

Then it was lawful; it was done as Comptroller General, regularly, officially
and consistently with his duty, to effectuate the exchange, as the obliging
friend of Hans Hamilton, and the public servant of Pennsylvania!

Then what was the legal result? Answer, The New-Loans being thus satisfied by
(...) parties receiving the original continental certificates in the form of
funded debt, became again the property of Pennsylvania.

This would have been the result if only the value or amount in other
certificates had been subscribed, but when the same continental certificates
originally loaned are subscribed, and that too, after the holders come down to
exchange them, and when the Comptroller General was in possession of the
New-Loans. (The answer to the 1st interrogatory then read.) This answer shows
that transaction was so viewed by Hans Hamilton himself, he viewed no private
bargain to vest the property of his New-Loans in John Nicholson and not in the
commonwealth. He considered it as the effectuating the exchange, under the law
of 1789, which he had not time to carry through himself, and little did he, or
would any other plain and unskilful man conceive the monstrous idea that by
delivering up the property of the state, a property in the New-Loans could be
acquired by the officer.

This appears not to have occured to the Comptroller General until April 1792.
If then the property deposited by Hans Hamilton actually belongs to the state,
it cannot be the property of John Nicholson -- What! my servant to take my
property for the purpose of paying one of my engagements, and then allege it
belongs to him? Notwithstanding all the technical difficulties of the statute
of frauds, if my money is employed to buy a house it belongs to me although the
deed may be in my agent's name; then most assuredly the property in the
certificates in question is in the state. As an agent he received them from
Hans Hamilton; but as Comptroller General, as depository of the commonwealth he
subscribed them; or if it is admitted that his subscribing, as
Comptroller General was illegal, he exchanged them as Comptroller General, and
subscribed them as the friendly agent of Hans Hamilton. We are not to be
entangled by the acts of the Comptroller General, he is not to be the agent of
Hans Hamilton whilst he is acting as Comptroller General of Pennsylvania; this
double assumption of qualities is improper, but it was only as
Comptroller General he had access to the certificates, and the
Comptroller General was very remiss indeed, if he permitted the agent of Hans
Hamilton to put his fingers into the public coffers of the state; in relation
to the New-Loans he ceased to be the private agent as soon as the continental
certificates were subscribed, for if Hans Hamilton had no more right, his agent
had not, he had no other duties to perform in regard to them than as
Comptroller General.

What are his duties and powers? They are defined in the Act of the 1st April
1790. It was his duty to deliver them over to the Treasurer to be cancelled; as
Comptroller General, he had no power but to deliver them over for the above
purpose; what has he done? They remain with him till, April 1792, when Hans
Hamilton came to town and applied to his agent for the funded debt. (The
defendant's 3d interrogatory and answer then read) I will not ask, Sir, why
during this interval, the New-Loans were deposited with the
Comptroller General, after the continental certificates had been funded and
were not delivered to be cancelled, why the indents were not adjusted, nor in
short, why he did not perform his official duty in respect to them. The
New-Loans, as well as the funded stock remained in his hands during this
period; he confirms the transaction by receiving the interest; the continental
certificates had been taken out of the trunk of the Comptroller General -- two
things were then done. -- 1. Hans Hamilton lost his right to the New-Loans. --
2. Pennsylvania lost her continental certificates. -- What did Hans Hamilton
receive? Funded stock. What did the commonwealth receive? A blank.

(Seventh article then read.) I say, this testimony is fuller than that of Mr.
M'Clenachan. Hans Hamilton is an honest man; but we find the deposition turns
out different from what they expected. I do not find that they prevailed in
obtaining an exposition to their mind. Answers come out which the defendant did
not expect. In all his interrogatories to the deponent, he mentioned nothing of
an agent -- he mentioned an obligation -- and what became of it? Yet we find
that Hamilton calls it an agency. Hans Hamilton had answered honestly. The
exparte deposition did not corrupt him. All his answers fully confirm the
charge, and come literally within the seventh article. I will add no more;
whatever doubts may be entertained elsewhere, here are no judicial
speculations; -- Acts of Assembly have been violated -- the law is clear -- and
the facts are well supported.

Mr. Tilghman rose in reply, and said,

I AM glad the counsel who spoke last has not embarrassed the question to
bring us to answer a charge brought against us by the House of Representatives.
There is a way of attempting a thing, by communicating it in a gentle manner,
when a man is willing to strike. I will leave it to the Senate whether the hint
that is intended for the defendant, is worthy of those who brought it forward.
Mr. Nicholson's conduct has ever been open and manly, and he must be acquitted
of any design derogatory of that character.

Then I take the question solemnly to be, whether Mr. Nicholson acted in the
line of his official duty, and whether he received those certificates from Hans
Hamilton for the purpose of being exchanged? I take this to be a naked question
of fact. I agree that a gentleman may act in two capacities. It has been said
that Mr. Nicholson acted in two capacities. Was he less sedulous for acting in
the twofold capacity of John Nicholson, and Comptroller General? That he acted
for Hans Hamilton as John Nicholson and not as Comptroller General, and his
doing or acting as agent for Hans Hamilton could not become a crime as
Comptroller General; no man could be prevented from acting as an agent for
another unless restrained by positive laws. While he acted as Mr. Nicholson he
is not liable to impeachment, I call upon the gentlemen to state where he acted
as Comptroller General in this affair? I consider it was lawful for him to act
as a private citizen, without being impeachable before this honorable tribunal.
I will not take the time to run over the answers of Hans Hamilton, he did not
act in his official capacity, but he had been friendly, Mr. Hamilton said, "all
I want is stock of the United States, I leave these certificates with you for
that purpose," while he acted as Mr. Nicholson he is not liable to impeachment,
I will take it for granted that Mr. Nicholson was the agent of Hans Hamilton,
even, I will take it for granted, that Mr. Nicholson was mistaken -- so far I
take it for granted, that he has paid Hans Hamilton what Hamilton wished to
have; by lodging those very certificates with Mr. Smith the continental
Loan-officer, which Hamilton afterward received. Here then is the candor of
the defendant. Nay more, he received double the amount; and, here is venality
charged against him in profusion! This does not favor their arguments, that he
used the continental certificates improperly, but it is what the logicians call
a non sequitur.

He applied to Mr. Nicholson as a friend not as an officer; does he come to Mr.
Nicholson, and say, I wish to unite the characters of Agent and
Comptroller General? No, Sir, he negatives all official communications. -- But
again the gentlemen say, how could the Comptroller be in possession?

The gentlemen themselves have stated, that it was not essential to have the
very identical ones, and the laws and instructions point out that their
co-relatives could not always be at hand, that the practice was otherwise, at
which many were much agitated, nay, offended, because they could not have their
own returned to them.

I must beg the indulgence of the Senate, whilst I Will observe, that Mr.
Nicholson was a holder of New-Loans to a considerable amount, why then as it is
agreed that it is a species of criminality, if a doubt remains respecting these
certificates, Why does not the doubt operate in favor of the defendant? Why
not presume him innocent in some of these instances? Why not presume, that Mr.
Nicholson obtained them some other way, by some exchange, or purchase of some
other person? In either case Mr. Nicholson is far from guilt. Does Hans
Hamilton say his continental certificates were returned? No.

The gentlemen have assumed the basis and reasoned ingenuously and subtly
that these continental certificates were in the coffers of the state, they have
not trod tenderly on the Act of 1786; but let them not collect criminality from
surmises, let them prove it, if the fact is capable of proof; that it was the
property of Pennsylvania at that time, then one of two things must be the
consequence, either it follows that the Comptroller General was excessively
blameable by affecting to act as Comptroller General; but in the mean time made
use of his official advantages, and acted so as to be highly criminal. -- Or
that disrobing himself of his character, intruded his rash and sacrilegious
hands into the coffers of the state! One or the other of these must be the case!

Has the prosecution altogether rested with the Comptroller General? Have they
a right to impeach the Comptroller and not to arraign Hans Hamilton? Do they
not consider him charged? The evidence being that the transaction was of a
private nature, and that he acted as the agent of Hans Hamilton. Where the
Senate can make a favorable construction it is their duty nay it is not only
their duty, but it is agreeable to their sensations. But when it appears from
Hans Hamilton's depositions, that no continental certificates were ever
delivered to him, how is the inference to be drawn without any premises to
support it? But the case stands simply thus, We are charged with taking the
New-Loan certificates of the state which had been exchanged by the state and
applying them to our use.

What is the proof? Is there a particle of evidence in Hans Hamilton's
deposition to show that these were ever exchanged? No. Is there even a shadow
of proof to show that they had ever been presented for such exchange to the
state? No. Hans Hamilton did not do it as he tells you upon oath, nor did he
direct it to be done, and Hans Hamilton's testimony is full and clear in our
favor: Here we might rest the cause without replying to any charges not in the
impeachment.

But it is said, if this was not done, we must have taken the continental
certificates, for which these had originally been loaned, for that, on turning
to the book of continental certificates loaned which we have kept, and the
abstract of continental certificates in the Treasury office of the United
States and comparing the one with the other, they agree in dates and sums,
although we are not bound to reply to this aspersion until we are charged by the
House of Representatives with sequesiring continental certificates the property
of the state, yet I will observe, 1. That to this comparison of dates and sums
should be added another book, that of their re-exchange, whereby the state
became divested of these continental certificates; here, you will find
exchanges entered which were made for Mr. Nicholson, and corresponding in dates
and interest as sufficient to identify the re-exchange, as the former does the
exchange; for the dates of interest, their amounts, and numbers are all that
were recorded in either case, in these books which were directed in their form,
by, and occasionally submitted to the Supreme Executive Council. Nor is this
all, there are other exchanges the sums and dates of interest of which would
apply to these certificates, and Mr. Nicholson might have bought them of
others, who had previously exchanged them, but it is difficult to account for
any transaction without a motive, and here there was no motive of interest to
urge the Comptroller to lay his hands on these certificates, the property of
the state, they were no better than a like amount of any other such continental
certificates, and yet he was obliged to account for every dollar of these
certificates in his hands, and pay over to the State-Treasurer such amounts as
were not exchanged, so that, as the state could not lose on the one hand he
being responsible, so neither could he have gained on the other.

Lastly. If it should be imputed to us that we have dealt unfairly by Hans
Hamilton, for our conduct will bear the test in every view, either as an
officer, or as an individual, we show clearly from his testimony, that he was
fully satisfied and has got what he asked for, the certificates he thus wanted
and received from Mr. Nicholson, were not granted by the Comptroller General,
but by the United States. In this transaction therefore, we not only did not
act officially, but the business was not to be transacted at all in the office
where the mal-practice is charged.

In conclusion I beseech the Senate to consider, that miserable and wretched
indeed must be the condition of officers it impeachments can be found where
there is no offense against the law. A book of high estimation says, NO LAW, NO
TRANSGRESSION.

Permit me to read the following passages from one of the most excellent of all
books on profane history, where he treats of the doctrine of constructive
treason. Hume's History of England, vol. 6, page 340.

"Where has this species of guilt lain so long concealed? Says Strafford in
conclusion.
Where has this fire been so long buried, during so many centuries, that no
smoke should appear, till it burst out at once, to consume me and my children?
Better it were to live under no law at all, and by the maxims of cautious
prudence, to conform ourselves, the best we can, to the arbitrary will of a
master; than fansy we have a law on which we can rely, and find at last, that
this law shall inflict a punishment precedent to the promulgation, and try ns
by maxims unheard of, till the very moment of the prosecution. If I sail on the
Thames, and split my vessel on an anchor; in case there be no buoy to give
warning, the party shall pay me damages: But, if the anchor be marked out, then
is the striking on it at my own peril. Where is the mark set upon this crime?
Where is the token by which I should discover it? It has lain concealed under
water; and no human prudence, no human innocence, could save me from the
destruction with which I am at present threatened.

"It is now full two hundred and forty years since treasons were defined; and
so long has it been, since any man was touched to this extent, upon this crime,
before myself. We have lived, my lords, happily to ourselves at home: we have
lived gloriously abroad, to the world: Let us be content with what our fathers
have left us: Let not our ambition carry us to be more learned than they were,
in these killing and destructive arts. Great wisdom it will be in your
lordships, and just providence, for yourselves, for your posterities, for the
whole kingdom, to call from you, into the fire, constructive treasons, as the
primitive christians did their books of curious arts, and betake yourselves to
the plain letter of the stature, which tells you where the crime is, and points
out to you the path by which you may avoid it.

"Let us not, to our own destruction, awake those sleeping lions, by rattling
up a company of old records, which have lain, for so many ages, by the wall,
forgotten and neglected. To all my afflictions, add not this, my lords, the
most severe of any; that I, for my other sins, not for my treasons, be the
means of introducing a precedent, so pernicious to the laws and liberties of my
native country.

"However, these gentlemen at the bar say they speak for the commonwealth; and
they believe so: Yet, under favor, it is I who, in this particular, speak for
the commonwealth. Precedents, like those endeavored to be established against
me, must draw along such inconveniences and miseries, that, in a few years, the
kingdom will be in the condition expressed in a stature of Henry IV.; and no
man shall know by what rule to govern his words and actions.

"Impose not, my lords, difficulties insurmountable upon ministers of state,
nor disable them from serving with cheerfulness their king and country. If you
examine them, and under such severe penalties, by every grain, by every little
weight; the scrutiny will be intolerable. The public affairs of the kingdom
must be left waste; and no wise man, who has any honor or fortune to lose, will
ever engage himself in such dreadful, such unknown perils.

"My lords, I have now troubled your lordships a great deal longer than I
should have done. Were it not for the interest of these pledges, which a saint
in heaven left me, I should be loath" -- Here he pointed to his children, and
his weeping stopped him. Here too Mr. Tilghman dropped the tear of sensibility,
said it was too much for any man to read -- and handed the book to another.
-- "What I forfeit for myself, it is nothing: But, I confess, that my
indiscretion should forfeit for them, it wounds me very deeply. You will be
pleased to pardon my infirmity: Something I should have said; but I see I shall
not be able, and therefore I shall leave it.

"And now, my lords, I thank God, I have been, by his blessing, sufficiently
instructed in the extreme vanity of all temporary enjoyments, compared to the
importance of our eternal duration. And so, my lords, even so, with all
humility, and with all tranquillity of mind I submit, clearly and freely, to
your judgments: And whether that righteous doom shall be to life or death, I
shall repose myself, full of gratitude and confidence, in the arms of the great
Author of my existence."

Mr. Rawle rose, and replied --

I DO not wonder that the Comptroller General should be defended with so much
ingenuity, and I am willing to justify his counsel for combining every
necessary qualification and in selecting all the pathetic passages; and am also
willing to do justice to my own feelings at the expense of my judgment; for I
think we have nothing to do with the last, but I will leave him to that single
plank oh which he is to be saved from total ruin. There is but one main
argument, and that is, Who is impeached? and whether the Comptroller is of a
moral or a civil species of existence? Every species of offense is committed by
the man; yes, by the man who holds the office. How then is a line to be drawn,
between the man and the officer? The man has offended, and the officer is
innocent! One of those offenses come in virtue of his holding the office,
therefore it did not become him to purchase. If he had been a private
individual, another tribunal would be the proper one, and as such he could not
be entitled to such a solemn trial as the present. (Mr. Rawle then read some
passages from 2 Woodison, page 602.) Here the Lord-Chancellor of Great Britain
was found guilty of bribery, one of the most exalted judges; agreeably to the
arguments of the learned counsel for the defendant, he should not be impeached
as Lord-Chancellor, but as a man. If Judges, if Privy-Counsellors and a
Lord-Chancellor -- and he too, a confidential adviser of his sovereign, is
impeached, and these circumstances are not unlike the present, how much more
proper it must be here, where trials by impeachment are embodied into our
Constitution. When Mr. Hamilton was applied to officially, he answered, that he
applied privately to Mr. Nicholson to be his agent. Had he applied to Mr.
Nicholson to make the exchange, he would no doubt have done it; there is no law
on this subject, it would be a wholesome thing to make a law for such a
purpose. It would ease a great deal of this embarrassment.

But it is said that as a private man, Mr. Nicholson is not liable to
impeachment. That remains unproved. It is not to be presumed that he acquired a
right by any subsequent transaction; -- we have no light to guide us in these
particulars, but Hamilton employed Nicholson his agent -- it was for his use
and for his benefit; -- Mr. Nicholson made use of his naked authority as an
agent. Hence the offense of acting as Comptroller General for the commonwealth,
and acting as agent for Hans Hamilton is inferred.

Let us now put this in the most favorable point of view, and admit, that Mr.
Nicholson owned these New-Loan certificates, or that he purchased them before
they had been owned by Hans Hamilton. If he transacted the business which he
afterward did, laying Hans Hamilton entirely out of the question, still the
heavy charges remain. Let us then hear no more of Hans Hamilton; let us infer
from no presumption; we will take Hans Hamilton's testimony and the official
transaction. The gentleman has suggested nothing to prove that the Continental
certificates were out and ceased to become the property of the state in
September 1791.

A singular and romantic co-incidence of sums and dates, that it should again
have come round, the identical Continental certificates were the property of
the commonwealth in 1786, and of John Nicholson in 1791. We have proved that
they were deposited in 1786; then if once in the custody of the state, on whom
is it incumbent to show, that they did not remain so? From whom is the
information to come? From none, but from himself!

Are we then under all these circumstances to prove that they remained in the
custody of the state? It is not by the aid of presumption, not by getting a
stride of probability and galloping off, that we prove this. But we are told by
Hans Hamilton, that they were not exchanged. But it is said, that exchange may
inadvertently be taken for commutation, that in any dictionary you would find
them convertible terms, and that their application is the same. Take it either
way it is substantially the same: By that exchange it was to be converted by
the Comptroller General into debt of the United States. Let us suppose it
either way, let us suppose it to be converted to stock of the United States
previously subscribed. Then the charge remains, the form is only altered, the
offense is the same, the certificates are purchased of Hans Hamilton; but to
have it as the testimony runs, there is an exchange in view, this gentleman is
the agent, and agreeably to the existing laws he transacts the business which
no man in Pennsylvania could do but the Comptroller General.

One more word about presumption, and that is, in favor of innocence. They
say, "Why do you not prove him criminal?" We deem it fully so. Here is a
tortuous and wr^ngful depredation of property. He is not to say, the charge is
not supported by presumption without testimony, as presumption is disregarded
in dealings. There is no circumstances in this transaction which I do not
conceive of importance. Whether the certificates with which he is charged were
more or less than those brought to him for the purpose of being exchanged; it
is sufficient for us that he is charged with those, the transactions are traced
and the accusation is proved, these bloody and mysterious volumes of arbitrary
and let our proof be opposed to his matter of defense. It is not to be
considered that he did so with all others.

I will detain the Senate no longer, I have concluded my arguments -- the
gentleman has advanced the case of lord Strafford -- How is that like the
present case? What analogy? He was one of the most distinguished and amiable of
men without an imputation of vice; Is it upon construction of municipal laws
which are not generally known that the present impeachment is founded, is this
a law concealed, is it a law unknown, as Strafford's treasons? No, we have this
law in our nature, it is a monitor, which no man can escape, as Cicero calls
it, Lex.non scripta, sed nata, quam non didicimus, sed accepimus -- not
received at school, but grew with life, against that law there is no statute.
It is in positive testimony that the Comptroller General had offended, and I
appeal to this honorable court, that were there no other charge against him,
and all other accusations for the injured interest of the commonwealth done
away, he ought to be held up as a public example, that no station in life shall
deter the hands of justice, nor no labors will be spared, that others may be
deterred from violating her trusts in similar stations, and that the virtue and
integrity of this republic will not bear official treachery.

In the minutes of the House of Representatives the following entry is inserted
for the last time: --

"In conformity to the resolution of the 25th day of February last, the House
resolved itself into a committee of the whole in order to attend the trial of
John Nicholson, Comptroller General.

"The Speaker quitted the chair and Mr. Montgomery was placed therein.

"The committee of the whole then proceeded to the Senate-chamber for the
purpose aforesaid.

"After some time,

"The committee of the whole returned to their own chamber.

"The Chairman left the chair, and the Speaker resumed it.

"The Chairman then reported that the committee of the whole had attended the
trial of John Nicholson, Comptroller General.

"The committee appointed to manage the trial of the articles of impeachment
against John Nicholson, Comptroller General reported that the counsel on the
part of the commonwealth, as well as the counsel in defense of the said
Comptroller General had concluded their arguments, and that the final decision
thereof now remains with the Senate."

On a review of this trial, the Editor finds it proper to state that the
Senators were qualified in the presence of William Bradford, Esquire one of the
Judges of the Supreme Court of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in the
Senate-chamber in the city of Philadelphia, on Wednesday the 8th day of
January, 1794, "Well, and truly to try, and a true judgment give, according to
law and evidence between the commonwealth of Pennsylvania and John Nicholson,
Comptroller General of the said commonwealth, on articles of accusation and
impeachment exhibited against him, the said John Nicholson, and now depending
before Senate," in the following manner, to wit, 1 Anthony Morris, Speaker,
affirmed. 2 William Bingham, sworn. 3 Robert Brown, sworn. 4 Lindsay Coats,
sworn. 5 John Edie, sworn. 6 James Finley, sworn. 7 John Andre Hanna, sworn. 8
Gabriel Heister, sworn. 9 John Hege, sworn. 10 Thomas Jenks, affirmed. 11
Thomas Kennedy, sworn. 12 Michael Schmyser, sworn. 13 Alexander Scott, sworn.
14 John Sellers, affirmed. 15 Abraham Smith, sworn. 16 Richard Thomas, affirmed.


And William Hepburn was sworn in the same manner as the other gentlemen were
qualified, in the presence of James Biddle, Esquire the President of the court of
Common Pleas of the city and county of Philadelphia on the 19th of February
following, being the day appointed for trying the charges against Mr. Nicholson
but was further postponed on account of the following representation from
William Lewis, Esquire one of the counsel for the defendant, and Jared Ingersoll,
Esquire Attorney General for the state, which was read in the words following, to
wit, "SIR, February 18th, 1794.
"WE have been so much engaged, and find ourselves so particularly so at
present, that we do not think it possible for us, without extreme
inconvenience, to attend to the trial of Mr. Nicholson, on his impeachment,
before Wednesday, the twenty-sixth instant: We, therefore, take the liberty of
uniting in an application to the honorable the Senate to postpone the trial
until that day, and we beg that you will be so good as to communicate this our
request to the honorable the Senate.

"We have the honor to be with the highest sentiments of regard, your friends
and servants, WILLIAM LEWIS, JARED INGERSOLL.

"Honorable Mr. MORRIS."



The following is the order in which it was taken up in the Senate -- the
proceedings are given here from the Journal of that honorable body. --

"WEDNESDAY, April 2, 1794.
"Moved by Mr. Kennedy, seconded by Mr. Finley,

"That the Senate will proceed to determine on the impeachment of John
Nicholson, Comptroller General of this commonwealth, article by article.

"After debate,

"The Senate adjourned to 4 o'clock in the afternoon.

"The same day in the afternoon.
"The Senate met according to adjournment.

"The motion, made by Mr. Kennedy, respecting the trial of the
Comptroller General, was withdrawn.

"Moved by Mr. Bingham, seconded by Mr. Scott,

"That the Senate will proceed, tomorrow, on the trial of the articles of
impeachment, as exhibited by the House of Representatives, against the
Comptroller General.

"Moved by Mr. Finley, seconded by Mr. Hepburn,

"That the word "tomorrow" be struck out and Friday next be inserted in place
thereof.

"The question being put, was carried in the negative.

"Moved by Mr. Hoge, seconded by Mr. Hanna, and

"Agreed, that the word to "morrow" be struck out and Saturday next be inserted
in place thereof.

"Moved by Mr. Hoge, seconded Mr. Thomas, and

"Agreed, That the words "on the trial" be struck out and the words take into
consideration be inserted in place thereof.

"Moved by Mr. Hoge, seconded by Mr. Thomas,

"That the words with shut doors be inserted next after the word "General."

"After debate,

"The yeas and nays were called for by Mr. Finley and Mr. Edie, and

The question being put, the members voted as follow, viz.

"YEAS.
1 Mr. Bingham, 2 Mr. Brown, 3 Mr. Coats, 4 Mr. Edie, 5 Mr. Hanna, 6 Mr.
Heister, 7 Mr. Hepburn, 8 Mr. Hoge, 9 Mr. Jenks, 10 Mr. Schmyser, 11 Mr. Scott,
12 Mr. Sellers, 13 Mr. Thomas.
"NAYS.
1 Mr. Finley, 2 Mr. Kennedy, 3 Mr. Smith.
"So it appeared, That there were thirteen yeas and three nays, and that the
question was carried in the affirmative.

"Whereupon, it was

"Resolved, That the Senate will proceed, on Saturday next, to take into
consideration the articles of impeachment, as exhibited by the House of
Representatives, against the Comptroller General, with shut doors."

"SATURDAY, April 5, 1794.
"Moved by Mr. Bingham, seconded by Mr. Schmyser, and,

"Resolved, That the doors of the Senate be closed in pursuance of the
resolution of Wednesday, the second instant;

"And thereupon,

"The doors of the Senate were closed accordingly.

"Moved by Mr. Hoge, seconded by Mr. Smith, that it be

"Resolved, That the Senate will, on next determine on the articles of
accusation and impeachment exhibited by the House of Representatives, against
John Nicholson, Comptroller General of the commonwealth and that the question
to be put to each Member shall be -- "Is John Nicholson guilty or not guilty of
high misdemeanors charged upon him by the House of Representatives?" The answer
shall be general if not guilty, but if guilty, shall specify on what article or
articles he is guilty.

"Moved by Mr. Bingham, seconded by Mr. Thomas,

"That the words "but if guilty shall specify on what article or articles he is
guilty" be struck out.

"After debate,

"The question was put and carried in the negative,

"Moved by Mr. Coats, seconded by Mr. Bingham, and

"Agreed, That the word "shall" be struck out and the word may be inserted in
place thereof.

"The motion, as amended, was agreed to.

"Moved by Mr. Bingham, seconded by Mr. Smith, and

"Agreed, That the further consideration of the subject be postponed until
Monday next.

"MONDAY, April 7, 1794.
"According to the order of the day, the Senate resumed the consideration of
the articles of impeachment as exhibited by the House of Representatives
against the Comptroller General.

"Moved by Mr. Hoge, seconded by Mr. Kennedy,

"That the Senate re-consider the resolution on the subject of the impeachment,
agreed to on Saturday.

"Moved by Mr. Schmyser, seconded by Mr. Coats,

"That the consideration of the motion be postponed.

"The question, on the motion being put, was carried in the negative.

"The question, on the motion for re-considering the resolution, was put and
carried in the affirmative.

"Moved by Mr. Hoge, seconded by Mr. Scott,

"That the word "may" be struck out and the word shall be inserted in place
thereof.

"The question being put, was carried in the negative.

"Moved by Mr. Hoge, seconded by Mr. Scott,

"That the consideration of the resolution be postponed in order to take into
consideration a resolution in the words following, to wit --

"Resolved, That on Wednesday next the Senate will proceed to determine,
article by article, the several articles of accusation and impeachment for high
misdemeanors, exhibited, by the House of Representatives, against John
Nicholson, Comptroller General of this commonwealth, and now depending before
the Senate; that the question shall be -- "Is John Nicholson,
Comptroller General, guilty or not guilty?" Which question shall be taken on
each article and the votes entered on the Journal; and if, on any one or more
of the said articles, on the question being taken as aforesaid, two thirds of
the Senators present shall say guilty, the Speaker shall, on the Friday next
following, pronounce the sentence of the Senate on such article or articles;
but if two thirds of the Senators present shall not say guilty on any one of
the said articles, then, on the Friday aforesaid, the Speaker shall declare,
that John Nicholson, Comptroller General, is not guilty of all or any of the
said articles of accusation and impeachment for high misdemeanors, and shall
discharge him accordingly.

"After debate,

"The yeas and nays, on the question, were called for by Mr. Hoge, seconded by
Mr. Smith,

"And the question being put, the members voted as follow, to wit: "YEAS.
1 Mr. Brown, 2 Mr. Edie, 3 Mr. Hanna, 4 Mr. Hoge, 5 Mr. Kennedy, 6 Mr. Scott,
7 Mr. Sellers, 8 Mr. Smith,
"NAYS.
1 Mr. Bingham, 2 Mr. Coats, 3 Mr. Finley, 4 Mr. Heister, 5 Mr. Hepburn, 6 Mr.
Jenks, 7 Mr. Schmyser, 8 Mr. Thomas.


"So it appeared, That there were eight yeas and eight nays, and that the votes
were equal;

"Whereupon,

"The Speaker voted in the affirmative, and so the question was carried in the
affirmative.

"Moved by Mr. Hoge, seconded by Mr. Smith,

"That the motion be amended by striking out the words "Friday next" and
inserting, in place thereof, the words on a day to be fixed.

"The question being put, was carried in the affirmative.

"Moved by Mr. Bingham, seconded by Mr. Thomas,

"That the motion be amended by inserting, next after the word "Journal," the
words after which a general question shall be put to each member -- "Is John
Nicholson guilty or not guilty of a high misdemeanor as charged upon him in the
articles of accusation and impeachment exhibited against him by the House of
Representatives?"

"After debate,

"The yeas and nays were called for by Mr. Schmyser and Mr. Bingham;

"And, the question being put, the members voted as follow, to wit -- "YEAS.
1 Mr. Bingham, 2 Mr. Coats, 3 Mr. Finley, 4 Mr. Heister, 5 Mr. Hepburn, 6 Mr.
Fenks, 7 Mr. Schmyser, 8 Mr. Thomas.
"NAYS.
1 Mr. Brown, 2 Mr. Edie, 3 Mr. Hanna, 4 Mr. Hoge, 5 Mr. Kennedy, 6 Mr. Scott,
7 Mr. Sellers, 8 Mr. Smith.


"So it appeared, That there were eight yeas and eight nays, and that the votes
were equal;

"Whereupon,

"The Speaker of the Senate voted in the negative, and so the question was
determined in the negative.

"Moved by Mr. Hoge, seconded by Mr. Smith, and

"Agreed, That the words "Friday next following" be struck out; and that, next
after the word "sentence" the words agreed upon by be inserted; and that the
word "aforesaid" be struck out and the words next following be inserted in
place thereof.

"The question, on the resolution as amended, being put, was carried in the
affirmative; and so it was

"Resolved, that on Wednesday next, the Senate will proceed to determine,
article by article, the several articles of accusation and impeachment for high
misdemeanors, exhibited, by the House of Representatives, against John
Nicholson, Comptroller General of this commonwealth and now depending before
the Senate, that the question shall be -- "Is John Nicholson,
Comptroller General, guilty or not guilty? Which question shall be taken on
each article, and the votes entered on the Journal; and if, to any one or more
of the said articles, on the question being taken as aforesaid, two thirds of
the Senators present shall say, guilty, the Speaker shall, on a day to be
fixed, pronounce the sentence agreed upon by the Senate on such article or
articles; but if two thirds of the Senators present shall not say guilty on any
one of the said articles, then, on the Friday next following, the Speaker shall
declare, that John Nicholson, Comptroller General, is not guilty of all or any
of the said articles of accusation and impeachment for high misdemeanors and
shall discharge him according.

"WEDNESDAY, April 9, 1794.
"The resolution of the Senate, of Monday, the seventh instant, respecting the
trial of John Nicholson, Comptroller General of the commonwealth, was read;

"Whereupon,

"It was moved by Mr. Kennedy, seconded by Mr. Scott,

"That the doors of the Senate be shut.

"After debate,

"The Yeas and Nays were called for by Mr. Hiester and Mr. Finley; and,

"The question being put, the members voted as follow, low to wit, "YEAS.
1 Mr. Bingham, 2 Mr. Brown, 3 Mr. Edie, 4 Mr. Hanna, 5 Mr. Hepburn, 6 Mr.
Hoge, 7 Mr. Jenks, 8 Mr. Kennedy, 9 Mr. Scott, 10 Mr. Sellers, 11 Mr. Smith, 12
Mr. Thomas.
"NAYS.
1 Mr. Coats, 2 Mr. Finley, 3 Mr. Hiester, 4 Mr. Schmyser.


"So it appeared, That there were twelve Yeas and four Nays, and that the
question was carried in the affirmative; and the doors were shut accordingly.

"Moved by Mr. Hoge, seconded by Mr. Smith,

"That the question be put first to the Speaker, and then to the several
Members of the Senate in alphabetical order.

"After debate*

"The question was put and carried in the affirmative.

"Whereupon.

"Article I. of the accusation and impeachment for high misdemeanors against
John Nicholson, Comptroller General of the common^ealth of Pennsylvania, by the
House of Representati^es of the said commonwealth, in their name, and in the
name of the people of Pennsylvania, exhibited to the Senate thereof was read;
and,

"The question -- "Is John Nicholson, Comptroller General of this commonwealth,
guilty or not guilty of the charges contained in this article as it stand?"
being put, the Members, respectively, said as follow, to wit, "Anthony Morris,
Speaker, said not guilty; William Bingham said guilty; Robert Brown said not
guilty; Lindsay Coats said guilty; John Edie said not guilty; James Finley said
guilty; John Andre Hanna said not guilty; Gabriel Hiester said guilty; William
Hepburn said not guilty; John Hoge said not guilty; Thomas Jenks said guilty;
Thomas Kennedy said guilty; Michael Schmyser said guilty; Alexander Scott said
not guilty; John Sellers said not guilty; Abraham Smith said not guilty;
Richard Thomas said guilty.


"So it appeared, That eight Members said guilty, and that nine Members said
not guilty.

"Article II. of the said accusation and impeachment was read, and the question
thereon was put;

"The respective Members said as follow, to wit, "Anthony Morris, Speaker, said
not guilty; William Bingham said guilty; Robert Brown said not guilty; Lindsay
Coats said guilty; John Edie said not guilty; James Finley said guilty; John
Andre Hanna said not guilty; Gabriel Hiester said guilty; William Hepburn said
not guilty; John Hoge said not guilty; Thomas Jenks said guilty; Thomas Kennedy
said guilty; Michael Schmyser said guilty; Alexander Scott said not guilty;
John Sellers said not guilty; Abraham Smith said not guilty; Richard Thomas
said guilty.


"So it appeared, That eight Members said guilty, and that nine Members said
not guilty.

"Article III. of the said accusation and impeachment was read, and the
question thereon was put.

"The respective Members said as follow, to wit, "Anthony Morris, Speaker, said
not guilty; William Bingham said not guilty; Robert Brown said not guilty;
Lindsay Coats said not guilty; John Edie said not guilty; James Finley said
guilty; John Andre Hanna said not guilty; Gabriel Hiester said not guilty;
William Hepburn said not guilty; John Hoge said not guilty; Thomas Jenks said
guilty; Thomas Kennedy said not guilty; Michael Schmyser said guilty; Alexander
Scott said not guilty; John Sellers said not guilty; Abraham Smith said not
guilty; Richard Thomas said not guilty.


"So it appeared, That three Members said guilty, and that fourteen Members
said not guilty.

"Article IV. of the said accusation and impeachment was read, and the question
thereon was put;

"The respective Members said as follow, to wit, "Anthony Morris, Speaker, said
not guilty; William Bingham said guilty; Robert Brown said not guilty; Lindsay
Coats said guilty; John Edie said not guilty; James Finley said guilty; John
Andre Hanna said guilty; Gabriel Hiester said guilty; William Hepburn said
guilty; John Hoge said not guilty; Thomas Jenks said guilty; Thomas Kennedy
said guilty; Michael Schmyser said guilty; Alexander Scott said not guilty;
John Sellers said not guilty; Abraham Smith said not guilty; Richard Thomas
said guilty.


"So it appeared, That ten Members said guilty, and that seven Members said not
guilty.

"Article V. of the said accusation and impeachment was read, and the question
thereon was put;

"The respective Members said as follow, to wit, "Anthony Morris, Speaker, said
not guilty; William Bingham said not guilty; Robert Brown said not guilty;
Lindsay Coats said guilty; John Edie said not guilty; James Pinley said guilty;
John Andre Hanna said not guilty; Gabriel Hiester said not guilty; William
Hepburn said not guilty; John Hoge said not guilty; Thomas Jenks said guilty;
Thomas Kennedy said guilty; Michael Schmyser said guilty; Alexander Scott said
not guilty; John Seller said not guilty; Abraham Smith said not guilty; Richard
Thomas said guilty.


"So it appeared, That seven Members said guilty and that ten Members said not
guilty.

"Article VI. of the said accusation and impeachment was read, and the question
thereon was put; The Members said as follow, to wit, "Anthony Morris, Speaker,
said not guilty; William Bingham said guilty; Robert Brown said not guilty;
Lindsay Coats said guilty; John Edie said not guilty; James Finley said guilty;
John Andre Hanna said guilty; Gabriel Hiester said guilty; William Hepburn said
guilty; John Hoge said not guilty; Thomas Jenks said guilty; Thomas Kennedy
said guilty; Michael Schmyser said guilty; Alexander Scott said not guilty;
John Sellers said not guilty; Abraham Smith said not guilty; Richard Thomas
said guilty.


"So it appeared, That ten Members said guilty and that seven Members said not
guilty.

"Article VII. of the said accusation and impeachment was read, and the
question thereon was put;

"The Members said as follow, to wit, "Anthony Morris, Speaker, said not
guilty; William Bingham said not guilty: Robert Brown said not guilty; Lindsay
Coats said not guilty; John Edie said not guilty; James Finley said guilty;
John Andre Hanna said not guilty; Gabriel Hiester said guilty; William Hepburn
said guilty; John Hoge said not guilty; Thomas Jenks said guilty; Thomas
Kennedy said guilty; Michael Schmyser said guilty; Alexander Scott said not
guilty; John Sellers said not guilty; Abraham Smith said not guilty; Richard
Thomas said not guilty.


"So it appeared, That six Members said guilty, and that eleven Members said
not guilty and that two-thirds of the Senators present have not said guilty on
any one of the said articles.

"Moved by Mr. Hoge, seconded by Mr. Thomas, that it be

"Resolved, That on Friday next, at eleven o'clock the Senate will pronounce
their final determination on the articles of accusation and impeachment,
exhibited by the House of Representatives, against John Nicholson,
Comptroller General.

"Moved by Mr. Bingham, seconded by Mr. Schmyser,

"That the consideration of the motion be postponed in order to take into
consideration a motion, read by Mr. Bingham, in his place, in the words
following, to wit,

"Resolved, That an extract from the minutes be forthwith made out, relative to
the decision of the Senate on the subject of the impeachment of the
Comptroller General, and transmitted to the House of Representatives.

"The question, on the motion to postpone, being put, the votes were equal;

"Whereupon,

"The Speaker of the Senate voted in the negative, and so the question was
determined in the negative.

"The question, on the resolution, as moved by Mr. Hoge, seconded by Mr.
Thomas, being put, was carried in the affirmative.

"Ordered, That the Clerk present to the House of Representatives an extract of
the said resolution; and that the Sergeant-at-Arms furnish the
Comptroller General with a copy of the same resolution, attested by the Clerk."

Although the doors were shut during the whole time the Senate were engaged in
taking the question on each article, the decision transpired immediately, and
it gave great satisfaction to the citizens, but it made a different impression
on the managers and others in the House of Representatives and elsewhere: --
therefore,

A motion was made then by Mr. Evans, seconded by Mr. Tyson, and read, as
follows, viz.

"Whereas John Nicholson, Comptroller General of this commonwealth, has, by
conduct unworthy of his trust, forfeited and lost the confidence of the
citizens of Pennsylvania; thereby rendering it highly improper that he should
any longer continue to enjoy any office of trust or profit in this
commonwealth: -- therefore,

"Resolved, That a committee be appointed to draught an address to the Governor
for the removal of the said John Nicholson from the office of
Comptroller General of this commonwealth.

"A motion was made by Mr. Evans, seconded b^ Mr. Gartner,

"To take up said resolution by special order for second reading.

"On the question, "Will the House agree to the same?

"The yeas and nays being called by Mr. M'Len^ and Mr. Evans, were as follow,
viz.

"YEAS.
1 Jacob Hiltzheimer, 2 Benjamin R. Morgan, 3 Henry Kammerer, 4 Joseph
Magoffin, 5 Thomas Britton, 6 Thomas Paul, 7 John Chapman, 8 Gerardus Wynkoop,
9 Ralph Stover, 10 Joseph Erwin, 11 John Ross, 12 Joseph Pierce, 13 James
Morrison, 14 James Old, 15 John Whitehill, 16 Isaac Ferree, 17 Alexander
Turner, 18 Philip Gartner, 19 John Montgomery, 20 Paul Groscop, 21 Charles
Shoemaker, 22 George Graff, 23 Abraham Bachman, 24 Abraham Cable, 25 Josiah
Haines, 26 James Davidson, 27 Benjamin Lodge, 28 Abraham Hendricks, 29 John
Minor, 30 Craig Ritchie, 31 John Maclay, 32 Cadwallader Evans, 33 Joseph Tyson,
34 John Shoemaker, 35 Isaiah Davis, 36 Christian King, 37 Ebenezer Bo^^an, 38
Nathaniel Newlin, 39 William West.
"NAYS.
1 Thomas Campbell, 2 Thomas Lilly, 3 James Kelly, 4 David Mitchell, 5 Jonas
Hartzell, 6 John Moore, 7 Thomas Stokely, 8 Benjamin White, 9 John Cuningham,
10 James M'Lene, 11 Anthony Kelker, 12 Andrew Forest, 13 John Canan.
"So it was determined in the affirmative.

"And the said resolution being under consideration

"On the question, "Will the House agree to the same?"

"The yeas and nays being called by Mr. Evans, and Mr. Mitchell, were as
follow, viz.

"YEAS.
1 Jacob Hiltzheimer, 2 Benjamin R. Morgan, 3 Henry Kammerer, 4 Joseph
Magoffin, 5 Thomas Britton, 6 Thomas Paul, 7 John Chapman, 8 Gerardus Wynkoop,
9 Ralph Stover, 10 Joseph Erwin, 11 John Ross, 12 Joseph Pierce, 13 Matthias
Barton, 14 James Old, 15 John Whitehill, 16 Isaac Ferree, 17 Alexander Turner,
18 Philip Gartner, 19 Thomas Lilly, 20 James Kelly, 21 David Mitchell, 22 John
Montgomery, 23 Paul Groscop, 24 Charles Shoemaker, 25 George Graff, 26 Abraham
Bachman, 27 Abraham Cable, 28 Josiah Haines, 29 James Davidson, 30 Benjamin
Lodge, 31 Abraham Hendricks, 32 John Minor, 33 Craig Ritchie, 34 John Maclay,
35 Cadwallader Evans, 36 Joseph Tyson, 37 John Shoemaker, 38 Isaiah Davis, 39
Christian King, 40 Ebenezer Bowman, 41 John Canan, 42 Nathaniel Newlin, 43
William West.
"NAYS.
1 Thomas Campbell, 2 Jonas Hartzell, 3 John Moore, 4 Thomas Stokely, 5
Benjamin White, 6 John Cuningham, 7 James M'Lene, 8 Anthony Kelker, 9 Andrew
Forest.
"So it was determined in the affirmative

"Whereupon,

"Ordered, that Mr. B. Morgan, Mr. ^^lly, and Mr. Evans be a committee to
draught an address conformably to the said resolution.

"The clerk of the Senate being introduced presented to the chair an extract
from the Journal of that House; and having withdrawn; the same was read, as
follows, viz.

"In SENATE. WEDNESDAY, April 9, 1794.
"Resolved, Tha^ on Friday next at eleven o'clock, the Senate will pronounce
their final determination on the articles of accusation and impeachment
exhibited by the House of Representatives against John Nicholson,
Comptroller General.

Extract from the Journal, TIMOTHY MATLACK, Clerk of the Senate.


"The committee appointed for the purpose this forenoon, reported an Address to
the Governor for the removal of John Nicholson from his office as
Comptroller General of this commonwealth, which was read* and

"On motion and by special order the same was ^^od the second time, and
adopted, as follows, viz.

"To THOMAS MIFFLIN, Governor of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania: --
"The SENATE and HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
"Respectfully represent,
"THAT, whereas John Nicholson was a person meriting and possessing the
confidence of the freemen of this commonwealth and their representatives
appointed Comptroller General, and, in that official capacity, entrusted with
many of its most important pecuniary concerns; but has since the said
appointment, conducted in such a manner as to forfeit that confidence, and
thereby rendered himself unfit to be continued in the aforesaid office: We,
therefore, considering ourselves as the constitutional guardians, as well of
the property as of the rights of our fellow-citizens, do earnestly recommend to
you, that the said John Nicholson be removed from his office."

After which the Address was transmitted to the Senate for their concurrence.

SENATE, FRIDAY, April 11, 1794.
John Nicholson, Comptroller General of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania, at
the bar, (with two of his counsel.) The House of Representatives did not attend
on this occasion, as they had been accustomed to do, and although their
committee were directed (page 200) they did not officially report the final
determination of the Senate thereon.


"The Speaker of the Senate said --

"JOHN NICHOLSON, it has been resolved, That if two-thirds of the Senators
present should not find you guilty on any one of the articles of accusation and
impeachment, exhibited against you by the House of Representatives, the Speaker
of the Senate should declare the same and discharge you.

"And the question, on the said articles, having been separately put, and
two-thirds of the Senators present not having found you guilty on any one of
them, It is declared, That you are not guilty of all or any of the misdemeanors
charged upon you in the said articles of accusation and impeachment, and you
are accordingly discharged."

After which Mr. Nicholson waited on the Governor and resigned the office of
Comptroller General, which he had held for twelve years.

The Senate, after their determination of the acquittal of the Comptroller,
having resumed the consideration of Legislative business: --

"Mr. Kennedy called for the address to the Governor, presented, for
concurrence, by the Clerk of the House of Representatives and read yesterday;
and the same was again read; whereupon,

"It was moved by Mr. Kennedy, seconded by Mr. Schmyser,

"That the Senate concur the said address.

"After debate, It was moved by Mr. Hanna, seconded by Mr. Sellers,

"That the further consideration of the motion be postponed until tomorrow.

"After debate,

"The yeas and nays on the question, were called for by Mr. Kennedy, and Mr.
Schmyser.

"The question being put, the members voted as follow, to wit, "YEAS.
1 Mr. Brown, 2 Mr. Edie, 3 Mr. Hanna, 4 Mr. Hoge, 5 Mr. Scott, 6 Mr. Sellers,
7 Mr. Smith.
"NAYS.
1 Mr. Bingham, 2 Mr. Coats, 3 Mr. Finley, 4 Mr. Hiester, 5 Mr. Hepburn, 6 Mr.
Jenks, 7 Mr. Kennedy, 8 Mr. Schmyser, 9 Mr. Thomas.


"So it appeared, That there were seven yeas and nine nays, and that the
question was carried in the negative.

"On the question to concur the address, the yeas and nays were called for by
Mr. Schmyser and Mr. Kennedy, and,

The question being put, the members voted as follow, to wit, "YEAS.
1 Mr. Bingham, 2 Mr. Coats, 3 Mr. Edie, 4 Mr. Finley, 5 Mr. Hanna, 6 Mr.
Hiester, 7 Mr. Hepburn, 8 Mr. Jenks, 9 Mr. Kennedy, 10 Mr. Schmyser, 11 Mr.
Smith, 12 Mr. Thomas.
"NAYS.
1 Mr. Brown, 2 Mr. Hoge, 3 Mr. Scott, 4 Mr. Sellers.


"So it appeared, That there were twelve yeas and four nays, and that the
question was carried in the affirmative.

"Ordered, That an extract of the foregoing resolution be presented to the
House of Representatives."

The Address was presented to the Governor on the 14th by a joint committee of
both Houses, the circumstances were as follow: --

"And they also presented "The address to the Governor," on the subject of the
removal of John Nicholson, Comptroller General, from his office, to which the
the Governor was pleased to deliver an answer in writing, which Mr. Hanna read
in his place, and presented the same to the chair.

"Whereupon, the same was read as follows, to wit, "GENTLEMEN,
"MR. Nicholson has superseded the necessity of a removal by resigning the
office of Comptroller General, which resignation I accepted on Tuesday last.

THOMAS MIFFLIN.
"April 14 th, 1794.
"Messrs. HANNA and HAINES, a committee of Legislature of Pennsylvania."



On Monday the 21st April, the House of Representatives took up the business of
Mr. Nicholson, and disposed of the same in the following manner, with an
apparent view to get rid of it, the adjournment being fixed for the next day.

"The report of the committee to whom was referred the report of the committee
appointed during the rece^ of the late House of Representatives to examine the
official transactions of the Comptroller General, read April 11th instant, was
read the second time.

"And the following resolution being under consideration, viz.

"Resolved, That the Attorney General be directed to institute a suit against
John Nicholson, Comptroller General for the whole amount of the certificates
issued to satisfy certain claims of clothing made in the name of sundry
officers, including both the principal and interest paid by the state.

"It was,

"On motion of Mr. Evans, seconded by Mr. Magoffin,

"Ordered, That the same be referred to the Comptroller General with the
instructions to make a report thereon to the next session of the Legislature.

"And the following resolution being under consideration, viz.

"Resolved, That a committee be appointed to bring in a bill to provide for the
effectual statement of the accounts of John Nicholson, Comptroller General and
Escheator-General."

"It was,

"On motion of Mr. Evans, seconded by Mr. Wynkoop,

"Ordered That the same be referred to the consideration of the next succeeding
Legislature."

Same Day.
"Mr. M'Lene on behalf of himself and others asked and obtained leave to enter
on the Journal of this House protest against the resolution for taking up, by
special order, for a second reading a resolution which was moved and seconded
for the appointment of a committee to draught an address to the Governor, for
the removal of John Nicholson from the office of Comptroller General, of this
commonwealth, and presented the same to the chair, which is as follows, viz.

"A protest against the Resolution for taking up, by special order, for a
second reading, a resolution which was moved and seconded for the appointment
of a committee to draught an address to the Governor for the removal of John
Nicholson from the office of Comptroller General of this commonwealth.

"WE DISSENT, because,

"AT the time of the said resolution being agreed to, the said John Nicholson
stood impeached by the House of Representatives, in their name, and in that of
all the People of Pennsylvania, of certain high crimes and misdemeanors in the
discharge of his official duties; and as no judgment had been rendered, the
said impeachment was still depending, and within the power of the Senate: We
therefore consider the adoption of the resolution at that time as an infraction
of the law, no less oppressive to the defendant than dangerous to the security
of individuals; as derogatory to the justice and dignity of this House, and as
highly disrespectful to the Senate and Governor of the Commonwealth.

"As an infraction of the law, no less oppressive to the defendant than
dangerous to the security of individuals, because their safety and security
depend on the pure and impartial administration of justice; and every thing
which has a tendency to prejudice the public mind or to bias the Judges while a
cause is depending, poisons the springs of justice, warps their steady and even
course, and undermines the most valuable bulwark of security, which innocence
can have. Hence it is that all publications, touching a cause depending, which
are calculated to give a bias either way, are highly criminal.

"If anonymous publications are considered as of this dangerous tendency, we
conceive that a solemn vote by the House of Representatives, "in their name,
and in that of all the people of Pennsyvania," must be of a tendency equally
dangerous. It is true, it may not have all the intended effect, yet since that
is owing to the virtue and firmness of others, it affords no apology for the
imprudence of such a measure. Whatever might be the motives, its tendency
certainly was to prejudice the public mind while a prosecution was depending,
and to bear down and oppress the accused, by assailing the minds of his judges
with all the weight and influence of the most numerous branch of the
Legislature; and, as if this was really intended, care was taken to introduce
the resolution, with a declaration that John Nicholson had, by conduct unworthy
of his trust, forfeited and lost the confidence of the citizens of
Pennsylvania; thereby rendering it highly improper that he should any longer
continue to enjoy any office of trust or profit in this commonwealth. As
publications of this nature by an individual, while a prosecution was
depending, would be highly criminal; and as the House of Representatives had
fulfilled their constitutional duty by impeaching and prosecuting the
Comptroller; and as it remained for the senate to discharge their
constitutional duty by determining on that impeachment, and for the Governor to
discharge his constitutional duty by displacing the Comptroller, or continuing
him in office, at least till judgment should be given by the Senate, we can
conceive no apology for passing the resolution at that time. For these reasons
we cannot but consider the resolution as an infraction of the law, no less
oppressive to the accused than danegerous to the security of others.

"We also consider it as derogatory to the justice and dignity of this House.
Derogatory to its justice for the reasons already mentioned; and to its
dignity, from the ardor and precipitancy with which it was hurried through the
House. We say ardor and precepitancy, because, during the debate, a
communication was received by the Speaker, from the Clerk of the Senate, that
on the next day judgment on the impeachment would be pronounced, and yet
without waiting even till the message was read, or announced from the chair,
the resolution was by special order taken up, read a second time, and passed in
opposition to all endeavors for a short delay. This we believe to be
unexampled in Legislative bodies; and it appears to us to be the more
exceptional, since a decent regard for the opinions of men seemed to require
that the House of Representatives, being the accusers and prosecutors of the
Comptroller, should have manifested their moderation and impartiality, by
declining to usurp the province of judging on their own charges, at least until
constitutional judges had determined on them. On the contrary, as no time for
consideration or enquiry was allowed, there is too much reason to believe that
the proceeding will be viewed by impartial men, as partaking more of sudden or
disappointed resentment, than of that just and dignified displeasure which
becomes the Representatives of a great Republic.

"We have said of judging on their own charges, because it is reasonable to
suppose the answer, conveyed by the resolution, is founded on the matters
charged in the articles of impeachment. It is true it is expressed in such
general and indefinite terms, as to render it impossible to say whether it is
grounded on them or indeed on any thing else, since it contains no
specification of facts, nor the least hint of any particular matter to which it
relates; but as the Comptroller has not been called upon to answer any other
charges than those which are mentioned in the articles of impeachment, nor had
an opportunity of being heard in his defense, we are unwilling to suppose any
member of this House capable of condemning him without a charge, and unheard on
any other grounds.

"We have said that we consider the adoption of the resolution at that time as
highly disrespectful to the Senate and to the Governor. As highly disrespectful
to the Senate, inasmuch as it relates to a prosecution depending before them,
and is expressed in terms calculated to influence their decision. The time, the
manner and the extreme hurry with which it was hastened forward, must carry to
the minds of the Senate too strong evidence of a supposition prevailing in this
House, that the Senate or some of its members, were not to be trusted with a
decision, until they were influenced by a solemn resolution that "John
Nicholson had, by conduct unworthy of his trust, forfeited and lost the
confidence of the citizens of Pennsylvania, thereby rendering it highly
improper that he should any longer continue to enjoy any office of trust or
profit in this commonwealth."

"And when we take into consideration the time of passing the resolution, we
cannot but consider it as equally disrespectful to the Governor, since it
strongly implies either that he had neglected his duty by not having already
displaced the Comptroller, or that (...) was apprehended he would neglect it in
future by continuing him in office. While we admit the rights of the House to
address the Governor, to remove an unworthy officer, we are far from agreeing
that the Governor was to blame in not removing the Comptroller after the
charges were brought against him, and while they were depending; since this
would have amounted to a declaration on his put, that the Comptroller was
unworthy of trust and confidence, before either his innocence or guilt had
appeared on a fair trial. If after a decision by the Senate the Governor had
continued the Comptroller in office, this I loose had thought him unworthy of
it, there might have been a propriety in addressing for his removal; but to do
this at a time when the Governor could not with propriety displace him, when it
was known that the difficulty would on the next day be removed, appears too
much like converting the right of addressing into a vehicle of general and
unqualified censure, both upon the officer who may have incurred the
displeasure of the House, and upon the Governor for not adding his weight to
that displeasure or censure, by displacing the accused before his modern ^o or
guile had been established on a fair trial. Under this view of the matter, we
cannot but consider the proceedings against which we protest, as an usurpation
of inconstitutional and arbitrary power, and an attempt to disfranchise a
citizen, by voting him unworthy of any office of trust or profit.

"Under these impressions, we protest against the resolution referred to, and
have recorded our reasons in justification of our conduct.

"Thomas Campbell, James M'Lene, Andrew Forest, John Moore, Benjamin White,
Thomaes Stokely, John Cuningham, Jenas Hartzell."
The next day.
"Mr. Benjamin Morgan, in behalf of himself and others, asked and obtained
leave to enter their Reply to the Protest of the minority of the House of
Representatives against taking up by special order for a second reading a
resolution for the appointment of a committee to draft an Address to the
Governor for the removal of John Nicholson, Comptroller General of this
commonwealth, on the Journal of the House; and presented the same to the chair,
which is follows, viz.

"Reply to the Protest of the minority of the House of Representatives against
taking up, by special order, for a second reading, a Resolution for the
appointment of a committee to draught an address to the Governor for the
removal of John Nicholson, Comptroller General of this commonwealth.

"THAT at the time of passing the said resolution, the Senate had decided on
the Articles of Impeachment against the said John Nicholson,
Comptroller General of this common wealth; and although they had neither
pronounced judgment nor convicted the said John Nicholson on any of the
articles exhibited against him, yet so large a proportion as ten out of
seventeen, (the whole number of Senators present) having declared him guilty on
two of the most serious of the said articles, it would have been highly
improper in the Legislature not to have made use of every lawful means, to
prevent him from continuing a moment longer in office. Had they acted
otherwise, it would in their apprehension have been an unpardonable breach of
the confidence reposed in them by their constituents; nor could they have
expected their vote on the said resolution would have any such influence on the
decision of the Senate, as is suggested in the said protest; the said decision
having previously taken place; and though not directly communicated to the
House of Representatives, must have been as well known to the minority as it
was to the other members of that House. On this ground alone, we consider the
said vote and resolution not only justifiable but necessary, even had there
been no other causes of removal than those contained in the Articles of
Impeachment.

"Independently however of any thing contained in the said articles, we
consider the Comptroller's refusal to produce to the committee of
investigation, appointed by the last House of Representatives, any of the
books, vouchers or papers relative to the certificates issued to the
Pennsylvania line for the arrears of their pay, a sufficient cause of removal;
and were any thing wanting to aggravate his conduct in this instance, it was
sufficiently supplied by his subsequent refusal to comply with the peremptory
orders of the Governor on the same subject.

"There is some difficulty in reconciling the different objections offered by
the protesting minority; the principal part of which rest on the supposed
influence the resolution would produce in the decision of the Senate, when that
minority state in their protest itself, that before any vote had been taken on
the said resolution, an official communication was received from the Senate,
informing the House of Representatives that on the next day judgment would be
pronounced on the impeachment, which could only be the consequence of a
decision having previously taken place.

"April 22d, 1794. "Benjamin R. Morgan, Matthias Barton, Cadwallader Evans,
jun. John Chapman, Gerardus Wynkoop, John Shoemaker, Joseph Magoffin, Craig
Ritchie, Abraham Bachman, Thomas Paul, Nathaniel Newlin, George Graff, John
Ross, Jacob Hiltzheimer, Alexander Turner, Abram. Hendricks, Baltzer Gebr,
Isaiah Davis, Abraham Cable, Ralph Stover, Christian King, Paul Groscop, Thomas
Britton, Joseph Pierce, William West, James Davidson, Isaac Ferree, James
Morrison, Henry Kammerer, John Minor, Joseph Tyson, Nicholas Lutz, Joseph
Erwin, Ebenezer Bowman, John Bratton, James Old."


A short view of the votes of the Senators on Mr. NICHOLSON's Trial.
Articles of Impeachment. I. II. III. IV. V. VI. VII Mr. Morris, Speaker, N.G.
N.G. N.G. N.G. N.G. N.G. N.G. Mr. Bingham, G. G. N.G. G. N.G. G. N.G. Mr.
Brown, N.G. N.G. N.G. N.G. N.G. N.G. N.G. Mr. Coats, G. G. N.G. G. G. G. N.G.
Mr. Edie, N.G. N.G. N.G. N.G. N.G. N.G. N.G. Mr. Finley, G. G. G. G. G. G. G.
Mr. Hanna, N G. N.G. N.G. G. N.G G. N.G. Mr. Hiesler, G. G. N.G. G. G. G. G.
Mr. Hepburn, N.G. N.G. N.G. G. N.G. G. G. Mr. Hoge, N.G. N.G. N.G. N.G. N.G.
N.G. N.G. Mr. Jenks, G. G. G. G. G. G. G. Mr. Kennedy, G. G. N.G. G. G. G. G.
Mr. Schmyser, G. G. G. G. G. G. G. Mr. Scott, N.G. N.G. N.G. N.G. N.G. N.G.
N.G. Mr. Sellers, N.G. N.G. N.G. N.G. N.^ N.G. Mr. Smith, N.G. N.G. N.G. N.G.
N.G. N.G. N.G. Mr. Thomas, G. G. N.G. G. G. G. N.G.

ERRATA.
In page 584 in the 3d and 5th lines from the bottom strike out 20th and insert
30th.

In page 591 read the third and fourth lines, and then the first and second
ones, and proceed.

Expunge not in the 11th line page 756.

FINIS.
An alphabetical index of the letters, official documents, witnesses, names of
the speakers, and other occurrences contained in these trials, published in
this volume from page 5 to page 772, inclusively.
Year. Month. From whom. To whom. Page [B.] 1780 Wm. Budden's deposition, 20
1794 March 4, Hilary Baker's testimony, 252 6, Joseph Boggs' ditto, 299 1791
June 15, William Bradford, Thomas Mifflin. 150 1794 March 13, His speech for
defendant, 444 1793 April 24, Ed. Burd's 6 official certifi. 152 1794 Feb. 28,
Thomas Biddle's testimony, 239 Ditto. Clement Biddle's ditto, 240 [C.] 1780
Nov. 16, Ger. Clarkson's deposition, 13 J. Clarke's do. 15 1780 Dec. 18, Matthew
Clarkson's do. 29 Do. do. 41 1789 May 21, Council's instructions, John
Nicholson. 266 [D.] 1791 July 1, Alex. J. Dallas, John Nicholson. 276 Dec. 23,
Same, Same. 220 27, Same, Same. 277 1792 April 13, Same, Same and J. Donnaldson
232 16, Same, Same and same. 356 March 21, Same, Same and same. 286 May 3,
Same, J. N. and J. D. 359 June 23, Same, Same and J. Donnaldson 217 Same, Same,
Same and same. 309 July 23, Same, Same and same. 301 Same, Same, Jared
Ingersoll. 98 Dec. 24, Same, J. N. and J. D. 226 1793 Feb. 11, Same, Albert
Gallatin. 79 A. J. Dallas' testimony, 231 1780 Dec. 26, Decree of Council in
Mr. Hopkinson's case. 56 1794 April 11, Decision of the Senate in Mr.
Nicholson's case, 762 1791 June 4, John Donnaldson, Thomas Mifflin. 147 1793
March 30, Same, Com. ways and means. 79 April 3, Same, Same. 82 J. Donnaldson's
testimony, 234 291 307 1793 Sept. 4. James Duncan, Speaker of the Senate. 191
1794 March 12, S. Dexter's speech for state, 415 April 29, Same, Edmund Hogan,
442 [E.] Griffith Evans' testimony, 306 [F.] 1780 Mr. Fitzsimmons' deposition
53 Miles Filbourne's do. 19 1793 Jan. 1, Christian Febiger, Speaker. 67 March
4, His testimony. 251 Finance plan -- Nicholson's 279 [G.] 1793 Jan. 14, Albert
Gallatin, A. J. Dallas. 74 His testimony, 295 J. Gibson's speech, 316 [H.] 1780
August 7, Francis Hopkinson, Matthew Clarkson. 9 11, Same, Same. 9 Oct. 30.
Same, To Council. 8 1791 June 6, Alex. Hamilton, Thomas Smith. 272 8, Same,
Same. 273 27, Same, Thomas Mifflin. 275 Dec. 21, Same, Same. 102 1792 June 25,
Same, Same. 97 1793 Feb. 8, Same, A. J. Dallas. 76 Aug. 21. Same, Thomas
Mifflin. 218 1794 March 5, His testimony before Senate 287 Same, Robt. Hare's
testimony, 289 Hs. Hamilton's deposition, 313 487 March 7. Those. Hale's
testimony, 311 Mr. Higginson's speech, 369 1780 M. Henderson's deposition, 15
Wm. Heysham's deposition, 19 1780 Dec. 18, F. Hopkinson's answer to two art. of
impeachment, 32 21, Same to the third article, 38 [I.] 1780 Dec. 12,
Impeachment articles against F. Hopkinson, 25 One ditto against the same, 30
Impeachment articles against John Nicholson, 202 1792 July 28, Jared Ingersoll,
A. J. Dallas. 100 His speech, 688 [L.] 1794 March 19, W. Lewis' speech for J.
N. 528 His deposition, 16 Lewis and Ingersoll, Speaker of the Senate, 746 [M.]
1780 Nov. 30, F. A. Muhlenberg, Francis Hopkinson. 5 1791 June 2, Thomas
Mifflin, John Nicholson, 146 7, Same, Same. 147 17, Same, J. Nicholson and J.
D. 150 1792 April 27, Same, J. N. and J. Donnaldson 357 1793 July 29, Thomas
Mifflin, Alex. Hamilton. 351 Dec. 1. B. R. Morgan, J. Nicholson, 144 His
speech, 209 1780 Aug. 12, Charles Miller, Matthew Clarkson. 14 His deposition,
20 Jesse Morris' testimony, 242 1780 B.M'Clenachan's deposition 17 Same, 46
1793 Sept. 4. His testim. before Assembly 188 1794 March 1. His deposition on
interrog. 253 George M'Clenachan, 254 1793 Sept. 4. Matthew M'Connell, John
Dunlap. 191 3, His testim. before Assembly 185 1794 March 4, Same before the
Senate, 250 W. Montgomery's testimony 290 Robert Morris, sworn, 47 [N.] 1790
Sept. 30, John Nicholson, Thomas Smith. 271 1791 June 7, Same, Thomas Mifflin.
148 July 2, Same, Same, 631 Dec. 24, Same, Same, 220 1791 Dec. 29, Same,
Alexander Hamilton. 277 1792 Jan. 18, Same, Same. 278 Feb. 29, Same, Thomas
Mifflin. 223 March 29, Same, Robert Hare. 290 April 28, Same, Thomas Mifflin.
224 June 21, Same, Same. 308 25, Same, Same. 30^ 1793 Jan. 5, Same, Speaker of
the Senate. 60 7, Same, Same. 72 April 1, Same, John Swanwick. 82 6, Same,
Same. 93 Same, Speaker House Rep. 94 8, Same, Same. 94 Same, Same. 95 11, Same,
Same. 108 Same, Speaker of the Senate. 108 Same, Speaker House Rep. 109 July 9,
Same, Thomas Mifflin. 166 Dec. 5, Same, Speaker of Senate. 194 June 27, Same,
Committee investigat. 164 28, Same, Thomas Mifflin. 165 Nov. 28, Same, Benj. R.
Morgan. 144 1794 Jan. 8, Same, (very long) Speaker House Rep. 11^ Feb. 25,
Same, Same. 200 Nicholson and Donnaldson. 1792 April 16, J. N. and J. D. Thomas
Mifflin. 356 30, Same and same, Same. 225 (...) Same and same, Same. 215 1792
Dec. 26, J. N. and J. D. Thomas Mifflin. 227 1793 Feb. 13, Same and same,
Speaker House Rep. 363 [O.] John Oldden's testimony, 243 [P.] Col. Porter's
testimony, 310 [R.] 1780 Aug. 9, Jos. Reed, Matthew Clarkson. 11 Resol. to
impeach Mr. H 22 Mr. Robeson's deposition, 17 44 1794 April 5, Resolution to
impeach Mr. Nicholson, 88 Mr. Rawle's speech for state 341 Ditto in conclusion,
730 741 1793 March 30. Edmund Randolph, Alex. Hamilton. 81 Mr. Lewis' animad.
on same 584 Report of the sale of stock, 103 Com. of investigat. 112 Com. ways
and means, 83 Philip Reilly's testimony, 242 [S.] 1780 Dec. 5, Samuel Sterett,
Francis Hopkinson. 7 Aug. 9. J. D. Sergeant, Mr. Reed. 10 His deposition, 16
His memorial to Assembly, 27 1790 Sept. 30, Thomas Smith, John Nicholson. 271
1791 May 5, John Stag's certificate, 147 June 2, Jonas Simonds, A. J. Dallas.
147 1794 March 5, John Smilie's testimony, 289 Abraham Smith's do. 290 Richard
Smith's do. 300 Daniel Stroud's do. 311 J. Servoss and Hilary Baker, To the
Senate. 253 Strafford from Hume, 739 Senate qualified. 745 Jon. Smith's
certificate, 154 [T.] Mr. Tilghman's speech. 268 Do. in conclusion. 729 734 R.
Thomas' testimony. 287 [W.] 1780 Nov. 16, Wm. Watkin's testimony, 15 1792 Feb.
2, Oliver Wolcott, Thomas Smith. 278 [Y.] Yeas and Nays on the impeachments of
Mr. H. 23 (...) Mr. N. 88


