PROPHECIES OF THE Rev. Christopher Love: Who was beheaded on Tower Hill,
LONDON, ON The Twenty-second Day of August 1651. AND His LAST WORDS ON The
SCAFFOLD.

BOSTON: Reprinted and sold at the Bible and Heart, in Cornhill, 1794.

PROPHECIES, etc. OF Mr. Christopher Love.
A FEW Nights after he was sentenced to be beheaded on Tower Hill, which was on
the 22d day of August, 1651, ten days before his appointed time, by the
sentence which he received at the bar; being one night visited by two of his
intimate acquaintances, or bosom friends, as he himself called them, they began
to complain of the cruelties of the times, and the masicious usage of
time-serving brethren; to which Mr. Love answered, -- "And think you this is an
evil time? No, No; this is the very time, when grace and true godliness can be
distinguished from hypocrisy. Many have followed Christ, hitherto, for the
loaves, and are now turned back for the roughness of the way, and the sore
trial and tribulation, which others met with, who are gone before them.

"There are many in London, at this very day, who think to go to Heaven in
their gilded coaches, and who have denied Christ's cause before men (against
whom I now witness) and Christ, in his never failing word, has promised to deny
all such before his Father and the holy Angels. This is the time to discern
between him that serves God, and him that serves him not. They formerly were
my familiar acquaintances, in fellowship and in sweet converse. I sent this day
to have a few words with them, here in the prison, but they would not come; for
their countenances are fallen, and their consciences wounded; they cannot look
me in the face; because I knew of their resolution, and was a witness of their
perjuration. But, ah! how will they look the blessed JESUS in the face, in the
morning of the resurrection? What answer or excuse will they have for what they
have done? O foolish people! who think to escape the Cross, and come to the
Crown! I tell you nay: you must all suffer persecution, who follow the Lamb. We
must be hated of all nations, for Christ's sake. We must go through great
tribulation, and through the fiery furnace of affliction, before we can enter
the land of joy and felicity. Know ye not, that the souls that were slain for
the testimony of Jesus, are placed under the Altar. Happy, happy are those men
at this day, and ever shall be happy, who suffer for Christ's sake in a right
way, i. e. through love to his cause, and an honesty of heart; and not through
pride and hypocrisy, without the root of the matter, to have it said they died
martyrs. These are they who will miss their mark. I am now pointed out by many
to be in a destitute and forlorn condition; but I would not exchange my state,
no, not for all the glory that is on earth. I find my Redeemer's love stronger
in my bonds, than ever I did in the days of my liberty: I am as full of love
and joy in the Holy Spirit, as ever a bottle was filled with new wine. I am
ready to cry out, the Spirit of the Lord God is upon me. I will not take upon
me to prophesy; nevertheless, the Spirit of the Lord causes me to utter. --
This usurped authority, now in the hand of Cromwell, shall shortly be at an
end. It contined only four years.
England shall be blessed with meek kings, and with a mild government, and
powerful preachers. But good sermons to them will be but as music to a sleepy
man; they shall hear, but not understand, nor lay the word to heart, to
practice it in their lives, and walk by it. O England! thou shall wax old in
wickedness; and thy sins abound like those of Sodom; thy voluptuousness shall
cry aloud for vengeance; and the Lord shall threaten and chastife thee; In 1665
the Plague raged in London, and carried off 87,000 persons. This was followed,
the next year, with the great Fire, 1666, which raged for three days, and burnt
13,000 houses, and destroyed 700 streets.
yet in mercy and love will he look upon those who fear him, and call upon his
name; he will spare and save them alive in the day of his anger, when the
wicked shall be sifted from amongst you, as the chaff is sifted from amongst
the wheat. Out of thee, O England! shall a bright Star arise, Uncertain; some
say Whitefield; some the Society in Scotland for propagating the Gospel; others
that the time of its accomplishment has not come.
whose light and voice shall make the heathen to quake, and bow with submission
to the Gospel of Jesus. He shall be as a sound of thunder in the ears of the
wicked, and as a lantern to the Jews. to lead them to the knowledge of Jesus,
the only Son of God, and the true Messiah, whom they so long mistrusted; for
the short work spoken of by the Apostle, which the Lord is to make upon the
earth, in the latter age of the world, cannot be far off. Observe, my dear
friends, while you live, my calculation of the dates in the book of the
Revelations, and in Daniel, which the Spirit of the Lord led me into; for the
Lord will reveal it to some of his own, ever that time come; for the nearer the
time is, the seals shall be taken away, and more and more shall be revealed to
God's People; for the Lord does nothing without he reveal it, by his Spirit, to
his Servants the Prophets. He destroyed not the old world without the knowledge
of Noah. -- He did not overthrow Sodom and Gomorrah without the knowledge of
Abraham. I do not mean now, that any new Prophet shall arise: But the Lord by
his Spirit shall canse knowledge to abound among his people, whereby the old
prophecies shall be clearly and perfectly understood. And I die in that
thought, and really believe that my calculation will be found true, on the
Revelation by St. John, and the prophecy which St. Jerome copied off, and
translated out of the Hebrew Language, as it is written on Seth's Pillar in
Damascus; which pillar is said to have stood since and before the flood, and
was built by Seth, Adam's son, and written by Enoch the Prophet; as likewise
the holy precepts, whereby the Patriarchs walked, before the law was given to
Moses, which were also engraven on the said Pillar; whereof many Jews have
copies, in their own language, written on parchment, and engraven on brass and
copper, This prophecy is entitled, "A short work of the Lord's, in the latter
age of the world."

PERIODS.
Great earthquakes and commotions by sea and land, Remarkable year for shocks
of earthquakes, volcanoes, inundations, factions, and commotions, in different
parts of the world.
shall come in the year of God 1779.

Great wars in Germany and America, Great dissentions in the Germanic body,
bickerings on the borders, and the height of the American war, where the
Germans served against the Americans.
in 1780.

The destruction of Popery, or Babilon's fall, The Revolution in France, which
is properly Babylon's fall, as it has broken off the tenth horn of the beast,
so that the Pope has become weak as another man.
in the year 1790.

God will be known by many Reformation. Future.
in the year 1795. This will produce a great man.

The Stars will wander, and the Moon shall turn as blood in 1800 Future.


Africa, Asia, and America will tremble in 1803. Future.


A great earthquake over all the world in 1805. Future.
God will be universally acknowledged by all: Then a general reformation and
peace, when the people shall learn war no more. Future. MILLEMIUM.
Happy is the man that lives to see this day.

The last Words of the Reverend CHRISTOPHER LOVE. Minister of Laurence Jury,
London, who was beheaded on Tower Hill, August 22, 1651, in the time of
Cromwell's usurpation, under pretense of his plotting against it. His words on
the scaffold were these.
"ALTHOUGH there be but little between me and death, yet this bears up my
heart, there is little between me and heaven. It comforted Dr. Tailor, the
martyr, when he was going to execution, that there were but two styles between
him and his Father's house: There is a lesser way between me and my Father's
house, but two steps between me and glory. It is but laying down my head upon
that block, and I shall ascend upon a throne. I am this day sailing toward the
ocean of eternity, through a rough passage to my haven of rest; through a red
sea to the promised land. Methinks I hear God say to me, as he did to Moses, Go
up to Mount Neho, and die there; so to me, Go up to Tower Hill, and die there.
Isaac said of himself, that he was old, and yet he knew not the day of his
death; But I cannot say so; I am young, and yet I know the day of my death, and
I know the kind of my death, and the place of my death also. I am put to such a
kind of death, as two famous preachers of the gospel were before me, John the
Baptist, and Paul the Apostle. They were both beheaded. I read, Rev. xxth, 4th,
The saints were beheaded for the word of God, and the testimony of Jesus. But
herein is the disadvantage which I lie under, in the thoughts of some; they
judge that I suffer not for the word of God, or for conscience, but for
meddling with State matters. -- To this I shall briefly say, that it is an old
trick of Satan, to impute the cause of God's people's sufferings to be
contrivements against the State; when, in truth, it is their religion and
conscience they are persecuted for. The Rulers of Israel would have put
Jeremiah to death upon a civil account, though indeed it was only the truth of
his prophecy that made the rulers angry with him; and yet upon a civil account
they pretended he must die; because he fell away to the Chaldeans, and would
have brought in foreign forces to invade them. The same thing is laid to my
charge, of which I am as innocent as Jeremiah was. So Paul, though he did but
preach Jesus Christ, yet his enemies would have him put to death under pretense
that he was a mover of sedition. Upon a civil account my life is pretended to
be taken away; whereas, it is because I pursue my covenant, and will not
prostitute my principles and conscience to the ambition and the lusts of men. I
had rather die a covenant-keeper, than live a covenant-breaker. -- Beloved, I
am this day making a double exchange: I am changing a pulpit for a scaffold,
and a scaffold for a throne, -- And I might add a third, I am changing the
presence of this numerous multitude upon Tower Hill, for the innumerable
company of saints and angels in Heaven, the holy Hill of Zion; and I am
changing a guard of soldiers for a guard of angels, which will receive me, and
carry me to Abraham's bosom. This scaffold is the best pulpit that ever I
preached in. In my church pulpit, God, through his grace, made me an instrument
to bring others to heaven; but in this pulpit he will bring me to heaven."

Afterward he said, "Though my blood be not the blood of nobles, yet it is
Christian blood, minister's blood; yea more, it is innocent blood. I magnify
the riches of God's grace and mercy toward me, that I, who was born in Wales,
an obscure country, and of obscure parents, should be singled out to honorable
sufferings. For the first fourteen years of my life, I never heard a sermon
preached; yet in the fifteenth year of my life it pleased God to convert me.
Blessed be God, who not only made me a christian, but also a minister, judging
me faithful, and putting me into the ministry, which is my glory, I had rather
be a preacher in the pulpit than a prince on the throne. I had rather be an
instrument to bring souls to heaven, than that all nations should bring tribute
to me. -- Formerly (said he) I have been under a spirit of bondage; yea,
sometimes I have had more fear in drawing out a tooth, than now I have for
cutting off my head. When fear was upon me, death was not near; now, when death
is near to me, my fear is evanished. -- I am comforted in this, though men kill
me, they cannot damn me; though they thrust me out of the world, yet they
cannot shut me out of heaven. -- When I have shed my blood, I expect the full
declaration of the remission of sins through the blood of Christ. I am going to
my long home, and ye to your short homes; but I shall be at my home before you
be at yours."

When the executioner was raising the fatal axe, Mr. Love's neck being placed
across the block to receive it, he prayed. That, seeing he was called to do the
work which he never did, he might have the strength which he never had. The
blow followed, and fevered the head from the trunk.

Dr. Wild in his Elegy has these Lines:

MEthinks I heard beheaded Saints above
Call to each other, Sirs, make room for LOVE,
Who when he came to tread the fatal stage,
(Which proved his glory, and his enemies rage)
(His blood never run to's heart, Christ's blood was there,
Reviving it: His own was all to spare;
Which rising in his checks, did seem to say,
Is this the blood you thirst for? Take It I pray.
Spectators in his looks such life did see,
That they appeared more like to die than he.
Lightnings, which filled the air with blazing light,
Did serve for torches at that dismal night;
In which, and all next day, for many hours,
Heaven groaned in thunder, and did weep in showers;
Nor do I wonder that GOD thundered so,
When Is Boanerges murdered lay below.

