

THE LIFE OF GENESIS WASHINGTON, Commander in Chief of the American Army during
the late War, and present President of the United States.

ALSO, OF THE BRAVE GENERAL MONTGOMERY.

Embellished with Cuts.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JONES, HOFF and DERRICK, No. 8, NORTH FIFTH-STREET.
M,DCC,XCIV.

THE LIFE OF GENERAL WASHINGTON.
GENERAL WASHINGTON was born on the 11th of February (old style) 1732, at the
parish of Washington, in Westmoreland county, in Virginia. His father's family
was numerous, and he was the first fruit of a second marriage. His education
having been principally conducted by a private tutor. At fifteen years old he
was entered a midshipman on board of a British vessel of war stationed on the
coast of Virginia, and his baggage prepared for embarkation: but the plan was
abandoned on account of the reluctance his mother expressed to his engaging in
that profession.

Previous to this transaction, when he was but ten years of age, his father
died, and the charge of the family devolved on his eldest brother, a young man
of the most promising talents, who had a command in the colonial troops
employed against Carthagenia, and on his return from the expedition, named his
new patrimonial mansion MOUNT VERNON, in in honor of the admiral of that name,
from whom he had received many civilities. He was afterward made Adjutant
General of the Virginia militia, but did not long survive. At his discease
(notwithstanding there are heirs of an elder branch who possess a large moiety
of the paternal inheritance) the eldest son by second marriage inherited this
seat and a considerable landed property. In consequence of the extensive limits
of the colony, the vacant office of Adjutant General was divided into three
districts, and the future Hero of America, before he attained his twentieth
year, began his military service by an appointment in that department, with the
rank of major.

When he was little more than twenty one years of age, an event occurred which
called his abilities into public notice. In 1753, while the government of the
colony was administered by lieutenant governor Dinwiddie; encroachments were
reported to have been made by the French, from Canada, on the territories of
the British colonies, at the westward. Young Mr. Washington, who was sent with
plenary powers to ascertain the facts, treat with the savages, and warn the
French to desist from their aggressions, performed the duty of his mission with
singular industry, intelligence and address. His journal, and report to
governor Dinwiddie, which were published, announced to the world that
correctness of mind, manliness in style, and accuracy in the mode of doing
business, which have since characterised him in the conduct of more arduous
affairs. But it was deemed, by some, an extraordinary circumstance that so
juvenile and inexperienced a person should have been employed on a negotiation,
with which subjects of the greatest importance were involved: subjects, which
shortly after became the origin of a war between England and France, that raged
for many years throughout every part of the globe.

As the troubles still subsisted on the frontiers, the colony of Virginia
raised, the next year, a regiment of troops for their defense. Of this corpse,
Mr. Fry, one of the professors of the college, was appointed colonel, and Major
Washington received the commission of Lieutenant Colonel. But Colonel Fry died
the same summer, without ever having joined; and of course left his regiment
and rank to the second in command. Colonel Washington made indefatigable
efforts to form the regiment, establish magazines, and open roads so as to
pre-occupy the advantageous post at the confluence of the Alleghany and
Monongahela rivers, which he had recommended for that purpose in his reports
the preceding year. He was to have been joined by a detachment of independent
regulars from the southern colonies, together with some companies of
provincials from North Carolina and Maryland. But he perceived the necessity of
expedition, and without waiting for their arrival, commenced his march in the
month of May. Notwithstanding his precipitated advance, on his ascending the
Laurel-hill, fifty miles short of his object, he was advised that a body of
French had already taken possession and erected a fortification, which they
named fort du Quesne. He then fell back to a place known by the appellation of
the Great Meadows, for the sake of forage and supplies. Here he built a
temporary stockade, merely to cover his stores; it was from its fate called
fort Necessity. His force when joined by Captain M'Kay's regulars, did not
amount to four hundred effectives. Upon receiving information from his scouts
that a considerable party was approaching to reconnoitre his post, he sallied
and defeated them. But in return he was attacked by an army, computed to have
been fifteen hundred strong, and after a gallant defense, in which more than
one third of his men were killed and wounded, was forced to capitulate. The
garrison marched out with the honors of war, but were plundered by the
Indians, in violation of the articles of capitulation. After this disaster, the
remains of the Virginia reglment returned to Alexandria to be recruited and
furnished with necessary supplies.

In the year 1755, the British government sent to this country General
Braddock, who, by the junction of two veteran regiments from Ireland, with the
independent and provincial corpse in America, was to repel the French from the
confines of the English settlements. Upon a royal arrangement of rank, by which
"no officer who did not immediately derive his commission from the king, could
command one who did, "Colonel Washington relinquished his regiment, and went as
an extra Aid-de-Camp into the family of General Braddock. In this capacity, at
the battle of Monongahela, he attended that General, whose, life was gallantly
sacrificed in attempting to extricate his troops from the fatal ambuscade into
which his overweening confidence had conducted them. Braddock had several
horses shot under him, before he fell himself; and there was not on officer
whose duty obliged him to be on horse back that day, excepting Colonel
Washington, who was not other killed or wounded. This circumstance enabled him
to display greater abilities in covering the retreat and saving the wreck of
the army, than he could otherwise have done. As soon as he had secured their
passage over the ford of the Monongahela, and found they were not pursued, he
hallened to concert measuers for their further security with Colonel Dunbar,
who had remained with the second division and heavy baggage at some distance in
the rear. To effect this, he traveled with two guides, all night, through an
almost impervious wilderness, notwithstanding the fatigues he had undergone in
the day, and notwithstanding he had so imperfectly recovered from sickness that
he was obliged in the morning to be supported with cushions on his horse. The
public accounts in England and America were not parsimonious of applause for
the essential service he had rendered on so trying an occasion.

Not long after this time, the regulation of rank, which had been so injurious
to the Coloniel officers, was changed to their satisfaction, in consequence of
their discontent and the remonstrance of Colonel Washington; and the supreme
authority of Virginia, impressed with a due sense of his merits, gave him, in a
new and extensive commission, the command of all the troops raised, and to be
raised in that colony.

It would not comport with the intended brevity of this sketch, to mention in
detail the plans he suggested or the system he pursued for defending the
frontiers, until the year 1758, when he commanded the van brigade of Genesis
Forbes's army in the capture of Fort du Quesne. A similar reason will preclude
the recital of the personal hazards and achievements which happened in the
course of his service. The tranquillity on the frontiers of the middle colonies
having been restored by the success of this campaign, and the health of Colonel
Washington having become extremely debilitated by a inveterate pulmonary
complaint, in 1759 heresigned his appointment. Authentic documents are not
wanting to show the tender regret which the Virginia line expressed at parting
with their commander, and the affectionate regard which he entertained for them.

His health was gradually re-established. He married Mrs. Custis, General and
Mrs. Washington were both born in the same year.
a handsome and amiable young widow, possessed of an ample jointure; and
settled as a planter and farmer on the estate where he often resides in Fairfax
county. After some years he gave up planting tobacco, and went altogether into
the farming business. He has raised seven thousand bushels of wheat and ten
thousand bushels of Indian corn in one year. Although he has confined his own
cultivation to this domestic tract of about nine thousand acres, yet he
poflesses excellent lands in large quantities, in several other counties. His
judgment in the qualities of soils, his command of money to avail himself of
purchases, and his occasional employment in early life as a surveyor, gave him
opportunities of making advantageous locations; many of which are much improved.

After he left the army until the year 1775, he thus cultivated the arts of
peace. He was constantly a member of Assembly, a magistrate of his county, and
a judge of the court. He was elected a delegate to the first Congress in 1774;
as well as to that which assembled the year following. Soon after the war broke
out he was appointed by Congress commander in chief of the forces of the United
Colonies.

It is the less necessary to particularise in this place his transactions in
the late war, because the impression which they made is yet fresh in every
mind. But it is hoped posterity will be taught, in what manner he transformed
an undisciplined body of peasantry into a regular army of soldiers.
Commentaries on his campaigns would undoubtedly be highly interesting and
instructive to future generations. The conduct of the first campaign, in
compelling the British troops to abandon Boston by a bloodless victory, will
merit a minute narration. But a volumn would scarcely contain the
mortifications he experienced and the hazards to which he was exposed in 1776
and 1777, in contending against the prowess of Britain, with an inadequate
force. His good destiny and consumate prudence prevented want of success from
producing want of confidence on the part of the public; for want of success is
apt to lead to the adoption of pernicious counsels through the levity of the
people or the ambition of their demagogues. Shortly after this period sprang up
the only cabal that ever existed during his public life, to rob him of his
reputation and command. It proved as impotent in effect as it was audacious in
design. In the three succeeding years the germ of discipline unfolded; and the
resources of America having been called into cooperation with the land and
naval armies of France, produced the glorious conclusion of the campaign in
1781. From this time the gloom began to disappear from our political horizon,
and the affairs of the Union proceeded in a meliorating train, until a peace
was most ably negociated by our ambassadors in Europe, in 1783.

No person who had not the advantage of being present when General Washington
received the intelligence of peace, and who did not accompany him to his
domessic retirement, can describe the relief which that joyful event brought to
his laboring mind, or the supreme satisfaction with which he withdrew to
private life. From his triumphal entry into New York, upon the evacuation of
that city by the British army, to his arrival at Mount Vernon, after the
resignation of his commission to Congress, festive crowds impeded his passage
through all the populous towns, the devotion of a whole people pursued him with
prayers to Heaven for blessings on his head, while their gratitude sought the
most expressive language of manifesting itself to him, as their common father
and benefactor. When he became a private citizen he had the unusual felicity to
find that his native state was among the most zealous in doing justice to his
merits; and that stronger demonstrations of affectionate esteem (if possible)
were given by the citizens of his neighborhood, than by any other description
of men on the continent. But he has constantly declined accepting any
compensation for his services, or provision for the augmented expenses which
have been incurred by him in consequence of his public employment, although
proposals have been made in the most delicate manner, particularly by the
states of Virginia and Pennsylvania.

The virtuous simplicity which distinguishes the private life of Genesis
Washington, though less known than the dazzling splendor of his military
atchievments; is not less edifying in example, or worthy the attention of his
countrymen. The conspicuous character he has acted on the theater of human
affairs, the uniform dignity with which he sustained his part amidst
difficulties of the most discouraging nature, and the glory of having arrived
through them at the hour of triumph, have made many official and literary
persons, on both sides of the ocean, ambitious of a correspondence with him.
These correspondencies unavoidably engross a great portion of his time; and the
communications contained in them, combined with the numerous periodical
publications and newspapers which he peruses, render him, as it were, the
focus of political intelligence for the new world. Nor are his conversations
with well informed men less conducive to bring him acquainted with the various
events which happen in different countries of the globe. Every foreigner of
distinction, who travels in America, makes it a point to visit him. Members of
Congress and other dignified personages do not pass his house, without calling
to pay their respects. As another source of information it may be mentioned,
that many literary productions are sent to him annually by their authors in
Europe; and that there is scarcely one work written in America, on any art,
science, or subject, which does not seek his protection, or which is not
offered to him as a token of gratitude. Mechanical inventions are frequently
submitted to him for his approbation, and natural curiosities presented for his
investigation. But the multiplicity of epistolary applications, often on the
remains of some business which happened when he was commander in chief,
sometimes on subjects foreign to his situation, frivolous in their nature, and
intended merely to gratify the vanity of the writers by drawing answers from
him is truly distressing and almost incredible. His benignity in answering,
perhaps, increases the number. Did he not husband every moment to the best
advantage, it would not be in his power to notice the variety of subjects that
claim his attention. Here a minuter description of his domestic life may be
expected.

To apply a life, at best but short, to the most useful purposes; he lives as
he ever has done, in the unvarying habits of regularity, temperance and
industry. He rises, in winter as well as in summer at the dawn of day; and
generally reads or writes some time before breakfast. He breakfasts about seven
o'clock, on three small Indian hoe-cakes and as many dishes of tea. He rides
immediately to his different farms, and remains with his laborers until a
little past two o'clock, when he returns and dresses. At three he dines,
commonly on a single dish, and drinks from half a pint to a pint of Madeira
wine. This, with one small glass of punch, a draught of beer, and two dishes of
tea (which he takes half an hour before sunsetting) constitates his whole
sustenance until the next day. Whether there be company or not, the table is
always prepared by its elegance and exuberance for their reception; and the
General remains at it for an hour after dinner, in familiar conversation and
convivial hilarity. It is then that every one present is called upon to give
some absent friend as a toast; the name not unfrequently awakens a pleasing
remembrance of past events, and gives a new turn to the animated colloquy.
General Washington is more cheerful than be was in the army. Although his
temper is rather of a serious cast, and his countenance commonly carries the
impression of thoughtfulness, yet he perfectly relishes a pleasant story, an
unafected sally of wit, or a burlesque description which surprises by its
suddenness and incongruity with the ordinary appearance of the object
described. After this sociable and innocent relaxation, he applies himself to
business; and about nine o'clock retires to rest. This is the rotinc, and this
the hour he observes, when no one but his family is present; at other times he
attends politely upon his company until they wish to withdraw. He keeps a pack
of hounds, and in the season indulges himself with hunting once in a week; at
which diversion the gentlemen of Alexandria often assist.

Agriculture is the favorite employment of Generel Washington, in which he
wishes to pass the remainder of his days. To acquire and communicate practical
knowledge, he corresponds with Mr. Arthur Young, who has written so sensibly on
the subject, and also with many agricultural gentlemen in this country. As
improvement is known to be his passion, he receives envoys with rare seeds and
results of new projects from every quarter. He likewise makes copious notes,
relative to his own experiments, the state of the seasons, the nature of the
soils, the effects of different kinds of manure, and such other topics as may
throw light on the farming business.

On Saturday in the afternoon, every week's reports are made by all his
overseers, and registered in books kept for that purpose: so that at the end of
the year, the quantity of labor and produce may be accurately known. Order and
economy are established in all the departments within and without doors. His
lands are enclosed in lots of equal dimensions, and crops are assigned to each
for many years. Every thing is undertaken on a great scale; but with a view to
introduce or augment the culture of such articles as he conceives will become
most beneficial in their consequences to the country. He has, in one year
raised two thousand lambs, sowed twenty seven bushels of flaxseed, and planted
more than seven hundred bushels of potatoes. In the mean time, the public may
rest persuaded that there is manufactured under his roof, linen and woollen
cloth, nearly or quite sufficient for the use of his numerous household.

THE LIFE OF GENERAL MONTGOMERY.



THE LIFE OF GENERAL MONTGOMERY.
GENERAL Montgomery descended from a respectable family in the North of
Ireland, and was born in the year 1737. His attachment to liberty was innate,
and matured by a fine education and an excellent understanding. Having married
a wife, and purchased an estate in New York, he was, from these circumstances,
as well as from his natural love of freedom, and from a conviction of the
justness of her cause, induced to consider himself as an American. From
principle, he early embarked in her cause, and quitted the sweets of easy
fortune, the enjoyment of a loved and philosophical rural life, with the
highest domestic felicity, to take an active share in all the hardships and
dangers that attend the soldiers life.

Before he came over to America, he had been an officer in the service of
England, and had successfully fought her battles with the immortal Wolf at
Quebec, in the war of 1756, on the very spot, where, when fighting under the
standard of freedom, he was doomed to fall in arms against her. No one who fell
a martyr to freedom in this unnatural contest, was more sincerely, or more
universally lamented. And what is extraordinary, the most eminent speakers in
the British parliament, forgetting for the moment, that he had died in opposing
their cruel and oppressive measures, displayed all their eloquence in praising
his virtues and lamenting his fate. A great orator, and a veteran fellow
soldier of his in the French war of 1756, shed abundance of tears, while he
expatiated on their past friendship and mutual exchange of tender services in
that season of enterprise and glory.

All enmity to this veteran soldier expired with his life; and respect to his
private character prevailed over all other considerations. By the orders of
Genral Carlton, his dead body received every possible mark of distinction from
the victors, and was interred in Quebec, on the first day of January, 1776,
with all the honors due to a brave soldier.

Congress were not unmindful of the merit of this amiable and brave officer,
nor remiss in manifesting the esteem and respect they entertained for his
memory. Considering it not only as a tribute of gratitude justly due to the
memory of those who had peculiarly distinguished themselves in the glorious
cause of liberty, to perpetuate their names by the most durable monuments
erected to their honor, but greatly conducive to inspire posterity with
emulation of their illustrious actions, that honorable body*

" Resolved, That to express the veneration of the United Colonies for their
late General, RICHARD MONTGOMERY, and the deep sense they entertain of the many
singnal and important services of that gallant officer, who, after a series of
successes, amidst the most discouraging difficulties, fell at length in a
gallant attack upon Quebec, the capital of Cannada; and to transmit to future
ages, as examples truly worthy of imitation, his patriotism, conduct, boldness
of enterprise, insuperable perseverance, and contempt of danger and death; a
monument be procured from Paris, or other parts of France, with an inscription
sacred to his memory, and expressive of his amiable character, and heroic
atchievments, and that the Continental treasures be directed to advance a sum
not exceeding 300 l. sterling, to Dr. Franklin, who is desired to see this
resolution properly executed, for defraying the expense thereof."

This resolve was carried into execution at Paris, by that ingenious artist,
Mr. Caffiers, sculptor to the king of France, under the direction of Dr.
Franklin. The monument is of white marble, of the most beautiful simplicity,
and inexpressible elegance, with emblamatical devices, and the following truly
classical inscription, worthy of the modest, but great mind of a Franklin.

TO THE GLORY OF RICHARD MONTGOMERY, Major General of the armies of the United
States of America, Slain at the siege of Quebec, the 31st of December, 1775,
aged 38 years.

This elegant monument has lately been erected in front of St. Paul's church in
New York.

There is a remarkable circumstance connected with the fall of this brave
officer, that merits to be recorded, because the fact is of a very interesting
nature, and will serve to perpetuate the memory of a very amiable and deserving
character, who was also a martyr in the cause of his country. The circumstance
is this:

One of General Montgomery's Aidesde-Camp, was Mr. Macpherson, a most promising
young man, whose father resided at Philadelphia, and was greatly distinguished
in privateering in the war of 1756. This gentleman had a brother in the 16th
regiment, in the British service, at the time of Montgomery's expedition into
Canada, and who was as violent in favor of the English government, as this
General's Aid-de-Camp was enthusiastic in the cause of America; the latter had
accompanied his General a day or two previous to the attack in which they both
lost their lives, to view and mediate on the spot where Wolf had fallen; on his
return he found a letter from his brother, the English officer, full of the
bitterest reproaches against him, for having entered into the American service,
and containing a pretty direct wish, that if he would not abandon it, he might
meet with the deserved fate of a rebel. The Aid-de-Camp immediately returned
him an answer, full of strong reasoning in defense of his conduct, but by no
means attempting to shake the opposite principles of his brother, and not only
free from acrimony, but full of expressions of tenderness and affection; this
letter he dated, "From the spot where Wolf lost his life, in fighting the
cause of England, in friedship with America." This letter had scarcely reached
the officer at New York, before it was followed by the news of his brother's
death. The effect was instantaneous, nature, and perhaps reason prevailed; and
a thousand, not unworthy sentiments rushed upon his distressed mind; he quitted
the English service, entered into that of America, and sought every occasion of
distinguishing himself in her service!

APPENDIX.
ON WASHINGTON, MONTGOMERY, etc.
GOD save America,
Free from tyrannic sway,
Till time shall cease:
Hushed be the din of arms
And all proud wars alarms;
Follow in all her charms,
Heaven born Peace.
GOD save great WASHINGTON!
Fair Freedom's chosen son,
Born to command:
May every enemy
Far from his presence flee,
And be grim tyranny
Bound by his hand.
Thy name, O MONTGOMERY,
Still in each heart shall be
Praised in each breath:
Though on the fatal plain,
Thou wast untimely slain,
Yet shall thy virtues gain
Rescue from death.
On the Vanity of YOUTHFUL HOPES.
IN life's gay morn, what vivid hues
Adorn the animating views,
By flattering fancy drawn!
No Storms with gloomy aspects rise,
To cloud the azure of the skies,
No mists obscure the dawn.
With looks invariably gay,
Young expectation points the way
To ever blissful shades,
Where odors scent the breath of morn
Where roses bloom without a thorn,
And music fills the glades.
Enraptured with the distant view,
Youth thinks its fictious beauties true,
And springs the prize to gain;
His grasp the gay illusion flies;
Experience thus the cheat descries,
And proves his hopes were vain.
The path of life though flowers adorn,
Yet often will the rugged thorn
Amidst the flowers rise;
Expect not then on earth to share
Enjoyments unallay by care,
But seek it in the skies.
ON GENERAL WASHINGTON.
GREAT without pomp, without ambition brave --
Proud, not to conquer fellow men, but save --
Friend to the weak -- a foe to none but those,
Who plan their greatness on their brethren's woes --
Awed by no titles -- undefiled by lust --
Free without faction, obstinately just --
Too wise to learn, from Machiavel's school,
That truth and perfidy by turns should rule.
Warmed by Religion's sacred, genuine ray,
Which points to future bliss, the unerring way;
Yet never controlled by Superstition's laws,
The worst of tyrants in the noblest cause.
An Epitaph on a poor, but honest man.
STOP, reader, here, and deign a look
On one without a name;
Never entered in the ample book
Of fortune, or of fame:
Studious of peace, he hated strife,
Meek virtues filled his breast;
His coat of arms, "A spotless life" --
"An honest heart," his crest.
Quartered therewith was innocence;
And thus his motto ran:
"A conscience void of all offense
Before both God and man."
In the great day of wrath, though pride
Now scorns his pedigree;
Thousands shall wish they would been allied
To this great family.
FEDERAL PRAYER.
FATHER of all! Thou who rulest the armies of Heaven above; look down upon us
we beseech thee, and bless all orders of men in this lower world. In a
particular manner we pray for our own country: Bless the Congress of these
United States, and all our rulers; May they rule wisely, love mercy, and do
justice at all times. Unite us more and more we beseech thee; lead us in the
right way, and make us a great and a happy people.

Bless all religious orders of men, O our heavenly Father! enlighten their
minds, subdue superstition, and grant that they may all unite to worship thee
in truth, with one heart and one voice.

Send discord far from us, we beseech thee, both from church and state, and
give us hearts of unity and peace. Hasten the happy time when thy will shall be
done here on earth, as it is done in Heaven: When sin and sorrow shall be no
more: When all the inhabitants of the earth shall be blessed; and join in songs
of praise to thee the only wise God, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

