Mr. M'Clure's Sermon, AT THE INSTALLATION OF THE Morning Star Lodge.

A SERMON, DELIVERED AT THE INSTALLATION OF THE Morning Star Lodge, OF Free
Masons, IN EAST-WINDSOR, CONNECTICUT, AUGUST 21, 1794.

BY DAVID M'CLURE, A. M. Minister of the first Church in East-Windsor.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN. MDCCXCIV.

TO Capt. REUBEN CHAMPION, the MASTER, and to the BRETHREN of the MORNING STAR
LODGE. This Discourse is respectfully inscribed, by The AUTHOR.

A Sermon, etc.
Respectable friends and Brethren, INVITED by you to speak on this occasion,
permit me to call your greateful contemplations to dwell a few moments on the
majesty and goodness of the supreme Lord and Architect of the universe. The
pious admiration, expressed by that wise and ancient monarch Solomon, the
builder of the Temple, at the greatness and condescension of Jehovah, will be
the theme of my discourse.
I KINGS, viii. 27. But will God indeed dwell on the earth! Behold the heaven,
and the heaven of heavens cannot contain thee: how much less this house which I
have builded?
THIS is a sentence of that devout and solemn prayer, which Solomon addressed
to the God of Israel, at the dedication of that magnificent edifice the Temple.
It was the will of God, that a house of prayer should be erected in Jerusalem,
and that Solomon, the wisest and wealthiest monarch of the east, should build
it, and that it should exceed in splendour, any thing that the world had seen.

"Solomon built him a house. Howbeit the Most High dwells not in temples made
with hands, as says the prophet, Heaven is my throne, and earth my footstool."
God is not confined to place or bounds. The house was intended for the
worshippers of Jehovah, in which to meet and present their religious homage.
The magnificence of the building, which was one of the wonders of the world,
was designed by the pious builders to bear a faint resemblance of the glory of
the Being worshipped there.

The model of the house was given from heaven, and Israelites and Tyrians were
the workmen. Hiram, king of Tire, sent his skilful architects from Tyere and
Sidon, to work with the builders of Israel. The materials were prepared
beforehand. The cedars were fashioned on Lebanon, and the stones and marble
hewed and polished at the quarries. They were brought together, and the
building arose without the noise of axes or hammers. Lively emblem of the
church of the redeemed, made up of Jews and Gentiles; a glorious building
resting on the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ, the chief
corner stone. They are here prepared by the grace of the Redeemer, the
sanctification of ordinances and of afflictions, and the operation of the
divine Spirit, fashioning them in the strength and beauty of holiness, for that
temple in the Lord, in the peaceful world above, where no jarring noise is
heard. And lively image also of the church on earth, when the peaceful and
benevolent spirit of the religion of Jesus, shall universally reign.

At the completion of this noble edifice, king Solomon, at the head of the
congregation of Israel, addressed God in a most solemn prayer, emploring his
favorable presence, and beseeching him to bless his worshippers there. And God
was pleased to give them a pledge of his gracious acceptance, by a glorious
light shining in the temple, between the golden cherubims, and by a dazzling
cloud inveloping the edifice. No pious souls sincerely seek the favor of God
in vain. How great was the joy and holy wonder of the king and the people, at
this manifestation of the divine favor? Solomon could scarcely realize the
condescension; that the high and holy Being who inhabits eternity, should thus
favorably regard the prayer of his people, and by this token of his gracious
presence, dwell with men. But will God indeed dwell on the earth? Behold the
heaven, and the heaven of heavens, cannot contain thee! how much less this
house which I have builded?

Two thoughts especially, strike the mind, on reading this sublime passage,
this pious exclamation of the royal preacher, -- the majesty of God, and his
kindness to men. I will humbly attempt to raise my own and your devout
contemplations to these great subjects -- the majesty and immensity of Jehovah,
the builder of the universe, and creator of the ends of the earth, and his
wonderful goodness and condescension to the wants and affairs of men; and to
make such application of the subject, as may correspond to the purposes of our
present assembling.

Every pious mind is struck with admiration at the immensity of God. For there
can be no part of the universe or infinite space, but God is present there.

Our thoughts are capable of forming only very scanty conceptions of the
immensity or omnipresence of God. On entering on this great subject, I feel my
insufficiency and nothingness; but to pursue it as far as we are able, will
exalt God in our thoughts and serve to give us suitable apprehensions of
ourselves. For who by searching can find out the majesty of God, or his
infinite immensity to perfection? Our existence and knowledge are limited, and
beyond certain bounds we cannot extend. And all creatures with whom we are
acquainted, are also finite and limited; and in our conceptions of the
universe, we are ready to imagine that there must be some end to the creation,
or to extended space. And also in our thoughts on the existence of God, we are
inclined to limit his presence, and to conceive that it is local and
circumscribed. We are unable to grasp immensity and infinitude. Our capacity of
thought is finite and bounded, and we are therefore lost and drowned in the
divine immensity. Such is the imperfection and scantiness of our knowledge.

So far as our eyes can see over the earth, and up to the stary heavens, we
behold the wonderful effects of the Creator's skill, his power and goodness.
The stars appear small by reason of their immense distance. It would be many
ages before the swiftest eagle could reach the nearest of them. This earth on
which we dwell is great, but how small a spot is it compared to the whole
creation? Numerous stars are seen by the eye, and by the help of glasses are
seen, stars greatly beyond them; and each, probably a sun to inhabited worlds
of rational creatures, revolving around them.

Should the soul disengaged from the body, fly with swiftness to those distant
worlds of light, it would no doubt, there see other systems and worlds of light
on all sides, appearing as stars in the vast fields of the universe. Should it
extend its journey for millions of ages, through interminable space, it would
see, with increasing wonder, works on works of the creator. Or should it reach
the end of the works of Creation, if any end there be, to created systems and
worlds, would find itself within the universe of God, sustained and upheld by
his omnipresence. Beyond the utmost bounds of creation, there still remains an
unbounded infinite space, the work of the Almighty. In attempting to reach the
limit or the end, the thoughts are lost, weary and confounded. Such is this
immense universe, and infinite extended space. And God is present in all parts
and places therein. His essential presence is here and there, and beyond the
utmost extent to which our thoughts can reach. He is, says one, as a circle,
whole center is every where, and his circumference no where. Whither, O Lord,
shall I go from thy presence? If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there; if I
make my bed in hell, lo, thou art there: if I take the wings of the morning,
and fly with the swiftness of the rays of light to the utmost bounds of the
creation, even there will thy hand sustain me, and thy immensity surround me.

This amazing universe, the temple and residence of the Deity, was brought into
existance by an act of his almighty will. " In the beginning God created the
heavens and the earth." He spoke and it was done. Man can fashion some curious
work when he has materials and tools to work with. But who except a Deity, can
call from nothing into being? Who but God could stretch out the heavens as an
immense curtain, adorned with countless worlds of light, and give them their
admirable beauty and order!

Fond atheist, could a giddy dance,
Of atoms lawless hurled,
Produce so regular, so fair,
So harmoniz'd a world!
A God! a God! Creation shouts,
A God! each insect cries;
He molded in his palm the earth,
And hung it in the skies.
From the works of creation, we infer the immensity and omnipresence of God. As
unbounded space and the created universe have God for their author, his essence
must be necessarily infinite and unbounded. If there were any place, where God
is not, it would imply imperfection, because his existance would then be
limited and his infinitude abridged.

It is also inferred from the providence of God, and his conservation of all
things. Without his presence in all parts of the universe, sustaining,
upholding and governing all, all things would rush to ruin, and to their
primitive nothingness. All things are full of God. O wondrous knowledge! The
immensity of Jehovah is high, we cannot attain unto it. "Thy greatness, O Lord
is unsearchable. Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God almighty, sought
out by all them, who have pleasure in them."

The majesty and immensity of God are perfections which fill our minds with
awful reverence and solemn fear. It is his goodness, his kindness and
condescension to men which render all his perfections amiable, and which
encourage us to approach this high and holy being, our glorious Maker, with
humble confidence and filial love.

His condescension to the wants and the affairs of men, impressed the mind of
the king and congregation of Israel with holy wonder, admiration and joy. Let
the goodness and condescension of our God to us, sirs, his needy and offending
creatures, now and all times deeply affect our minds, and irresistably and
sweetly impel us, to love and serve him for ever. "Bless the Lord, O my soul,
and never forget his benefits, for his mercy endures forever." An ocean of
benevolence exists in God. The streams flow over all creation. His infinite and
amiable goodness appears in the creation of the universe. It is seen on earth*
in all the favorable circumstances, in which creatures are placed to obtain
the happiness of which they are capable. "The eyes of all, O Lord, wait upon
thee, and thou satisfiest the desires of every living thing." What a vast
family of living creatures, besides man, wait on God, and are fed and clothed
from the storehouse of his bounty?

Thus God's infinite kindness appears in the creation of beings to possess
happiness, and also in their constant preservation. "In God we live and move
and have our being." His presence pervades our essence and by his constant
care, the spirits are preserved before him, and the souls which he has made.

To every nation and individual, he leaves not himself without a witness of his
goodness, in sending rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, and all the
bounties of his providence, filling their hearts with food and gladness.

And though men misuse and abuse the bounties of heaven, and spurn at the hand
that is liberally extended to give, yet the goodness and the mercy of God
follow them, all the days of their mortal life. Time would fail, should we
dwell on the delightful theme of the goodness and the love of God to men, and
the one half would remain untold.

I shall only remind you brethren, of that capital gift of God to men, the gift
of his Son to redeem us. This is such an expression of love in the Deity, as
fills holy angels with admiration and joy. In this was manifested the love of
God, that he sent his Son into the world to redeem us. Herein is love, not that
we loved God, but that God loved us. Hear, O heavens, and be astonished, O
earth, with joyful surprise, at this wonderful and divine condescension; and
let the glory be given to the highest, that through the blessed Mediator, there
is peace on earth, and good will to men.

The same divine philanthropy is seen in the Son of God, by whom the father
made all worlds, and who as to his divine nature is one with him, and whom
neither heaven, nor the heaven of heavens can contain. Yet, wondrous
condescension! Behold him coming to dwell on earth, -- veiling his glories in
mortality, -- conversing with us as a man converses with his friend, -- guiding
us by his example, his precepts and his spirit, through the duties and dangers
of life, and pointing us to the mansions of eternal life, glory and felicity in
heaven.

Having now taken a summary though very imperfect view, of the immensity of
Jehovah, and his kindness and condescension to men, we will conclude with a few
REFLECTIONS.

1. Great, sirs, is the duty and unspeakable the advantages of having our minds
habitually impressed, with the consciousness of a present God. The eyes of the
Lord are in every place, beholding the evil and the good. He is the constant
witness and will be the righteous judge of all thoughts and actions, and before
his supreme tribunal our spirits must appear, to receive an eternal retribution.

We are wholly dependant on God for our being, and for all the favorable
circumstances of our state of trial for eternity; and for all that good and
happiness which our immortal spirits hope for throughout the endless periods of
our existance. To whom then should we seek principally to approve ourselves,
but to him, in whose favor is our immortal life?

2. We hence infer the necessity of our reconciliation with God; and that we
secure in this our state of trial for eternity, an interest in his love and
favor. His displeasure is more dreadful than the terrors of death, and his
smiles diffuse immortal joy. Here we are surrounded with objects of sense, and
see God only in his works; but when our disembodied spirits shall be ushered
into the world of spirits, our thoughts will then be filled with the immensity
of God. There we shall see him, face to face. All other objects will be in a
manner lost to us, and God be all in all. What will then be the condition of
the soul that finds itself alone with God? How dreadful the terrors of his
displeasure whose frowns can make a hell of misery.

Let the solemn consideration powerfully restrain from all sin, and impel us to
all duty. Let us cultivate an habitual sense of the presence of God with us
every where. It will be the safest and happiest means of guarding us from evil
-- of restraining the sallies of intemperate passions -- of mortifying our love
of forbidden pleasures, and crucifying every lust. It will sweetly persuade to
the cultivation of a meek, holy, and heavenly temper and conversation; to be
holy as God is holy, and merciful as our Father in heaven is merciful.

3. He is most safe and happy who loves and pleases God. There can be no true
love to God without an habitual desire to please him in all things. And to what
higher blessedness can the soul aspire, than the friendship of the immense and
eternal Jehovah, the greatest and best of beings. Secure of this the soul is
safe in every possible condition. It is the only cordial and support in the
most adverse and trying scenes of life. When the wicked are driven away in
judgment as chaff before the destroying tempest, God remembers the righteous
and comforts them in the midst of trouble. His favor makes sweet amends for the
loss of all things. "Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall
fruit be in the vines, the labor of the olive shall fail, and the fields shall
yield no meat, the flocks shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no
herein in the stalls, yet, I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of
my salvation." And when they pass through the valley of the shadows of death
they fear no evil, for God is with them.

The friendship of God, is the only source of immortal life and joy, through
all eternal ages. This constitutes the happiness of angels and pious departed
spirits. To them God is all in all. They are absorbed in the immensity of his
love.

4. Let pious souls look up to God, and trust in his almighty goodness. For to
them, he gives the tokens of his special favor. He meets them in the ways of
his institution. He answered the pious prayer of Solomon and the congregation,
at the temple, in divine condescension and kindness. He honors the house of
prayer, and meets the faithful with celestial blessings. Happy are all his
faithful servants who worship him in his earthly temple! In due time they will
be admitted to the heaven of heavens, the sanctuary on high, where they will
need not the light of the fun, to enlighten them, "for the glory of the Lord
does enlighten it and the Lamb is the light thereof."

5. From the divine example illustrated by the subject, we infer, that
condescension, kindness and brotherly love, toward our fellow men, are duties
which as men and christians, we ought daily to put in practice. Is Jehovah,
whom the heaven of heavens cannot contain, good and kind to men? Let men be
glad to imitate the great example. "If God has thus loved us, then ought we to
love one another." Cultivate and cherish, sirs, the benevolent and friendly
affections. Let the love of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ reign in your
heart, and ye cannot fail to love your neighbor as yourself. And actuated by
this genuine principle of christian benevolence, you will present an offering
acceptable to God and useful to men. For God is love, and this is his
commandment that ye love one another, as brethren of one family and travelers
to the immortal inheritence.

Gentlemen of this ancient and honorable Society,

UNDER the impression of the sublime and glorious truths, of which some faint
sketches have now been offered, permit me to address to you a few thoughts.

As the most excellent creature on earth, it has pleased our merciful Creator,
to make man capable of the communications, the profits and pleasures of
society. There is in man the principles of justice, truth and benevolence; and
a sense of accountableness to God, as the powerful motive to every moral and
social virtue. In him are found the humane and friendly affections, the faculty
of reason and speech, and skill in numberless useful inventions and arts.

Without society these faculties and acquisitions would be useless and man most
unhappy. You have entered into a society where the obligations are special.
Every laudable society is formed to promote the good of its members and the
public happiness. In the estimation of mankind a society is honorable in
proportion to this tendency. May you, gentlemen, ever act up to the charitable
and beneficent design of your institution. Ever remember that there can be no
true greatness of character without goodness.

The real antiquity of your society, is great. It was honored in the ages of
Chivalry. Kings princes and priests have enroled their names among the
fraternity. It is much to the credit of your institution, that your laws
exclude from your social retreats all opposing debates on the politics of
government, and on different systems of religion; and that it opens its
friendly bosom, to receive as brethren, the worthy of all nations, languages
and denominations. Your society is dispersed over Europe and America and
extends into Asia. Multitudes of the fraternity, whom misfortunes had reduced,
have been comforted, fed and clothed by its charity. Funds are collected for
this purpose.

In captivity and distress in foreign climes, your laws encourage you to expect
relief from the charity of Masons; and demand of you the same return; and to
forget the enemy in the brother. These things are good and profitable to men.

Illustrious characters in civil and military departments in modern times, are
also found in your fraternities. May you dignify your society by a laudable and
worthy example in all respects, and in all duty to God, to mankind and to one
another. Permit me to call to your grateful recollection, that kind providence
of God, which allows you, with undisturbed quietness, to pursue your labors in
these peaceful regions, while the nations of Europe are convulsed with dreadful
wars. Deus hec otia fecit. God gives us this repose.


How gloomy is the prospect on the other side of the atlantic, where kingdoms
are desolated? And discord and war their borders fiercely range,
And shake the nations and their rulers change,
By land and sea, their utmost rage employ,
Nor heaven repairs, so fast as men destroy.
YOUNG.

Let us thank, love and obey our God, the God of our fathers, for his
distinguished favors. And may his redeemed people of these states, celebrate
his goodness forever!

The badges of your order, are very significant and happily designed. Imitate,
brethren, the Sun, one of the bright emblems of your order, in the diffusion of
goodness and useful knowledge all around you. He shines upon the evil and the
good, and scatters joy and gladness wherever his light and warmth come. Observe
the shining stars, their regular revolutions and steadiness in their orbits. Be
like them constant and persevering in all useful labors.

May this new society, be as the bright morning star, arising in this western
hemisphere, resplendant in goodness!

Take the compass of propriety of behavior, and the square of rectitude in all
your conversation, the plum-line and level of unshaken justice, the sword of
fortitude in duty, and the trowel of diligence in business, and daub not with
untempered mortar; but be ambitious to excel in evely noble and useful labor.
Let all your life be uniform in virtue and goodness, and like a finished and
well proportioned edifice.

Bear the hod of patience in the necessary labors and sufferings of life, and
ascend the ladder of honorable promotion, and may you be worthy of a feat in
Solomon's chair. Solomon, whom we celebrate for wisdom, and whom you claim as
the ancient patron of your order. And let the white and fair aprons, be the
true emblems of your innocence and purity of character, and fidelity in all
business.

Like the hive of industrious bees, may you gather stores of knowledge and
virtue from the wide fields of nature and revelation, and the fruits of your
labors benefit others as well as yourselves. And in all the social intercourse
of life may the naked heart be truly descriptive of your sincerity and
brotherly love. Let your whole life be as a noble edifice, supported by the
four comely pillars of virtue, benevolence, friendship and truth. Let wisdom
and integrity be the base, and charity the pinnacle, and strength and beauty
will adorn the structure.

These emblematic figures, respected friends, calling you to virtue, and the
wise and diligent improvement of life, as a state of preparation for eternity,
receive additional force from the shroud and the coffin, which terminate all
earthly scenes, and remind you of the shortness of your abode on earth. May
your remembrance live as the sprig of evergreen, when the grass growing over
your grave, shall wave to the whispering winds. May you flourish in immortal
bloom, and your names be found written in the book of life.

While you meet for the purposes of your institution, suffer the preacher to
remind you of the fading nature of earthly friendships and all sublunary joys.

Death will speedily dissolve the social ties which combine fraternal
societies, and before the supreme Architect of the universe and Judge of all,
must you appear, to give account of all your labors of life; when every secret
thing will be brought into judgment, and the actors receive the recompense of
reward either of approbation or condemnation. And with you, sirs, will be
assembled the whole brotherhood of mankind the children of Adam. For that
solemn and august assembly, let it be your daily solicitude to prepare.

And as you profess yourselves, speculative Masons, may you indeed be operative
and practical christians, and be found of your judge in peace. Use this world
as not abusing it; remembering that the fashion, the phantastic parade and
noise of life passes away, and will speedily leave you in the solitude and
darkness of the grave. May you meet with acceptance, with all the faithful and
the chosen, Amen.

I will conclude, in a word addressed to this whole assembly. My fellow
mortals, we are here in the morning of our existance and beginning our character
and labors, for eternity. Of what importance is it, that we begin well? And
that our hearts and lives, and all our ways be approved by that high and holy
and immense Being, under whose constant inspection we are, and to whom we must
go. Scenes of infinite moment, await us, when the curtain of time shall drop,
and unbounded eternity open upon our astonished minds. "Set your affections on
things above, and not on things on the earth.

"The cloud-capt towers, the gorgeous palaces, and this great world itself,"
will pass away as a vision of the night. Let us prepare for that kingdom that
shall never be moved; looking for and hastening to the coming of the day of
God, that through redeeming grace, we may be received into those mansions of
light and holiness on high, which the blessed Redeemer prepares for his loving
and obedient disciples.

Now unto him that is able to build us up into an holy temple in the Lord, and
to give us an inheritence among all them that are sanctified, be ascribed
salvation, dominion and glory, throughout all ages.

AMEN.
SONG.
Composed by brother SHUBAEL GRISWOLD, of MORNING STAR LODGE.
NOVEMBER 1794. Tune, God save America.
HAIL, brother Masons, hail!
Let friendship long prevail,
And bind us fast,
May harmony and peace,
Our happiness increase,
And friendship never cease,
While life does last.
Sincerity and love,
Descendants from above,
Our minds employ*
Morality our pride,
And truth our constant guide,
With us are close allied,
And form our joy.
We on a level meet,
And every brother greet,
Skilled in our art.
And when our labor's past,
The glass around we'll tossed,
Then on the square at last,
Let us depart.
May wisdom be our care,
And virtue form the square,
By which we live;
That we at last may join,
The heavenly Lodge sublime,
Where Masons, perfect shine,
With GOD above.

