AN ORATION. DELIVERED ON THE FOURTH JULY, 1794

AN ORATION DELIVERED ON THE FOURTH JULY, 1794, TO A NUMEROUS AUDIENCE,
ASSEMBLED IN THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH OF NEWARK, TO CELEBRATE THE EIGHTEENTH
ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN EMANCIPATION.

By ALEXANDER C. MACWHORTER, Esquire, Counselor at Law.

Published at the desire of the Republican Society of the Town of Newark.

NEWARK -- PRINTED BY JOHN WOODS -- 1794.

At a seated meeting of The Republican Society of the Town of Newark, held in
the Society Chamber, on Monday evening, the 14th July, 1794, and in the Year of
American Independence the Nineteenth, it was On Motion, Unanimously Resolved,

THAT Capt. Thomas Ward and Stephen Wheeler, be a Committee to wait upon
Citizen Alexander C. Macwhorter, and present him with the thanks of this
Society, for the Oration which he delivered the 4th inst. in the Presbyterian
Church of this Town, to his fellow citizens, at their desire, and request the
favor of a copy for publication, and if favored with a copy, to cause the same
to be published.

Extract from the Minutes. AARON PENNINGTON, Secretary.

AN ORATION DELIVERED ON THE FOURTH JULY, 1794.
THIS auspicious day, my fellow citizens, is the epoch from which we date our
national existence; it ranks first in our American calander. From one extreme
to the other of these extensive states, does this anniversary of freedom and
independence call forth the patriotic citizens of America to mirth and festive
joy. The birthday of kings, their accessions to their thrones, and the periods
of their victories, when thousands of their fellow men have fallen, constitute,
in general, the great festivals of the earth; but in the view of reason and
philosophy these are days of sorrow not of joy. We, on the contrary, assemble
to celebrate a day, the first in the annals of time, which gave to mankind
equal rights and equal privileges -- How striking the contrast! the one sinks
and degrades, the other exalts and ennobles the human character -- How august
the contemplation! that through the various changes and national revolutions
which the historic page unfolds, this should be the first period of time, when
in truth and reality man became re-invested with that equal liberty, which the
God of nature gave him. It is right therefore, that we commemorate this joyous
day; and in the commemoration thereof, what contemplations, my fellow citizens,
more useful and instructive, than the causes from whence resulted this our
great revolution. The principles on which it was defended and supported -- the
distinguished rank it takes among the other revolutions of the earth, and the
conduct of its brave defenders in the days of danger and distress.

A British political writer observes, that the American war originated in
parliamentary jobbing, and its great purpose was to transfer enormous masses of
English property into loans, funds and taxes, to form that corrupt ministerial
phalanx called the friends of government, while this faction, like a malignant
disease, was draining the vital substances of Britain, and even armies and
navies were merely its ramifications.

If this representation of the cause of the American war be true, and such a
faction, or such a parliament, could obtain such an ascendency in Britain as to
draw forth the vital substances of that nation to effect such purposes, how
awfully wretched must have been our situation and circumstances had they been
enabled to rear and establish the standard of corruption on our American shores
-- instead of rejoicing this day, we should have been mourning -- instead of
celebrating the triumphs of freedom, we should have been languishing in the
shackles of despotism.

The frequent representations which were made in England of the wealth of the
Americans by the British officers, who had served here against the French, and
who had fared sumptuously at the American tables, roused into action the
contemplations which had long been entertained by the government, to raise a
revenue in America.

Early in 1764, the question of right to tax was brought forward in the house
of commons, and so strong was the impulse of avarice, and such the influence
which a corrupt administration had acquired at this period, that not a person
in the house ventured to controvert the right. Afterward however, many
illustrious characters came forward in the opposition; and the names of those
whose motives were pure and incorrupt will ever brighten and adorn the page of
American freedom. They improved us in the knowledge of our political rights,
and confirmed us in the support of them. The first, the foremost, and I may
add, the most sincere, was the celebrated Colonel Bar, for whose noble
defense of virtue, and America, in opposition to the whole house; "May recorded
honors gather round his monument and thicken over him."

Subsequent to the revolution of 1688, the most prominent features in the
British system of politics was "That taxation could only result from
representation," or, in other words, that the property of the subject could
never be taken without his consent. But the influence of corruption and the
anxiety to draw resources from America to support its foeted stream, in all its
branches, from the king on the throne down to the lowest ministerial hireling,
had opperated such an entire dereliction of principles, that when the question
of right, as before observed, first came forward, there was not an advocate in
its favor; and they considered the future opposition as merely the petulance of
discontent and not the voice of reason.

From hence, my fellow citizens, we have this instructive lesson, never to
permit a departure from a political principle of freedom, known, established
and felt to be right -- it augurs corruption in the government, and will never
be attempted from motives pure and virtuous.

To supply the privileged and pampered orders of state, the heart of poverty
in Britain had been probed, from every quarter, for many years, and for new
sources they turned their baleful eyes across the atlantic.

America was seen like a fair flower rising in the wilderness, untouched and
unblighted by the breath of corruption. The hierarchy of that country ever
closely united with the ministry and with hands equally impure, as anxiously
desired to grasp and enjoy the flower -- it was as strongly inculcated that the
establishment and support of a Bishopric in America, with its desirable
appendages, was as essential to the support and preservation of the mother
church, as the obtaining a revenue was essential to the support of the state.
Thus united with these views and these desires, they commenced the operation
from whence resulted the glorious revolution which we this day celebrate.

But let us turn, my countrymen, from that barren waste "in which no salutary
plant takes root, no verdure quickens," to a soil, as I willingly believe, pure
as the limped stream, and fertile in every great and good qualification.

It is the observation of an elegant writer, "That the Americans, dispersed
throughout an immense continent, free as the wilds of nature which surrounded
them; amidst their rocks, their mountains, the vast plains of their deserts, on
the confines of those forests, in which all is still in its savage state, and
where there are no traces of either the slavery or the tyranny of man; seemed
to receive from every natural object a lesson of liberty and independence -- as
far removed from riches as from poverty, they were not corrupted either by the
excess of luxury or the excess of want. Feed us with food convenient for us,
lest we be full and deny thee, and say, who is the Lord, or lest we be poor and
steal and take the name of our God in vain," was their united prayer.

From this natural equality in which man is more jealous of his rights than
perhaps in any other state of society, flowed a greater effusion of knowledge
than falls to the lot of mankind in general, as they better understood their
rights, so were they more ready to repel every unjust invasion of them.

The principle, that representation and taxation must go together, was well
understood in America; there were comparatively few, so illiterate, but knew it
to be a political axiom; none so insensible but felt it as their only security
against the grasp of oppression -- this principle individuals in America
opposed in their public prints to the repeated attempts making in Britain to
bring forward bills to tax them; and illustrated it with a strength of argument
that sunk beneath contempt the vile and slavish yell of the minions of
despotism, that all opposition to government was rebellion, and rebellion
treason.

The plan however progressed in Britain, and when matured, was brought into
action; it was like putting fire to the train; the noble sentiment of Freedom
or Death spread quick as the electric flame from one extreme of our continent
to the other, and roused, as it were, instantaneously, three millions of people
in support of their right.

The forming a Congress by a representation from the then different Colonies,
circumstanced as they were, is a phenominon in political science, and the
strongest evidence of the happy effects resulting from a general diffusion of
knowledge among the people; spread over an immense tract of territory,
strangers to each other, with different customs, manners and local prejudices,
under strong collisions of interest, flowing from commercial rivalships and
disputed boundaries of territory, reason and policy required their union under
one head, to render effectual the defense of their freedom. Contrary to the
expectation of their enemies they nobly sacrificed every private and party
consideration, and immediately complied with the requisition. And here let me
ask, in the language of a celebrated orator, "What memory teems not with the
recollection of the wisdom, the eloquence and perseverance of our confederated
statesmen," -- called together to vindicate the injured rights of their
country, they assembled with hands and hearts pure as the cause in which they
were engaged. No faction -- no corruption found admission here; their councils
were not warped by intrigue, nor their resolutions confounded by party heat and
animosity -- the good of their country (...) their object and every difference
of opinion, as to the means of obtaining it, was discussed with the calmness of
reason, seeking for truth, and not with the keen personal invective only aiming
at party superiority. And to the honor of our country would it be, could we in
truth pass this eulogium from the Congress of '75 to every subsequent Congress
of America. Their compositions united a manliness of sentiment with an elegance
of style that seemed inspired by the pure spirit of the cause in which they
were engaged, and will go down to posterity as illustrious monuments of
American genius.

To show to you, my countrymen, the character of these our youthful politicians
in the mind of the unprejudiced in Europe; permit me to repeat the language of
the first statesman and orator of Britain: "The representatives of America
(said he) meet with the sentiments and temper, and speak the sense of the
continent. For genuine sagacity, for singular moderation, for solid wisdom,
manly spirit, sublime sentiments and simplicity of language, for every thing
respectable and honorable, the Congress of Philadelphia shine unrivalled. They
are viewed as the northern constellation of glorious worthies illuminating and
warming the New World." These eulogiums resulted from that policy, spirit and
union, which they exercised in the support of their grand principle, that no
American could be taxed without his consent, expressed by himself or
representative, which right they contended, our ancestors derived both from
nature and the British constitution, and transmitted, unmarred, to their
posterity; and to the honor of our country be it remembered, that this
principle, as their leading star, was unremittingly pursued from the gloom of
unsuccessful supplication to the splendour of victory and acknowledged
sovereignty.

But let us pass to a comparative view of this our glorious revolution, with
the other revolutions of the earth, having Liberty for their object. In one
respect, my countrymen, there is a distinguishing difference which gives luster
to the American character. The revolution of this country proceeded from a well
digested knowledge of civil rights, the result of philosophical reflection, and
speculative enquiry. The other revolutions, which have preceded it, have been
caused either by a series of oppressions which could no longer be endured, or
have sprung from the impulse of the moment, occasioned by some unexpected and
violent act of despotism that tortured human nature into action -- the one
pourtrays the reason and reflection of man, the other the limits of his
patience, and the keenness of his sensations. The Romans, so celebrated in
history for their patriotic virtues, were roused from slavery to freedom by the
sight of the poignard reeking with the blood of the virtuous Lucretia.

The death of the chaste Virginia, by the hand of her father to save her honor
from the tyrannic Decimvir, and her body exposed to the public view, impelled
that people again to revolt and to annihilate the order of the Decimvirs, which
had violated the rights of the Roman citizens.

And to come down to more modern times -- the introduction of the inquisition
into the Netherlands by the despotic Philip, -- The terrible spectacles daily
presented by that awful institution of men perishing in the flames on account
of their religion; and the ignomineous death of Egmont and Horn, two popular
favorites, at length tortured the people into that opposition which,
eventually, issued in the emancipation of the seven united provinces. Even the
hardy robust inhabitants of the Alps, since so famous for the Helvetic
confederacy, for a long time, bore the most degrading oppressions until the
manly virtues of a TELL excited them to resistance. Nor is the important
revolution in France, so justly celebrated for the magnitude of its object, and
the transcendant brilliancy of execution, an exception; those heroic and
unconquerable republicans had borne the hard hand of despotism, till forced by
its oppressive weight to avenge their wrongs.

The guardian genius of America, on the contrary, would never permit the fangs
of despotism to fasten on our hallowed soil. And may it forever be our great
characteristic to foresee danger at a distance, and to repel its approach on
principle and rational enquiry.

Where are the liberties of the republics which have preceded us; except the
Swis Cantons, I know of no republican state at this day but has returned to the
dark glooms of despotism, and the name of Republic and Liberty is, with them,
mere sounding brass and tinkling cimbal. The cause of this awful relapse from
freedom to slavery is well worth the enquiry of every American. And the great
source from whence it has proceeded, my countrymen, is the want of general
instruction and information among the people. This forms an unsurmountable
barrier against their investigating their political rights, renders them
inattentive thereto, and obliges them to entrust the sacred deposit in the
hands of a few individuals, whose conduct they are unable to scrutinize, and
subjects them to be carried away credulous victims to the artifice of every
designing demagogue.

But it is time we turn to a summary consideration of the conduct of the brave
defenders of our country in its days of danger and distress. "And what hand
withholds the laurel so justly due to the virtues of our patriotic warriors,"
called from the peaceful walks of private life by their country's danger --
from citizens they became soldiers. What hardships, incident to that situation,
for seven long years did they not endure? Where is the example in history of
equal gallantry and perseverance in every difficulty and danger unsupplied and
unpaid, owing to the impoverished state of their country. In the dark seasons
of the war when the genius of liberty seemed to languish under the pressure of
despotism, and many of her sons, in moments of despondency, sought protection
from the relentless foe; who saw the army discover simptoms of despair, or
heard from them the language of submission?

Permit me here, my fellow citizens, to pay the tribute of praise to the
patriotic soldier who continued on the banks of the Deleware, with their
illustrious commander, after the expiration of their enlistments, and with whom
he was enabled to recross that river and turn the tide of the war by his
victories at Trenton and at Princeton. But why do I particularize? Scarcely a
town in our country but where have been displayed acts which sound their
panegyric -- when the cause of freedom was finally triumphant, and the minions
of despotism obliged to withdraw from its shores, which they had so long
stained with the blood of its citizens, these patriotic warriors gave to the
world an example of the love of country ever to be admired and imitated.
Unsatisfied and unrequited for their long laborious toils and services, the
moment their country ceased to call, they forsook the insignia of War for the
mantle of Peace, and returned to the bosom of that country whose rights they
had so nobly defended.

And here they have pursued the various occupations of civil life with an
industry which distinguishes them in society; and at this day are, almost
unexceptionably, conspicuous examples of attachment to the Rights of Man and
the cause of Liberty in general, in opposition to all arbitrary power --
sentiments that were so strongly impressed in the course of their illustrious
service. The (...), the respect and affection due to distinguished merit, is
the only compensation they can now receive. These will never be withheld while
gratitude is an American virtue; and when time shall cease with them and us,
let their monumenal inscription be "HE FOUGHT AND CONQUERED IN HIS COUNTRY's
CAUSE." It will serve both for Epitaph and Elegy, and endear their memory with
posterity.

The brilliant exploits of the militia of our country ought never, on an
occasion like this, to be passed over in silence. They have ever been
considered as the grand defense of every land of freedom, and in the course of
our struggle for independence, they proved themselves eminently worthy of the
sacred charge. The scenes of Bunker's hill, of Bennington and the Sarratoga
heights, will stand to the latest time, illustrious examples of their prowes
and intripidity. But to enumerate all the glorious deeds of our warring
yeomanry would require time far beyond my present limits. Permit me only to
add, that the militia of New Jersey acquired laurels which will ever be
conspicuous in the volums of American history.

I will not lead you on this occasion to the tombs of our illustrious warriors
who fell in their country's cause -- it would touch the springs of grief in the
heart of sensibility, and draw the sympathetic tear from many an eye. The
renumeration of their names without the annexation of their shining virtues,
would be too melancholy a detail -- and to give to each his characteristic
glory is the pleasing task of the historian. The memory of every son and
daughter of liberty will embalm them as long as time and recollection shall
exist.

And now permit me to close this address, my countrymen, in reminding you that
the preservation of that liberty, which you have so gloriously obtained,
depends on your own knowledge and the right instruction and education of your
children; for you and they can only be thereby enabled to guard the avenues to
the temple of freedom, from the first approaches of tyranny, and to detect both
oppression, and anarchy, which are equal evils in all their variety of shapes
-- guard with anxious care your present free and glorious Constitution, and
afford at all times your ready exertions to support it in its purity against
either its destroyer or corrupter; for by either its destruction or corruption
you loose your all; in vain you fought -- in vain you conquered.


