CHARTER FOR ESTABLISHING AN HOSPITAL IN THE CITY Of NEW YORK. GRANTED BY THE
Right Hon. JOHN, Earl of Dunmore, The 13th JULY, 1771.

NEW YORK: Printed by HUGH GAIN, at the Bible in HANOVER-SQUARE, M,DCC,XCIV.

The CHARTER, etc.
GEORGE the Third, by the Grace of GOD, of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
KING, Defender of the Faith, and so forth.
To all to whom these Presents shall come, GREETING:
WHEREAS our loving Subjects, Preamble.
PETER MIDDLETON, JOHN JONES, and SAMUEL BARD, of our City of New York,
Physicians, by their humble petition presented unto our trusty and well-beloved
CADWALLADER COLDEN, Esquire our Lieutenant Governor, and then our Commander in
Chief of our Province of New York, and the Territories depending thereon in
America, and read in our Council for our said Province, on the ninth Day of
March, which was in the Year of our Lord One thousand seven hundred and
seventy, did, among other Things in Substance, set forth, Petition of Doctors
Middleton, Jones, and Bard, for a Charter for an Hospital, recited.
That there had been a Subscription set on Foot by them, for the Purpose of
erecting a public Hospital in our said City of New York, and that sundry public
spirited Persons, influenced by Principles of Benevolence, had liberally
subscribed toward the same; that from the manifest Utility of such an
Infirmary, the Petitioners hoped for further Contributions, and that some very
considerable Donations had been then already promised, in Case the Success of
the Institution should be rendered probable; but that the said Moneys could not
be conveniently collected, or the Design prosecuted with Vigor, unless a
Corporation should be formed for that Purpose; and therefore the Petitioners
humbly prayed our Letters Patent, forming a Corporation for the Purposes
aforesaid: Which in Consideration of its beneficial Tendency is
NOW WE taking into our Royal Consideration the beneficial Tendency of such an
Institution within our said City, calculated for relieving the Diseases of the
Indigent, and preserving the Lives of many useful Members of the Community,
granted.
are graciously pleased to grant the said humble Request of our said loving
Subjects; KNOW YE THEREFORE, That we, of our special Grace, certain Knowledge
and mere Motion, HAVE Willed, Given, Granted, Ordained, Constituted and
appointed, and by these Presents, for us, our Heirs and Successors, DO Will,
Give, Grant, Ordain, Constitute and Appoint, Members of the Corporation named.
That the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants of our City of New York, in
America, now and for the Time being; the Rector of Trinity Church in our said
City, now and for the Time being; the President of King's College in our said
City, now and for the Time being; the Senior Minister of the Reformed
Protestant Dutch Church in our said City, now and for the Time being; the
Minister of the ancient Lutheran Church in our said City, now and for the Time
being; the Minister of the French Church in our said City, now and for the Time
being; the Senior Minister of the Presbyterian Church in our said City, now and
for the Time being; the Minister of the Moravian Church in our said City, now
and for the Time being; the Minister of the German Reformed Calvinist Church in
our said City, now and for the Time being; the Minister of the New Lutheran
Church in our said City, now and for the Time being; the Minister of the
Anabaptist Congregation in our said City, now and for the Time being; the
Minister of the Scotch: Presbyterian Church in our said City, now and for the
Time being; and Sir William Johnson, Baronet, John Fothergill, of our City of
London, in our Kingdom of Great Britain, Physician; Daniel Horsmanden, John
Watts, Oliver De Lancey, Charles Ward Apthorp, Roger Morris, William Smith,
Hugh Wallace, Henry White, Robert R. Livingston, Andrew Elliott, Archibald
Kennedy, Abraham Mortier, Philip Livingston, William Axtell, James Duane, John
Morin Scott, Leonard Lispenard, Simon Johnson, Thomas Smith, William Bayard,
Walter Rutherford, Alexander Colden, John Van Cortland, Augustus Van Cortland,
William Livingston, Abraham Mesier, Richard Morris, John Bogert, and John
Moore, all of our said City of New York, Esquires; Abraham Lot, Esquire,
Treasurer of our said Province; Peter Van Brugh Livingston, David Clarkson,
Walter Franklin, Gerard William Beekman, William M'Adam, George Bowne,
Nathaniel Marston, Lawrence Kortright, George Folliott, David Provoost,
Cornelius Clopper, John Myer, David Van Horn, Thomas White, Charles M'Evers,
Isaac Low, John Beekman, Richard Sharp, Thomas Pearsall, Joshua Delaplane,
Samuel Bowne, Isaac Sears, Samuel Broom, John Thurman, Jacob Watson, Lewis
Pintard, Gerardus Duyckinck, James Beekman, Peter Goelet, William Ludlow,
Nicholas Stuyvesant, John Harris Cruger, John Wetherhead, Theophilact Bache,
Samuel Verplank, John Crook, Grove Bend, John Alsop, Casper Wistar, Isaac
Roosevelt, Evert Bancker, Gerrardus De Peyster, Henry Rutgers the younger,
Henry Haydock, Gabriel H. Ludlow, Isaac Corsa, Thomas Buchannan, Andrew
Barclay, John Livingston, Augustus Van Horn, Joseph Hallet, Peter Kettletas,
Jacob Le Roy, and Abraham Duryee, all of our said City of New York, Merchants;
William Brownejohn, of our said City of New York, Druggist: John Leake, of our
said City of New York, Mariner; George Harrison, of our said City of New York,
Brewer; Walter Du Bois, and Nicholas Jones, both of our said City of New York,
Gentlemen; and Francis Bassett, of our said City of New York, Pewterer; and
such other Persons as shall be elected and admitted hereafter Members of the
Corporation hereby erected, and incorporated.
be, and for ever hereafter shall be, by Virtue of these Presents, One Body
Corporate and Politic, in Deed, Fact and Name, Name of the Hospital.
by the Name, Style and Title of THE SOCIETY OF THE HOSPITAL IN THE CITY OF
NEW YORK, IN AMERICA, And them and their Successors by the same Name, WE DO by
these Presents, really and fully make, erect, create, constitute and declare
One Body Politic and Corporate, in Deed, Fact and Name, for ever: AND will
give, grant and ordain that they and their Successors, The Society of the
Hospital in the City of NEW YORK in AMERICA, by the same Name, To have
perpetual Succession.
shall and may have perpetual Succession; and shall and may, by the same Name,
be Persons capable in the Law to sue and be sued, Capable to sue and be sued.
implead and be impleaded, answer and be answered unto, defend and be defended
in all Courts, and elsewhere, in all Manner of Actions, Suits, Complaints,
Pleas, Causes, Matters, and Demands whatsoever, as fully and amply as any other
our liege Subjects of our said Province of New York, may or can sue or be sued,
implead or be impleaded, defend or be defended by any lawful Ways or Means
whatsoever. AND, that they and their Successors, by the same Name, shall for
ever hereafter be Persons capable and able in the Law to purchase, take, hold,
receive and enjoy to them and their Successors, May hold Estates,
any Messuages, Tenements, Houses and real Estate whatsoever, and all other
Hereditaments of whatsoever Nature, Kind and Quality they be, in Fee Simple,
for Term of Life or Lives, or in any other Manner howsoever. AND, also any
Goods, Chattels and personal Estate whatsoever. Provided always, provided the
clear yearly income does not exceed L 5000 Sterling.
the clear yearly Value of the said real Estate does not at any Time exceed the
Sum of Five Thousand Pounds Sterling, lawful Money of our Kingdom of
Great Britain, above all Outgoings and Reprises. AND, that they and their
Successors, by the same Name, shall have full Power and Authority to give,
grant, sell, lease, The Corporation may lease and sell Estates,
demise and dispose of the same real Estate and Hereditaments whatsoever, for
Life or Lives, or Years, or for ever. AND also all Goods, Chattels, and
personal Estate whatsoever, at their Will and Pleasure, as they shall judge to
be most beneficial and advantageous to the good and charitable Ends and
Purposes above mentioned. AND, that it shall and may be lawful for them and
their Successors, for ever hereafter, and have a Seal.
to have a common Seal to serve for the Causes and Business of them and their
Successors, and the same Seal to change, alter, break and make new, from Time
to Time, at their Will and Pleasure. When Ground is obtained, they may build an
Hospital,
AND our Royal Will and Pleasure is, That when our said Corporation hereby
erected, shall have acquired by the Aid of the Legislature of our said Province
of New York, by the generous Donations of the Benevolent, or otherwise, a
proper and convenient Piece of Ground in and near our said City of New York,
and Funds sufficient, without injuring the said Charity, to admit of the
erecting an Hospital for the Reception and Relief of sick and diseased Persons,
that the said Society do erect within our said City of New York, an Hospital
for the said Purposes; which we will shall for ever hereafter be called by the
Name of, which shall be called the New York Hospital.
THE NEW YORK HOSPITAL. AND that it shall and may be lawful for our said
Corporation, from Time to Time, and at all Times hereafter, to erect for their
Use and Convenience, any other House, Houses or Buildings whatever. AND, for
the better carrying into Execution the Purposes aforesaid, For the more orderly
Government of the Society, there shall always be Twenty six Governors.
our royal Will and Pleasure is, and we do hereby for us, our Heirs and
Successors, give and grant, to The Society of the Hospital in the City of
NEW YORK in AMERICA, and their Successors for ever, that there shall be forever
hereafter belonging to our said Corporation, Twenty-six Governors of the said
Hospital and Corporation, of whom there shall be taken and had one President, A
President and Vice President.
and one Vice President, and who shall conduct and manage the Affairs and
Business of the said Hospital and Corporation, in Manner as hereafter is
declared and appointed. AND also, that there shall be forever hereafter, one or
more Treasurer or Treasurers, A Treasurer and Secretary.
and one Secretary, belonging to our said Corporation. AND for the more
immediate carrying into Execution our Royal Will and Pleasure herein, we do
hereby assign, constitute and appoint the aforesaid John Watts, Oliver De
Lancey, Charles Ward Apthorp, First Governors of the Corporation named.
Roger Morris, William Smith, Hugh Wallace, Henry White, Robert R. Livingston,
Whitehead Hicks, Mayor of our said City of New York, Andrew Elliot, Archibald
Kennedy, Peter Van Brugh Livingston, David Clarkson, Abraham Mortier, Abraham
Lot, Walter Franklin, Leonard Lispenard, Gerardus William Beekman, Philip
Livingston, William M'Adam, George Bowne, William Axtell, Doctor John
Fothergill, Nathaniel Marston, Lawrence Kortright, and George Folliot, to be
the present Governors of the said Hospital and Corporation; the aforesaid John
Watts, President, Vice President, Treasurer and Secretary named, where to
remain in Office to
to be the present President; and the aforesaid Andrew Elliott, to be the
present Vice President; the aforesaid Peter Van Brugh Livingston, to be the
present Treasurer; and the aforesaid John Moore, to be the present Secretary of
our Corporation hereby erected. Which said Governors, President,
Vice President, Treasurer, and Secretary, shall hold, the 3d Tuesday in May,
1772.
possess and enjoy their said respective Offices until the third Tuesday in May
now next ensuing. AND, for the keeping up the Succession in the said Offices,
our royal Will and Pleasure is, And for keeping up a Succession, the Society is
to meet for the Election of new Officers,
and we do hereby for us, our Heirs and Successors, establish, direct, and
require of and give and grant to the said Society of the Hospital in the City
of NEW YORK in AMERICA, and their Successors, for ever, that on the said third
Tuesday in May now next ensuing, the 3d Tuesday in May annually,
and yearly, and every Year for ever thereafter on the third Tuesday in May in
every Year, they and their Successors, shall meet at the said Hospital, or at
some other convenient Place in our said City of New York, to be fixed and
ascertained by some of the Bye Laws or Regulations of our said Corporation, to
elect by Ballot or otherwise,
and there, by the Majority of such of them as shall be directed and
established by any the Bye Laws or Regulations of our said Corporation, elect
and choose Twenty-six of their Members, and out of the Governors chosen, to
elect a President and Vice President, for the ensuing Year.
to be Governors of our said Corporation and Hospital for the ensuing Year: And
also out of the said Governors so elected and chosen, shall elect and choose as
aforesaid, one President and one Vice President, of our said Corporation, for
the ensuing Year. AND also, shall then and there, And out of the Governors or
Members choose a Treasurer.
elect and choose, as aforesaid, one or more of the said Governors or Members
at large, of our said Corporation, to be Treasurer or Treasurers of our said
Corporation for the ensuing Year, And out of the Members, a Secretary.
and another of the said Members to be Secretary for the ensuing Year. Which
said Governors, and other the Officers aforesaid, of our said Corporation, The
new chosen Governors and Officers, to enter immediately on their Duty, and
remain in Office one Year, or till others be chosen in their Stead.
so elected, shall immediately enter upon their respective Offices, and hold,
exercise and enjoy the same respectively, from the Time of such Elections for
and during the space of one Year, and until other fit Persons shall be elected
and chosen in their respective Places, according to the Laws and Regulations
aforesaid. AND, in Case any of the said Persons by these Presents nominated and
appointed to the respective Offices aforesaid, In Case of the Death, Removal,
Refusal, or Neglect of Officers, others to be chosen in their Stead, within
thirty Days after such Contingenty.
or who shall hereafter be elected and chosen thereto, respectively, shall die,
or on any Account be removed from such Offices, respectively, before the Time
of their respective appointed Services shall be expired, or refuse or neglect
to act in and execute the Office for which he or they shall be so elected and
chosen, or is or are herein nominated and appointed; then our royal Will and
Pleasure is, and we do hereby direct, ordain and require our said Corporation,
to meet at the Place for the Time being appointed, for the said annual
Elections, and choose other or others of the Members of our said Corporation,
in the Place and Stead of him or them so dying, removed, refusing or neglecting
to act, within Thirty Days next after such Contingency: AND in this Case, for
the more due and orderly conducting such Elections, and to prevent any undue
Proceedings therein, To prevent undue Practices in such Elections, the
President or Vice President, with five of the Governors,
we do hereby give full Power and Authority to, and ordain and require, that
upon every Vacancy in the Office of President, the Vice President, and any Five
of the Governors of our said Corporation and Hospital, for the Time being: and
upon every Vacancy in the Office of Vice President, Governor, and in any other
the Offices aforesaid, the President, and any Five of the said Governors for
the Time being, shall appoint the Time for such Election and Elections, and
cause public Notice thereof to be given, by publishing the same in one or more
of the Public Newspapers printed in this Colony, to give seven Days Notice in
the Newspapers, of the Day and Place appointed for holding the Election,
at least Seven Days before the Day appointed for such Election; or in Case it
shall so happen that at any Time or Times hereafter, there be no such
Newspapers printed in this Colony, then by affixing up Notices in Writing, at
the least Seven Days before the Day appointed for such Election; at two or more
of the most public Places in our said City of New York; HEREBY giving and
granting that such Person and Persons as shall be so chosen from Time to Time,
and the Persons then chosen, to hold their Officers from the Time of Election
by the Majority of such of the Members of our said Corporation as shall, in
such Case, meet in Manner hereby directed, by Ballot, or in such other Manner
and Form as shall be directed by any the Bye Laws or Regulations of our said
Corporation, shall have, hold, exercise and enjoy such the Office or Offices to
which he or they shall be so elected and chosen, until the third Tuesday in May
then next following.
from the Time of such Election until the Third Tuesday in May thence next
ensuing, and until other or others be legally chosen in his or their Place or
Stead, as fully and amply as the Person or Persons in whose Place he or they
shall be chosen, Which Method of Election for filling up Vacancies to be always
practiced.
could or might have done by Virtue of these Presents. AND we do hereby will
and direct, that this Method shall for ever hereafter be used for the filling
up all Vacancies in the said Offices, between the annual Elections above
directed: Provided nevertheless, But no Person shall at such Elections, or the
annual Elections, be chosen President, or Vice President, unless he be a
Governor.
That as well in the Elections last mentioned, as in the annual Elections above
mentioned, no Person shall be elected to the Office of President, or
Vice President, unless he then be a Governor of our said Corporation and
Hospital. -- AND our Will and Pleasure is, and we do hereby for us, our Heirs
and Successors, direct, ordain and require, The President, Vice President,
Governors, Treasurer and Secretary, to be elected, shall, before they enter on
their respective Others take an Oath or Affirmation, for the faithful Execution
thereof.
that every President, Vice President, Governor, Treasurer and Secretary of our
said Corporation, to be elected by Virtue of these Presents, shall, before they
act in their respective Offices, take an Oath, (or if any of them shall be of
the People called Quakers, or Unitas Fratrum, an Affirmation) to be to them
administered by the President, or Vice President of our said Corporation for
the Time being, or of the preceding Year, (who are hereby severally authorized
to administer the same) for the faithful and due Execution of their respective
Offices, during their Continuance in the same, respectively. AND further, our
royal Will and Pleasure is, and we do hereby for us, our Heirs and Successors,
ordain and appoint, and give and grant to The Society of the Hospital in the
City of NEW YORK in AMERICA, that the President of the said Corporation for the
Time being, The President, or in his Absence, the Vice President
and in Case of a Vacancy in the said Office of President, or in Case of his
Sickness or Absence, the Vice President of our said Corporation shall, and may,
from Time to Time, as Occasion may require, summon and call together, at such
Days and Places within our said City of New York, as they shall respectively
think proper, may summon the Governors to meet,
the Governors of the said Corporation and Hospital for the Time being, giving
them at the least One Day's Notice thereof; and we do hereby require them to
meet accordingly, and give, grant, and ordain, giving at least one Day's Notice.
that any Seven or more of the said Governors of our said Corporation, being so
convened together, Seven of the Governors, of where the President or
Vice President, to be always (...), shall make a Quorum,
of whom the President of our said Corporation for the Time being, or in Case
of a Vacancy in the said Office, or the Sickness or Absence of the said
President, the Vice President for the Time being, shall always be one, shall
for ever hereafter be a legal Meeting of the said Corporation; and they, or the
major Part of them so met, have Power to adjourn,
shall have full Power and Authority to adjourn from Day to Day, or for any
other Time, as the Business of our said Corporation may require; and transact
the (...) of the Corporation,
and to do, execute, transact, manage and perform, in the Name of our said
Corporation, all and every Act and Acts, Thing and Things whatsoever, which our
said Corporation are or shall, by Virtue of these our Letters Patent, be
authorized to do, act, transact, manage and perform, in as full and ample
Manner as if all and every the Governors and Members of the said Corporation
were present, (...) the (...) Governors and other Officers,
and consenting thereto: SAVING AND EXCEPT ALWAYS the Electing of Governors,
and other the Officers above mentioned of our said Corporation: And also,
SAVING AND EXCEPT the giving, granting, and except greating (...) Year
selling, or otherwise aliening any of the Estate, real or personal, of our
said Corporation; and the leasing, demising or disposing of any the Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments, real or mixed Estate of our said Corporation, for
any longer Term or Time than one Year: our royal Will and Pleasure being, (...)
that none of the Estate real, personal or mixed, of our said Corporation, be
sold, or in any wise aliened, but by and with the Concurrence and Approbation
of the Majority of the whole Number of the Governors of our said Corporation
for the Time being, first obtained at some legal Meeting of our said
Corporation. AND, that none of the real or mixed Estate of our said Corporation
be leased, demised, or in any wise disposed of, for any longer Term than one
Year, without the like Concurrence and Approbation of the Majority of the whole
Number of the Governors of our said Corporation for the Time being, first
obtained as aforesaid. AND FURTHER, we do hereby for us, our Heirs and
Successors, ordain and appoint, and give and grant to The Society of the
Hospital in the City of NEW YORK in AMERICA, that at any, and every such legal
Meeting of any Seven or more of the Governors of our said Corporation, (...)
of whom the President of our said Corporation for the Time being, or in Case
of a Vacancy in the said Office, or the Sickness or Absence of the said
President, the Vice President for the Time being, shall always be one, it shall
and may be lawful for them, in Writing, under the common Seal of our said
Corporation, to make, (...) the Seal of the C^^^^^tion, make Bye Laws, for the
good Government thereof; of its Members, Officers, and Servants and of the
Patients to be admitted.
frame, constitute, establish and ordain, from Time to Time, and at all Times
hereafter, such Laws, Constitutions, Ordinances, Regulations and Statutes for
the better government of the Officers, Members, and Servants of the said
Corporation, and of the Patients from Time to Time admitted into the said
Hospital; for fixing and ascertaining the Places of Meeting of our said
Corporation, on the Days and Times of the Elections above mentioned: and for
regulating the Mode and Manner of making such, The Places and Made of Elections.
and all other the Elections in our said Corporation; The Management and
Disposition of the (...) and Charities, and all (...) Business, (...) of the
Corporation, and the (...) again repeal and amend.
the Management and Disposition of the Funds and Charities, and all other the
Business and Affairs whatever of our said Corporation, as they, or the major
Part of them, so legally met, shall judge best for the general Good of the said
Corporation, and profitable for the more effectual promoting the charitable and
beneficial Designs of the said Corporation: And the same, or any of them, to
alter, amend or repeal from Time to Time, as they, or the major Part of them so
met as aforesaid, shall judge most conducive to the Benefit of the said
Charity; PROVIDED such Laws, Constitutions, Regulations, Such Bye Laws not to
be repugnant to the Laws of England or this Colony.
Ordinances, and Statutes, be not repugnant to the Laws of that Part of our
Kingdom of Great Britain called England nor of this our Province of New York.
AND WE DO FURTHER WILL AND GRANT, The Governors to appoint the Number of
Physicians and Surgeons to attend the Patients,
That the said Governors of the said Corporation for the Time being, or any
Seven or more of them, so legally met and convened as aforesaid, of whom the
President, or Vice President, for the Time being, shall always be one, as
aforesaid, shall have the full and sole Power and Authority for ever hereafter,
by the Majority of their Voices from Time to Time, to elect, nominate and
appoint such and so many Physicians and Surgeons, as they shall judge necessary
to attend the said Hospital, and the sick and diseased Patients from Time to
Time admitted to the Benefits of the said Charity; and to appoint the
Physicians and Surgeons so elected, their respective Powers, Authorities,
Business, Trusts and Attendances; and also to appoint an Apothecary, also an
Apothecary, a Steward and Matron,
a Steward, and Matron, of and for the said Hospital; and from Time to Time to
appoint them, the said Apothecary, Steward, and Matron, and each of them, their
respective Powers, Authorities, Business, Trusts, and Attendances; and to
displace and discharge the Apothecary, and again displace and appoint others in
their Stead.
Steward, and Matron, from the Service of the said Hospital, and to nominate
and appoint other or others in their Places and Stead. AND WE DO FURTHER, of
our especial Grace, certain Knowledge, and mere Motion, for us, our Heirs and
Successors, grant and ordain, that when, and as often as any President,
Vice President, The President, Vice President, Governor, Treasurer, Secretary,
Physician or Surgeon, incapable of serving orf misdemeaning himself,
Governor, Treasurer, Secretary, Physician, or Surgeon of the said Corporation,
shall become unfit or incapable to execute their said Offices, respectively, or
shall misdemean themselves in their said Offices, respectively, contrary to any
the Bye Laws or Regulations of our said Corporation, or refuse or neglect the
Execution thereof, and thereupon a Complaint or Charge in Writing, shall be
exhibited, against him or them, by any Member of our said Corporation, at any
legal Meeting of the Governors of our said Corporation and Hospital, as
aforesaid, that it shall and may be lawful for the President, or Vice President
and Governors, or the major Part of them (...), or at any other legal Meeting
of our said Corporation from Time to Time, may upon Complaint, Examination, and
due Proof, be suspended,
and upon Examination and due Proof, to suspend or discharge such President,
Vice President, Governor, Treasurer, Secretary, Physician, or Surgeon, from
their Offices respectively, although the yearly or other Time for their
respective Services, shall not be expired; any Thing before in these Presents
contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding; -- Provided
always, That no President, Vice President, Governor, Physician, or Surgeon,
shall be suspended or discharged at any Meeting, without the Concurrence and
Approbation of the Majority of the whole Number of the Governors of the said
Corporation, by a Majority of Governors.
nor without having a Copy of the Complaint or Charge against him, at least Six
Days before such Examination; and an Opportunity to be fully heard in his
Defense. AND for the keeping up and preserving for ever hereafter, a Succession
of Members for the said Corporation, our Will and Pleasure is, and we do hereby
for us, our Heirs and Successors, ordain, give, and grant, to The Society of
the Hospital in the City of NEW YORK in AMERICA, The Governors in legal Meeting
(...)
and their Successors, for ever, that it shall and may be lawful at all Time
and Times hereafter, for ever, for any Seven or more of the Governors of our
said Corporation, for the Time being, of whom we Will the President, or in Case
of his Absence, Sickness, or a Vacancy in the said Office of President, the
Vice President of the said Corporation, shall always be one, being convened and
met together as aforesaid, so as to be a legal Meeting of our said Corporation,
as above mentioned, to elect and choose by the Majority of their Voices, and in
such Manner and Form, and upon such Terms and Conditions, (...) Majority of
Voices, choose (...) Members,
as shall be directed, ordained and established for that Purpose, by any the
said Bye Laws, Statutes, Constitutions or Ordinances of the said Corporation,
and admit under the common Seal of our said Corporation, and under their Seal
admit as many as they shall deem beneficial to the Society.
such, and so many Persons, to be Members of the said Corporation, as they
shall think beneficial to the laudable Designs of the said Corporation. Which
Persons, and every of them so from Time to Time elected, chosen, and admitted,
shall, by Virtue thereof, and of these Presents, be vested with all the Powers,
Authorities and Privileges, which any Member of the said Corporation is hereby
invested with. The Governors to render Accounts to the General Assembly, of all
their Proceedings, when thereunto required
AND our Will and Pleasure further is, that the said Governors of the said
Corporation and Hospital, shall yearly and every Year, give an Account in
Writing, of the several Sums of Money by them received and expended by Virtue
of these Presents, or any Authority hereby given; and of the Management,
Application and Disposition of the Revenues and Charities aforesaid, to the
General Assembly of our said Province, for the Time being, or to such Person or
Persons as the said General Assembly shall, from Time to Time, appoint to
receive and audit the same Accounts, when they the Governors of our said
Hospital shall be thereunto required by the said General Assembly of our said
Province. AND FURTHER, we do by these Presents, for us, our Heirs and
Successors, give and grant, unto the said Society of the Hospital in the City
of New York in AMERICA, and their Successors for ever, The Charter to be
construed in favor of the Society,
that this our present CHARTER, shall be deemed, adjudged and construed in all
Cases, most favorably, and for the best Benefit and Advantage of our said
Corporation, and for the promoting the good Ends and Designs of this charitable
Institution; And that this our present Grant, and being entered on Record,
shall be effectual in the Law.
being entered on Record, as is herein after expressed, shall be for ever
hereafter, good and effectual in the Law, according to our royal Intent and
Meaning herein before declared; and without any other License, Grant or
Confirmation from us, our Heirs or Successors, hereafter by the said
Corporation to be had or obtained, notwithstanding any Mis-recitals,
Non-recitals, not-naming, or mis-naming, or any of the aforesaid Offices,
Franchises, Privileges, Immunities, or other the Premises, or any of them; and
although no Writ of ad quad Damnum, or other Writs, Inquisitions, or Precepts
has been upon this Occasion had, made, issued or prosecuted; any Statute, Act,
Ordinance, or Provision, or other Matter or Thing to the contrary thereof in
any wise notwithstanding. IN TESTIMONY whereof, we have caused these our
Letters to be made Patent, and the Great Seal of our said Province to be
hereunto affixed, and the some to be entered of Record, in our Secretary's
Office for our said Province of New York, in one of the Books of Patents there
remaining. WITNESS our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin, JOHN, EARL
of DUNMORE, our Captain General and Governor in Chief, in and over our said
Province of New York, and the Territories depending thereon in America,
Chancellor and Vice Admiral of the same at our Fort in our City of New York, by
and with the Advice and Consent of our Council for our said Province of
New York, the Thirteenth Day of June, in the Year of our Lord One Thousand
Seven Hundred and Seventy-one, and of our Reign the Eleventh.

RULES and REGULATIONS For the Government of the NEW YORK HOSPITAL, established
by Order of the Governors, in the Sixth Month, 1794.
Annual Business of the Governors.
Is It. AT the Monthly Meeting for the First Month in each Year, a Commitee shall
be appointed for the auditing the Treasurer's Accounts, which Accounts are to
be made up to the 31st Day of the said First Month, and produced at the next
following Monthly Meeting; with a Certificate of their Approbation annexed, if
the same be approved by them: Which Committee shall also make out, and produce
at the same Time, an Annual Report of the State of the Hospital, to be laid
before the Legislature in such Manner as the Governors may direct.

IId. To receive from the Matron, the Monthly Meeting previous to the Election,
an Inventory of the Household Furniture.

IIId. On the Election of a Treasurer, Security must be given by him for the
due Performance of his Trust.

Duty of the Treasurer.
Is It. To make up the Accounts to the 31st Day of the 1st Month in each Year.

IId. To present, at the several Monthly Meetings in the 5th, 8th, and 11th
Months, a State of the Funds and the Amount of the Moneys in Hand.

IIId. He must pay no Money on Account of Expenditures in the Hospital, unless
Accounts are produced to him, examined and signed by the Visiting Committee,
the Auditors of Accounts, or the Committee of Repairs, except to the Steward,
for the express Purpose of Marketing.

Duty of the Secretary.
Is It. That he attend (or appoint some Person in his Room) the Meetings of the
Society, and of the Governors; and take Minutes of the Proceedings of each
Meeting, and transcribe the same in the Book assigned for that Purpose.

IId. That immediately after each Election of Governors, he give Notice in
writing, to the different Persons appointed.

IIId. That on the Day preceding each stated and other Meetings, he send Notice
of the Time and Place of such Meeting, to each of the Governors.

IVth. That at every Meeting he read the Minutes of the preceding Meeting at
length, and then the Parts thereof respecting Business referred to that
Meeting, in the Order they stand.

Vth. That at every Monthly Meeting, he minute whether the Report of the
Visiting Committee is presented, or not; and, if it is not presented, the
Minute must express that the Committee is desired to bring forward a Report,
and to inform the Governors of the Reason of such Omission.

VIth. When the Business of each Meeting is completed, he must read the
Minutes thereof previous to the Adjournment.

VIIth. It being the Duty of the Treasurer to make up his Annual Account with
the Hospital to the 31st of the 1st Month, the Secretary is to have the same
regularly copied in the Minutes of the Second Month, and to make a Minute in
the 5th, 8th, 11th Months of Balance in the Treasurer's Hands.

Duties of the Visiting Committee.
Is It. To attend regularly at the Hospital from Twelve to One o'Clock, on the
Third and Sixth Days of the Week.

IId. If either of the Committee is not able to attend his Duty, owing to
Indisposition or other Cause, he is to request one of the other Governors to
attend in his Stead.

IIId. On the first Day of their Visitation, they are to receive from the
Steward, a State of the Hospital on the last Day of the preceding Month,
containing a List of Patients, and a List of all the Provisions, Stores and
Liquors, then under his Care; and a List of Necessaries he supposes may be
wanted in the Course of the Month of their Visitation; and if the Committee
approve of the same, they are to give him Directions in writing, directed to
the Committee of Accounts, to have them procured, or such Part thereof as they
may think is necessary; and also to receive from the Apothecary and Matron, a
List of such Articles as may be wanted in the Course of the Month.

IVth. When Applicants produce to them a Certificate that they have been
examined by a Physician or Surgeon, the Committee is to judge if the then
Circumstances of the Hospital is such as may be convenient to receive them; and
if the Circumstances of the Applicant renders him not able to pay for his
Board, the Committee will either direct the Steward to receive him as a Pauper;
or they will refuse him admittance, as to them may seem proper; and if they
admit him as a Pay Patient, they are to agree for the Price to be paid per
Week, not less than Twelve Shillings NOTE. -- By a late Order of the Governors,
the Pay-Patients Board is advanced to not less than Sixteen Shillings per Week.
, the Committee taking Security as per printed Form.

Vth. They are to visit the several Wards at least every Week, and see that
they are clean and in good Order; and inspect into the Wants of the Patients.

VIth. After having served a Month they are to exhibit to the next Monthly
Meeting, a Report of their Proceedings, together with the Steward's State of
the Hospital during the Month they served.

VIIth. They are to enquire of the Apothecary, on each Visiting Day, if any
Patients are deemed incurable, or in a Condition to leave the Hospital; in
Order that they may be discharged, and that no improper Objects are remaining.

Duties of the Physicians and Surgeons.
Is It. That one Physician and one Surgeon, (besides other necessary Attendance)
attend every Day from Twelve to One o'Clock, to visit and prescribe for the
Sick; to examine those who may present themselves as Patients, and certify
their Opinions of their Cases to the Visiting Committee.

IId. That if a Physician or Surgeon is prevented from attending his Duty at
the Hospital, he is to engage some other belonging to the same Line as himself
to attend for him.

IIId. That no Amputation or other capital Operation (except in Cases of
immediate and extreme Necessity) be performed without a previous Consultation
between at least two Physicians and two Surgeons, and to which all the
Physicians and Surgeons belonging to the Hospital shall be invited.

IVth. No Person shall be admitted to see the Practice of the Hospital without
the Consent of the Faculty.

Vth. Students having Leave from the Physicians or Surgeons to visit the
Hospital, to pay the Treasurer Forty Shillings each before they be admitted,
which Money is to be laid out with the Advice of the Physicians and Surgeons in
the Purchase of a Medical Library and Museum.

VIth. The Physicians and Surgeons to pay particular Attention to the
discharging the Patients, as soon as their Cases will admit, and to inform the
Apothecary of it without Delay.

VIIth. They are to require of the Apothecary to keep a fair Account (in a Book
provided for that Purpose) of the several Patients under their respective
Cares, and of the Disorders they labor under, and enter in the said Book the
Recipes or Prescriptions they may make for each of them.

Duty of the Apothecary.
Is It. He is to visit the Wards every Morning, and be prepared to report a State
of the Patients to the Physicians or Surgeons.

IId. That he dispences no Medicines, Wine, or Spirits, without Directions from
the Physicians or Surgeons, which he is Daily to receive from them.

IIId. That he never absent himself when the Physicians or Surgeons are to
attend, and that he always, on going out, leave Notice with the Steward or
Matron where he may be found.

IVth. He must inform the Visiting Committee of such Patients as are deemed
Incurable, or in a Condition, in the Opinion of the Physicians, to leave the
Hospital.

Vth. He must, on the last Day of each Month, make a Return to the Visiting
Committee of the Quantity and Kind of Liquors he received in the Course of the
Month from the Steward, and a List of Patients to whom the same have been
administered, and how much to each, with the Name of the Physician who ordered
the same.

VIth. He must deliver to the Visiting Committee, on the first Day of their
Visitation, a List of such Medicines as the Physicians or Surgeons suppose may
be wanted in the Course of the Month.

Duty of the Steward.
Is It. Under Direction of the Visiting Committee he is to purchase Wood,
Provisions, and all other Stores, (except Medicines) for the Use of the
Hospital.

IId. To Market regularly, and purchase such Provisions as the Matron may
direct.

IIId. To keep under his Key, all Stores, Wines, Spirits, Sugars, Molasses,
Linen and Blanketing, not made up, and all other Necessaries of which any
Quantity is purchased; and to deliver to the Apothecary or Matron, Weekly, or
at shorter Intervals, such Quantity as may be called for.

IVth. To oversee all Workmen employed in Repairs, etc. and to keep an Account
of the Time each Person is employed.

Vth. To take Care of the Garden, and see that it is kept in Order.

VIth. To take Care of the Doors, and see that the outer Gates be always locked
at Nine in the Evening, from the First of the 11th Month to the First of the
5th Month, and at Ten from the 1st of 5th Month, to the First of 11th Month.

VIIth. To fix a Ticket at the Head of each Patient's Bed, with the Name of the
Patient; together with that of the Physician or Surgeon who attends.

VIIIth. To visit every Ward every Morning and Evening, and at a different Hour
from that in which the Matron goes to the Wards; to cause the Names of the
Patients to be called over, and minute those who are absent; and, by his
Authority, to assist the Nurses in keeping up Order among them, and
particularly to take Care that every Patient is in Bed by Ten o'Clock at Night.

IXth. He must not enter in the Book of Admission the Name of any Person as a
Patient until he has an Order signed by the Visiting Committee for that Purpose.

Xth. On the first Day of each Month he must exhibit to the Visiting Committee
an Account of all the Provisions, Stores and Liquors then under his Care, with
the Prices they cost, and of whom purchased; and a List of such Articles as he
supposes may be wanted in the Course of the Month; and to receive from them an
Order directed to the Auditors of Accounts to procure such Articles as they may
think necessary.

XIth. On the last Day of each Month he must make a Return to the Visiting
Committee of the State of the Hospital, containing the Names of the Patients,
when admitted, etc. agreeably to the Form printed for that Purpose; and also an
Account of Stores, Liquors, etc. purchased and expended in the Course of the
Month, mentioning the Quantity and Sort of Liquors handed by him to the
Apothecary.

XIIth. With the Consent of the Visiting Committee he shall have full Liberty
to employ or discharge the Men Servants employed in or about the Hospital.

XIIIth. He must take particular Care that no Wine or Spirits be used in the
Hospital, except by the express Direction of the Physicians or Surgeons for the
Use of the Patients.

Duty of the Matron.
Is It. To visit all the Patients, at least twice every Day, at a different Hour
from that in which the Steward goes to the Wards, and see that they are
properly attended by the Nurses.

IId. With Consent of the Visiting Committee, the Matron is to have full
Liberty to employ or discharge the Nurses and Female Servants, employed in and
about the Hospital.

IIId. The Matron shall oversee all the Female Patients and Servants, take Care
that the Wards, Chambers, Beds, Cloths, Linen, and other Things within the
Hospital be kept clean; and to that End all the said Patients and Servants
shall be submissive and obedient to her.

IVth. That the Matron take Care of all the Household Goods and Furniture, and
at the first Meeting of the Governors, after the Annual Election, exhibit to
them an Inventory of the same.

Rules respecting Patients.
Is It. Application for Admission into the Hospital, must be made, in the first
Instance, to one of the Governors or Physicians, who, if they think proper,
will give a Recommendation, directed to the Visiting Committee, to whom it must
be presented at the Hospital, on the 3d or 6th Day of the Week, and after their
Disorders complained of, are examined by the Physicians or Surgeons, the
Visiting Committee will either direct the Steward to admit them; or they will
refuse them Admittance, as to them may seem proper.

IId. No Patient can be admitted into the Hospital unless the Visiting
Committee sign an Order to the Steward for that Purpose, except the Physician's
Certificate expressly mention, that the Patient's Case requires being
immediately admitted.

IIId. That no Patients shall be admitted whose Cases are judged incurable,
Lunaticks excepted, or any whose Cases do not require the particular
Conveniences of an Hospital.

IVth. That no Person having the Smallpox, Itch, or other infections
Distempers, shall be admitted until there are proper Apartments for the
Reception of such as are afflicted with those Diseases.

Vth. That Women having young Children, shall not be received (except when the
Child and Mother are both Patients, or their Children are taken Care of
elsewhere) that the Hospital may not be burdened with the Maintenance of such
Children, nor the Patients disturbed with the Noise.

VIth. That Citizens in the State of New York, not residing in the City and
County of New York, desirous of being admitted into the Hospital, must be
recommended by a Justice of Peace, and the Overseer or Overseers of the
Township wherein they reside: it is requested that Cases of their Diseases
drawn up by a Physician or Surgeon, be sent with them.

VIIth. That if there shall be Room in the Hospital to spare, Patients shall be
admitted at such reasonable Rates as the Visiting Committee may agree for, and
the Moneys arising from the Boarding and Nursing such Patients, shall be paid
to the Treasurer for the Use of the Hospital, and all such Patients must give
Security that they shall not become burdensome to the City or Hospital.

VIIIth. That all Patients when cured, shall sign Certificates of their
particular Cases, and of the Benefit they have received, to be either published
or otherwise disposed of as the Governors may think proper; in which
Certificate shall be inserted the Date of their Admission and Discharge.

IXth. That no Patient go out of the Hospital without Leave from one of the
Physicians or Surgeons, first signified to the Steward or Matron.

Xth. That they do not Swear, Curse, get Drunk, behave Rudely or Indecently, on
Pain of Expulsion after the first Admonition.

XIth. That no Patient presume to play at Cards, Dice, or any other Game within
the Hospital, or to beg any where in the City of New York, on Pain of being
discharged for irregularity.

XIIth. That such Patients as are able, in the Opinion of the Physicians and
Surgeons, shall assist in nursing others, washing and ironing the Linen,
washing and cleaning the Rooms, and such other Service as the Matron or Steward
shall require.

XIIIth. That no Spirituous Liquors be brought into the Hospital, or used by
any Patient, unless by Order or Consent of one of the Physicians or Surgeons.

XIVth. That no Patient enter the Kitchen, or any of the Servants Apartments,
under any Pretense whatsoever, unless by Order of the Steward or Matron.

XVth. That the Men Patients shall not go into the Women's Apartments or Wards,
nor the Women Patients into the Men's.

Mode of Admission.
APPLICATION must be made, in the first Instance, to one of the Governors or
Physicians, who, if they think proper, will give them the following
Recommendation, viz. --

NEW YORK, (...) Day of (...) 17^
I Recommend (...) to be admitted into the New York Hospital, if (...) appears
to you a proper Object after (...) shall be examined by the Physicians or
Surgeons.

To the Visiting Committee of the New York Hospital.


The Applicant must attend at the Hospital, on the 3d or 6th Day of the Week,
and be examined by the attending Physician or Surgeon; who will enquire into
the Nature of their Disorder; and if approved as a proper Patient, will give
them the following Certificate, viz. --

NEW YORK, (...) Day of (...) 17^
I Have examined (...) and find (...) is a proper Patient for the New York
Hospital.

To the Visiting Committee of the New York Hospital.


N. B. If the Patient's Case requires immediate Admittance, the Physician is to
subscribe the following Direction.

The Steward is desired to receive the Bearer until the Visiting Committee
attends.



These Certificates must be presented to the Visiting Committee, who will
either direct the Steward to receive them, or they will refuse them Admittance,
as to them may seem proper.

Forms, for the Use of the Hospital.
PAUPER.
New York Hospital, (...) Day of (...) 17^
WE have examined into the Circumstances of (...) and admit (...) as a Pauper
Patient into the New York Hospital.

Visiting Committee.

To the Steward of the New York Hospital.
PAY-PATIENT.
New York Hospital, (...) Day of (...) 17^
WE admit a Pay-Patient into the New York Hospital, having signed an Assurance
as Security for the Payment of his Board, etc.

Visiting Committee.

To the Steward of the New York Hospital.
(...), being admitted a Patient into the New York Hospital, at (...) Request,
do hereby promise to provide with Clothing sufficient for (...) Use while
there; to pay the Treasurer of said Hospital (...) per Week, for (...) Board
during Continuance there; to cause (...) to be removed when discharged, and to
pay the Expense of Burial, if (...) die there.

WITNESS (...) Hand the (...) Day of (...) 17^

THIS is to certify, That I (...) was admitted on the (...) Day of (...) 17^ a
Patient into the New York Hospital, afflicted with (...) and am now discharged;
being (...)

WITNESS my Hand, at the New York Hospital, this (...) Day of (...) 17^

At a Monthly MEETING of the GOVERNORS OF THE NEW YORK HOSPITAL.
8th Month, 1st, 1797.
THE Committee appointed to bring forward Rules for the Library, report the
following; which being read, were approved of, and the Secretary is desired to
furnish the Apothecary with a Copy of said Rules; and he being now called
before the Board, was directed to observe the same with strict Attention.

Extracted from the Minutes. THOMAS EDDY,
Secretary.
RULES, for the Preservation, etc. OF THE NEW YORK HOSPITAL LIBRARY.
Is It. THE Apothecary shall be Librarian.

IId. The Librarian shall keep an accurate Catalogue of the Books, which shall
specify the Title, Author, Size, Number of Volumes, and deposit, when loaned,
of each Work.

IIId. Every Work in the Library shall be numbered, both by a Label on the Back
of each Volume, expressive of the Number, and by the same Number written within
the Volume; and on the Title Page of each Volume shall be written, "The
Property of the New York Hospital."

IVth. It is the Duty of the Librarian to receive, and give out, Books;
observing, when they are returned, to replace them on the Shelves, after having
carefully examined whether they are free from Damage.

Vth. No Books can be lent out of the Library (except to the Governors,
Physicians, and Surgeons, of the Hospital) but on Mondays, Wednesdays,
Thursdays, and Saturdays, and between the Hours of Eleven and Twelve, when the
prescribing Hour is at Twelve; and between Eight and Nine, when it commences at
Nine. The Visiting Governors, Physicians, and Surgeons, are allowed to take out
Books, at the Hours of their Attendance, on Tuesdays and Fridays, and at the
customary Hours on other Days.

VIth. The Librarian is not authorized to let out Books to any Person, save the
Governors, Physicians, Surgeons, Apothecary, and House-Surgeon of the Hospital,
and to such Students of Medicine as are regularly admitted, agreeable to the
Rules of the Honse, to see the Practice thereof, (except as herein after
provided.)

VIIth. The Governors, Physicians, and Surgeons, may take out a complete Work,
even if it consist of several Volumes, -- but are not allowed this Liberty in
respect to voluminous Collections of distinct Papers, such as the Medical
Commentaries, etc. of which they can take but a single Volume at a Time.

VIIIth. No Student of Medicine can take out more than one Volume of any Work
at a Time.

IXth. Folios may be kept our four Weeks, Quartos three, and Duodecimos two
Weeks.

Xth. No Person can take out a Work, or a single Volume of a Work, without
leaving with the Librarian a Deposit (to be specified in the Catalogue, for
each Work) of not less than one Third more than the actual Value of the Work.
This Rule does not extend to certain Medical Collections, hereafter enumerated,
in respect to which the Deposit shall have Relation only to the Volume taken
out.

XIth. The Librarian shall make a regular Entry, at the Time of loaning any
Work, of its Title, Volume, Borrower, and of the Deposit made. He shall also
make a like regular Entry of the Time when it is returned, and at the Time of
its being returned.

XIIth. A Shilling a Week shall be paid for every Volume kept beyond the Time
herein specified. If the Volume be not returned within three Months, it is to
be considered as lost, and the Deposit is forfeited to the Library.

XIIIth. If any Person shall lose a Volume or Volumes of any Set of Books, the
Remains of the Set shall be delivered to him, on his substituting a new Set. In
Case this be not done, his Deposit is forfeited, and the mutilated Set is also
retained in the Library.

XIVth. Damages of Books are of four Degrees, -- [ a] The defacing the external
Appearance of the Book; [ b] The destruction or considerable Injury of the
Covering; [ c] Blots, Spots, and small Rents, etc. -- so as to deface, but not
destroy, the Contents of the Book; [ d] And, the tearing, so as to endanger or
occasion the Loss of some Part of the Contents. --


When any Damage, short of destroying its Value, happens to a Book, the
Librarian is to notice and report it to the Visiting Governors, who are to
determine the Fine to be paid by the Borrower -- according to the Degree and
Nature of the Injury and the Cost of the Book. -- The Deposit is to be retained
till the Fine is paid. If the Borrower refuses to pay the Fine, the Deposit is
forfeited.

XVth. All Fines and Forfeitures are to be appropriated to the Use of the
Library. The Librarian is to keep an exact Account of the same, which he is to
render Monthly to the Visiting Governors, and pay the Sums so collected to
their Order.

XVIth. The Librarian is responsible for the Library, agreeable to the
Catalogue, and shall render a semi-annual (or, if it be required, more
frequent) Account thereof, to the Governors.

XVIIth. In all Cases where Doubts arise respecting a Violation of the
foregoing Rules, they shall be submitted to the Visiting Governors, or the
attending Physicians, and Surgeons, whose Determination shall be final: but no
such Governors, Physicians, and Surgeons, shall judge in his own Case.

XVIIIth. Any Person making a Donation of Twenty-five Dollars, for the Benefit
of the Library, or of Books, connected with Medicine, to that Amount, shall be
entitled, during Life, to the Use of the whole Collection, agreeable to the
foregoing Rules.

The MEDICAL COLLECTIONS
Referred to in the VIIth and Xth Rules, in Respect to which the Deposit has
Relation only to the Value of the Volume, are -- Medical Commentaries, of
Edinburgh. Physical Essays of Edinburgh. Medical Essays, of Edinburgh. Medical
Observations and Inquiries, of London.


LIST of the MEMBERS of the Society of the NEW YORK HOSPITAL, 1797.
Those with this Mark (d) are deceased.

A
Charles Ward Apthorp, (d) William Axtell, (d) John Alsop, Gilbert Aspinwall,
Josiah Adams, Francis Atkinson, John Atkinson,
B
Grove Bend, (d) Evert Banker, Thomas Buchannan, Andrew Barclay, (d) William
Brownjohn, (d) Francis Bassett, Samuel Bowne, (d) Dirick Brinkerhoff, (d)
Benjamin Booth, Abraham Brinkerhoff, (d) Walter Buchannan, Robert Bowne,
Goldsbrow Banyar, Gerard G. Beekman, (d) G -- G. Beekman, jun. Samuel Bowne,
John Barrow, James Bowne, (d) James Buck, Aaron Burr, Samuel Burling, William
Backhouse, (d) Dr. John Bard, William Bayard, sen. John Bogert, (d) Robert L.
Bowne, Gerard W. Beekman, Walter Bowne, George Bowne, John Beekman, William
Bowne, Samuel Broom, William Bayard, jun. James Beekman, Joseph Byrnes,
Theophylact Bache, Samuel Belamy,
C
Peter Clopper, Henry Cruger, (d) Robert Crommeline, (d) John Clark, Henry
Cruger, jun. Cadwallader Colden, (d) Major Edward Clark, (d) Matthew Clarkson,
Alexander Colden, (d) David Clarkson, (d) Cornelius Clopper, (d) John H.
Cruger, John Crook, (d) Isaac Cor^a, Isaac Cock, Daniel Cotton, James
Constable, Samuel Corp, Brothers, Coster and Co. John B. Coals, William
Constable, Francis Child's, John Champlin,
D
Elias Desbrosses, (d) Patrick Dennis, George Duncan, R. H. John, Lord
Drummond, William Denning, Oliver Delancey, (d) James Duane, (d) Joshua
Delaplaine, (d) Gerardus Depeyster, Magdalin Desbrosses, (d) Gerardus Duyckink,
(d) Abraham Duryee, (d) Walter Dubois, (d) Daniel Dunscomb, Jacob Doty,
E
Thomas Eddy, Andrew Elliot, Effingham Embree, Thomas Ellison, (d) John
Elliott, William Edgar, Lawrence Embree, (d)
F
Samuel Franklin, Johnstone Fairholme, (d) Col. Edward Fanning, (d) Thomas
Franklin, (d) George Folliott, Thomas Fisher, Henry Franklin, (d) John
Franklin, Francis Flemming, (d) Dr. John Fothergill, of London, (d) Walter
Franklin, sen. (d) Thomas Franklin, jun. Caleb Frost, George Fox,
G
Adam Cilchrist, (d) Hugh Gain, Edward Goold, Robert Gray, Andrew Gautier, (d)
Peter Goelet, Nicholas Gouverneur,
H
Daniel Horsemanden, (d) Henry Haydock, George Harrison, (d) Henry Haydock,
jun. Nathaniel Hauxhurst, John Hunter,
I
Charles Ingliss, Samuel Jones, John Jay, James Jauncey, (d) Thomas Jones, Col.
Thomas James, (d) Sir William Johnson, (d) Simon Johnston, (d) Nicholas Jones,
(d) William Jauncey, John Jones, Horace Johnson,
K
William Kelly, (d) Benjamin Kissam, (d) John Tabor Kemp, John Keese, Archibald
Kennedy, (d) Lawrence Kortwright, (d) Joseph Kettletas, William Kenyon, John
Knox, Robert I. Kemble, Peter Kemble,
L
John Lawrence, (d) John H. Livingston, sen. Dirick Lefferts, John Laboyteaux,
(d) Philip P. Livingston, Catherine Lawrence, Caleb Lawrence, Robert R.
Livingston, jun. Cornelius P. Low, (d) Robert P. Livingston, Leonard Lispenard,
(d) William Livingston, (d) Abraham Lot, (d) P. V. B. Livingston, (d) Isaac
Low, (d) William Ludlow, Gabriel H. Ludlow, John Livingston, sen. (d) Jacob Le
Roy, (d) John Leake, (d) Thomas Legget, Richard R. Lawrence, Leffert Lefferts,
John Lamb, Daniel Ludlow, Nicholas Low, William Lawrence, Philip Livingston,
Jonathan Little,
M
Lindly Murray, John Murray, Alexander M'Dougali, (d) Mary M'Evers, John
Marston, (d) John Murray, jun. William Maxwell, (d) Robert Murray, (d)
Alexander M'Comb, Roger Morris, Abraham Mortier, (d) Abraham Mesier, (d)
Richard Morris, John Moore, William M'Adam, (d) Nathaniel Marston, (d) John
Myer, Charles M'Evers, Benjamin Minturn, John M'Vicker, William Minturn, Thomas
Maule, Seton, Maitland, and Co. Robert Mott,
N
William Neilson,
O
(...)
P
Frederick Pigou, Daniel Phoenix, Thomas Pearsall, John Pell, (d) Joseph
Pearsall, Thomas Pearsall, Watch-maker, David Provost, (d) Lewis Pintard,
William Post, Elijah Pell, Frederick Philips,
Q
(...)
R
Jacobus Roosevelt, (d) Elizabeth Richards, (d) John Reid, Hendrick Rutgers,
(d) Alexander Robinson, Cornelius Ray, Walter Rutherford, Isaac Roosevelt, (d)
Henry Rutgers, jun. Nehemiah Rogers, William T. Robinson,
S
Miles Sherbrook, Christopher Smith, John Stites, Pascal N. Smith, George
Stafford, Gerard Stuyvesant, (d) Jesse Smith, William Smith, John M. Scott, (d)
Thomas Smith, (d) Richard Sharp, (d) Isaac Sears, (d) Nicholas Stuyvesant, (d)
Peter Schermerhorn, Ebenezer Stevens, James R. Smith, Edmund Seaman, Comfort
Sands, William Shedden, Henry Sadler, Thomas Stoughton,
T
John Thurston, John Thurman,
U
William Ustick, jun. William Ustick, Benjamin Underhill,
V
Jacobus Van Zandt, (d) James Van Varick, (d) Peter Vandervoort, (d) Theo. Van
Wyck, (d) Henry Van Vleck, (d) John Van Cortlandt, (d) David Van Horn, (d)
Samuel Verplank, Augustus Van Horn, (d) Gulian Verplanck, Augustus Van
Cortlandt, Richard Varick,
W
Erasmus Williams, (d) Thomas Wooldridge, (d) Richard Waldron, William Walton,
(d) Jacob Walton, (d) Gerard Walton, Isaac L. Winn, Robert Watts, Jacob Watson,
John Watts, sen. Hugh Wallace, (d) James Watson, Thomas White, sen. Henry
White, (d) John Wetherhead, (d) Casper Wistar, Joshua Wadington, William W.
Woolsey, Charles Watkins,
Y
Richard Yates, Hamilton Young, Lawrence Yates, (d)
Z
(...)
At an ELECTION, held on the 16th Day of the 6th Month, 1797, the following
Persons were elected:
GERARD WALTON, President. MATTHEW CLARKSON, Vice President. JOHN MURRAY,
Treasurer. THOMAS EDDY, Secretary. Peter Schermerhorn, John Murray, jun.
William Edgar, William Minturn, Thomas Buchanan, Robert Bowne, I. C. Kunzie,
Edmund Prior, Moses Rogers, John B. Coals, Henry Haydock, jun. Henry Rutgers,
John Thurston, John I. Glover, Thomas Franklin, William T. Robinson, James
Kent, Hugh Gain, William Jauncey, J. De la Montagnie, James Watson, John
Barrow.
Physicians and Surgeons to the Hospital, viz.
PHYSICIANS.
John R. B. Rogers, David Hosack, Samuel L. Mitchell, Elihu H. Smith,
SURGEONS.
Richard Bayley, Wright Post, Richard S. Kissam, Samuel Barrowe, Valentine
Seaman.
Adolph Lent, Apothecary, Samuel Barnum, House-Surgeon.

