MINUTES OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE COMMITTEE, APPOINTED ON THE 14th SEPTEMBER,
1793, BY THE CITIZENS OF PHILADELPHIA, THE NORTHERN LIBERTIES AND THE DISTRICT
OF SOUTHWARK, TO ATTEND TO AND ALLEVIATE THE SUFFERINGS OF THE AFFLICTED WITH
THE MALIGNANT FEVER, PREVALENT, IN THE CITY AND ITS VICINITY, WITH AN APPENDIX.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY R. AITKEN and SON, AND SOLD BY J. CRUKSHANK, W.
YOUNG, T. DOBSON AND THE OTHER BOOKSELLERS.

M.DCC.XCIV.

Registered according to Law.

THE FOLLOWING ADDRESS WAS PUBLISHED IN THE NEWS PAPERS.
TO THE BENEVOLENT CITIZENS,
THOSE of the overseers of the poor, who attend to the care of the unfortunate
now laboring under the prevailing malignant disorder, are almost overcome with
the fatigue which they undergo, and require immediate assistance. This, it is
hoped, may be found among the benevolent citizens, who actuated by a
willingness is contribute their aid in the present distress, will offer
themselves as volunteers to support the active overseers in the discharge of
what they have undertaken. For which purpose, those who are thus humanely
disposed, are requested to apply to the Mayor, who will point out to them how
they may be useful.

SEPTEMBER 10 th 1793.
In compliance with the preceding ADDRESS, a Number of CITIZENS met at the
CITY-HALL the 12th September, 1793.
The MAYOR in the Chair.
MR. James Wilson an overseer of the poor reported the situation of the sick
and poor at Bush-Hill, and that Dr. Physic, Dr. Cathral, Dr. Annan and Dr.
Leib, are the attending Physicians at that place.

The following persons have offered to assist the overseers of the poor, viz.
Samuel Wetherill, Israel Israel, Thomas Wistar, Andrew Adgate, Caleb Lownes,
Henry Deforest, Thomas Peter's, Joseph Inskeep, Stephen Girard, John Mason.


Who are requested to report the state of the sick and poor in the city and
vicinity, and measures for their relief.

ADJOURNED.

At a meeting of the citizens of the city and its environs held at the
City-Hall September 14th 1793.

Samuel Wetherill was appointed Chairman and Caleb Lownes Secretary.

The report of the committee appointed at the last meeting, to make enquiry
into the situation of the afflicted under the present prevailing malignant
disorder in the city, being produced, was read and is as follows.

Philadelphia September 12 th 1793.
At a meeting of a number of citizens held at the Courthouse, this evening, in
consequence of an appointment of the Mayor and others, convened at the
City-Hall, to take into consideration the present calamitous state of the city
and its environs. Present, Stephen Girard, Thomas Wistar, Samuel Wetherill,
Israel Israel, Thomas T. Peter's, Henry Deforest, Andrew Adgate, Joseph Inskeep,
John Hawkins, Caleb Lownes,
and several of the overseers of the poor,

Samuel Wetherill in the chair.

Having made enquiry into the situation of the poor and afflicted, they are of
opinion, that it is not in the power of the overseers and guardians of the poor
to afford the necessary aid which the cases of the sick require, that the
citizens be again convened, in order that some effectual means may be used, and
a plan adopted to mitigate, and, if possible, to afford relief to the
afflicted, both in the city and at the Hospital at Bush-Hill.

On Motion, Resolved, -- That the Secretary be directed to publish the
foregoing minute and to request the citizens to attend a meeting, to be held at
the City-Hall at 12 o'clock, on the 14th instant: and that in the mean time
Israel Israel, Thomas Wistar and Caleb Lownes be desired to confer with the
Physicians who have the charge of the sick at Bush-Hill, and obtain information
of their situation, and furnish the necessary aid and relief in their power to
afford.

On Motion, Resolved, -- That, as this city is much exposed, for want of a
suitable place to receive and accommodate those that are afflicted with
malignant disorders -- and that as the increased trade and population subjects
the citizens to constant danger from the numbers that are daily arriving from
foreign parts, where infectious disorders are frequently prevalent; that this
subject be laid before the citizens at their next meeting, in order that some
steps may be taken to bring the subject before the Legislature, that the evils
now experienced may be avoided in future, by suitable and comfortable provision
for those who may suffer a similar affliction.

At an adjourned meeting held at the Courthouse -- September 14th 1793.
Present, Samuel Wetherill, Andrew Adgate, Thomas Wistar, Stephen Girard, Joseph
Inskeep, Israel Israel, Henry Deforest, Thomas Harrison, Caleb Lowness
and several of the overseers of the poor.

The committee appointed to confer with the Physicians who have the charge of
the sick at Bush-Hill.

Report, that they have attended to their appointment, and have produced the
following account of the situation of that Hospital -- as given by Doctors
Cathral and Physic.

That the Hospital is without order o^ arrangement, far from being clean, and
stands in immediate need of several qualified persons to begin and establish
the necessary arrangements. -- There are five or six female attendants; but
none qualified for the proper management of the sick. -- it is attended by four
Physicians, viz. Doctors Cathral, Physic, Annan and Leib -- the latter is
indisposed, and unable to attend.

That there are immediately wanted,

A person qualified to arrange and manage a Hospital, as steward.

A person qualified to act as barber and bleeder, -- and eight nurses.

That it is unnecessary to enumerate all the wants: they are numerous, and call
for speedy attention but the above mentioned require instant attention, which,
when supplied, will reduce the number to a few, and render the institution
useful and beneficial.

Whereupon it was agreed, that the following propositions be laid before the
general meeting of the citizens, viz.

1. That a sum of money be instantly procured. 2. That a large committee be
appointed from the different parts of the city, Southwark and the Northern
Liberties to aid the sick and distressed. 3. That they have full power to act
as circumstances may require. 4. That they keep a just account of their
proceedings and expenditures, and report to a future general meeting of the
citizens.
Resolved, that the chairman and secretary attend the ensuing general meeting
with the proceedings of the committee.

Extract from the minutes (...) Caleb Lownes
Secretary.
Agreed unanimously. That fifteen hundred dollars be immediately procured for
the purpose of furnishing suitable accommodation and supplies for the use of
the afflicted under the prevailing malignant fever, and that Thomas Harrison,
Thomas Wistar, and Caleb Lownes, be appointed a committee to procure the said
sum at the Bank of North America. That, Matthew Clarkson, MAYOR of the city,
Samuel Whetherill, Jo^^ D. Sergeant, Caleb Lownes, Thomas Wistar, Israel
Israel, Thomas Harrison, Stephen Girard, Joseph Russel, Andrew Adgate, Matthew
Carey, Thomas Savery, William Cliffton, Samuel Benge, John Connelly, Jacob
Weaver, John M'Culloch, Joseph Inskeep, William Robinson, Jacob Whitman, Henry
Deforest, John Letchworth, James Swain, James Sharswood, John Haworth, James
Kerr, and Peter Helm,
be a committee to transact the whole of the business relative to mitigating
the sufferings of those that are or may be afflicted with the disorder
prevalent in this city and vicinity -- to procure Physicians, nurses, and
attendants, and generally to furnish those things that now are or may become
necessary to be procured for the above mentioned purposes.

That they or a majority of them, have full powers to appropriate such sums as
may be necessary for obtaining supplies -- for compensating those who may be
employed in the business under their direction, that they keep a fair account
of their proceedings and expenditures and report to a future meeting of the
citizens.

Resolved,

That Matthew Clarkson, be President of the board.

Samuel Wetherill, Vice President. Thomas Wistar, Treasurer, and Caleb Lownes,
Secretary.
Resolved, that the said committee take under their consideration the propriety
of providing suitable accommodations for the reception of such as may hereafter
be afflicted by similar complaints, and to guard against the dangers to which
this city is exposed from its increased trade and population, and the danger
which the daily arrivals from foreign parts, where malignant disorders are
frequently prevalent, constantly subject it to, and to report thereon at a
future meeting.

Caleb Lownes,
Secretary
MINUTES OF THE COMMITTEE, etc.
At a meeting of the COMITTEE, At the CITY-HALL, September 14th 1793.
IN consequence of an appointment, at a general meeting of the citizens held
this day at 12 o'clock, at the City-Hall, the following persons attended.
Thomas Wistar, Matthew Carey, Samuel Benge, Stephen Girard, Thomas Harrison,
Thomas Savery, Israel Israel, John Letchworth, James Swain, James Sharswood,
James Kerr, Peter Helm, Henry Deforest, Joseph Inskeep, and Caleb Lownes,
Secretary.
Israel Israel was appointed Chairman pro. temp.

The committee appointed to procure a sum of money for the use of the Hospital
at Bush-Hill, etc. Report, that they have applied to the president of the bank
of North America, deposited the necessary obligation, and shall have the sum of
fifteen hundred dollars ready on the 16th instant.

Resolved, that James Swain, John Connelly, Israel Israel, Andrew Adgate,
Stephen Girard, Matthew Carey, Thomas Savery, Jacob Weaver of the Northern
Liberties, James Sharswood, and John M'Culloch, of Southwark, be a committee to
superintend the business at Bush-Hill and to agree with and appoint the
necessary officers at that place.

Resolved, that the Treasurer advance fifty dollars to each of the above named
committee, for current expenses, and to continue to advance upon their drafts
as often as they may require, and that they individually make a weekly return
of their expenditures.

Resolved, that James Kerr, Thomas Wistar, and John Letchworth, be a committee
to prepare suitable carriages for the use of the Physicians and for the
diseased.

Resolved, that the committee be empowered to advance such sums of money to
poor families, at their houses, who are afflicted with the malignant disorder,
and to render them such services as may be in their power to afford.

Adjourned to the 16th inst. at 6 o'clock, to meet at this place.

Caleb Lownes, Secretary.

At a Meeting of the Committee, Sept. 16th 1793.
Present, Israel Israel, James Sharswood, James Swain, Samuel Benge, Thomas
Harrison, James Kerr, Joseph Inskeep, Henry Deforest, Thomas Wistar, John
Letchworth, and Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
Israel Israel, in the Chair.

The committee appointed to the care of the Hospital at E^^^-Hill, report, that
they have attended to their appointment and have produced their minutes, which
areas follows.

(...)-HILL HOSPITAL COMMITTEE.
September 15th 1793.
Present, Israel Israel, Henry Deforest, James Sharswood, James Swain, Matthew
Carey, Thomas Savery, Stephen Girard, Jacob Weaver,


Resolved, that three members of this committee attend at the City-Hall daily,
from nine in the morning 'till twelve, and from three to five in the afternoon,
to receive applications for relief, and to afford such assistance as may be
necessary to persons afflicted with the prevalent malignant fever.

Stephen Girard and Peter Helm, report. "That they have visited the Hospital,
and have made out a list of articles wanted at that place." Thomas Wistar is
requested to procure and forward them to the Hospital.

Several of the bedsteads being out of repair, William Hamilton, Carpenter, is
desired to put them in order and to make as many more as may be wanted. It is
agreed that he have two dollars per day for each hand he may employ there.

James Kerr, and Israel Israel are desired to purchase a horse for the service
of the Hospital and to engage two men to attend the cart.

Stephen Girard and Peter Helm, members of this committee, commiserating the
calamitous state to which the sick may probably be reduced for want of suitable
persons to superintend the Hospital, voluntarily offered their services for
that benevolent employment. -- Resolved, that their offers be accepted, and
that they be encouraged immediately to enter upon the important duties of their
appointment.

Received a letter from John Todd, (...) enclosing a bank note for twenty
dollars, for the use of the sick under the care of the committee, which was
directed to be placed in the hands of the Treasurer.

September 16th. in the Afternoon.
Present, Israel Israel, James Sharswood, Joseph Inskeep, Thomas Harrison,
Henry Deforest, Thomas Savery, James Swain, Andrew Adgate.
Stephen Girard, and Peter Helm, the managers of the Hospital at Bush-Hill
report "That the Hospital is now fully furnished with officers and attendants,
except a few nurses, that the necessary arrangements are made, and that the
sick are amply furnished with the necessary supplies and accommodations; and
that the business is now so far matured, as to afford every assistance,
necessary at such a Hospital."

A note was received from the steward of the Hospital, informing that last
night they lost eight (...) and requested twelve coffins.

Resolved, that Henry Deforest be requested to procure a number of coffins, and
make report.

Resolved, that George Richardson, John M'Coy, Thomas Wade and Andrew
Bearsticker be employed in the service of the Committee, the three first to be
under the direction of the steward -- the latter to attend the cart employed in
removing the sick.

Resolved, that five dollars be given to Samuel Bull-man, whose wife and
children are sick of the prevailing disorder.

Resolved, that six nurses be immediately employed and conveyed to the Hospital.

John Burch^^^, offers his services at Bush-Hill as an assistant. -- The
Secretary is requested to give him a letter to the managers of the Hospital and
if they should have occasion for his services that they employ him.

Cyrus Bustle offers the services of himself, his horse and cart in the employ
of the committee, which are accepted, and it is agreed to allow him three
dollars per day.

Doctor De Veze offered his services as a Physician in such part of the
Hospital as may be assigned to his care.

Resolved, that the Doctor be referred to the managers of the Hospital, and
that in the mean time enquiry be made into his abilities and character, and if
they should prove to be such as to justify his being employed, that when the
committee shall go into the appointment of Physicians, he have a part allotted
to him.

Received a letter from Thomas, Samuel and Miers Fisher enclosing a check on
the bank of North America for one hundred and fifty dollars, for the use of the
sick and afflicted under the care, of the committee which is directed to be
handed to the Treasurer to be disposed of agreeably to the design of the donors.

A widow, recommended by several respectable citizens for relief for herself
and several orphan children, made application for assistance;

It is agreed that she have five crowns and a half.

The managers of the Hospital report "that they have been engaged in promoting
the order of the house and that sundry supplies are wanted," which are directed
to be furnished. As it may subject the sick to great inconvenience to lay on
the floors until bedsteads can be made, -- the Secretary is requested to
procure as many as he can, and have them conveyed to the Hospital as early as
possible.

The secretary is requested to publish the following advertisement, viz.

Generous wages will be given to persons capable and willing to perform the
services of Nurses at the Hospital at Bush-Hill; as the end desired by
establishing a Hospital at Bush-Hill, much depends on good nu^^rsin and
attendance. The citizens of Philadelphia will render essential service to the
sick, by aiding and procuring suitable persons for this employment. Those who
are willing to engage, will please to apply to Israel Israel, Thomas Wistar or
Caleb Lownes.

At a Meeting of the Committee, September 17th.
Present, Samuel Wetherill, James Sharswood, Thomas Wistar, Jonathan D.
Sarjeant, James Kerr, Henry Deforest, Samuel Benge, John Letchworth, Joseph
Inskeep, Thomas Harrison, Andrew Adgate, Thomas Savery, Israel Israel, John
Connelly, and Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
Stephen Girard, reports, "that the Hospital is advancing fast toward order
and regularity -- and that more effectually to promote the objects of the
committee, there ought to be a place procured for the accommodation of the
convalescent." The Secretary is requested to make enquiry and endeavor to
procure a house for that purpose.

He also, reports, "that Doctor De Veze had visited the Hospital, that he
appears to be a professional character and that from the information he has
received of his abilities and practice, in Cape-Francois, from persons who were
intimately acquainted with him at that place, he believes him well qualified to
perform the duties of a Physician at the Hospital at Bush-Hill." Whereupon it
was resolved that the Doctor be desired to give his attendance at the Hospital.

James Kerr is desired to provide a horse and chair for the use, and to be at
the command of the Doctor.

The manager further reports "that the sick stand in immediate need of a
variety of articles for their accommodation and use, a list of which he now
presents to the committee." The Secretary is desired to cause them to be
procured and forwarded to the Hospital as early as possible.

Sundry irregularities prevailing among the persons employed as nurses and
attendants on the sick, the managers are desired to discharge the disorderly.
The members of the committee are requested to exert themselves to procure a
number of suitable persons to supply their places.

The Secretary reports, "that he has obtained bedsteads from the prison and
forwarded them to the Hospital."

The Apothecary attended, and informs, "that the duties of his appointment are
such as to render an assistant indispensibly necessary," which being taken into
consideration, it was Resolved that endeavors be used to obtain one
immediately.

A (...) belonging to Captain Borrows was (...) by the committee, the expenses
to be born by the Captain.

Resolved, that the committee continue their sittings constantly at the
City-Hall, until the situation of the Hospital; and afflicted in the city,
shall render it proper to adjourn.

The Secretary reports, that he has made enquiry respecting a suitable place
for accommodating the convalescents, that the large stone barn at Bush-Hill
appears to be the most suitable place for the purpose, which could be obtained.
On consideration it was resolved, that Israel Israel be desired to send a
sufficient number of persons to remove the ^^y and other things which are in
the barn, to a place where they may be secured from loss or damage, and that
the managers be instructed to take measures for sitting up that place for the
accommodation of the convalescent.

NOON.
The managers of the Hospital returned from thence and offer it as their
opinion, "that a Physician should be appointed to attend constantly at the
Hospital. They also report, "that a number of patients are admitted after the
visiting Physicians have returned to the city, who have no relief till the next
day at eleven o'clock, and that many suffer for want of the above regulation."
Which being taken under consideration, it was resolved, that a Physician be
employed who will give his constant attendance, and that as soon as possible.

Resolved, that the Physicians attending the Hospital be requested to meet the
committee to morrow morning at nine o'clock.

The managers of the Hospital have (...) of the following property le^t by John
Joseph Perrin, a French citizen who died yesterday, which is directed to be
handed to Henry Deforest for the use of the heirs of the said J. J. Perrin when
ascertained by legal proof, viz. one tortoise shell watch, one pair silver
buckles, one pair silver knee buckles, one Joe, value six pounds, seven dollars
and one ear-ring.

They also deposited in the same hands, one set broach the property of a person
unknown, who died last night.

The managers inform that they have employed the following persons at the
Hospital.

NURSES. (...) Beakly, Matron, Peter Rose's wi^e, Elizabeth Sooks, Lydia
Bolton, Elizabeth M'Cutchin, Susan St. Clair, Catharine Magill, Isabella
Frederick, Nancy Cunningham.
ATTENDANTS. Peter Rose, Thomas Noer, John Brown, John Dudman, George
Richardson, John M'Coy, Thomas Wade, John Nassey, William Kelly* Samuel Posey.


Mary Savi^l attending the committee, offered her services as an assistant
matron a^ the Hospital at Bush-Hill; being well recommended for her abilities,
(...) and attention as a nurse and (...) it is (...) that ^he be recommended to
the managers, and if it be agreeable to them, that she be immediately employed,
and that her pay be three dollars per day.

Peter Barriere and Stephen Crousillat attended the committee and informed
them, that Joseph Mercier and wife are dead, and have left two infant children,
twins, about fifteen months old, without any person to take care of them (or
the effects left by the deceased, which are said to be of considerable value)
except a servant girl whose character is unknown, which being taken into
consideration, it is resolved, that James Kerr and John Letch worth be a
committee to make enquiry into the circumstances --, obtain an account of the
property and return it to the committee, -- procure suitable places for the
infants and take such other measures as may be proper on the occasion.

The committee on the foregoing business report, that they have been to the
dwelling of the ^^te Joseph Mercier, have taken the necessary steps to secure
the property and have brought with them the following effects, which are
directed to be placed in the hands of the Treasurer to be held until legally
called for, viz. one morocco pocket book, contents unknown, three gold watches
with the ornaments, one pair silver buckles, fourteen silver table spoons, two
silver table forks, eleven tea spoons and one snuff box.

"That the rest of the effects found in the house are left in it, under the
care of Peter Barriere, who has engaged to get the house cleaned, and have left
the management of the affairs to him till further directed: "that they have
procured a very suitable place for the infants."

The managers at Bush-Hill, report, that the difficulty apprehended from the
failure of the pump, at the Hospital, is now removed by a discovery of a spring
in the vicinity which will afford an abundant supply of water, and that a small
repair of the pump will render it useful.

That the arrangements of the Hospital are considerably advanced, and that the
Hospital will be capable of accommodating a much greater number of patients
than on the former plan.

That the barn will be ready to receive convalescents in a few days.

Orders were issued to the carters for the interment of six persons this day,
from the City-Hall.

SEPTEMBER 18th 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, Jonathan D. Sarjeant,
Joseph Inskeep, James Sharswood, Thomas Wistar, Treas. James Kerr, Thomas
Savery, Andrew Adgate, Samuel Benge, Henry Deforest, John Letchworth, Thomas
Harrison, James Swain, John Connelly, and Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

Resolved, that the managers of the Hospital, at Bush-Hill, have the entire
direction at that place; and that they be empowered to employ and discharge
such persons as they may think proper.

The Physicians agreeably to notice, attended, viz. Doctors Physic. Cathral,
Leib and Annan -- when a conference was had respecting the state of the
Hospital and the mode of affording medical assistance.

After some time spent upon the subject, the Physicians produced the following
propositions.

1. That the Physicians will attend regularly every ^ay at eleven o'clock in
the morning. 2. That for this attendance they shall have two (...) a visit
each. 3. That Mr. Graham be prescribing Apothecary, to attend to those patients
who are admitted in the absence of the Physicians, and that he be provided with
two or more assistants in the Apothecaries duties. 4. That Doctors Leib,
Physic, Cathral and Annan, have the entire direction of the Hospital, to be
arranged in such manner as they shall judge proper; and that in ease of the
indisposition of either, he will provide a medical friend to attend for him.
Which being considered, were agreed to, with the addition of the following,
viz.

That a room at the Hospital be appropriated to the use of such patients as are
desirous of being under the direction of Doctor Deveze: that he procure the
necessary medicine for his patients, to be made up at the expense of the
committee, and, if necessary, that he provide a person to administer them.

The President produced a letter from a citizen, complaining of the route taken
by the carters employed to remove the dead from the Hospital; which being
considered it was agreed, that the carters be directed to proceed in future,
from the Hospital down broad street to walnut street, thence to the place of
interment.

The prevailing calamity having deprived a number of children of their parents
and guardians, and rendered many of the latter who have survived, incapable of
a^^ording those under their care the necessary suppor and protection;

The committee conceive it to be a duty incumbent on them to attend to these,
as well as to sufferers of other descriptions who are laboring under the
prevailing disorder, and to use their endeavors to provide for their
comfortable accommodation and support.

On motion; Resolved, that a house be provided for the accommodation of such;
and that suitable provision be made for their support: that Israel Israel,
James Kerr and Thomas Harrison be a committee to carry the foregoing resolution
into execution.

The managers Report that there are a variety of articles wanted for the use of
the Hospital, which are directed to be obtained and forwarded as soon as
possible.

Doctors Cathral, Leib and Physic attended at the Hospital this day.

The Physicians anxiously wish that the committee would endeavor to prevail
upon our fellow citizens to send those who are designed for the Hospital, as
early as possible after they take the disorder; as the chance of recovery in
case of an immediate removal is very flattering, but that the contrary must be
expected to be the consequence of delay. The Secretary is directed to cause
this to be published in the news papers.

The managers report, that they have buried eight persons from the Hospital
since last evening, Seventeen have been sent out, and orders were issued for
the interment of six persons this day, from the City-Hall.

Twenty patients not visited.

SEPTEMBER 19th 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Samuel Wetherill, James Sharswood,
Jonathan D. Sarjeant, Thomas Wistar, Treas. James Kerr, Samuel Benge, Henry
Deforest, John Letchworth, Joseph Inskeep, Thomas Harrison, Andrew Adgate.
Thomas Savery, Israel Israel, John Connelly, and Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

The committee appointed to procure a house for the accommodation of the orphan
children, Report, "that they have obtained one." the same committee are
requested to collect them, and see that they are properly accommodated and
treated: and in case any of them should prove to be infected with the
prevailing disorder, that they be removed to the Hospital.

The committee, appointed to the care of Joseph Mercier's children, Report,
"that they have delivered them to Peter Barriere, who has provided a suitable
place for them."

The managers of the Hospital Inform the committee that they have received a
copy of the resolution of yesterday relative to the appointment of Physicians,
and having given it due consideration, are of opinion, that it will not be
productive of the benefit desired; and having offered several forcible
objections to the mode, -- the committee again went into the consideration of
this important subject; after considerable time spent thereon it was agreed to
rescind the resolution of yesterday -- and that the patients be separated into
two divisions, that each division have a distinct appointment, and that the
nomination of Physicians be left to the managers, Stephen Girard and Peter Helm.

Doctor Deveze attending the committee, and being recommended by the managers
as a suitable person to attend as Physician for one division. It was Agreed,
that he be appointed accordingly.

Doctor Physic also attending, it was Agreed, that he be appointed to the
other part, the Doctor desiring to have till to morrow to consider the subject,
which was approved.

Mary Parvin attending and offering herself as matron of the orphan house,
being well recommended for her sobriety and abilities, it is Agreed to employ
her, and that she be allowed three dollars per day.

Elijah Weed keeper of the prison, having represented that there are two
persons lately committed for slight offenses. who it is apprehended have
symptoms of the prevailing disorder upon them; to prevent the consequences of
the disorder being introduced into that place, the Mayor is requested to give
them a discharge. Agreed that they be admitted into the Hospital at Bush-Hill.

There being a number of French sailors and soldiers in the Prison, belonging
to the army and navy of the Republic of France, at the suit of the minister of
that Republic, whose continuance may be attended with alarming consequences
should the prevailing disorder be introduced into the prison, it becomes an
indispensible duty to use means to have them removed as early as possible, --
The Mayor is requested to write to the minister of France upon the subject, and
have them discharged from confinement in that place.

The Mayor reports that he has visited the prison, that he found health,
industry, quietness and cleanliness prevailing there in a pleasing degree.

Three Physicians attended at the Hospital, viz. Doctors Physic, Leib and
Annan. The managers report, that a number of the sick were not visited this
morning, that there are sixty patients in the Hospital, that eight died last
night, and several were discharged, cured.

That Doctor Deveze had visited the sick who were reported as not having been
visited this morning.

That a number of articles for the use of the institution are wanted, which are
directed to be sent early to morrow.

Orders were issued for the interment of nine persons this day, from the
City-Hall.

SEPTEMBER 20th 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, James Sharswood, Samuel
Benge, Thomas Harrison, Jonathan D. Sergeant, Thomas Wistar, Treas. Joseph
Inskeep, and Thomas Savery, John Letchworth, Andrew Adgate, John Connelly,
James Kerr, Henry Deforest, Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

William Sinclair Sand with is engaged in the employ of the committee, as
carter.

The managers Report, that Robert Tait of Kentucky merchant, who went some days
ago from the house of Barnabas M'Shane is now dead, that in his last illness he
was attended by Stephen Girard and a notary public, who took an account of the
manner in which his effects should be disposed of, and that he has appointed
Barnabas M'Shane Innkeeper and Andrew Kennedy of this city merchant to execute
his will.

That he has left all his estate to his brother William Tate, of the Western
Country, the property which he had in possession at the Hospital when he died,
was collected and brought to the committee to be delivered to his executors.

Doctor Physic attended the committee, and informed them, that he was willing
to take charge of one half of the Hospital, which was agreed to, but the
compensation to him as well as to Doctor Deveze, was by their desire deferred
until a future time.

Several applications being made by poor and distressed objects, suffering in
consequence of the prevailing calamity, who cannot obtain relief from the
overseers of the poor, on account of their absence, or be admitted into the
house of employment by reason of the refusal of the managers to admit them;
their cases were taken into consideration, and it was,

Resolved, that Israel Israel, Joseph Inskeep and John Letchworth be a
committee to receive applications from the poor, and administer such relief as
their circumstances may render proper and necessary.

Resolved, that Israel Israel, Joseph Inskeep and Thomas Harrison be a
committee to visit the house of employment, to enquire of the steward of that
place, what are the circumstances of it, and whether any of the managers attend
there, and whether suitable objects can obtain the relief designed to be
afforded by the institution.

The last mentioned committee Report, that they have been to the almshouse and
have had a conference with the steward; who informed them that the last meeting
of the managers was on the ninth day of this month, when a resolution was
entered into "that no person should be admitted into that place until further
orders." that on the sixteenth instant, two members only met, when the
foregoing instructions to the steward were renewed.

They were informed that the house is capable of accommodating two hundred
patients more than it at present contains; which being considered, it was
Resolved that the managers be requested to meet the committee to morrow morning
at nine o'clock in order to consult upon means, for affording relief to the
afflicted, not laboring under the prevailing disease.

Doctor Physic being present, the consideration of the state of the Hospital
and the most eligible mode of affording medical aid was again entered upon.
After considerable time spent upon the subject it was Agreed, that it would be
most advisable to divide the Hospital into three divisions, that there be three
Physicians appointed, and that the committee immediately proceed to an election
of Physicians to attend the Hospital agreeably to the regulations now concluded
on: when Doctors Physic, Leib and Deveze were duly elected. The Secretary is
directed to inform them of their election and to request their attendance to
morrow morning at nine o'clock.

John Vicar presented five dollars for the use of the poor, which was received
and handed to the Treasurer to be applied agreeably to the design of the donor.

Sarah, Mary, Edward and Phebee Gallaghar were admitted into the orphan house.

Orders were issued this day from the City-Hall, for the interment of nine
persons.

SEPTEMBER 21st 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, Jonathan D. Sarjeant,
Joseph Inskeep, James Sharswood, Thomas Wistar, Treas. James Kerr, Samuel
Wetherill, Thomas Savery, Andrew Adgate, Samuel Benge, Henry Deforest, John
Letchworth, Thomas Harrison, James Swain, John Haworth, John Connelly, and
Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

A letter was received from Doctors Leib, Cathral and Physic, which was read:
in which they decline accepting the appointment at the Hospital under the
resolution of yesterday. The Secretary is directed to inform the managers at
the Hospital of the receipt of their letter and that they need not expect the
attendance of the Physicians this day; and to desire them to proceed to the
care of the sick and to endeavor to obtain the necessary medical aid which
their situation may require.

The keeper of the prison informed the committee, that there is reason to fear
that the prevailing disease has made its appearance in the jail: and as a
number of French prisoners are there confined who are not charged with any
crime, but held as deserters; and that the consequence of its breaking out, may
be attended with many bad effects, it is Agreed, that the Mayor be requested to
write to the Minister of France and use his endeavors ^o have them removed.

Orders were issued this day from the City-Hall, for the interment of eight
persons.

SEPTEMBER 22d 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, Jonathan D. Sergeant,
Samuel Benge, Joseph Inskeep, Andrew Adgate, Stephen Girard, Peter Helm, and
Henry Deforest, Thomas Wistar, Treas. John Connelly, John Letchworth, James
Swain, James Sharswood, Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
The managers attending this morning inform the committee that they have
received the letter from the Secretary and taken the necessary care of the
sick, and that there is no cause for uneasiness about medical aid, as Doctor
Deveze is, with the assistance of the Apothecaries, fully capable of performing
all the duties of the place, until the numbers shall considerably exceed those
now in the Hospital.

They request that measures may be adopted to prevail upon those who wish to
avail themselves of the advantages of the Hospital, to apply early for
admission after they discover symptoms of the disease upon them; as many for
want of this attention, have suffered; many have deferred it so long, that they
have died on their way, and most who die at the Hospital, expire within two
days after their admission.

The Secretary is directed to prepare an address to our fellow citizens upon
the occasion, and cause it to be published as early as possible.

A packet containing sundry articles the property of Captain Burrow's, who died
this day at the Hospital were delivered to Henry Deforest to be held for the
use of the heirs of the said Captain Burrows.

Daniel Offley offering his assistance to the committee, in such manner as they
think will promote the object of their appointment. It was Resolved, that the
offer be accepted and that he be requested to attend their sittings.

John Cummings, steward of the house of employment, attended the committee, and
informed them, that the managers are all absent; and gave an account of the
circumstances of that institution.

Whereupon it was Resolved, that John Connelly, Israel Israel and James
Sharswood be a committee to make enquiry into the difficulties suggested and
make report whether that place can be used with propriety for the benefit of
the suffering poor.

Joseph Crusel attended and made application for the effects of John Joseph
Perrin, and for a certificate of his death. -- The Secretary is desired to
obtain the certificate and deliver it to the said Joseph Crusel, who is
requested to bring proof of his right to the effects of the deceased.

Joseph Keen presented ten dollars for the use of the sick; which was delivered
to the Treasurer, to be applied agreeably to the desire of the donor.

Doctor Benjamin Duffield offered his services to assist at the Hospital, at
Bush-Hill, which are accepted, -- Agreed, that the thanks of the committee be
presented to him, that he be furnished with a chaise or other carriage to aid
him in his benevolent undertaking.

Orders were issued this day from the City-Hall, for the interment of fourteen
persons.

SEPTEMBER 23rd 1793.
Present, Jonathan D. Sergeant, Andrew Adgate, Joseph Inskeep, James Sharswood,
Thomas Wistar, Treas. Israel Israel, John Connelly, Samuel Benge, James Kerr,
John Letchworth, Henry Deforest, James Swain, John Haworth, Thomas Savery,
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

The managers of the house of employment being absent, the Mayor and Hilary
Baker, Esquire. prepared blanks for the admission of suitable objects into that
place, conformably to Law.

Hugh Ferguson being recommended by Nicholas Waln and Doctor Park, as a
suitable object, was accordingly sent to the alms house.

Doctor Logan offers two or three cart loads of turnips, for the use of the
sick, which are directed to be sent for.

James Graham presented a letter accompanying several propositions, respecting
the mode of arranging the Apothecaries department. Referred to future
consideration.

John Pea is employed as a carter, at one dollar per day.

Sent Catharine Ord to the house of employment.

Owen M'Garvey and Henry Spence were admitted into the orphan house, M'Garvey's
father and mother both died at the Hospital at Bush-Hill.

Sent Mary Maloy to the house of employment.

The managers Report, that they have buried nine the last twenty four hours,
have discharged several, and that there are twenty one convalescents.

Orders were issued for the interment of six persons this day.

SEPTEMBER 24th 1793.
Present, Israel Israel, Jonathan D. Sergeant, Joseph Inskeep, James Sharswood,
Henry Deforest, Thomas Wistar, Treas. Andrew Adgate, Samuel Benge, John
Haworth, Thomas Savery, John Letchworth, James Swain, and Caleb Lownes,
Secretary.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

Rowland Sandiford is employed to serve at the Hospital under the direction of
the managers.

The calls for the relief of the sick and distressed appearing to continue
without abatement,

Resolved, that application be made to the bank of North America for a further
loan of five thousand dollars, and that a new subscription be opened to
indemnify them; and that the Treasurer and Jonathan D. Sergeant, be desired to
apply to the President and directors for the purpose.

The Treasurer and Jonathan D. Sergeant returned and Report, that the President
and directors cheerfully complied with their request; and offer to furnish a
further supply, if it shall be found necessary.

The overseers of the poor of the Northern Liberties met the committee and
represented that frequent applications are made to them for the burial of the
dead, and request that they may be furnished with a horse and cart.

Whereupon it was Resolved, that they be desired to provide a horse and cart
and render an account of the expense to the committee, who will provide for the
same.

The further services of James Graham being unnecessary, the managers are
requested to settle his account in order for payment.

Doctor Benjamin Duffield Reports, "that he has visited the Hospital and finds
every thing there in proper order, -- that he is satisfied with the mode of
practice of Doctor Deveze, and the treatment of the sick, and recommends the
continuance of the French Apothecaries."

Lot Davis, John Miller, Mary Smith, Ann Maria Anthony and three children of
Forbes Newton were sent to the orphan house.

It was Agreed to pay one dollar per week for three weeks, for the support of
Matthew M'Kean, a blind man who is going to his friends in the country.

On complaint that some of the coffins are not properly pitched -- it is
ordered that measures be taken to remedy this neglect, and that the persons
employed to make coffins be enjoined to be more attentive in future.

The managers Report, that all the sick are on bedsteads, and furnished with
suitable bedding, that the rooms are all numbered and that the whole house is
in regular order.

Orders were issued this day from the City-Hall, for the interment of fifteen
persons.

SEPTEMBER 25th 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Thomas Wistar, Treas. Israel Israel,
Jonathan D. Sergeant, Samuel Benge, Joseph Inskeep, James Sharswood, Thomas
Savery, James Swain, Samuel Wetherill, John Letchworth, Henry Deforest, John
Haworth, and Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

The Mayor presented a letter which he had received from the minister of the
French Republic, now at New York, in answer to one written by him at the
request of the committee, relative to the French sailors and soldiers confined
in the prison of this city: in which the minister refers to Secretary
Bournonville, to give such aid in disposing of the prisoners as may be thought
best.

The committee being informed by the orphan committee that the children under
their care, although in other respects sufficiently provided for, are very
destitute of changes of clothing. They therefore request such of their fellow
citizens as have childrens clothing to spare, to send it to the City-Hall,
where it will be thankfully received.

The Secretary is requested to cause the foregoing minute to be published.

William Smith was admitted into the orphan house.

Orders were issued this day, from the City-Hall, for the interment of nine
persons.

SEPTEMBER 26th 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, Jonathan D. Sergeant,
Joseph Inskeep, James Sharswood, Thomas Wistar, Treas. Samuel Benge, Henry
Deforest, Jacob Weaver, James Swain, John Letchworth, and Caleb Lownes,
Secretary.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

Many injurious reports having been circulated relative to the interment of the
dead in the Potters-Field -- it was Agreed to request the attendance of Joseph
Ogden, who has the charge of that burying place -- who attended and satisfied
the committee that the reports were groundless -- and as his character has been
attacked, he desired that a committee might be appointed to view the ground and
the mode of interment in order that the minds of the public may be satisfied on
the subject.

Whereupon Israel Israel and James Sharswood were appointed to view the ground
and report.

The committee having returned Report, that they are satisfied that the charges
of improper interments are unfounded and that the mode pursued is proper and
safe. -- The Secretary is directed to publish an account of this business as
early as possible.

A letter was received from the Physicians at the Hospital -- the consideration
of which is deferred for the present.

Orders were issued this day, from the City-Hall, for the interment of five
persons.

SEPTEMBER 27th 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Jonathan D. Sergeant, Israel Israel,
Joseph Inskeep, James Sharswood, James Kerr, Thomas Wistar, Treas. John
Haworth, Thomas Savery, John Letchworth, Samuel Benge, James Swain, Henry
Deforest, and Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

Doctor Duffield Reports, that the Hospital is in good order, that there are
ninety five patients in the Hospital; -- that several who were admitted
yesterday were in the last stages of the disorder, that in general the persons
who die are those who have not been there above two or three days and that nine
were sent to the convalescent house.

Anthony Fraim, John Burden, Mary Burden, David Parvin and James Ross were
admitted into the orphan house.

Orders were issued this day, from the City-Hall, for the interment of seven
persons.

SEPTEMBER 28th 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, James Sharswood, Jonathan
D. Sergeant, Joseph Inskeep, Thomas Savery, James Kerr, Thomas Wistar, Treas.
Samuel Benge, James Swain, Henry Deforest, and Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

Doctor Logan having visited the Hospital at Bush-Hill, attended and informed
the committee that the house was in good order -- that it was clean and under
excellent regulations. He produced a letter on the subject, which the Secretary
is desired to hand to the printer for publication.

The consideration of the crowded state of the Potters Field, being again
brought before the committee and some time spent in considering the subject, it
was

Resolved, that James Kerr and John Haworth be a committee to view the north
west public square of the city, and report the situation of it and whether it
would not be a more suitable spot for a burial ground than that now occupied
for the purpose.

A letter was received from the orphan children of the late Matthew Parker,
respecting some infected bedding, etc. at the late dwelling house of John D.
Coxe, which causes much uneasiness to them as well as to the neighbors
generally; whereupon it was Resolved, that Thomas Savery be requested to take
the necessary measures for having the cause of complaint removed.

Doctor Duffield Reports, that there are one hundred and six patients in the
Hospital -- seven were removed to the convalescent house, and more would have
been sent but for the state of their blisters.

Sent John Butter to the house of employment.

Agreed, that the consideration of the bills of the Physicians be referred to a
future day.

Clementina King, John King, Charles King, Richard Smith, Sophia Smith and
Margaret Glancey were admitted into the orphan house.

Orders were issued this day from the City-Hall, for the interment of ten
persons.

SEPTEMBER 29th 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, Jonathan D. Sergeant,
Joseph Inskeep, Thomas Wistar, Treas. James Sharswood, James Swain, and Thomas
Savery, Samuel Benge, James Kerr, John Haworth, Henry Deforest, Caleb Lownes,
Secretary.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

The committee appointed to make enquiry concerning the public square, Report,
that they have been there, to ascertained the spot; and are of opinion that it
is a suitable place for the interment of the dead, and that it ought to be used
for that purpose.

Whereupon it was Resolved, that the same committee call upon Joseph Ogden and
request him to inter the dead in that ground, for the future.

Rachael Moloy was admitted into the orphan house.

Orders were issued this day from the City-Hall, for the interment of nine
persons.

SEPTEMBER 30th 1793.
Jonathan D. Sarjeant, Israel Israel, Thomas Savery, James Kerr, Henry
Deforest, Joseph Inskeep, Samuel Benge, John Letchworth, Thomas Wistar, Treas.
James Swain, James Sharswood, John Haworth, Daniel Offley, and Caleb Lownes,
Secretary.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

The number of children increasing at the orphan house, and other circumstances
requiring a more commodious and airy situation, the committee appointed to the
care of the orphans are requested to pay early attention to this business.

Thomas Harrison a member of the orphan committee having left the city, and
Daniel Offley offering his services, he is requested to take his place in that
committee.

The orphan committee having attended to the request of the committee made this
morning*

Report, that they have found a place, which they think more eligible than that
at present occupied, if it can be obtained. It is the house lately made use of
for and known by the name of the Loganian Library: and is now the property of
John Swanwick, Esquire. and at present in possession of Ambrose Varinot, to whom
the landlord has made application to induce him to give up possession* and
has further offered, to be at any necessary expense to render it convenient
and suitable for the purpose designed.

The committee are desired to continue their attention to the business and if
possible prevail on the Tenant to give early possession.

John Wilcox has presented four fine sheep for the use of the poor and sick,
which are directed to be placed under the care of Henry Deforest to be disposed
of agreeable to the design of the donor.

The managers have delivered sundry small packages containing effects of
persons sick at the Hospital and of others who have died, which are directed to
be handed to Henry Deforest to be held till properly claimed.

Orders were issued this day from the City-Hall, for the interment of twelve
persons.

This day died Andrew Adgate, one of the members of the committee.

OCTOBER 1st 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Jonathan D. Sergeant, Israel Israel,
John Letchworth, Thomas Wistar, Treas. James Sharswood, Samuel Benge, Henry
Deforest, Joseph Inskeep, Thomas Savery, Jacob Whitman, Daniel Offley, and
Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

James Wilson one of the overseers of the poor, attended the committee, and
produced an account, of sundry expenditures made by him for the use of the
poor, previous to the appointment of this committee, which he wishes may be
discharged. After some time spent in considering the subject it was unanimously
Resolved, that this committee cannot take any measures relative to this
business, and that his account cannot be allowed.

The orphan committee Report, "that they have this day taken possession of the
house lately the Loganian Library for an orphan house."

Orders were issued this day from the City-Hall, for the interment of fourteen
persons.

OCTOBER 2d 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Jonathan D. Sergeant, James Kerr, Israel
Israel, James Sharswood, Thomas Wistar, Treas. John Letchworth, Joseph Inskeep,
Samuel Benge, Thomas Savery, James Swain, Henry Deforest, Daniel Offley, Caleb
Lownes, Secretary.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

A letter was received dated at Haddonfield New Jersey this day, signed by
sundry inhabitants of that town, informing the committee that they had opened a
subscription for procuring supplies of provisions for the use of the sick and
distressed at the Hospital and in the city; that eighty pounds are already
subscribed and that the subscription is going forward, that they had by this
conveyance sent forty four fowls and that a further supply would be forwarded
toward the last of the week." Which instance of sympathy and friendship for
our suffering fellow citizens claiming our grateful acknowledgment, it was

Resolved, that the benevolent donors be early informed of the receipt of the
above communications and donation, and that the thanks of this committee be
transmitted to them. The Secretary is directed to cause the said letter and
subscription to be published.

The number of patients at the Hospital increasing daily, and there not being
sufficient room to accommodate them comfortably, it was Resolved, that a house
of fifty feet by twenty be instantly undertaken, and completed as early as
possible for the reception of the sick, with chimney's, etc. suitable for such
a place, and that Stephen Girard, Peter Helm and Thomas Savery be a committee
to have the same executed.

The managers Report, that the Hospital is clean and in good order, that the
several nurses and attendants perform their respective duties to satisfaction;
several patients have been removed to the convalescent house and many have been
discharged.

A large supply of sheets, blankets, etc. being immediately necessary, Thomas
Wistar and Henry Deforest are requested to take their instructions from the
managers and procure every necessary that may be required for the use of the
sick at the Hospital.

Eliza Day, Joseph Campbell, Sarah and Charles Daver, and James Jenkins were
this day admitted into the orphan house.

Orders were issued this day from the City-Hall for the interment of fifteen
persons.

OCTOBER 3d, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Jonathan D. Sergeant, Israel Israel,
Joseph Inskeep, James Sharswood, Samuel Benge, John Letchworth, Thomas Wistar,
Treas. James Kerr, Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
The President presented a letter from John Broom chairman of the committee
appointed by the citizens of New York, to prevent the introduction and
spreading of infectious diseases in that city, dated New York 26th ult.
offering such aid as in their power, for the relief of the poor and most
distressed citizens of this place; which being read, the President was
requested to prepare an answer and forward it.

The Secretary is directed to deliver the letter and answer to the printer for
publication.

Clement Humphreys attended the committee and made an offer of his services in
Southwark, to assist in forwarding the sick to the Hospital, and in burying the
dead. Which being accepted he is requested to procure a horse and cart, and
send his bills to the committee for the expenses which may occur in the
business.

The Committee appointed to the care of the orphans, Report that they have
taken possession of the late Loganian Library agreeably to the direction of the
committee: -- and that the nature of their appointment requires assistance, --
whereupon Resolved, that James Sharswood and John Letchworth be added to the
committee.

Thomas Savery is requested to procure an account of the number of persons
employed in making coffins, and Report the rates, etc. that they are employed
at.

John Kinsinger, Ann M. Tailor and David Parvin were admitted into the orphan
house.

Orders were issued this day from the City-Hall, for the interment of thirteen
persons.

OCTOBER 4th 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Jonathan D. Sergeant, Israel Israel,
Joseph Inskeep, James Swain, Thomas Savery, Samuel Benge, James Kerr, Thomas
Wistar, Treas. Henry Deforest, James Sharswood, John Letchworth, and Caleb
Lownes, Secretary.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

A note was received from Joseph Russell accompanying eighteen bundles of
shirts and shifts for the use of the orphans under the care of the committee,
the gift of the Widow Grubb at Chester.

A letter, with a supply of provisions was received from the Gloucester County
committee and delivered to Elijah Weed for the use of the sick.

They inform that their subscription has increased to near L200. and that they
shall continue to furnish provisions regularly on the days preceding market
days. The present supply consists of one lamb, two cheese, twenty nine and an
half pounds, sixty fowls, two bushels corn, twenty five and an half pound
butter, four dozen eggs, five and an half bushels sweet potatoes, half barrel
vinegar and a bundle of clothes and linen for the Hospital.

Elijah Weed offering to take the charge of provisions sent for the use of the
Hospital from Gloucester County and elsewhere -- it is Agreed that his offer be
accepted and that the Secretary inform the Gloucester committee thereof.

It being believed that every information relative to the effects of the
prevailing disorder in this city would be acceptable to our fellow citizens, as
well as useful to posterity, it is Agreed that Edmund Hogan be employed to make
enquiry into the numbers of houses that are locked up or deserted in the City
and Suburbs, with such information on the subject, as he may be enabled to
obtain.

Samuel Wetherill informs the committee, that the indisposition of several of
his family who are afflicted with the prevailing malignant disease, has
prevented his attendance for some days; that many apothecary shops being shut,
it becomes the more necessary, for the relief of the sick, for him to attend to
the distribution of medicine at present; and therefore requests that the
committee will excuse his absence from their board, until he shall be better
enabled to give his attendance.

The managers Report, that eighteen patients have died within the last 24 hours
-- the greater part of them having been sent out within a few days last past.
One died going out, fifty six are convalescents, and one hundred and thirty six
is the whole number now in the Hospital. The general prospect of the Hospital
is favorable, and could the citizens be prevailed upon to go out as soon as
they are attacked by the disorder the lives of many might be preserved.

Christiana and Elenor Wossem; William, Thomas and Ann Cresswell; Rachael
Obercow and two children of the name of Brayley, were admitted into the orphan
house.

Orders were issued this day from the City-Hall, for the interment of fourteen
persons.

OCTOBER 5th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Samuel Benge, Thomas Savery, James
Sharswood, Thomas Wistar, Treas. John Letchworth, Israel Israel, Henry
Deforest, James Swain, James Kerr, and Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

Received a letter from Captain Nathaniel Falconer enclosing a bank note for
fifty dollars, which he desires may be applied to the use of the orphans; it
was delivered to the Treasurer.

Issued an order to the Steward of the house of employment to receive --
Chapman, an ancient poor woman.

John Connelly attended, and informed the committee that the indisposition of
his wife and family ^^th prevented his giving attendance for some days past.

Maria Summers a mulatto child from the Hospital, was sent to the orphan house.

Orders were issued this day from the City-Hall, for the interment of fourteen
persons.

OCTOBER 6th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, Samuel Benge, James
Sharswood, Thomas Savery, John Connelly, John Letchworth, Joseph Inskeep, James
Swain, Henry Deforest, and Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

The Secretary is directed to inform William Hamilton, carpenter at Bush-Hill,
that the committee have no further occasion for his services.

The managers Report, that they have buried eight, last 24 hours, five of whom
were sent out yesterday -- that there are sixty three in the convalescent house
an that things wear a more favorable aspect.

A letter was received from John Barry, Thomas L. Moore, William Burrows,
William M'Pherson and David Leno^, communicating their attentions of sending
some provisions for the poor, and requesting information of the best mode of
conveying them, which the President is requested to answer.

Catharine Summers and Biddy, Honor, Ann and Mary Sweeny, were admitted into
the orphan house.

Orders were issued this day, from the City-Hall, for for the interment of
twenty persons.

OCTOBER 7th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, Samuel Benge, Thomas
Wistar, Treas. James Sharswood, Joseph Inskeep, John Letchworth, Thomas Savery,
John Connelly, Henry Deforest, and Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

Received a letter from the inhabitants of Potts-Grove dated the 5th October,
covering a copy of resolutions of a meeting held at that place for the purpose
of affording relief to the afflicted in this city, signed by Francis Nichols,
chairman.

Also another letter from the inhabitants of Providence township, dated the
6th, signed by Frederick A. Muhlenburg, covering the resolves of that township
for the like purpose as the foregoing -- which are directed to be answered.

Patty Conrad Bevrum; Jane, Mary and Susanna Miller; George Reed; Stephen,
Rachael, Hannah, Sally, and John Eastwick and Richard Welsh, were admitted into
the orphan house.

Orders were issued this day, from the City-Hall, for the interment of eighteen
persons.

OCTOBER 8th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, Samuel Benge, James
Sharswood, Thomas Savery, Thomas Wistar, Treas. Matthew Carey, Joseph Inskeep,
John Letchworth, Henry Deforest, James Kerr, John Connelly, and Caleb Lownes,
Secretary.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

A letter was received from John Redman dated Salem, the 5th instant informing
that a number of persons in his neighborhood sympathising with our afflicted
fellow citizens, are making a collection for the relief of the sick, etc.
Thomas Wistar is requested to answer the letter, acknowledging their benevolent
attention.

A letter was received from William Innes brewer, Southwark, which the
secretary is directed to answer.

The increasing necessities of the Poor, give reason to apprehend, that they
will stand in need of considerable aids for their support; and our fellow
citizens and friends in the country having communicated their dispositions and
resolutions of forwarding supplies for the poor and distressed, the subject
being taken into consideration it was Resolved,

That a committee of eight members be appointed to receive applications and
recommendations, and to afford relief, where it may be proper, and that Israel
Israel, John Letchworth, James Kerr, Matthew Carey, James Swain, John Haworth,
Jacob Witman and James Sharswood be this committee.

That an assistant committee be formed of respectable citizens, from the
different parts of the city to recommend suitable objects for relief to the
above committee of eight. --

The same committee are desired to wait upon the citizens herein after named,
and request their assistance and attendance at this place tomorrow, viz.

For the Northern Liberties.
William Sprague, William Gregory, Jacob Witman, James Swain, George
Forepaugh, Casper Snyder, Peter Smith, Joseph Burns,
From the south side of Vine Street to the north side of Race Street.
Richard Whitehead, Joseph Kerr, John Ettris,
From the south side of Race Street to the north side of Arch Street.
Thomas Willis, Daniel Dawson, Peter Thompson, Thomas Allibone, George
Reinhart, Lambert Wilmer,
From the south side of Arch Street to the north side of Market Street.
William Sansom, Justinian Fox Amos Wickersham,
From the south side of Market Street to the north side of Chestnut Street.
Arthur Howell, Thomas Dobson, Alexander Cochran, John Olden,
From the south side of Chestnut Street to the north side of Walnut Street.
Jeremiah Paul, Casper W. Morris, James Cummings, Thomas Castiere,
From the south side of Walnut Street to the north side of Spruce Street.
Samuel Coats, George Rutter, Benjamin W. Morris,
From the south side of Spruce Street to the north side of Pine Street.
Levi Holingsworth, Samuel Pancost, John Woodside,
From the south side of Pine Street to the north side of South Street.
Joseph Russel, Campbell Dick, Isaac Jones, John M,Minn, John Wood,
Southwark.
William Innis, Richard Mosley, William Robinson, John Grantham, William
Clifton, John Savage, John Patterson,
A letter was received from Josiah Reeves, dated this morning* in behalf of a
number of inhabitants of Evesham, communicating their intentions of forwarding
supplies for the use of the poor -- The secretary is directed to answer it.

Israel Israel is particularly requested to have the grain stacked at the
Hospital as early as possible.

The managers Report that there were sixteen deaths, at the Hospital this day.

This day died Jonathan D. Sargeant, one of the members of the committee.

Betsy, Susanna, Lydia and Sally Steinfelt, Nathan and Ely Findly, and P^^y and
Sally Davis, were admitted into the Orphan House,

Orders were issued this day, from the City-Hall for the interment of nineteen
persons.

OCTOBER 9th, 1793.
present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Samuel Benge. Israel Israel, Thomas
Wistar, Treas. Matthew Carey, James Sharswood, James Kerr, John Letchworth,
Thomas Savery, Henry Deforest, and Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm, at the Hospital.

Two letters were received from sundry citizens of Philadelphia now in the
neighborhood of Wilmington, dated the 7th and 8th instant, covering a copy of
resolutions entered into at that place, for the purpose of contributing to the
relief of the sick and poor in this city and vicinity. The President is
requested to answer them by the first opportunity.

A letter was received from Major M'Pherson; informing the committee that he
had sent a steer and a quantity of vegetables for the use of the poor; and that
he should send more by the first opportunity.

Another was received from Jonathan Williams, Esquire dated this day at Mount
Pleasant on Schuylkill, informing that he had sent a load of vegetables for the
use of the poor.

One other letter was received without date, under the signature of a Friend
covering fifteen dollars, for the use of the poor.

The managers Report, that Colonel Perry and William G^enville are both dead,
they now deposite sundry articles which were the property of the former in the
hands of the committee as per list, to be held for the use of his daughter and
heirs when they may appear, the will of the latter was handed to the committee,
who he has appointed his executors.

This day a number of the citizens, who were requested to assist this
committee, attended, and the mode of arranging the business was agreed on.

David, John and Jenny Williams; John Reedle, Sally Polhemus and Mary Sweeny
were admitted into the Orphan House.

Orders were issued this day from the City Hall for the interment of
twenty-three persons.

OCTOBER 10th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, James Sharswood, James
Kerr, John Letchworth, Thomas Wistar, Treas. Henry Deforest, and Thomas Savery,
Samuel Benge, James Swain, John Connelly, Matthew Carey, Caleb Lownes,
Secretary.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

A letter was received from a committee at Potts-Grove, informing that they had
forwarded fourteen sheep to peter Robeson's mill for the use of the sick, and
requesting information how they may render themselves most useful. The
secretary is desired to answer this letter and take measures for disposing of
the sheep.

Another letter was received from sundry citizens of Philadelphia residing in
and near Germantown, signed by G. H. Wells accompanying several resolutions
relative to supplying the necessities of the poor. -- The secretary is directed
to answer it.

Information being given of improper management in the interments in one of the
burial grounds of this city; Matthew Carey is appointed to enquire into the
business and have the cause of complaint, if any, removed.

John Rutter and Mary Curren were admitted into the Orphan House.

Orders were issued this day from the City Hall, for the interment of
twenty-one persons.

The Managers Reported the following Statement of Bush-Hill Hospital, this day.
THE Mansion House is divided into fourteen rooms or apartments, besides three
large entries. One of the rooms is occupied by the matron and an assistant
woman under her; eleven rooms, and two entries, by the sick; one room by the
sick, who are in a very low state, and the other apartment for the dying
persons. The sick men and women are in separate appartments and attended by
nurses of their own sex.

Each room, apartment, and entry, have their nurses.

The entry on the first floor, has a doorkeeper, and the assistant matron
keeps constantly herb-teas and beverage, to supply the nurses for the use of
the sick.

Every sick person is furnished with a bedstead, clean sheet, pillow, two or
three blankets, chamber pot, poringer, plate, spoon and clean linen when
necessary.

Each nurse is supplied with two or three large pitchers, one bucket,
house-cloth and sweeping brush.

The mansion house contains, one hundred and forty bedsteads.

The new Frame House built for an addition to the Hospital, in case of
necessity, is 60 feet front and 18 feet deep with 3 rooms on the ground floor;
one for the head nurses of that house and the other two for the sick; each of
the two last contains seventeen bedsteads, besides the loft, which may be used
for the convalescents and will contain forty bedsteads.

The barn is a large commodious stone building divided into three apartments,
one occupied by the Resident, Doctors and Apothecary, one by the men
convalescents and contains forty bedsteads, the other by the women
convalescents which contains fifty seven bedsteads.

The building adjoining to the mansion house is occupied in the following
manner. The East end by the tenant of the place, the West by the cooks; one of
the cellars for the provisions and the other cellar by the steward and clerk.

Some distance from the west of the Hospital and in a private place there is a
frame building erected to store the empty coffins and deposit the dead until
they are sent to the burying ground.

Besides the nurses employed in the house, there are two cooks, four laborers
and three washer women who are constantly employed for the use of the Hospital.

The sick are visited twice a day by two physicians, Doct. Deveze and Doct.
Ben. Duffield, who prescribe for them, and their prescriptions are executed by
the th^^^ resident physicians and the apothecary.

(...) of the resident Doctors is charged with the distribution of the victuals
for the sick; at 11 o'clock in (...) morning he gives them broth with rice,
bread, boiled beef, veal, mutton and chicken, with cream of rice to those whose
stomachs will not bear stronger nourishment; at their second meal which is at
about six o'clock in the evening, he gives them broth, rice, with boiled prunes
and cream of rice; the sick drink at their meals porter or claret and water,
their constant drink between their meals, is centaury tea and boiled lemonade.

The resident Doctors and Apothecary have two waiters under them, one of which
shaves the sick.

OCTOBER 11th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Samuel Benge, James Sharswood, Thomas
Wistar, Treas. James Kerr, John Letchworth, Thomas Savery, Henry Deforest, and
Caleb, Lownes, Secretary.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

Peter Shiras, Esquire. of Mount Holly, presented to the committee one hundred
pounds, as a donation from the inhabitants of Mount Holly and that
neighborhood, for the use of the poor of the City, Northern Liberties, and
district of Southwark, who may stand in need of relief, in consequence of the
prevailing disease; which was delivered to the Treasurer, to be disposed of
agreeably to the design of the donors.

A letter dated the 5th Inst. covering the resolutions of the inhabitants of
Potts Grove and its vicinity, with fourteen sheep, were received, and another
letter from the same place of the 10th, with 106 Fowls.

The Secretary is directed to answer the letters and acknowledge the receipt of
the sheep and fowls.

The managers inform the committee, that twenty patients died at the Hospital
the last 24 hours; that they had received 15 men and 8 women, that several
patients were sent to the convalescent house, and that several are discharged,
cured.

Maria Hicks, Jane Elliott, and Betsey Seafert, were admitted into the orphan
house.

Orders were issued this day, from the City-Hall for the interment of twenty
four persons.

OCTOBER 12th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, Samuel Benge, James
Sharswood, Thomas Savery, Thomas Wistar Treas. John Letchworth, James Kerr,
Matthew Carey, Henry Deforest, James Swain, and Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

The managers Report, that there is a great want of the herb centaury. Resolved
that 400 hand bills be printed and distributed for the purpose of obtaining a
supply.

Two letters were received, one from John Pearson dated Darby this day,
informing of a sum of money being collected for the use of the orphans under
(...) care of the committee and requesting information how to dispose of it;

The other from Aaron H. Middletown, of Woodbury to Joseph Lownes, informing
him that the sum of fifty seven pounds has been raised for the use of the poor
and distressed citizens, which he desires to be informed how to dispose of.

The Secretary is directed to answer these letters.

Ten dollars were received from George Peddle as a donation for the use of the
poor -- which is directed to be handed to the Treasurer.

This day died Daniel Offley, one of the members of the committee.

A letter dated this day was received, signed by Benjamin Brannon, informing
that the inhabitants of the country of Delaware were contributing for the
relief of the sick at Bush-Hill, or for such persons as may stand in need of
relief in the City or Liberties, and requesting information from the committee
on the subject; the Secretary is requested to answer it.

The managers Report, that they have in their possession several parcels of
money and other effects, the property of sundry persons sick and dead at the
Hospital.

They also Report that this has been a bad day, -- that they have buried
twenty eight since their last report.

The property above mentioned is directed to be put in the hands of Henry
Deforest, for the use of those to whom it belongs, or may have authority to
receive it.

That eighteen men and nine women were this day buried from the Hospital -- and
that fourteen patients were received there.

On motion, it was agreed, that a return be made of the names of all the
persons employed by the committee both at the Hospital and elsewhere, with the
terms on which they are engaged: and generally of the regular expenses which
the committee are at, in the prosecution of the business entrusted to their
care; in order that a due economy may be pursued in the expenditures.

That Israel Israel, James Sharswood, Thomas Wistar, Matthew Carey, James Kerr,
and Caleb Lownes, be a committee to prepare a plan for distributing the
donations which shall be from time to time received.

Ann Henson; William and Margaret Norris, were admitted into the orphan house.

Orders were issued this day, from the City-Hall for the interment of twenty
nine persons.

OCTOBER 13th 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, James Sharswood, John
Letchworth, James Kerr, Matthew Carey, Samuel Benge, Thomas Savery, Henry
Deforest, James Swain, John Haworth, and Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

Ten dollars were received from Matthew Spilliard for the use of the
distressed, which is directed to be delivered to the Treasurer.

The managers report, that nine men, and nine women were received at Bush-Hill
and ten men and six women buried.

Mary and Eliza Elder; Alexander, Betsey, and Jane M'Clean; and George Tailor
were admitted into the orphan house.

Orders were issued this day from the City-Hall, for the interment of twenty
one persons.

OCTOBER 14th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, James Sharswood, James
Kerr, Henry Deforest, Thomas Wistar, Treas. James Swain, and Samuel Benge,
Jacob Whitman, John Letchworth, Matthew Carey, John Haworth, Caleb Lownes,
Secretary.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

A letter was received from Paul Zantzinger at Lancaster, informing the
committee of a collection being made of clothing for the orphans under their
care, and that a collection, through the county, of cash and provisions was
making for the use of the poor, etc.

Several Letters were received, viz.

One from Philip Price and others in Kingsessing township, with seventy seven
pounds eight shillings and four pence, for the use of the poor and distressed.

One from Germantown, dated the 13th Inst. from John Dunlap, chairman of the
citizens of Philadelphia resident at that place, covering eleven hundred and
six dollars, raised by them for the use of the poor, etc. to be disposed of in
such a manner as the committee may think will best relieve the distressed in
the City and its vicinity -- with a subscription of credit for obtaining a
further accommodation at the bank, for eight or ten thousand dollars.

A letter from Robert Ralston, da^ed Wilmington 12th Inst. was received, with a
donation of two and an (...) barrels of ^^mes.

One from Daniel Cooper, dated this morning, informing that fifty seven pounds
had been delivered to him by A. H. Middletown, from the committee at Woodbury,
for the relief of the distressed which the Secretary has received, and handed
it to the Treasurer.

Two quarters of veal and a quantity of vegetables were received from Captain
Barry, for the use of the poor.

Many instances occuring where there is property left by the deceased and no
persons legally authorized to take care of it: the committee desirous as far as
may be in their power to preserve such property from waste or embezzelment,
having taken the same under consideration, do appoint Matthew Carey, John
Letchworth, and Caleb Lownes, a committee to obtain information on the subject,
and report a plan for affording the necessary aid, in such circumstances.

Twelve men, and six women were received at Bush-Hill and eight men, and three
women buried from thence.

Catharine, John, Ann and Rebecca Johnson; Elizabeth Watson; Billy Dee a
mulatto; John Crane and Elizabeth Ryan, were admitted into the orphan house.

Orders were issued this day, from the City-Hall, for the interment of twenty
two persons.

OCTOBER 15th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Samuel Benge, Israel Israel, James
Sharswood, Thomas Savery, John Letchworth, James Swain, Henry Deforest, Thomas
Wistar, (...). John Haworth, James Kerr, Matthew Carey, and Caleb Lownes, Sec.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

Several letters were received, viz.

One from the committee of Delaware county, informing that they had raised the
sum of one hundred and ninety one pounds seven shillings and six pence, which
they had empowered Nathaniel Newlin to pay to any person authorized to receive
the same. They also inform that they have assurance of a further sum. The
Secretary is directed to answer their letter, and Henry Deforest is requested
to go to Nathaniel Newlin's to receive the money and deliver it to the
Treasurer.

One from Bows Reed, Esquire. was received dated Burlington 14th Inst. desiring
information how the inhabitants of that place shall dispose of the donations
received for the relief of the poor of this City.

And one from the inhabitants of the upper part of Burlington county,
requesting information of the like nature. The Secretary is directed to answer
these letters.

Sixteen dollars were received from John Wilson, and ten dollars from Samuel
Coutty, for the use of the sick, which are directed to be handed to the
Treasurer.

On Motion, Agreed, that Matthew Carey, James Sharswood and Caleb Lownes be a
committee to select from the correspondence of this committee such letters as
may be proper for publication.

Four men and eleven women were received this day at Bush-Hill, and eight men
and six women buried from thence

Elizabeth, Mary, Susanna, Eloisa and William Beatty were admitted into the
orphan house.

Orders were issued this day, from the City-Hall, for the interment of fourteen
persons.

OCTOBER 16th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, Samuel Benge, Matthew
Carey, Thomas Wistar, Treas. Henry Deforest, John Haworth, and James Kerr, John
Letchworth, James Swain, Thomas Savery, Jacob Witman, Caleb Lownes, Sec.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

A letter from Joseph Potts dated the 16th Instant, with the copy of the
resolutions of the meeting of the inhabitants of Montgomery county, held at
Norristown, were read, which the Secretary is directed to answer.

Henry Deforest was desired to take the answer to the letter of the inhabitants
of Delaware county to Nathaniel Newlin and receive from him the money collected
for the use of the afflicted. Which service he performed and delivered the
money to the Treasurer.

The managers report, that the following persons are employed at the Hospital
at the rates affixed to their respective names.

Time of Entry. Names. Rates. DOCTORS DEVEZE AND BEN. DUFFIELD, Sep. 20 Apo^.
Aug. Joseph Liber, 4 Dolls. per day. Sep. 24, Daniel Nicholas Morris, Ditto,
Joseph Guisard, Ditto, 27, -- Mulneir, Ditto, Barber and attendant on the
doctors, 26, Joseph Baubru^, 1 50/100; Doll. per day Oct. 11, Jacob Decombe, 1
Ditto, Sep. 16, Frederick Foy, Steward, John Mason, Clerk, MEN NURSES. Peter
Rose, Room No. 1. 24 Dol. per mo. 18, Samuel Posey, 3. 1 do. do. day. 16, Jacob
Darr, 2. ditto, Oct. 9 John Dutilh, 4. ditto, Sep. 16 John Brown, 5. ditto,
Boerty Fitzgerald, 6. ditto, Oct. 4 John Charter, Cellar, ditto, 7 Thomas
Warner, Barn, ditto, discharged 16 Instant. Sep. 17 Samuel Brown, 1 Doll. per
day. 18 John Nass, ditto, Oct. 1 John Ant. Wunkler, ditto, 7 Barney Cox,
discharged, 16 Instant. 11 Terrance O Hagan, 1 Doll. per day. Sebastian
Archand, discharged 16 Instant. 13 John Delabar, 21 -- Varner, Cook, 32 Dols.
per mo.

John Haworth and Israel Israel are appointed a committee to procure a supply
of wood and have it deposited in a suitable place for the use of the Hospital
and the poor, they are requested to continue to purchase, until they shall have
500 cords in store.

The managers Report, that

Seven men, and two women were received at Bo^^ Hill, and six men, and three
women buried from thence.

This day died Joseph Inskeep one of the members of the committee.

John Simpson; John Peter Mory; Mary Antoinette Cambay; Catharine, Elizabeth,
William, Charles, Lewis and Ann Figel, were admitted into the Orphan House.

Orders were issued this day, from the City-Hall, for the interment of twelve
persons.

OCTOBER 17th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, Thomas Savery, John
Haworth, John Letchworth, Matthew Carey, Samuel Benge, James Kerr, Henry
Deforest, and Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

The following letter from Richard Varick, Esquire. mayor of the city of New York,
dated 12th Instant, was this day received, which the president was desired to
answer.

NEW YORK, October 12 th, 1793. SIR
I AM requested by the Common Council of this city to inform you, that the
committee appointed to prevent the introduction and spreading of infectious
diseases, consisting of seven members expressly chosen for the purpose by the
citizens at large, and a^ equal number of the members of our board, of which
Mr. John Broom is the chairman, have laid before the board copies of the
correspondence, between them and you on the subject of supplies to be furnished
by the citizens of this city, for the relief of the poorer and more distressed
of your fellow citizens, under the heavy pressure of their present calamity and
that disorganized state of your city police, which must necessarily attend so
unexpected and afflicting a dispensation of Divine Providence.

Although I sincerely lament the cause of this correspondence, it is with
pleasure I do announce to you that the Common Council of this city, deeply
impressed with the awful judgment of the Almighty on the American Nation, in
permitting a pestilential disease to lay waste and disorganize that once
populous, well regulated and flourishing sister city, the seat of Empire, by
destroying the lives of many valuable patriots and citizens and by driving many
others of its numerous and very opulent and useful inhabitants into exile, they
have caused five thousand dollars to be placed in my hands, and have directed
it to be paid to the order of the Chief Magistrate of Philadelphia, and they
have requested me to advise you of ^^is measure and to pray you to draw on me
therefore; you will therefore be pleased to draw upon me for that sum; at sight,
and your bill will be duly honored.

May Almighty God, in condescending mercy to your devoted city, speedily stay
the progress of the desolating disease and say it is enough; may he restore to
their homes your banished fellow citizens and sanctify his past judgments to
all; and may you Sir, and those with you who have remained faithful to your
trust and borne the heat and burden of the day, in the midst of surrounding and
threatening dangers be the peculiar care of Heaven, is the sincere wish and
prayer of

Sir, Your most Obedient, Humble Servant, RICHARD VARICK.
MATTHEW CLARKSON, Mayor of the City of Philadelphia City of New York, ss.

At a Common Council held on Friday the 11th day of October 1793.
RESOLVED, that this board will provide the sum of five thousand dollars, for
the relief of the poorer and most distressed citizens of Philadelphia, under
the pressure of their present great calamity.

Extract from the minutes, ROBERT BENSON, Clerk.

On Motion Resolved, That a committee be appointed to settle the accounts of
the different members of the committee who have received moneys from the
treasurer, and that John Connelly and James Sharswood be this committee.

Resolved, That the secretary apply to Mazrie and William Boyce for their
assistance in taking charge of the property of the orphan children, who now are
or hereafter may become objects of the care of this committee.

Resolved, That a well qualified accountant be employed, for keeping the
accounts of the committee, and that Matthew Carey, be appointed to procure one.

That an exact list be obtained of the daily burials in each ground in this
city and vicinity.

From accounts received from different quarters of the city, it is evident that
the disorder now raging, has for the last week been more general and alarming
than at any time since its appearance -- its greatest height being about the
12th, the mortality at the Hospital also at that period, being greater than at
any other time.

Whether it is owing to the extreme malignancy of the disease, neglect, or
delay of sending the patients to the Hospital in the early stage of the disease
cannot be determined; it is remarkable that the greater part of those who die,
terminate their existence within three days after their admission, many on the
next day after, and frequent instances occur of their dying on the passage to
the Hospital.

The managers Report, that sixteen men and four women have this day been
received into the Hospital and five men, and five women buried from thence.

John Scriminger; Mary, John, Margaret, Norry and George Grogan; Kitty King;
Elizabeth Neaves and Ann M'Glaugh^in, were admited into the Orphan House.

Orders were issued this day from the City-Hall, for the interment of thirteen
persons.

OCTOBER 18th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. James Sharswood, Samuel Benge, John
Letchworth, John Haworth, and James Swain, James Kerr, Thomas Savery, Caleb
Lownes, Sec.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

The following letters directed to the President, were laid before the
committee.

One from George Latimer dated at Newport the 16th Instant, covering a donation
"from a Gentleman of the highest respectability who desires to be unknown," of
five hundred dollars, which was placed in the Bank of North America.

One from Thomas W. Tallman, dated Norris-Town October 16th, 1793, covering
several resolves of a number of respectable inhabitants, at a meeting at the
house of Jesse Roberts "for the purpose of forming some plan toward the relief
of the poor distressed citizens of Philadelphia" -- to (...), answers were
returned.

Benjamin Wistar Morris, handed to the committee the following checks, being
the benevolent donations of the persons by whom they are severally subscribed,
amounting ^o one thousand and sixty two dollars.

Samuel Pleasants and Sons 60 Isaac Wharton, 50 Caleb Carmalt, 10 Ruben Haines,
50 Eliston and John Perot, 100 Hartshorne Large, and co. 100 Robert Wharton, 50
Joseph Swift, 50 Jesse and Robert Waln, 200 George Roberts, 50 Samuel Dilworth,
12 James Craig, Jun. 30 Nicholas Waln, 100 Mordecai Lewis, 50 Conyngham, Nesbit
and co. 50 George Emlen, 50 John Nixon, 50
which were placed in the Bank of North America.

The president presented to the committee his draft dated the 17th Instant,
upon Richard Varick, Esquire. Mayor of the city of New York, in favor of the
President and Directors of the Bank of North America, for the sum of five
thousand dollars, the benevolent donation of the Common Council of that city.

Which bill being delivered at the Bank; the amount was passed to the credit of
the Treasurer of the committee.

An answer to the letter from the Mayor of New York, was this day forwarded by
post, copy of which is as follows.

SIR,
I AM favored with your letter of the 12th Inst. which I have communicated to
the committee for the relief of the poor and afflicted of this City.

It is with peculiar satisfaction that I execute their request by making in
their name, on behalf of our suffering fellow citizens, the most grateful
acknowledgements, for the seasonable benevolence of the Common Council of the
city of New York; their sympathy is balm to our wounds.

We acknowledge the divine interposition, whereby the hearts of so many around
us have been touched with our distress and have united in our relief.

May the Almighty disposer of all events be graciously pl^^^ed to protect your
citizens from the dreadful calamity with which we are now visited! whilst (...)
humbly kiss the rod and improve by the dispensation.

The part Sir! which you personally take in our afflictions and which you have
so pathetically expressed in your letter, excites in the breasts of the
committee the warmest sensations of fraternal affection.

The refreshing rain which fell the day before yesterday, though light, and the
cool weather which has succeeded, appear to have given a check to the
prevalence of the disorder; of this we have satisfactory proofs; as well in the
decrease of the funerals, as in the applications for removal to the Hospital.

I have at your request, this day drawn upon you, at sight, in favor of the
President and Directors of the Bank of North America, for the sum of five
thousand dollars, the benevolent donation of the Common Council of the city of
New York.

With sentiments of the greatest esteem and regard.

I am Sir, Your most Obedient humble Servant. MATTHEW CLARKSON,
Philadelphia October 17th, 1793. RICHARD VARICK, Mayor of the City of New York.

Received one hundred and twenty dollars from Darby for the use of the orphans
which were forwarded by John Pearson.

Received five dollars and one quarter from an unknown person for the use of
the poor.

A letter was received from Elias Boudinot, Esquire. dated Elizabeth Town October
15th, covering the resolves of the inhabitants of that place and a check on the
bank for one hundred and fifty dollars, being a donation from six or seven
gentlemen.

The managers Report, that, eight men, and eleven women were received this day
at the Hospital, and that six men, and three women were buried.

Charles and John Youst; Polly and Peter Starkey; were admitted into the orphan
house.

Orders were issued this day from the City-Hall, for the interment of sixteen
persons.

OCTOBER 19th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Samuel Benge, Thomas Savery, James
Sharswood, Matthew Carey, James Kerr, Israel Israel, Henry Deforest, James
Swain, John Letchworth, John Connelly, and Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

A letter from Jonathan Williams, Esquire. was received with a present of ten
sheep, etc. the President is requested to answer it.

Received by the hands of Captain William Watkins and Joseph Lownes, thirty one
pounds nineteen shillings and four pence for the use of the sick, from Aaron
Middleton, on account of the subscription at Woodbury.

Received a letter from John Shoemaker and others at Cheltenham, covering a
check for eighty four pounds fifteen shillings, for the use of the sick.

Various instances of distress, some extremely afflicting, frequently occur, to
enumerate them is difficult, (...) have come within the power of the committee
(...) mitigate have been attended to, -- one of the carters in the service of
the committee Reports, that in the performance of his duty he heard the cry of
a person in great distress, the neighbors informed him, that the family had
been ill some days -- and that being afraid of the disease no one had ventured
to examine the house, he cheerfully undertook the benevolent task, went up
stairs and to his surprise found the father dead, who had been lying on the
floor for some days, two children near him also dead, the mother in labor* he
tarried with her, she was delivered while he was there, and in a short time
both she and her infant expired! he came to the City-Hall, took coffins and
buried them all.

The managers, report, that twelve men, and (...) women, were received at the
Hospital and that four men, and five women were buried from thence.

Polly and George Youst; Sarah, Elizabeth, Ann and Charles Thomas were admitted
into the orphan house.

Orders were issued this day, from the City-Hall, for the interment of twelve
persons.

OCTOBER 20th 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, James Sharswood, Jacob
Weaver, Thomas Savery, John Haworth, Matthew Carey, John Letchworth, James
Kerr, Samuel Benge, John Conn^^y, Henry Deforest, and Caleb Lownes, Sec.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

On Motion it was Agreed, that the committee appropriate the latter part of the
afternoon of every day, for the purpose of receiving reports, etc. at which
(...) the minutes of the preceding day shall be read, and reports made by the
respective sub-committees -- that four o'clock be the hour, and to commence to
morrow.

The managers Report, that twelve men, and four women, were received, and two
men, and six women, were buried from the Hospital.

Orders were issued this day from the City-Hall, for the interment of ten
persons.

OCTOBER 21st, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Thomas Savery, Israel Israel, James
Sharswood, Matthew Carey, Jacob Whitman Henry Deforest, James Kerr, Samuel
Benge, James Swain, John Haworth, John Letchworth, and Caleb Lownes, Sec.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

Received a letter from Joseph Sho^twell, dated Bridge Town New Jersey, 18,
Inst. covering two drafts in favor of Thomas Wistar and Caleb Lownes for the
use of the poor under the care of the committee; the first on Emanuel Josephson
for twenty pounds -- the other for twenty seven pounds ten shillings on Henry
Helmuth, both of the above dates, which are directed to be presented for
payment.

The Secretary Reports, that he has called for payment of the above drafts; the
first is refused, the person on whom the second is drawn is not at home, the
Secretary is directed to attend to the business and answer the letter.

The following letters were received, viz.

One from Phineas Bond, Esquire. dated Moore-Hall 19th Instant, covering a copy of
sundry resolutions entered into by the inhabitants of Charlestown township
Chester county, relative to raising supplies for the use of the poor, and
requesting some information how to proceed in forwarding them to the city, etc.

Another from John Chaloner, dated Great Valley the 20th Instant, communicating
the disposition of the inhabitants of that part of the country to afford
supplies for the relief of the poor of the city, and requesting information as
above, the Secretary is desired to return answers to these letters.

A letter was received from Joshua Howell, dated the 18th, addressed to Levi
Hollingsworth and William Watkins, informing them that he had forwarded a flatt
load of wood for the use of the poor; which was read and referred to John
Haworth and Israel Israel.

A letter was received from Elliston Perot and Standish Ford, dated the 18th
Instant, relative to affording employ to the poor -- Referred for future
consideration.

The committee on the letters, Report, that they have attended to their
appointment and shall hand two letters for publication tomorrow morning, and
that they will continue their attention till the business is completed.

The committee on admissions and burials Report, that they sent twelve to the
Hospital, and buried six yesterday.

The orphan committee Reported, verbally on the business referred to their
care; they are desired to prepare a written statement of their proceedings and
produce it as early as they can.

James Swain is appointed a member of the wood committee in the room of Israel
Israel, who requests to be discharged therefrom.

William Innes presented his account of disbursements.

The committee of distributions Report, that they will make returns weekly.

The managers Report, that there are eighteen men and thirteen women in the
convalescent house; that they have received seventeen men and three women, and
buried eleven men and one woman the last twenty-four hours.

Mary Shyer and William Andrews were admitted into the Orphan House.

Orders were issued this day from the City-Hall, for the interment of fourteen
persons.

OCTOBER 22d, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, Samuel Benge, Matthew
Carey, James Sharswood, John Letchworth, James Kerr, Thomas Savery, James
Swain, John Haworth, Henry Deforest, John Connelly, and Caleb Lownes, Sec.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

The orphan committee Report, that they shall be ready to report fully
tomorrow.

The committee on admissions and burials Report, that there were six sent to
the Hospital and six buried by their orders yesterday.

The committee on distributions Report, that five hundred and fifty seven
families have been relieved as follows. Ds. Cts. Octo. 14, By Haworth and Kerr,
24 fam. 20 50 in cash. 15, By Swain and Carey, 62 63 75 16, By Whitman and
Kerr, 61 62 17, By Sharsw. and Letch. 100 96 50 18, By Israel and Haworth, 119
121 75 19, By Swain and Kerr, 95 88 21, By Witman and Kerr, 96 79 50 Families
557 532 Dollars, with provisions to individuals according to their necessities.

The committee appointed to procure wood Report, that as it will be difficult
to make returns daily, they therefore will report weekly.

The committee on the publishing of letters Report, that they have entered upon
their business and will continue their attention to it.

On Motion Agreed, that the treasurer advance Joseph Ogden, the sum of one
hundred dollars.

Several Letters were received and read, viz.

One from the Governor, covering a letter from Edward Crawford dated
Chambersburg October 15th, informing that the sum of one hundred and
seventy-seven pounds nineteen shillings and eight-pence, had been collected by
the inhabitants of Franklin County, for the use of the sick and poor of the
city, which sum was received from the Governor and delivered to the treasurer.

One from Paul Zantzinger, dated Lancaster 19th Instant, informing that the sum
of one hundred and ninety-four pounds six shillings and five-pence, has
already been collected, that there is a pleasing prospect of a considerable
supply of flour from the different townships in that county, and that a
collection of grain, etc. is making for the relief of the poor. That the sum of
fifty-five pounds two shillings and twopence was raised by the German reformed
congregation of that place, for the use of the poor children whose parents
belonged to that society in this city and have died of the prevailing disorder
(to be under the direction of the trustees) if there be any, if not that this
sum is to be at the disposal of the committee.

He also forwarded a very handsome supply of clothing in 38 packages, for the
orphans under the care of the committee, which was presented by the benevolent
ladies of the Borough of Lancaster.

A letter from Bows Reed, Esquire. dated Burlington 19th Instant, informing that
he had sent 20 cords of wood.

One from John Clement Stocker, secretary of the Potts-Grove committee dated
21st Instant, covering one hundred and fifty dollars for the use of the poor,
etc.

One from Benjamin Chew, dated Long Island 19th Instant, requesting attention
to a distressed family of children.

One from Israel Wheelen, dated Downings Town 20th Instant, covering a check
for five hundred dollars, being part of a subscription of the inhabitants of
that part of Chester County -- which letter with those from the Governor and
Paul Zantzinger, the president is desired to answer. The others are referred to
the secretary.

Israel Israel, and Caleb Lownes by appointment met Job Collins and Enoch
Evans, a deputation from Evesham township Burlington county, and received two
hundred and seventy nine dollars and ninety cents, twenty seven cheese, twelve
hams and sundry other articles of provisions to be disposed of by the commit
for the use of the poor and sick as they shall think best.

A donation was received by the hands of Thomas Wishart, from Richard Gibbs of
Bensalem township Bucks county of six pounds for the use of the sick at
Bush-Hill Hospital.

The managers Report that they have received twelve men, and three women, and
buried five men and three women these last twenty four hours.

Wiliam Calder; Polly and Harriot Webber; Eleanor Finney; Fanny, Dorcas and
Margaret Higginbottom; James Garrot and Lewis Hornberger, were admitted into
the orphan house.

Orders were issued this day, from the City-Hall for the interment of sixteen
persons.

OCTOBER 23d, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, James Sharswood, James
Kerr, John Letchworth, Matthew Carey, Thomas Savery, Samuel Benge, James
Swain, John Haworth, Henry Deforest, and Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm, at the Hospital.

John Letchworth produced a letter from Matthew M'Clain to whom allowance had
been made by a former committee of relief,

Referred to the present committee for the relief of the poor.

The employment of a clerk to keep the book of accounts of the committee is
referred to Matthew Carey and James Sharswood.

Stephen Girard produced an account of charges amounting to ten dollars,
against the estate of J. J. Perrin who died at the Hospital, Joseph Clousel who
has administered upon the said estate claims sundry articles which belonged to
the deceased and which are in the keeping of this committee.

Agreed that these articles shall be delivered to the administrator, he paying
the before mentioned charge of ten dollars.

On motion it was Resolved that the hams and cheese received yesterday from
Evesham be sold, and the proceeds be laid out in such other articles as may be
better adapted to the necessities of the poor.

Henry Deforest is appointed to dispose of them and make report.

Herman Stout, was employed as clerk at the Hospital to reside there, and for
which he to be allowed two dollars per day.

The orphan committee Report, that there is more business for them to lay
before the board than they are at present prepared to do, and therefore request
further time.

The committee for admissions and burials, Report, that they buried two and
sent twelve to the Hospital yesterday.

The committee of distributions to the poor, Report, that yesterday they
relieved one hundred and eighteen families; the amount of money expended for
the purpose is one hundred and six dollars and twelve and an half cents,
besides wood and provisions.

The committee for purchasing wood, will report on Saturday.

The committee for publication of letters are proceeding in that appointment.

Moved that a committee be appointed to collect such bills as are against the
committee, for supplies, and that they report the 26th Instant; afterward
weekly.

Agreed that John Letchworth and Henry Deforest, be that committee.

Moved and seconded, that a committee be appointed to collect all those demands
which have been made against this committee in which the transactions of the
overseers of the poor are involved and to make report as early as possible,
Agreed, and that Thomas Savery, Matthew Carey and James Swain be the committee.

The managers Report that, they have received five men, and three women, and
buried seven men and one woman, last twenty four hours.

Sarah Stewart was admitted into the orphan house.

Orders were issued this day from the City-Hall for the interment of fifteen
persons.

OCTOBER 24th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, Samuel Benge, James
Sharswood, John Haworth, James Swain, John Letchworth, James Kerr, Matthew
Carey, Henry Deforest, and Caleb Lownes, Sec.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

Received a letter from Peter Gordon and Abraham G. Claypoole dated Trenton,
23d October, informing that a subscription was begun there for the relief of
the poor and distressed citizens of Philadelphia and requesting to be informed
whether money or other articles would be most acceptable.

To this letter an answer was returned.

A letter from Joseph Potts of Potts-Grove 22d Inst. was received, informing of
his having forwarded two hundred and twelve fowls from the inhabitants of
Douglass township, to Peter Robinson's Mill for the use of the poor; Henry
Deforest, is requested to send a wagon for them.

Received one hundred and sixty dollars from the inhabitants of Norris-Town, by
the hands of John Pugh and Thomas W. Tallman for the use of the sick.

The commit appointed to the care of the orphans made the following Report,
of their proceedings, which the Secretary is directed to hand to the Printer of
the Federal Gazette for publication, viz.

To the committee appointed for the relief of the sick and poor, afflicted with
the prevailing malignant disease.

The committee appointed to the care of the orphans Report, that on the 19th
September, they engaged a house belonging to William Ralston, in fifth street,
for the accommodation of the orphans under the care of the committee: and on
the same day they engaged Mary Parvin as Matron, and placed thirteen children
under her care; and between that time and the 13th October fourteen more were
added to their number.

That from the frequent applications for admissions, it was necessary to
procure a more commodious place, which, by direction of the committee they
obtained. This house was formerly occupied, and is now known by the name of the
Loganian Library: it is the property of John Swanwick, Esquire. and although it was
rented to a person who then occupied it, the exertions of that Gentleman soon
prevailed, and we obtained possession, with the concurrence of the tenant, on
the 1st Instant.

Your committee further Report, that from that time to the present, they have
employed three men and seven women to assist the matron.

That they have agreed with Doctor Samuel Duffield to visit the house, and
afford such medical aid as may be necessary; and they doubt not but from the
well-known character of this Gentleman, that due attention will be paid to such
cases as may require his assistance.

That the children have now become so numerous, that notwithstanding additional
buildings have been erected for the purposes of washing, etc. they found it
necessary to add another room of about 30 feet by 14, which it is expected will
soon be completed.

That from the first establishment of this institution to this day, there has
been one hundred and fifty nine children admitted, forty three of whom are now
out at nurse, who appear to be well taken care of; thirty one have been
delivered to their relations or friends, eight have died, viz. six of those who
were at nurse and two in the house; seventy seven remain in the house and are
in general healthy and cheerful.

That your committee are perfectly satisfied with the conduct of the matron, as
well as of those who are employed under her direction.

It may not be improper to remark; that many of the children have not lost both
their parents; but when one of them is deceased, and the other sick, it has
been the uniform practice of the committee to admit the children into the house.

The committee will only add, that they keep regular minutes of their
proceedings, which are always open to the inspection of the members of the
general committee

Israel Israel, James Sharswood, John Letchworth, James Kerr.


The following Letter was received from Ambrose Varinot who was in possession
of the House.
Philadelphia, October 4 th, 1793. GENTLEMEN,
IT was notified to me a few days ago, that you wanted the house in sixth
street, known formerly under the name of Logan's Library, part whereof I then
occupied, for the purpose of accommodating the orphan children, who have lost
their parents, by the unhappy disorder which now rages in our city, and the
care whereof you have humanely taken upon you. The house was particularly
calculated on account of its situation and the height of its cicling, for the
purpose of my works; I had made some repairs to the windows and a close^ in the
garret, and in order better to secure the possession of the house -- I have
paid forty eight dollars, or one half years rent, before hand: but knowing that
private convenience and emolument must always give way to public utility and
particularly at a time of general calamity as the present is, I thought it my
duty to submit without opposition, and found myself happy to have it in my
power to contribute my mite toward your benevolent purposes; I therefore
cheerfully removed to the house pointed out to me, though far less suitable to
my purposes than the one I have quitted, and will most willingly content myself
there, until times alter; I only wish to know upon what terms I am in the house
I now occupy, what the rent thereof is and who is to pay it, as I can hardly
think, that it is expected I shall pay the rent here again, having paid in the
other house the rent before hand until the 18th day of January next as before
mentioned. I have therefore thought it my duty to lay these circumstances
before you, and humbly beg that you will be pleased to give me the necessary
elucidation in this respect, and that in case circumstances should render the
house in sixth street no longer necessary for your purposes, you will be
pleased to give me the preference to re-enter into the same again.

I am with the greatest respect, Gentlemen, Your most Obedient humble Servant,
AMBROSE VARINOT.
To the committee appointed to take care of the orphans who have lost their
parents in the present disease. P. S. If it should please the committee to
indemnify me with respect to the rent I have advanced, and the repairs made, I
could suit myself until such time, the committee shall have no further use for
the house in sixth street.




The committee of distribution Report, that Israel Israel, and John Haworth
distributed yesterday to one hundred and twelve families, 12 3/^ cords wood, 94
33/100; dollars beside a considerable supply of bread, meat and vegetables.

The commit for publishing letters, Report, that they are proceeding with
that business.

One hundred bundles of straw were received by the managers at Bush-Hill, from
Doctor Robert Shannon, of Norrington for the use of the sick.

The managers Report, that they have received six men, and buried four men, in
the last twenty four hours.

Orders were issued this day, from the City-Hall for the interment of thirteen
persons.

OCTOBER 25th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, John Letchworth, James
Kerr, James Swain, Matthew Carey, Samuel Benge, Henry Deforest, James
Sharswood, Jacob Whitman, John Haworth, and Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

A letter was received from Peter Martin of Cocolico township, Lancaster county
dated 23d Instant, accompanying 12 barrels flour and ten dollars, which the
President was requested to answer.

The committee for admissions and burials Report, that they have buried six
yesterday and admitted seven into the Hospital.

The committee of distributions Report, that they have relieved 138 families --
distributed 102 69/100; dollars 14 ^/4; cords wood, and twenty dozen loaves of
bread, besides vegetables, meat and some fowls.

The orphan committee Report, that they yesterday delivered John Grogan to his
master David Price.

On MOTION Resolved, that a committee be appointed to confer with the assisting
committee at their next meeting in order to make proper arrangements for
providing for such poor as may be suffering in obscurity; Israel Israel,
Matthew Carey and Caleb Lownes, are appointed to attend this service.

The fowls from Potts Grove are received and deposited in the care of Elijah
Weed.

Reports having been spread that some of the prisoners are ill with the
malignant fever, -- upon enquiry being made, one of the inspectors of the
prison Reports, that the prison is clean, healthy and in good order, and the
several regulations duly attended to.

One hundred bundles of straw were received from Benjamin Rittenhouse, Esquire. of
Norriston as a donation, for the use of the Hospital.

Received six dollars from the managers for the expenses of Peter Stobo, who
died at the Hospital, and ten dollars for the expenses of John Joseph Perrin.

The managers Report, that they have received six men at Bush-Hill from the
city, two men and one woman from the convalescent house, and buried four men
and one woman, discharged eight cured, several sent to the convalescent house,
the patients generally on the recovery.

Maria Lukehart and Luke Singer, were admitted into the orphan house.

No orders issued this day from the City Hall for interment.

OCTOBER 26th 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. James Kerr, Thomas Savery, James Swain,
Matthew Carey, Henry Deforest, and John Letchworth, Samuel Benge, James
Sharswood, John Haworth, Caleb Lownes, Sec.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

Matthew Carey and Caleb Lownes by appointment met Isaac Lloyd at Weed's ferry
on Schuylkill, from whom they received the sum of one thousand four hundred and
forty eight dollars and twenty one cents, being part of a subscription of the
citizens of Philadelphia, resident in the neighborhood of Darby, to be applied
to the use of the sick and poor.

The following letter was received from Henry Wynkoop, Esquire. chairman of a
meeting of sundry inhabitants of Bucks county, held at Newtown the 19th Instant
covering sundry resolutions of that meeting for the relief of the poor -- which
the President is requested to answer.

Bucks County, October 19 th, 1793. GENTLEMEN,
PERMIT your fellow citizens of Bucks county, to detain your attention a few
moments from your laudable and unremitted exertions in the cause of humanity --
Equally impressed with a sense of the obligation, which as men, and citizens of
the same common country, we are all under to afford each other every assistance
in our power, they request that you would suffer them to share the honors of
benevolence, and partake with you in the offices of social affection -- The
exemption of their particular district from the dreadful calamity which now
afflicts your devoted city, far from creating an indolent or unfeeling
security, suggests to their minds only the idea of what ought to be expected
from them and every other citizen of our hitherto prosperous community on this
lamentable occasion; for they can conceive no more acceptable method of
testifying their thankfulness to the All-wise disposer of human events, for his
particular mercy toward them, than by entertaining a proper tenderness for the
sufferings of their fellow-men, and a cheerful readiness to narrow the
dominions of distress -- They would also consider themselves as having rejected
all regard for the social tie, if, whilst members of other societies are
voluntarily coming forward with offers of assistance, they should be remiss in
their endeavors to alleviate the misery of our fellow citizens -- Under these
impressions a number of the inhabitants of Bucks County convened upon public
business, joined by others whom a common principle of benevolence had
associated with them, came to certain resolves, a copy of which will be found
enclosed, for the purpose of procuring relief for the sick, and poor
inhabitants of Philadelphia. Their distance from the scene of calamity not
permitting them to afford any other aid than a pecuniary on^, they appointed
the committee who now address you to make the necessary arrangements for the
collection of donations throughout the county, on the charitable occasion. The
committee have accordingly met, and taken every step in their power to execute
the charge entrusted to them; and they are happy to inform the committee of
Philadelphia that such is the general disposition of the inhabitants of the
county, that they are confident their donations will do no discredit to their
charity toward the distressed, or their affection for their fellow citizens --
The moneys collected will be lodged with the treasurer of the county, and wait
the order of the committee of Philadelphia. What we wish principally at present
is, that you would inform us of the place where, and the persons to whom you
would wish the payments to be made; A letter therefore upon this head directed
to the chairman of the committee will meet with due attention -- In the mean
time be assured that we are the friends of our fellow citizens, and
particularly of those who are in distress: And may the great Ruler of the
universe who ever chastens with the tenderness of 2 parent, look with
compassion upon the sufferings of his children, and put a period to their
afflictions -- We remain, worthy fellow citizens with esteem and sincerity,

Your Friends and Humble Servants, (By order of the committee of Bucks County,
for procuring relief for the poor and sick inhabitants of Philadelphia.) HENRY
WYNKOOP, Chairman.

To the committee of the city of Philadelphia appointed to assist the overseers
of the poor during the present prevailing disorder.

Another letter was received from Peter Muhlenburg dated Trap Montgomery County
the 25 October, accompanying ten sheep, 120 fowls and several turkeys,
vegetables, old linen and fifty dollars in cash for for the use of the sick and
afflicted.

The orphan committee Report, that the Orphan House is in good order, and the
children in health.

The committee of admissions and burials Report, that they gave no orders for
burials, and sent five to the Hospital yesterday.

The committee of distributions, Report, that yesterday they relieved 173
families with 130 49/100; dollars, seventy-three of those families had money
and provisions, and that they distributed 12 3/4; cords of wood.

The committee for purchasing and receiving wood, Report, as follows.

Wood purchased and donations received for the poor from the following persons.
Cords. Dols. Cts. Oct. 17 From Riffetts, 1 5 6 18 -- Toy, 11 at 24 s. 4 d
whar. 36 50 20 -- Ditto, 12 24 s. do. 39 75 22 -- Britton, 10 23 s. do. 31 11
-- Delany, 10 Donation, Wilmington 23 -- Loudon, 17 Ditto, 25 Toy, 12 24 s. do.
40 55 Gloucester, 16 Donation, -- Toy, 33 115 32 Donations, 44 80 Purchased,
268 29 80 ^/4 Purchased, Total, 125 125

On Motion Resolved, that the treasurer and secretary be a committee to wait
upon the directors of the Bank of North America and take up the obligations
delivered for the payment of the two sums of money borrowed of that
institution, the first of 1500 dollars and second of 5000 Dollars.

Resolved, that a committee be appointed to confer with a committee of the
ASSISTANT COMMITTEE concerning a plan for affording relief to the suffering
citizens whose modesty may prevent their obtaining that relief which their
circumstances require. That Matthew Carey, James Sharswood and Caleb Lownes be
this committee.

It having pleased Divine Providence to favor us with an agreeable prospect of
returning health to our long afflicted city -- And as several of the members of
the committee are desirous of attending their respective places of worship, it
is Agreed, that those who have no indispensible duties to perform at the
City-Hall, be at liberty to withdraw their attendance to morrow. The present
appearance of things affording much consolation, it is Agreed that the
following communication be handed to the printer for the information of our
fellow citizens.

The commit for the relief of the sick and distressed feel the highest
pleasure in announcing to their fellow citzens throughout the United States,
that the ab^^^ement of the disorder is beyond all expectation, and affords the
most flattering prospect of our being soon freed from it entirely.

They however strongly recommend to the absent (...) of Philadelphia, not to
return for a week or ten days, or until there shall be a considerable fall of
rain; (...) the (...) of air might prove dangerous, and probably (...) to many.

The managers Report, that they have received eight men, and four women, buried
two men, and sent one to the convalescent house.

The commit appointed to confer with the assistant commit, Report, that
they have agreed to distribute to such as may desire assistance by way of loan,
as much as they would under the same circumstances have afforded as a donation:
T. Savery and S. Benge are appointed a committee to afford the assistance that
may be required.

Sarah Bache was admitted into the orphan-house.

OCTOBER 27th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Samuel Benge, Henry Deforest.
The managers Report, that they have received three men, and two women, buried
three men and two women and sent one man and two women to the convalescent
house, the last 24 hours.

Orders were issued this day from the City-Hall, for the interment of three
persons.

OCTOBER 28th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Samuel Benge, Israel Israel, James
Sharswood, Thomas Savery, John Haworth, and John Letchworth, James Kerr, Henry
Deforest, Matthew Carey, Caleb Lownes, Sec.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

Matthew Carey and Caleb Lownes by appointment met Nathaniel Newlin at his
house near (...) and received from him six hundred and fourteen dollars and
ninety one cents, a donation from the inhabitants of Delaware county, for the
use of the poor, etc.

The orphan committee Report, that the orphan house is in good order, the
children healthy, and well provided for; they also Report, that frequent
demands are made by people for children who they say they are connected with;
and it being apprehended that improper persons may by such pretenses obtain
children upon whom they have no just claim -- on consideration it was Resolved,
that no person be permitted to have any of the children from the orphan house
for ten days, without permission from this committee.

The committee on admissions and burials Report, that on the 26th none were
buried, and that nine were sent to the Hospital, on the 27th one child buried
and three sent to the Hospital.

The committee on distribution Report, that on the 26 they relieved one hundred
and forty two families to whom they distributed 130 60/100;dollars; to sixty
one of these families they delivered provisions, and to thirty three others,
they delivered one quarter of a cord of wood each.

The committee appointed to cancel the obligations at the bank, not being
prepared to report are continued.

The committee on the publication of letters, Report, that, that business is
attended to.

The committee appointed to confer with the Assisting Committee, not being
prepared to report, are continued

Received a letter from Andrew Craig, dated the 26th informing the committee
that he had sent a load of wood from the inhabitants of Burlington; referred to
the wood committee.

The managers Report, that they received five men and two women, buried three
men, and sent one man and two women to the convalescent house the last twenty
four hours.

Robert Cole; William and Hannah Tureen and John Ravey, were admitted into the
orphan house.

An Order was issued this day, from the City-Hall, for the interment of one
person.

OCTOBER 29th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, Samuel Benge, Henry
Deforest, James Sharswood, James Kerr, James Swain, John Letchworth, John
Haworth, Matthew Carey, and Caleb Lownes, Sec.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

Received thirty dollars and six cents from the township of Evesham, per the
hands of Enoch Evans with a parcel of provisions from the same place to the
amount of fifteen pounds fifteen shillings and three pence.

Received thirteen dollars from Thomas Levis of Springfield township, Chester
county, for the use of the poor.

The Secretary read an extract of a private letter, informing the committee
that the inhabitants of that part of Lancaster county where the writer resides,
are raising supplies, etc. for the use of the poor, and requesting information
in what manner it may be best conveyed; the Secretary is requested to inform
him.

A letter was received from Joseph Potts dated Mansfield, informing the
committee that he had forwarded (...) load of wood, containing twenty cords and
an half, from the inhabitants, of that township for the use of the poor and
distressed.

The committee being informed that a number of patients have been admitted into
the Hospital at Bush-Hill who were not afflicted with the malignant fever,
which if continued, must be attended with many inconveniences, -- On Motion
Resolved, that no persons be admitted in future into the Hospital without
certificates from a physician that they are afflicted with that disorder,

The orphan committee Report, that the house remains much as yesterday and that
the new building is advancing.

The committee of admissions and burials Report, that seven were sent to the
Hospital yesterday and none buried.

The distributing committee, Report, that yesterday they relieved one hundred
and seventy three families, to whom they delivered 149 70/100; dollars, twenty
seven cords of wood, five hundred and forty loaves of Bread, ten sheep, twelve
fowls and fifteen bushels of potatoes.

On the 11th Instant were received from George Fisher and Jonathan Shoemaker of
Abington, eight bushels potatoes, forty pounds weight of butter, thirteen pair
of fowls, twenty two and an half lb. cheese and half a hundred of flour, a
donation from the inhabitants of that township.

The Secretary is desired to cause the following recommendations to be printed
in the News-Paper.

It is earnestly recommended to the citizens (...) ^^ve removed to the country
during the prevalence (...) the disorder, and whose houses have been shut up
(...) previous to their being reoccupied, they cause them to be well aired for
several days, by opening all the windows and chamber doors, in order that a
free circulation of air may take place.

Burning of nitre will correct the ^oul air which they may contain.

Quick lime should be thrown into the privies, and the chambers white-washed,
especially where any of the family have been afflicted by the disorder; the
former is of the greatest consequence.

These precautions being taken, it may reasonably be hoped, that no injury will
arise from the return of our fellow citizens to their former habitations in the
course of a few days, after the above recommendations have been complied with.

The managers Report, that they have received seven men, buried one woman, and
sent five men to the convalescent house.

William Wright was admitted into the orphan house.

Orders were issued this day, from the City-Hall, for the interment of five
persons.

OCTOBER 30th 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, James Sharswood, James
Swain, Matthew Carey, Henry Deforest, John Letchworth, James Kerr, Samuel
Benge, John Haworth, and Caleb Lownes, Sec.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

The President laid before the committee the following communications, viz.

A letter from the Governor, dated this day, proposing several queries on the
subject of their undertaking, and requesting answers to them, in order that
they may be laid before the Legislature.

A letter from Benjamin Fuller of this city merchant, covering a check for one
hundred dollars to be appropriated to the relief of the poor and sick, "to be
applied to this purpose jointly with the orphan children, who he wishes to have
the greatest part."

A letter dated Boston October 24th 1793, from a committee of a number of
inhabitants of that town informing that they had chartered a vessel to sai^ to
the Mayor's address, in a few days with 60 or 70 puncheons of Vinegar if so
much can be procured of a good quality, and about 7 or 8,000 lbs. weight of
tallow candles, that the amount of the contribution will be about 2500 dollars,
balance of which after defraying the charges to be remitted in a bill of
exchange.

A letter from William Gibbons, Treasurer of a meeting of a number of heads of
families and others in West Chester dated 29th Instant, covering a check on the
bank for 188 60/100; dollars.

A letter from Samuel Erwine, dated Hatborough October 26th covering 261
71/100;dollars, contributed by the inhabitants of the townships, of Moreland,
Horsham and Upper Dublin.

The letter from the Governor being taken under consideration it was Resolved
that the President, Matthew Carey and Caleb Lownes be a committee to prepare an
answer.

The President is requested to answer the other letters.

The committee on admissions and burials, Report, that three have been admitted
into the Hospital and two buried.

The committee on distributions Report, that they have relieved one hundred and
ninety five families, distributed 167/;75100;dollars, two hundred and seventy
loaves of bread and twenty seven cords of wood.

The orphan committee Report, that yesterday they placed out two children to
nurse, delivered one to his father, and buried one; and that they received one
into the house.

Thomas Savery is added to the assistance of Samuel Benge in the distribution
of wood.

The managers Report, that they received four men and one woman, buried three
men and two women, and sent one man and one woman to the convalescent house.

John Collins; George Sypert and Dinah and Patty Cross, were admitted into the
orphan house.

Orders were issued this day from the City-Hall, for the interment of five
persons.

OCTOBER 31st, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Thomas Savery, Israel Israel, John
Letchworth, John Haworth, Matthew Carey, James Kerr, Samuel Benge, James
Sharswood, Henry Deforest, and Caleb Lownes, Sec.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

A letter was received from A. G. Claypoole and Peter Gordon, dated 29th
Instant, covering two checks from the inhabitants of Trenton, the first for 166
^^/^^^ dollars drawn by G. Roberts on the bank of North America, the other for
twenty dollars drawn by James F. Armstrong, to be disposed of for the use of
the poor.

Israel Israel delivered thirty pounds two shillings and three pence, being a
collection from the congregation of Leacock township, Lancaster county for the
use of the sick, etc.

The committee on admissions and burials, Report. that they have buried three
yesterday, but did not send any to the Hospital.

The committee on distributions Report, that they have relieved two hundred and
four families; distributed 158 ^^/^^^ dollars, twenty five cords of wood,
twenty two dozen of bread and some fowls.

The managers Report, that they have buried (...) and sent three men, and one
woman to the convalescent house.

Nancy Roach; John and Mary O Sullivan, were admitted into the orphan house.

Orders were issued this day from the City Hall, (...) the interment of three
persons.

NOVEMBER 1st, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, Samuel Benge, James Kerr,
Henry Deforest, John Haworth, James Sharswood, John Letchworth, Thomas Savery,
Matthew Carey, James Swain, and Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

Several Letters were received, viz.

One from the committee of citizens of Boston, dated the 24th ult. covering a
bill of lading for thirty eight hogsheads, pipes and tierces, seventy one
barrels and two tierces, containing 6245 gallons of vinegar, one hundred and
fifty boxes of candles, weighing 7798 pounds and two hundred and seventy jugs
of lemon juice, for the use of the poor, shipped on board the brig Lark,
Captain Curtis, bound for Wilmington. The President is requested to forward the
bill of lading to Robert Ralston, at Wilmington, and request him to transact
the business when the vessel arrives.

Another letter was received from John C. Stocker, dated 31st ult. covering
eighty five dollars and eighteen cents, the Secretary is directed to forward an
answer.

Another from R. H. Morris and Rueben Haines, dated Germantown 26th ult.
covering three hundred and two dollars from the citizens of this city resident
at that place and its vicinity -- which the Secretary is requested to answer.

One from Peter Shiras, dated Mount-Holly 30 ult. informing, that they have
sent forty bushels of potatoes, nine cheese and one gammon, being an addition
to their former donation.

Received two hundred dollars from Colonel James Read, by the hands of Levi
Hollingsworth, for the use of the poor.

The orphan committee Report, that they yesterday admitted, three children,
placed out two to nurse, and buried one who was at wet nurse.

The committee on admissions and burials Report, that they have sent out to the
Hospital one, and buried three yesterday.

The committee on distributions Report, that they have relieved two hundred and
five families, delivered 178 ^0/100 dollars, five hundred and forty loaves of
bread, twenty pair of fowls, and twenty eight cords of wood.

The managers Report, that they have received two men; buried three men and two
women, and sent one to the convalescent house, last twenty four hours.

John Lutz was this day admitted into the orphan house.

An order was issued this day from the City-Hall, for the interment of one
person.

NOVEMBER 2d, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, Samuel Benge, James
Sharswood, Matthew Carey, John Haworth, James Kerr, Thomas Wistar, (...) John
Letchworth, Thomas Savery, James Swain, Henry Deforest, and Caleb Lownes, Sec.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

A letter was received from Levi Hollingsworth, covering a note for thirty
dollars, a donation from J^^^ Hollingsworth of Baltimore.

The orphan commit Report, that they have admitted one child; that two are
indisposed, and that application was made by the mother of three of the
children to take them home.

The commit on admissions and burials Report, th^^ they have admitted two,
and buried one.

On Motion, Agreed, that the three children of -- Williams in the orphan house
be delivered to her.

On Motion, Resolved, that the president and James Sharswood be a committee to
settle the treasurer's accounts, and that Thomas Wistar be added to the
committee for settling the accounts of the individual members.

The commit on distributions Report that they have relieved one hundred and
eighty one families, distributed 148 ^^/100 Dollars, 24 Cords of Wood, 540
loaves of Bread.

The committee on the purchase of wood Report, that they have purchased (...)
cords of wood, and received 53 cords as donations.

The managers Report, that they have received two patients, and buried none
l^st 24 hours.

On the third of NOVEMBER the committee did not meet to transact business, the
managers Report, that they have admitted four women, but buried none.

The regulated list of Physicians, Officers, Nu^s^^, Cooks and Laborers,
employed at the Hospital, Bush-Hill for November 1793.
Physicians. Doctors DEVEZE, and DUF^^LLD. Aug. Joseph ^^^re, 4 Dolls. per day.
Daniel Nicholas Morris, 4 ditto. Joseph Guzard, 4 ditto. -- Muliner, 4 ditto.
Attendants on the Physicians. Nov. 1, Joseph B^aubrun, 1 Doll. per day.
Frederick Foy, (...), 3 Doll. per day. Mary Saville, Matron, 3 Dols. do. Oct.
3, Joshua Freeman, Clerk 1 50/100 Dol. do Cooks. Nov. 1, John Varrer, 5 Dol.
per week. 2, Jane Wilson, 1 do. do. Washing Women. 1, Sarah Evans, 3 do. do.
Kitty Shields, 3 do. do. Men Nurses. Nicholas Travers, 4 do. do. Henry
Holl^son, 2 do. do. Samuel Posey, 4 do. do. John Du^ihl, 4 do. do. John Brown,
4 do. do. Michael Conroy, 2 dol. do. Women Nurses. Oct. 28, Betsey Lucas, 3
dol. do. Nov. 1, Polly Beaklow, 2 do. do. Oct. 30, Catharine M'Nabb, 3 do. do.
Nov. 1, Sukey Sinclair, 3 do. do. Ann Smith, 3 do. do. Sally Wiley, 3 do. do.
Nelly Woolson, 3 do. do. Laborers. Nov. 2, John Delabar, 4 dols. per week.
Sep. 17, James Brown, 1 dol. per day. Nov. 2, Thomas Maxwell, 2 dols. per week.
James Lisle, 2 ditto, do.

Orders were issued from the City-Hall on the second for the interment of four
persons; and on the third for the interment of four.

NOVEMBER 4th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, Samuel Benge, James
Sharswood, Jacob Whitman John Haworth, James Swain, John Letchworth, James
Kerr, Matthew Carey, John Connelly, Henry Deforest, and Caleb Lownes, Sec.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

The managers Report that, on the third Instant they received four patients,
one of whom had been there before but had relapsed -- and but one of the number
had any appearance of the malignant fever.

Buried none since the 1 st Instant.

Received a letter from John Abbot dated Crosswicks ^4 ult. informing the
committee that he had sent 18 (...) cords of wood by John Quigley, for the use
of the poor.

The orphan committee Report, that on the 2d Inst they settled with and paid up
the nurses and assistants to that time -- and placed out two children who had
the small pox to nurses, on the third they placed out another under the same
complaint, delivered three to the mother -- and buried one who died of
convulsions.

The committee on admissions and burials Report, that they had admitted on the
2d two and buried four, on the 3d admitted four and buried three.

The committee on distribution Report, that they relieved one hundred and
eighty families, distributed 131 ^^/100 dollars, five hundred and forty loaves
of bread and thirteen and three quarters cords of wood.

A Motion was made and seconded, that a committee be appointed to wait upon
William Hamilton, Esquire. the proprietor of Bush Hill, and confer with him upon
the compensation that he will desire for the use of that property, and to
enquire what he will expect for the use of it for twelve months from this date,
and that Israel Israel, John Connelly and Caleb Lownes be this committee.

On Motion Resolved, that Israel Israel, Samuel Benge and John Connelly with
the managers, be a committee to consider the demands of the Physicians Physic,
Leib, Cathral and Annan, and report thereon, with the compensation which they
may think just to be made them for their services.

A letter was received from Paul Zantzinger, dated Lancaster the 1st Instant,
informing that he had sent five bundles of clothing for the use of the orphans,
which have been received.

The changeable state of the weather having induced the committee to believe
that a too sudden return of our fellow citizens may be attended with dangerous
consequence, it was agreed to address them upon the subject -- the following
was prepared and sent for publication.

FELLOW CITIZENS.
The unsettled state of the weather, changing suddenly from cold to heat, and
from heat to cold, renders it unsafe for our fellow citizens, to crowd, with
too much precipitation into the city, especially into houses which have not
been prepared in the manner heretofore recommended.

Although we can with confidence assert, that the disorder has abated, as was
formerly mentioned, and that there is the greatest reason to h^pe that it will
shortly disappear; yet we cannot say that it is totally eradicated; as there is
reason to fear that it may still lurk in different parts of the city. The
committee wi^h to impress upon the minds of their fellow citizens the absolute
necessity of causing those houses to be opened and aired, which have been long
shut up, before they venture to return; and that this be done instantly by
themselves, to prevent the necessity of its being done in another way.

The managers Report, that Thomas Wilkinson who (...) so faithfully and
assiduously attended to the interment of the dead, was this day received into
the Hospital as a patient, and that four persons have been buried, to wit; a
young man of the fever, a woman of a ^rop^y, one by a miscarriage, and one with
old age.

Orders were issued this day from the City-Hall, for the interment of four
persons.

NOVEMBER 5th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, James Sharswood, James
Kerr, Matthew Carey, Thomas Savery, Samuel Benge, John Letchworth, Henry
Deforest, and Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm, at the Hospital.

On Motion, Agreed, that the clothing sent for the use of the orphan children,
be deposited in the hands of the orphan committee, who are requested to hold it
for the use of the orphans only, under their care.

A letter was received from Robert Aitken, dated this day, requesting to have
one of the orphan children bound to him, which being considered, it was Agreed,
that none of these children can be disposed of upon this principle, and that he
be informed thereof.

The orphan committee, Report, that one of the children, Catharine Haas, was
delivered to her sister, and that Richard Smith a mulatto child died of a
lingering disorder.

The committee on admissions and burials, Report, that they sent one person to
the Hospital, and buried four.

The committee of distributions Report, that they have relieved two hundred and
twenty one families, distributed 173 ^5/100 dollars, five hundred and forty
loaves of bread, nineteen cords of wood, and twelve bushels of potatoes.

The committee appointed to treat with William Hamilton, Esquire. concerning
Bush-Hill, Report, that two of them have waited upon him, and having fully
conferred upon the subject, he informed them, that the property having been
taken from him, by the overseers of the poor, without his consent or knowledge,
and conceiving himself to have been hardly treated on the occasion, could not
fix upon any terms, or come to any conclusion on the matter at that time -- but
gave them assurance, that notwithstanding what had taken place he should not
put the committee to any inconvenience, neither would he do any act whereby the
patients under their care should in any degree be incommoded or injured.

The managers Report, that they have received two women, buried none, and sent
one to the convalescents.

Elizabeth Conrad was this day admitted into the orphan house.

An Order was issued this day, from the City-Hall, for the interment of one
person.

NOVEMBER 6th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, James Kerr, John
Letchworth, Matthew Carey, James Sharswood, Thomas Savery, James Swain, John
Haworth, Samuel Benge, Henry Deforest, and Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

Three letters were received, one dated Oley the 1st Instant, from Daniel Udre
and Thomas Lee, in behalf of the inhabitants of that township covering 170 2/3
dollars for the use of such as may claim the attention of the committee. One
other from George Reiff in behalf of the inhabitants of Lower Salford, Skippack
and Perkioming townships dated 5th Instant, covering 135 60/100 dollars, to be
applied in like manner as the foregoing -- And one from John Little, covering
294 dollars from the citizens of Princetown, New Jersey.

The orphan committee Report, that they have received Elizabeth Conrad and
Charles M'Connell two orphans into the house, and buried Sarah Estick with the
small pox, who wa^ out at nurse.

The committee on admissions and burials Report, that they have sent one to the
Hospital, and buried the orphan above mentioned.

The committee of distributions Report, that they have relieved one hundred and
ninety eight families, distributed one hundred and fifty four dollars, twenty
and an half cords of wood, five hundred and forty loaves of bread, and two cart
loads of potatoes.

John Cumming's bill for sundries was presented, and committed to John
Letchworth, James Kerr and Henry Deforest, who are requested to report thereon.

The committee on distributions, were directed to meet a committee from the
assistant committee at such time as they may request.

The managers Report, that they have received one woman, and buried two men --
sent one man and two women to the convalescents; that there are one hundred and
one sick in the house, twenty one men and twelve women in the convalescent
house -- one hundred and thirty four in all.

Orders were issued this day, from the City-Hall for the interment of two
persons.

NOVEMBER 7th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Thomas Savery, Samuel Benge, Henry
Deforest, Matthew Carey, James Swain, James Sharswood, John Letchworth, Israel
Israel, Jacob Whitman, James Kerr, John Haworth, John Connelly, and Caleb
Lownes, Secretary.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

A letter was received from the Governor covering a check for 86 ^^/100 dollars
from the congregation of Chestnut Level, handed to him by the Reverend Dr. James
(...) -- Also one from Peter Cordon and A. G. Claypoole covering fifty five
dollars, balance of the Trenton donation.

A letter was also received from the citizens of Boston, per the brig Lark,
John Curtis, master, which vessel is arrived in the river, and supposed to be
at Gloucester-Point.

Two other letters were received: One from Christian Lover, from Lampeter
township, Lancaster country, with 14 barrels of flour; part of a donation from
that township: And one from Frederick Seiger, Lancaster county, with 14 barrels
of flour; a donation from the inhabitants of Earl township, which were
delivered to Henry De Forest.

The managers Report, that they received two women, and buried one man, and
sent one to the convalescents.

John Connelly, John Haworth, and James Swain are appointed a committee to
receive the donation from Boston, to store the same, and make report; the
president having endorsed the bill of ladin^ to them.

The orphan commit Report, that yesterday they placed out Margaret Morris to
be nursed, she having the smallpox: and that David Parvin who was a^ nurse
died.

Committee of admissions and burials Report, that they buried two, and sent two
to the hospital.

Committee on distributions Report, that they relieved one hundred and eighty
four families; distributed one hundred and forty three dollars, twenty one and
an half cords of wood, five hundred and forty loaves of bread, and a parcel of
potatoes.

On Motion, it was (...) that the managers b^ requested to cause the accounts
of the (...), nurses* (...) and laborers to be (...) and reported to the
committee.

Orders were this day issued from the City-Hall for the interment of three
persons.

NOVEMBER 8th, 1793.
A variety of interruptions occurring at the usual time of reading the minutes,
it was Agreed to adjourn till to morrow.

The same members present this day as yesterday.

The managers Report, that they have received one man, and buried one woman,
and sent one man and one woman to the convalescents.

NOVEMBER 9th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, John Letchworth, James
Kerr, James Swain, Thomas Savery, Matthew Carey, Samuel Benge, Henry Deforest,
James Sharswood, Jacob Whitman, John Connelly, John Haworth, and Caleb Lownes,
Secretary.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

The orphan commit Report, that on the 7th instant they placed George Read
out to nurse, he having the smallpox, all the rest of the children being in
perfect health. The state of the orphan-house yesterday the same as the day
before.

The committee on admissions and burials Report, that they buried two, and sent
two to the hospital on the 6th, and that on the 7th they neither buried or
(...) any to the hospital.

The committee of distributions Report, that they (...) relieved two hundred
and thirty three families, distributed 168 6^/100 dollars, sixteen and a
quarter cords of wood, and five hundred and forty loaves of bread; on the 6th
and on the 7th they relieved one hundred and ninety two families, and
distributed 150 ^5/100 dollars, fifteen and an half cords of wood, and five
hundred and forty loaves of bread.

Fifty dollars were delivered to the Treasurer, being the remainder of the
donations, of the citizens of Philadelphia, resident in and near Germantown, of
which the following list, together with that mentioned in the minutes of the
18th day of October, form the amount of the contributions, received from them,
making in the whole 2472 dollars.

List of Donations by Citizens of Philadelphia, resident in and near Germantown.
Joseph Budd, 30 Boller and Jordon, 30 Valentine Bettinger, 4 Peter Blight, 100
Doctor Betton, 5 Joseph Crukshank, 50 Cash, 6 John Dunlap, 50 David Evans,
carpenter 30 Jacob Eckfelt, 10 John Fries, 50 Thomas Fisher, 50 John
Fromberger, 50 John Field, 50 George Fox, 50 Samuel Fox, 50 James and Samuel
Fisher 100 John Hallowell, 30 George Lauman, 50 Jonathan Meredith, 50 Thomas
Morgan, 25 Archibald M'Call, 100 William Rawle, 30 William Savery, 30 Joseph
Sansom, 25 Robert Smith, 50 John Vaughan, 100 John Wagner, 15 Wells and Morris,
100 Jeremiah Warder, 50 John Warder, 50 Charles Young, 50
In page 67, for Samuel Pleasants and Son 60 -- read 50

-- Keating made application for sundry articles of property left by his wife,
who died at the Hospital some time since, the subject being taken under
consideration it was agreed that they be delivered to him.

Isaac Chapman attended this committee, and delivered sixteen hundred and six
dollars, being a donation from the inhabitants of Bucks county, as advised in a
letter from Henry Wynkoop, chairman of the committee appointed for the purpose
of collecting relief for the use of the afflicted.

On Motion, Agreed, that the President, John Connelly, Matthew Carey and Caleb
Lownes be a committee to prepare a report of the proceedings of the committee
with an address to our fellow citizens, to be delivered when it shall be proper
to resign the charge, which has been entrusted to them.

The committee on the purchase of wood Report, that they have bought of Dols.
Cts. Philip Walters 8 (...) 24 s. 4 d. 28 34 Joshua Garwood 16 do. 22 s. 10 d.
50 23 William Mulford 17 1/8 do. 24 s. 4 d. ^5 60 Thomas Town 14 do. 24 s. ^ d.
4^ ^4 56 7/8 that they have rec. in don. 18 James Swaine's purchase 77 154 1/8
cords.

The committee appointed to consider the accounts of the Physicians Report,
that they should be paid as follows, viz.

Doctor Physic, for 5 visits a 70 s. p. visit L17 10 Doctor Cathral, 2 do. a
do. 7 0 Doctor Leib, for 3 visits a 70 s. p. visit L10 10 Doctor Annan, 2 do. a
do. 7 0

The managers Report, that they have received one patient, and buried three men
-- and on the 10th, received one man, and buried one.

Orders were issued this day, from the City-Hall for the interment of two
persons.

NOVEMBER 11th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Thomas Savery, Matthew Carey, James
Sharswood, Israel Israel, Stephen Girard Henry Deforest, Samuel Benge, John
Haworth, James Kerr, John Letchworth, Peter Helm, John Connelly, and Caleb
Lownes, Secretary.
The Secretary presented twenty one pounds nineteen shillings and four pence
halfpenny, being a donation from the inhabitants of Lower Merion township,
delivered to him by George Davis.

The orphan committee Report, that Catharine, William, Elizabeth and Charles
Fegel, were delivered to their uncle Nicholas Shultz. That the additional
building at the orphan house is finished, and that the children are all in
health -- and that the accounts of the matron and assistants are settled and
paid up to the 9th Instant.

The committee on admissions and burials Report, that on the 9th they sent a
French soldier to the Hospital, and buried two persons, on the 10th, the
neither buried or sent any to the Hospital.

The committee of distributions Report, that they have relieved two hundred and
four families by distributing one hundred and forty eight dollars, seventeen
cords of wood, and six hundred and seventy loaves of bread.

Henry Deforest, presented ten dollars from Alexander Christie, being the
reward offered for a sum of money which was found by his wife -- and ten
dollars from a person unknown.

The committee on John Cummings's account, Report, that they are not ready to
bring forward that business.

The state of the sick at the Hospital at Bush-Hill being such as to render the
constant attendance of the managers no longer necessary, it is Agreed, that in
future they visit it but twice a week unless circumstances should require more
frequent attention.

The managers Report, that they have not received any patients at the Hospital,
and have buried but one -- and sent one man, and one woman to the convalescent
house.

Maria Harness was admitted into the orphan house.

An order was issued this day from the City-Hall for the interment of one
person.

NOVEMBER 12th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Stephen Girard, James Swain, James
Kerr, Thomas Savery, Israel Israel, Matthew Carey, Henry Deforest, Peter Helm,
James Sharswood, John Letchworth, Samuel Benge, John Haworth, John Connelly,
and Caleb Lownes, Sec.
The President laid before the committee a letter from the Governor, covering
an extract of a letter from Citizen Genet, Minister of the French Republic, and
his draft on Citizen Bournonville Secretary to the legation, for the sum of 200
dollars which the President is requested to answer.

A letter from Paul Zantzinger accompanying ten barrels of flour, six of which
were manufactured at Rudy Hare's mill, three miles from Lancaster, and ^our
barrels at Christian Stower's mill, two miles from thence, from wheat collected
in the vicinity of Lancaster.

The orphan commit Report, that they have admitted Maria Harress into the
house; and delivered Maria Lukehart to her uncle Jacob Facundus -- the new
building is completed, and occupied by the orphans.

That they have agreed to allow William Ralston, twelve pounds for one
quarter's rent of the House first occupied as an orphan house.

The committee on admissions and burials Report, that they have buried but one
-- and sent out none.

The committee on distributions Report, that they have relieved on the 11th,
two hundred and twenty two families, distributed 166 ^^/100 dollars, seventeen
and three quarters cords of wood, and six hundred and fifty loaves of bread.

On Motion Resolved, that John Haworth and John Letchworth be a committee to
liquidate and pay the accounts of James Wilson deceased, for supplies furnished
the Hospital at Bush-Hill, and for affording relief to the afflicted poor.

That Stephen Girard, Matthew Carey, Israel Israel, James Kerr, John
Letchworth, John Haworth and John Connelly, be a committee to meet the
assistant committee, for the purpose of devising a plan for causing the several
houses in the city which have been shut up, and particularly those wherein
persons have died, to be opened and cleansed.

The said committees having met, -- the committee of this board returned with a
Report, which being read, was adopted, and is as follows.

The inattention of a number of the inhabitants, in whose houses the late
disorder has prevailed, in not opening and cleansing them, agreeably to the
recommendations frequently repeated, has induced this committee in conjunction
with the assistant committee to enter into the following resolutions.

Resolved, that it is highly expedient to have all houses and stores in the
city and liberties, wherever the malignant fever prevailed, purified and
cleansed as speedily and completely as possible: and to have all those well
aired, which have been closed for any length of time; and that it be
recommended to the citizens to have unslacked lime thrown into their privies.

Resolved, that the members of these committees will exert themselves, in their
several districts, to have the foregoing resolve carried into effect; and that
where the districts are too large for the respective members, they be hereby
empowered to call in such respectable characters to their assistance, as may be
necessary, and who may be disposed to cooperate in this business.

Resolved, that when any person whose house requires to be cleansed, and who is
able to defray the expenses thereof, shall refuse or neglect to comply with the
requisition of the members appointed to carry these resolves into effect, he or
they shall be reported to the next Grand Jury, for the city or county, as
supporting a nuisance dangerous to the public welfare.

Which being approved was directed to be published in the Papers, and fifteen
hundred hand-bills, with the names of the assistant committee, be printed, and
pasted up through the city.

Joseph Good was this day admitted into the orphan-house.

Orders were issued for the interment of two persons this day.

NOVEMBER 13, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, James Sharswood, Samuel
Benge, Jacob Whitman, Stephen Girard, John Letchworth, James Kerr, Henry
Deforest, Matthew Carey, Peter Helm, and Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
Isael Israel presented a letter from William Kennan and Jesse Higgins, dated
Red-Lyon Hundred, Nov. 11, 1793, covering L 10 5 2, being the collection of the
members of the church at that place, for the use of the poor under our care.
The money is directed to be handed to the treasurer, and Israel Israel is
desired to acknowledge the receipt thereof.

The secretary presented a ch^^k for fifty dollars, the donation of Tench Coxe,
Esquire. for the use of the poor, which is directed to be placed in the hands of
the treasurer for the purpose designed by the donor.

The managers Report, that there are in the mansion house seventy eight
patients: in the new house thirteen: and convalescents twenty three: total, one
hundred and fourteen.

The secretary presented a letter from Joseph M. Laurie, a member of a
committee at Crosswicks, dated the 7th Instant, informing that the inhabitants
of that part of the county of Burlington had a flatt-load of wood, ready at the
landing for the use of the poor under the care of the committee: The secretary
is directed to return an answer.

The orphan-committee Report, that they have received Joseph Good, a child of 7
months old into the orphan-house: They have employed Elizabeth Reed as an
assistant in that house.

The committee on admissions and burials Report, that they have buried two, and
sent three to the hospital yesterday.

The committee of distributions Report, that they have relieved two hundred and
ten families: Distributed one hundred and forty seven dollars; eleven and three
quarters cords of wood, and six hundred and fifty loaves of bread.

The managers Report, that none have been received or buried this day; sent one
to the convalescents.

An order was this day issued from the City-Hall for the interment of one
person.

NOVEMBER 14, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, Samuel Benge, Thomas
Savery, James Swain, John Letchworth, Matthew Carey, James Sharswood, James
Kerr, Henry Deforest, and Caleb Lownes, Sec.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

The president presented a letter received from Robert Ralston, dated
Wilmington, Nov. 12, covering bank noted to the amount of one hundred dollars,
which, with three hundred and fifty dollars received the 14 of October, is the
balance of the moneys collected at that place, for the (...) of the poor, after
deducting the cost of Limes, etc. which have been received, the secretary is
directed to deliver it to the treasurer.

The following is a list of the Contributors.
Dols. Dols. Elias Boys, 30 Thomas Harper, 30 Archibald Bingham, 30 Ezekiel
King, 10 Thomas Cuthbert, 30 Jehu Hollingsworth jun, 30 Meeker, Cochran and co
30 George Latimer, 30 Abijah Dawes, 30 Alexander Murray, 30 M. Emery, 10 Robert
Ralston, 30 Joseph Gilpin, 30 Joseph Thomas, 30 Francis Gurney, 30 John
Wilcocks, 30 Jonathan Harvey, 10 Kearney Wharton, 30

Also another letter from William Smith and Frederick Sieger, dated Earl
district, Lancaster county, ^1st ultimo, informing that the inhabitants of that
township had collected a parcel of wheat for the purpose of being manufactured
into flour for the use of the poor; and requesting that the committee would
give instructions how, and to whom the same shall be directed.

The president is requested to answer these letters.

The orphan-committee Report, that (...), one of the orphans who was at nurse,
was (...) this day.

The committee on admissions and burials Report, that they have not admitted or
buried any, except the orphan abovementioned.

The committee on distributions Report, that they have relieved one hundred and
seventy two families: distributed one hundred and twenty eight dollars and
seventy five cents, twelve and a quarter cords of wood, and two hundred and
ninety loaves of bread.

The return of health to the city affording much consolation to the commit,
it was on motion Agreed, to cause the following communication to be printed for
the information of our fellow-citizens.

After the long continued distress with which our city has been afflicted, the
committee have the happiness to congratulate their fellow-citizens upon the
return of as great a degree of health, they unanimously believe, as usually
prevails at this season of the year.

They have heard of no new cases in the malignant fever for many days; and they
have great reason to suppose that there will not remain any vestige of it in
the city or suburbs after a few days.

Applications for admission to the hospital at Bush-Hill have ceased; Of ninety
one patients who still remain there, the physicians are not apprehensive of
losing above three or four: The convalescents increase daily.

Among the great number of our citizens who retired to the country, it does not
appear that one of them has been attacked by the disorder since their return;
reports to the contrary have been circulated, which upon investigation have
proved to be false.

Purifying the houses where the disorder has been, is essentially necessary to
prevent future infection. The committee think it incumbent upon them to repeat
to their fellow-citizens, and to urge in the most pressing manner, the
performance of this important duty.

Clothing, either for the body or beds, which has been made use of by the
sick, and more particularly for those who have died of the disorder, should be
washed, baked, buried or destroyed. The loss which would attend a total
destruction, will not, it is hoped, be put in competition with the life or
health of an individual, much less with those of the community.

The committee are of opinions, that our fugitive brethren, as well as others,
who have business to transact, may safely come to the city, without danger from
the late prevailing disorder.

The managers Report, that they received no patients, that they have buried one
man and one woman -- and sent one to the convalescent house.

An order was issued this day from the City Hall for the interment of one
person.

NOVEMBER 15th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Samuel Benge, Israel Israel, Henry
Deforest, James Sharswood, Thomas Savery, John Letchworth, James Kerr, John
Haworth, Matthew Carey, and Caleb Lownes, Sec.
Stephen Girard and Peter Helm at the Hospital.

Received one hundred and twenty dollars, from Marmaduke Cooper.

The orphan committee Report, that Joseph Good died at the orphan house.

Admissions and burials, none.

The committee of distributions Report, that they have relieved two hundred and
seven families, distributed 160 75/100 dollars, 22 cords of wood, and four
hundred and forty four loaves of bread.

The managers Report, that they have received one person sent by a mistake in
the small pox; buried none -- sent one man and two women, to the convalescent
house.

Mary Birmingham was this day admitted into the orphan house.

NOVEMBER 16th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Stephen Girard, James Sharswood, Samuel
Benge, John Letchworth, Israel Israel, Matthew Carey, Peter Helm, James Swain,
Thomas Savery, Henry Deforest, John Connelly, James Kerr, and Caleb Lownes,
Secretary.
The orphan committee Report, that they have received one hundred and eighty
seven children since ^he commencement of their charge, forty one of whom are
out at nurse, forty seven have been discharged by applications of their
connections, sixteen have died, and eighty three remain in the house; total one
hundred and eighty seven received -- one hundred and twenty four remains under
the care of the committee.

The committee on admissions and burials, Report, that one person, in the small
pox, has been sent to the Hospital, and two were buried.

The committee of distributions Report, that they have relieved two hundred and
twenty two families, distributed one hundred and fifty seven dollars and sixty
two cents, nineteen and three quarters cords of wood, and four hundred and
eighty loaves of bread.

Circumstances having changed the business of the different committees, it is
Agreed, that in future the reports be made every evening, of the transactions
of the day, and not of the preceding day, as has been the practice.

A letter was received from William Gibbons of West Chester, dated the 15th
Instant, covering three hundred and two dollars and forty cents, being a second
donation from the inhabitants of that part of Chester county. The Secretary is
directed to deliver the money to the Treasurer.

Moved and Seconded, that the distribution of money, provisions and wood be
continued until this day week, and then to cease, which was Agreed, to.

The committee of distributions Report, for this day, that they have relieved
two hundred and twelve families, distributed one hundred and forty six dollars
and seventy five cents, twelve cords of wood, four hundred and eighty loaves of
bread and five barrels of indian meal.

The committee on admissions and burials Report, that they have sent two
persons to the Hospital and buried two.

The managers Report, that they have received one woman, buried none, sent two
men and two women to the convalescent house.

John, Mary and Jane Wilkins, were this day admitted into the orphan house.

Orders were issued on the 15th, 16th, and 17th, for the interment of six
persons.

NOVEMBER 18th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Stephen Girard, Henry Deforest, James
Sharswood, Samuel Benge, Thomas Savery, John Letchworth, Peter Helm, Jacob
Whitman, Matthew Carey, James Kerr, John Connelly, Israel Israel, and Caleb
Lownes, Secretary.
Thomas Billington and John Grimes applied to the committee for the last will
of Samuel Fisher, deceased, which was deposited in the hands of the Secretary,
some time since -- Agreed that it be delivered to them, The will was dated 7th
October last -- whereby it is directed that all his just debts in the city be
paid, and the residue of his estate to be appropriated toward the payment of
what he owes in England.

A letter was received dated New York, November 14th 1793, from Hallam and
Henry, covering a post note of two hundred and sixty dollars, for the use of
the poor and distressed of this city.

The orphan committee Report, that they have received two children into the
house, placed two out to nurse, and buried Richard Welsh.

The committee on admissions and burials Report, that they buried two
yesterday, and two this day -- sent none to the Hospital.

The committee on distributions, Report, that they have relieved two hundred
and four families, distributed one hundred and sixty eight dollars and sixty
nine cents, eighteen and a quarter cords of wood, one half barrel of rye flour,
one half barrel of wheat flour, one half barrel of indian meal, and four
hundred and forty loaves of bread.

As the patients in the mansion house at Bush-Hill, have decreased
considerably, it was Agreed, that all the sick who are in the new house and all
the women who are in the convalescent house be removed to the mansion house;
twelve men and the convalescent women were accordingly removed and two men
un^it for removal, were left in the new house.

The managers Report, that they received no patients yesterday, and but one
this day; that they buried one man yesterday, one woman to day, and placed five
patients among the convalescents.

Lydia Walker and John Joseph B^lwire, were this day admitted into the orphan
house.

Orders were issued this day from the City-Hill, for the interment of two
persons.

NOVEMBER 19th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, James Sharswood, Samuel
Benge, Peter Helm, James Swain, John Letchworth, Matthew Carey, Thomas Savery,
Stephen Girard, Henry Deforest, and Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
The committee appointed to prepare an answer to the Governor's letter,
produced an essay, which being read was approved. The letter and answer are as
follow.

GENTLEMEN,
AS I am desirous to lay before the Legislature, a particular statement of the
circumstances, that have attended the calamity, with which the city has
recently been visited; and as your benevolent exertions have afforded the best
opportunity of information on the subject; permit me to request the favor of
such answers, as you may be able to give to the following enquiries.

At what time and place did the disorder make its appearance; and to what
quarters of the city did its ravages extend?

How many citizens have died since the commencement of the disorder; how many
recovered, who had been afflicted with it; and what number of orphans have been
deprived of their parents on this occasion?

What accommodations and supplies were provided for the sick and poor; what
moneys have been disbursed, and what debts have been incurred?

What is the amount of the charitable contributions for the relief of the sick
and poor, distinguishing between the amount of the actual grants and
engagements, by way of security, to the Bank, for making loans?

What measures are necessary to purify the city from any latent infection; and
what general precautions ought to be taken to guard against a similar calamity
in future?

The same motives, which prompt me to make this application, will induce you,
gentlemen, to excuse it; and, I am confident, that we may all securely trust to
the sympathy and liberality of the Legislature, for aid and support, as well to
defray the recent expenses, as to provide against the return of so great a
calamity.

I am, with sincere esteem, Gentlemen, Your most obedient humble Servant,
THOMAS MIFFLIN.
Germantown, October 30, 1793.

Committee Chamber, City-Hall, November, 1793.
The committee for the relief of the sick and poor of the city of Philadelphia,
in reply to the several queries proposed to them by the Governor, answer;

To the first:

That the malignant disorder, by which so many of our citizens have been taken
off, made its first appearance about the latter end of July, in Water Street.

Its ravages were for some time confined to that street, between Mulberry and
Sassafras streets; from thence it extended northwardly up Water street to Vine
Street. Front street, within the above limits, was next attacked, whence it
spread into the parallel streets, up those which run East and West; the
greatest havoc being nearest the river Delaware, and becoming more feeble in
its progress to the Westward; this will more clearly appear from the account of
the number of houses, etc. in the different streets, lanes and all^ys in the
city and suburbs, hereunto subjoined.

To the second:

The committee have procured pretty accurate lists from the several burial
grounds in and about the city, of the interments from the first day of August
to the ninth day of November; from these it appears that Four thousand and
thirty one persons, of all ages, sexes and disorders, have been buried during
that period:

It is impracticable to discriminate the number taken off by the malignant
disorder, no accounts having been kept by the sextons, or other persons, to
whom the registering of burials was committed, except in two instances, viz. in
the burial grounds belonging to Christ-Church and St. Peter's.

There are no data from which the committee can form a calculation as to the
number of those who having been afflicted with the disorder, have recovered.

The committee have received into their care since the commencement of the
disorder, one hundred and ninety one children, who have either lost one or both
of their parents and the survivors being sick or so much reduced in
circumstances as to render the attention of the committee absolutely necessary.

The whole number admitted into the orphan-house, and the present state of it
is as follows, viz.

Admitted one hundred and ninety one: Died seventeen: Returned to their friends
forty nine: There remain one hundred and twenty five, of which at present there
are in the house eighty one, and of infants at nurse forty four.

The committee are so much affected by the situation of the orphans under their
care, that they beg leave to recommend them in a particular manner to the
Governor's notice.

To the Third:

At the first appearance of the disorder the general consternation was so
great, that those whose particular province it was to take care of the poor,
knew not how to act; terror soon put them all to ^light, except three, whose
exertions merit the highest encomiums; worn down with fatigue, a call was made
upon the benevolent citizens to come to their aid, a meeting of a few took
place, who voluntarily offered their services in the dangerous undertaking. A
second meeting was obtained, when a committee consisting of twenty seven
persons was appointed the majority of whom undertook the task, but from death
and other causes the business was principally conducted by twelve only. This
committee formed themselves into sub-committees to whom different parts of the
business was asigned -- One of which undertook the extreme hazardous part of
attending at and managing the hospital at Bush-Hill; Another to receive
applications for the removal of the sick to the hospital, and of burying the
dead.

The great increase of deaths soon left a number of children without parents or
friends to whom to apply for protection; some of those were found in the houses
from whence their parents had just been removed to the silent grave, deploring
their loss in the greatest agonies of distress.

A committee was appointed to provide a house for their reception; a matron and
nurses were employed.

As the effects naturally resulting from the accumulated distress of the more
indigent citizens, many of them were reduced to such a situation as to require
immediate supplies of the necessaries of life.

For this purpose another committee was appointed, who have for several weeks
past daily distributed to about two hundred families, for one week's support,
of the following articles, which have amounted upon an average to four hundred
and forty loaves of bread, fifteen cords of ^ood, one hundred and fifty dollars
in money, per day, besides meat, meal, vegetables, etc.

A number of citizens undertook to act as an ASSISTANT COMMITTEE in
recommending suitable objects for those supplies.

The whole amount of disbursements for the various objects already mentioned is
not less than Twenty thousand dollars; the particulars, cannot yet be
ascertained with precision.

To the Fourth:

The charitable contributions already received in money amount to Twenty two
thousand dollars. Some of our fellow-citizens, individuals of the committee,
before it was known that one dollar would be contributed by donations, borrowed
upon their personal security of the Bank of North America, six thousand five
hundred dollars; others of our fellow-citizens have since signed a guarantee to
that bank, to make good the amount of fifteen thousand dollars, if the
committee should have occasion for further loans.

The committee having thought it a measure extremely requisite in order to
purify the city from the latent infection, that respectable citizens should be
requested to undertake the trouble of going to every house where any person had
been sick, or in which any had died of the disorder, to recommend it to the
possessors, to cause them to be opened and thoroughly cleansed.

The Gentlemen who had before undertaken to act as an ASSISTANT COMMITTEE,
cheerfully added this to their labors; they have made considerable progress in
the business, and by their exertions will undoubtedly execute it in the most
satisfactory manner, as far as their influence can extend. There are some
refractory persons who either insensible of the danger to which themselves and
their fellow citizens may be exposed from a noncompliance, or from obstinacy,
occasion some difficulty. It is hoped that this, as well as proper means to
cause all infected clothing, and more especially beds and bedding, to be
purified or destroyed, will attract the Legislative attention.

The precautions necessary to be taken to guard against a similar calamity in
future, will require much consideration. The committee are of opinion that a
health-officer, upon a more extensive plan than the present, is of the greatest
importance, and that the residence of the officer and physicians should be at a
suitable distance below the city.

That a healthful spot for the site of an hospital, nearly contiguous to the
city, easily accessible by land and water, together with requisite buildings
for the accommodation of those who may be attacked by malignant disorders in
future, are among the most necessary means for the purpose of prevention.

From the want of such a place, to which the sick might have been removed, at
an early period of the late disorder, may be ascribed the great terror which
incapacitated the inhabitants from giving that assistance to their
fellow-citizens, by which many hundred lives might have been saved.

The increasing trade of the city, and the great number of people who are daily
arriving from all parts of the world, expose us to every species of infection
that prevails in other places, the necessity of efficient measures being
immediately taken to guard against future dangers become therefore
indispensible.

By order of the Committee, MATTHEW CLARKSON, President.


The orphan-committee Report, that Eliza Elder having taken the smallpox, was
placed out to nurse, and John Farmer, an infant of four months, was also
received, and placed out at nurse.

The committee of admissions and burials Report, that they have buried one, and
sent none to the hospital.

The distributing committee Report, that they have relieved two hundred and
forty families; distributed one hundred and eighty eight dollars and seventy
five cents, twenty four and an half cords of wood, and four hundred and forty
loaves of bread.

The managers Report, that they have not received any patients; that one has
died, and three men have been removed to the convalescent house.

Received by the hands of George Ashbridge of Oxford township, two hundred and
fifty dollars and thirteen cents, for the use of the poor: And by the hands of
the Rev. Slator Clay, the sum of one hundred and fourteen dollars and forty
three cents from Lower-Merrion township; and one hundred and twenty nine
dollars and thirty four cents, from Upper-Merrion.

John Palmer was this day admitted into the orphan house.

NOVEMBER 20th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Stephen Girard, John Letchworth, James
Kerr, Henry Deforest, Samuel Benge, John Haworth, Peter Helm, James Sharswood,
Thomas Savery, Matthew Carey, Israel Israel, James Swain, and Caleb Lownes,
Secretary.
James Kerr, delivered three hundred and fifty dollars and eighty one cents, a
donation from the inhabitants of Winchester, in Virginia; brought by James
M'Clay.

Israel Wheelen delivered five hundred and eighty seven dollars and eighty
eight cents, from the inhabitants of Downings Town, for the use of the sick and
poor under the care of the committee.

The Secretary delivered the following sums for the use of the sick, viz.

Ninety eight dollars from the inhabitants of Whit-plain township Montgomery
county, by the hands of James Morris, Esquire.

One hundred and forty seven dollars and sixty two cents; from the inhabitants
of Towamensing, Hatfield and Franconia township; by the hands of George Reiff.

Seventy three dollars and forty two cents from the inhabitants of Perkioming
and -- by the hands of Christopher Dannaker: which several sums were directed
to be delivered to the Treasurer, to be appropriated agreeably to the designs
of the donors.

The orphan committee Report, that they have put out one child to nurse, in the
small pox.

The committee of admissions and burials Report, that they have not buried or
sent any to the Hospital.

The committee of distribution Report, that they have relieved two hundred and
fourteen families, with one hundred and forty nine dollars and seventy six
cents, distributed sixteen and an half cords of wood and four hundred and forty
loaves of bread.

The managers Report, that they have not received any patients into the
Hospital or buried any from thence since their last report -- that they have
sent two to the convalescents apartment, and taken into the Hospital the man
that had his legs cut off, who was considered in an unfit condition to be
removed when, the others were brought from the new house.

NOVEMBER 21, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. James Sharswood, Matthew Carey, Samuel
Benge, Stephen Girard, John Connelly, John Haworth, Thomas Savery, James
Swain, Israel Israel, Peter Helm, James Kerr, Henry Deforest, and Caleb
Lownes, Secretary.
A letter was received from Robert Coleman, Esquire. associate judge of the court
of common pleas for Lancaster county, dated Elizabeth Furnace, November 12,
covering a draft on the state Treasurer, for the amount of his salary, for one
year as associate judge; to be applied to the use of the afflicted under the
care of the committee; which was delivered to the treasurer, to be appropriated
accordingly.

The orphan committee Report, that they have delivered Biddy, Hannah, and Mary
Sweeny to their uncle Hugh Sweeny; Stephen Estick to his father John Estick and
admitted Mary Wolf aged seven years; her father and mother being both dead.

The committee of admissions and burials Report, that they have buried two;
admitted none.

The committee of distributions Report that they have relieved two hundred and
twenty three families, distributed one hundred and sixty one dollars and fifty
cents, twelve and a quarter cords of wood, and four hundred and forty loaves of
bread.

The services of Doctor Benjamin Duffield, were taken under consideration; it
was Agreed, that he be presented with five hundred dollars. The President is
requested to communicate to him the thanks of the committee for his attention
to the afflicted at the Hospital, and to deliver to him a check for the above
sum.

The managers communicated the agreeable information, that they have not had
any deaths for two days past, -- that the patients are all in a promising
condition and that we may now look forward with confidence toward the
restoration to health and usefulness almost all that are at present in the
Hospital: and as there is no prospect of many more deaths at that place, they
will in future report occasionally.

Received one hundred and thirty three dollars and thirty four cents, a
donation from a person unknown, by the hands of Charles Jervis.

NOVEMBER 22, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, John Letchworth, Matthew
Carey, Jacob Whitman, Peter Helm, James Kerr, Thomas Savery, John Haworth,
Samuel Benge, James Sharswood, Stephen Girard Henry Deforest, and Caleb Lownes,
Secretary.
The orphan committee Report, that Polly Starkin was delivered to her master
Thomas Harper.

John Burden was delivered to his uncle.

The committee on admissions and burials Report, that they have sent a French
man to the Hospital and have buried none.

The committee of distributions Report, that they have relieved two hundred and
twenty families, distributed one hundred and seventy four dollars and sixty
nine cents, twenty two and three quarters cords of wood, and four hundred and
forty loaves of bread.

NOVEMBER 23d, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. James Swain, Thomas Savery, John
Letchworth, Israel Israel, John Haworth, James Sharswood, John Connelly, Henry
Deforest, Samuel Benge, Matthew Carey, Peter Helm, James Kerr, Stephen Girard
and Caleb Lownes, Sec.
The President presented a letter from J. Short, dated York Borough, 20th
Instant, covering two hundred and seventy one dollars and twenty seven cents;
being a collection of the inhabitants of that place, together with twenty one
dollars from the inhabitants of Chance-ford township, York county, for the use
of the afflicted under the care of the committee, which is directed to be
delivered to the Treasurer, to be applied agreeably to the design of the
donors: -- the above letter informs that further collections are making for the
same purpose, which when received will be forwarded.

The orphan committee Report, that they have delivered John, Mary and Jane
Wilkins to their brother, living in Easton and Rachel and Hannah Estick to
their father.

The committee of admissions and burials Report, that they have had no
applications.

The committee of distributions Report, that they have distributed to two
hundred and twelve families, one hundred and seventy two dollars, nineteen
cords of wood and four hundred and forty loaves of bread.

The committee on the purchase of wood Report, that they have received from
Burlington 17 cords wood

From Gloucester county 27 3/8 do.

and Have purchased, 360 do.

for which they have paid, and for hauling the donation and purchased wood,
1355 dollars and 71 cents.

Samuel Benge and Henry Deforest are appointed a committee to settle with the
carters and attendants, and to discharge such as they may think it unnecessary
further to employ.

The condition of the Hospital being again taken into consideration, it was
Resolved, that Stephen Girard, Peter Helm, Israel Israel, John Connelly, and
Caleb Lownes, be a committee to make enquiry into the state thereof -- the
ability of accommodating the French soldiers, and the expense of supporting
them, and to report at the next meeting, the terms on which they are to be
received at that place.

Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Thomas Savery, Samuel Benge, James Kerr,
John Haworth, Stephen Girard, James Sharswood, Matthew Carey, John Letchworth,
Israel Israel, Thomas Wistar, Treas. Henry Deforest, Peter Helm, John Connelly,
and Caleb Lownes, Sec.
Eighty five dollars and twenty five cents were received from A. H. Middleton,
Treasurer of Woodbury committee on the 20th October, and seventy dollars and
fifty one cents from Lancaster borough, by the hand^ of Paul Zantzinger on the
2d November, which were omitted to be entered in the minutes of that date.

As the disease has now abated and many of the children in the orphan house may
have connections who do not know where they are, -- the committee were of the
opinion that it would be advisable to publish a list of those remaining under
their care; requesting the surviving relatives, if any there be, to call and
take them away; It was on Motion Agreed, that the following advertisement be
published, in order that their connections be informed of their situation and
the committee be relieved from their charge.

Committee-Chamber, City-Hall. November 26, 1793.
The orphans remaining under the care of the committee, being the principal
objects of their anxiety, they consider them as a deposit in their hands, for
which they ought to give the most exact account; they therefore are of opinion
that the first measure necessary to be taken for the benefit of those
innocents, is to publish a list of their names, informing their relations and
friends that the committee are ready to deliver them to their nearest
connections. In doing this, it is to be understood, that the most satisfactory
testimony will be required in support of every claim.

Applications to be made to,

Israel Israel, James Sharswood, James Kerr, John Letchworth,
The Orphan-Committee, or either of them.

ANN M. ANTHONY, William Andrews, Abraham Andrews, Patty Conrad Buvrun,
Elizabeth Beatty, Susanna Beatty, Mary Beatty, William Beatty, Eloisa Beatty,
Sarah Bache, Mary Birmingham, John I. Beliviere, Joseph Campbell, Mary Currin,
John P. Cambay, Mary A. Cambay, Peter Clarke, William Calder, Robert Cole, John
Collins, Dinah Cross, Patty Cross, Elizabeth Conrad, Lot Davis, Sarah Daver,
Charles Daver, Billy Dee, Jean Elliot, Mary Elder, Eliza Elder, Anthony Fraim,
Ann Feigle, Elenor Finney, James Garret, Maria Hicks, Ann Henson, Fanny
Higgenbottom, Dorcas Higgenbottom, Margaret Higgenbottom, Lewis Hornberger,
Maria Harness, Catharine Johnson, John Johnson, Ann Johnson, Rebecca Johnson,
John Kinsinger, Mary Ker, Kitty King, Martha Ki^^, Catharine Lutz, John Lutz,
Rachael Meloy, Owen M'Garvey, Jane Miller, Mary Miller, Ann M'Laughlin, Jean
Newton, Isabella Newton, Forbes Newton, William Norris, Margaret Norris, Betty
Neaves, John O'Sullivan, (...), Lory O'Sullivan, Rachael Obercow, Matthew
Parker, Ann Parker, Sally Polhemus, Joseph Patterson, John Palmer, Adam
Phileman, James Ross, John Rutter, Elizabeth Ryan, Ann Roach, John Ravey, Mary
Smith, Sophia Smith, Kitty Scott, Mary Sweeny, John Simpson, John Siriminge^,
Peter Starkey, Mary Shyer, Sarah Stewart, Luke Singer, Ann M. Tailor,
Christiana Tysink, George Tyler, William Tureen, Hannah Tureen, Charles Thomas,
William Wright, Sarah Walter, Lydia Walker, Mary Wolf, Elizabeth Watson,
William Welsh, John Youst.

The committee to whom was referred the application on behalf of the French
soldiers, to be received at Bush-Hill until a suitable place can be provided
for them, Report that they may be conveniently accommodated in the house at
present appropriated for the convalescent, whose number is now much reduced,
and may be safely removed into other appartments;

That the soldiers may be supported without injury to the donations of the
contributors, at eight shillings per diem per man, including all charges; which
they submit to the committee.

The committee, commiserating the distressed situation of the sick and wounded
Frenchmen who lately arrived from Cape-Francois, in the citizen Marseillois,
and desirous of preventing the introduction of new calamities by the
introduction of diseased persons from the West India islands, where malignant
disorders are now prevalent, did on the 16th Instant, upon the pressing
solicitation of the secretary of the French Legation agree to admit them into
that part of the hospital at Bush-Hill, hitherto occupied by the convalescent,
for their present relief; under the assurance of the secretary that they should
be removed as speedily as possible, to a place to be provided for them by the
minister of the French Republic: And as there is a pleasing prospect that our
fellow-citizens, for whose accommodation the hospital was established, will
shortly be in a situation to return to their friends in the city, it was
Resolved, that the secretary of the Legation be informed that the sick and
wounded now at the hospital may be accommodated at that place at eight
shillings per man, per day; and that the committee will furnish them with every
accommodation and supply, necessary for their comfort and support, at the above
rate, until the sick citizens now in the hospital shall be in* a condition to
be discharged.

The managers of the hospital, Israel Israel, James Ker, and the secretary, are
appointed to wait upon him with the foregoing minute; and to attend to the
business, until the Frenchmen aforesaid are removed from the hospital.

NOVEMBER 25th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Thomas Savery, Matthew Carey, James
Sharswood, Israel Israel, Stephen Girard Henry Deforest, Thomas Wistar, Treas.
Samuel Benge, John Haworth, James Kerr, John Letchworth, Peter Helm, John
Connelly, and Caleb Lownes, Sec.
A letter from Dr. Benjamin Duffield was laid before the committee,
acknowledging the receipt of the letter to him from the President, with its
enclosure; and thanking the committee for their attention to his services.

A letter was received from Boston, of the 18th instant, from I. C. Jones,
covering three drafts of the following tenor: One for three hundred dollars,
dated the 14th instant, drawn by Thomas Grives on John Murray of New York,
merchant, at five days sight: One for one hundred and eighty four dollars and
seventy six cents, dated the 15th, drawn by I. C. Jones on Jonathan Williams,
at ten days: One for three hundred and thirty four dollars and seventy three
cents, dated the 18th, drawn by John Jones on John Murray of New York, merchant.

The President is desired to acknowledge the receipt of the above letter and
drafts.

Received ten dollars from James Douglass by the hands of Levi Hollingsworth;
also sixty four dollars from Pencader-Hundred by the hands of W. Cooch.

The orphan-committee Report, that Charles M'Connell was delivered to his
father; and that the list of orphans, etc. was handed to the printer for
publication.

The committee of admissions and burials Report, that they have had no
applications.

NOVEMBER 26th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Stephen Girard, James Kerr, Thomas
Savery, Israel Israel, Henry Deforest, Matthew Carey, Peter Helm, John
Letchworth, Samuel Benge, John Haworth, James Sharswood, John Connelly, and
Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
Two letters were received; one from Frederick Seger, dated Earl township,
Lancaster county, 18th instant, enclosing sixty five dollars, for the use of
the orphans, and inform the committee that sundry parcels of flour had been
sent, and desiring receipts therefore; as the waggoners had neglected to
deliver those given to them: the other from New-Holland, in the same township,
dated the 15th instant, signed by Henry Moeller, minister of the Lutheran
church, enclosing eighteen pounds ten shillings, a donation from the benevolent
farmers of Alleghany and Muddy creek, exclusive of those in their congregations
who have made their donation in wheat: These donations are particularly
designed for the orphans: The secretary is directed to deliver them to the
orphan-committee, and the president is requested to answer the letters.

The orphan-committee Report, that Elizabeth Watson, a child at nurse, died
this day, and that the children in the house are generally healthy.

The committee of admissions and burials Report, that they have had no
applications.

Received by the hands of James Morris one hundred and four dollars and fifty
six cents, from the inhabitants of Montgomery county: and one hundred and
twenty five dollars by John Wistar, from Manington township, Salem county,
New Jersey.

NOVEMBER 27th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, James Sharswood, Samuel
Benge, Thomas Savery, James Swain, Stephen Girard, John Letchworth, James
Kerr, Henry Deforest, Matthew Carey, John Connelly, Peter Helm, and Caleb
Lownes, Secretary.
The President informs the committee that he had answered the letters referred
to him yesterday.

The orphan-committee Report, that Joseph Hays is admitted into the
orphan-house from Bush-Hill hospital. Kitty Scott and Ann Maria Tailor, were
delivered to their friends.

The committee of admissions and burials Report, that they have had no
applications.

NOVEMBER 28, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, James Sharswood, James
Kerr, John Haworth, Peter Helm, James Swain, Thomas Savery, Samuel Benge, John
Letchworth, John Connelly, Stephen Girard Henry Deforest, and Caleb Lownes,
Secretary.
No material business occurring, adjourned.

NOVEMBER 29, 1793.
Some of the members attended, but the evening being wet, and a quorum not
appearing, adjourned.

NOVEMBER 30, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, Samuel Benge, John
Haworth, James Sharswood, Stephen Girard, Henry Deforest, James Swain, John
Letchworth, John Connelly, James Kerr, Peter Helm, Thomas Savery, and Caleb
Lownes, Secretary.
The committee appointed to wait upon the secretary of the French Legation
Report, that they have attended to their appointment, informed him of the terms
on which the sick and wounded, under his care, were to be accommodated at the
hospital, the circumstances on which the committee hold that place, and which
he must be subject to; to which he fully agreed and expressed himself well
satisfied with the attention of the committee toward these afflicted people;
and in addition to the terms stipulated, it was further agreed that four
dollars per man be allowed for the interment of all the French people who may
die at that place.

Thirteen barrels of flour were received from the inhabitants of Manheim
township, Lancaster county, accompanied by a letter from Martin Mayer, which
was answered.

As the business of the committee is drawing to a close, it was considered as
an indispensible duty that compensation be made for the use of the property,
which has been accupied by our afflicted fellow-citizens, as an hospital at
Bush-Hill: The subject was again brought before the committee, and after fully
considering the circumstances of the business, it was Agreed, that the
proprietor be presented with two thousand dollars for the time it has been
occupied as an hospital, and until the 25th day of March, 1795. As there are
fears existing in the minds of some of our fellow-citizens that the disease may
again make its appearance in the spring; and there being at present no
provision made for the accommodation of such as may be afflicted with malignant
disorders, it was thought advisable that endeavors be made to retain the
privilege of re-occupying that place, for the like purpose. The committee, to
whom is entrusted the management of this business, are requested to use their
endeavors to effect the object of the committee.

It was further agreed that the committee appropriate five hundred dollars for
repairs of said hospital; which may now be presented to the proprietor, should
it be more agreeable to him to make the repairs himself; if not, that it be
reserved in trust for that purpose.

And on Motion it was Resolved, that Stephen Girard, Peter Helm, Thomas Wistar
and Caleb Lownes be trustees to hold the said sum of five hundred dollars, and
to dispose of it agreeably to the foregoing resolution. Israel Israel and Caleb
Lownes are appointed a committee to attend to the foregoing business, and to
report.

The committee of accounts are requested to attend every evening ^t the
committee-chamber, in order to facilitate the settlement of the accounts, which
are not yet liquidated.

The committee of admissions Report, that three have been no applications.

The orphan-committee Report, that they have delivered Patty and Elizabeth C.
Buvran to their father, and have received Thomas Hopkins into the orphan-house.

DECEMBER 1, 1793.
Several members attended; but no business offering adjourned.

DECEMBER 2d, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Stephen Girard, Samuel Benge, John
Letchworth, Israel Israel, Matthew Carey, James Sharswood, Thomas Savery, Henry
Deforest, Thomas Wistar, Treas. James Kerr, and Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
A letter was received from John Bauchman, dated Conestogo township, 27th
ultimo, informing that fifteen barrels of flour are on the way; and covering
nine pounds and ten shillings, being the amount of a donation raised in that
township, for the use of the poor. The president is requested to answer it as
soon as the flour is received.

The services of Doctor Deveze being taken into consideration, after some time
spent thereon, it was Resolved, that he has as far as has (...) knowledge of
the committee, been eminently useful in the late afflicting calamity, and that
this committee ought to compensate him therefore as far as lays in their power.
That the president be requested to acknowledge the services which he has
rendered to the afflicted, -- present him the thanks of the committee, and a
check on the Bank of North America for fifteen hundred dollars, as a testimony
of their approbation of his services and unremitted exertions for the relief of
the afflicted at Bush-Hill during the late sickness.

The secretary informed the committee that he has received from the
inhabitants of Chestertown township, Chester county, by the hands of Matthias
Pennebecker, secretary of the association in that township, three drafts for
two hundred and eighty dollars, viz. one on Phineas Bond, the British consul,
for one hundred dollars; one on John Travis for fifty dollars; one on Edward
Cadwalader for fifty dollars; being the sums respectively subscribed by them
for the use of the poor; also one other draft for eighty dollars, on Charles
Shoemaker: the whole being the amount of the subscriptions of the aforesaid
township for the use of the poor under our care. He also presented the balance
of the donations of the inhabitants of Darby, which he received from the hands
of John Pearson, for the same use as the foregoing, amounting to twelve pounds
and ten shillings, which was directed to be delivered to the treasurer for the
uses designed by the donors.

DECEMBER 3d, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, James Sharswood, Samuel
Benge, Stephen Girard, James Kerr, John Letchworth, Matthew Carey, Thomas
Savery, Israel Israel, Henry Deforest, and Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
The President presented a check from Alexander Wilcocks on the Bank of
Pennsylvania for fifty dollars, for the use of the orphans, which was delivered
to the orphan committee.

Israel Israel presented a draft from Alexander Addison, district Judge of
Washington County, etc. for the amount of the half yearly dividend of one sh^re
in the Bank of Pennsylvania.

The orphan-committee Report, that they have delivered Sarah Stewart to her
mother, and that Joseph Hays was taken away by his mother without their consent.

DECEMBER 6, 1793.
Several members attended, but not a quorum for business. Adjourned to the 9th.

DECEMBER 9th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. James Sharswood, Samuel Benge, Henry
Deforest, Matthew Carey, James Kerr, John Haworth, Thomas Savery, John
Letchworth, Thomas Wistar, Treas. Stephen Girard, Israel Israel, and Caleb
Lownes, Sec.
A committee from the Assistant Committee attended and proposed to the
consideration of the committee the propriety of distributing a part of the wood
to certain descriptions of poor, which was after some time spent thereon,
Agreed to be deferred for the present.

DECEMBER 14th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Samuel Benge, James Swain, Thomas
Wistar, Treas. Peter Helm, James Sharswood, James Kerr, Thomas Savery, John
Letchworth, John Connelly, Matthew Carey, Stephen Girard, Henry Deforest, John
Haworth, and Caleb Lownes, Sec.
The subject of distributing the wood being taken under consideration, it was
Resolved, that the distribution of wood commence on the 16th instant, and that
Thomas Savery, Samuel Benge, James Swain, Thomas Wistar, John Haworth, and
Israel Israel, be a committee for this purpose.

The secretary is directed to inform the chairman of the assistant committee of
the foregoing resolution.

Sixty seven dollars and fifty cents were received from the German Reformed
Congregation of Northampton, forwarded by John Arndt, Esquire.

DECEMBER 21st, 1793
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. James Swain, James Sharswood, Peter
Helm, Samuel Benge, John Connelly, John Haworth, John Letchworth, Stephen
Girard Israel Israel, James Kerr, Henry Deforest, and Thomas Wistar, Treas.
Twenty two dollars and sixteen cents were received from the inhabitants of
Chester township, Burlington county, through the hands of Richard Smith; Fifty
dollars, a donation from Peter Gauladet; fifty three dollars and thirty three
cents from Hambourg, Berks county by the hands of John Myer, Esquire. Ten dollars
from Allen township, Berks county, by the hands of Simon Driesback, Esquire. in
addition to the following donations received of him the 5th instant, viz.
twelve dollars and eighty seven cents from Dryland congregation; fifteen
dollars and twenty seven cents from Moretown congregation; thirty seven dollars
and forty five cents from Allen and Lehigh congregations; seventy nine dollars
and sixteen cents from English congregation in Allen township; One hundred and
eighty dollars from Bucks county, by the hands of Isaac Chapman, Esquire. Ninety
two dollars and four cents from Leacock township, Lancaster county, by the
hands of Jacob John's: Fourteen dollars from John Hamilton of Carlisle: One
hundred dollars from Montgomery county, by the hands of Robert Loller, Esquire.
Eighty dollars from the inhabitants of Boston; and two hundred and thirty eight
dollars from Nottingham township, Burlington county, by the hands of Joseph M.
Lowry.

On Motion Resolved, that James Sharswood and Thomas Wistar be a committee to
wait upon the guardians of the poor, and to request recommendations from them
to the magistrates, for the admission of such poor persons, who are now in the
hospital at Bush-Hill and have no suitable residence to remove to.

On Motion Resolved, that the committee, appointed to confer with William
Hamilton, Esquire, concerning compensation to be made to him for the use of his
property at Bush-Hill, be instructed to apply to him for the further use of
that place, should a similar disease make its appearance in this city, between
this and the 25th day of March 1795, to be used by such citizens who may be
afflicted with malignant or contagious disorders; and that the right to enter
the premises for the foregoing use be clearly expressed and secured to such
trustees as may be mutually agreed upon between him and this committee.

Stephen Girard and James Kerr are appointed a committee to wait upon the
Minister of the French Republic, and present the bill for the support,
attendance and accommodation of the sick and wounded, received under the care
of the committee, at the request of the secretary of the Legation; amounting to
nine hundred and thirty five pounds and twelve shillings.

The orphan-committee are requested to call on Dr. Samuel Duffield, for his
bill for attending the orphan children.

On Motion Resolved, that the orphan-committee, John Connelly and Thomas Wistar
be a committee for preparing a plan for the future support of the orphans.

The committee of accounts are desired to send written notices to such of the
members of the committee whose accounts are unsettled, to bring them forward in
order that a final close of their business may be made as early as possible.

The managers of the Hospital are requested to furnish an account of the
property at that place belonging to the committee.

The subject of preparing a report of the proceedings of the committee, agreed
to on the 9th of November, being again taken under consideration, the committee
are of opinion that the publication of the minutes of the proceedings of the
committee, with such observations as may be connected therewith, will be the
most satisfactory mode of giving information to the public of the transactions
of the committee during the prevalence of the late malignant fever, of any
which they can adopt: Whereupon, on Motion, it was Resolved, that the said
committee be discharged, and that the minutes be printed under the direction of
the President, which he is requested to undertake, and to call to his
assistance such aid as may be necessary upon the occasion.

On Motion Resolved, that Stephen Girard, Peter Helm and Henry Deforest be a
committee to examine and report what property is now under the care of Henry
Deforest, the member who was appointed to receive the property of the sick and
those who died at the hospital at Bush-Hill.

DECEMBER 24th, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Thomas Savery, John Letchworth, James
Kerr, James Sharswood, John Haworth, John Connelly, Henry Deforest, Thomas
Wistar, Treas. Samuel Benge and Caleb Lownes, Sec.
The following donations have been received since the last meeting of the
committee, viz.

Sixty four dollars and ninety seven cents from the west end of the township of
Little-Brittain, in Lancaster county, received by the hands of Levi
Hollingsworth;

Forty five dollars from Kingston congregation, forwarded by the Rev. Stephen
Voorheis;

Seventy seven dollars and twelve cents from the Patriotic society at Newark,
New Jersey, forwarded by Uziel Ogden, and John Pintard, Esquires;

Forty one dollars and seventy five cents from Donnegal township, Lancaster
county, by the hands of John Whitehill, Esquire;

Fifty dollars from Whitemarsh, Montgomery county, by the hands of James
Morris, Esquire.

The committee appointed to confer with the guardians of the poor, not being
ready to report are continued.

The committee appointed to confer with William Hamilton, Esquire. Report, that
they have attended to their appointment, and have produced an essay of articles
of agreement for the consideration of the committee, of which the following is
the substance, viz. The said William Hamilton to secure to Israel Israel, John
Connelly and Caleb Lownes, for the use of the citizens of Philadelphia and
vicinity, all that part of his interest at Bush-Hill comprised within the
circular HA-HA on the South, bounded by a line extending from the western end
of said HA-HA to the South-East of the Grave-yard, thence by a line to the new
ditch, which incloses the pine grove on the North, thence by the several
courses of said ditch round the grove to the N. L. corner of the old
green-house foundation, thence along the Northern side of the coach-house and
stables and the Eastern side of the same to the gate on Callowhill street, with
the free use of the lane to the East end of the HA-HA wall, with the
Mansion House, kitchen, stables, etc. now occupied by the committee, to the use
of the said trustees, etc. from this time forward to the 25th day of March,
1795, in trust for the relief and accommodation of such persons as may be
afflicted by a return of the Yellow or malignant fever, or by any other similar
infectious disease, and for no other use or purpose whatever. The said trustees
to pay or cause to be paid to the said William Hamilton, Esquire. for the use of
the premises aforesaid, during the continuance of the late disease, and until
the 25th of March 1795, aforesaid, the sum of two thousand dollars; and the
further sum of five hundred dollars for repairing the said property, when
thereto they shall be required by the said William Hamilton.

That the said W. Hamilton shall have, during the time aforementioned, a right
to repair the buildings aforesaid, and to appropriate them as he may think
proper, provided the said trustees shall have no occasion to occupy them for
the use aforesaid. All claim to the use of said property to be relinquished by
the trustees on the 25th day of March, 1795. The said William Hamilton, for the
consideration beforementioned to release and forever discharge the said
trustees and all the members of the committee, and all other persons whatever,
from all claims, demands, actions and cause of actions, on account of trespass
or injury done to or upon the premises, during the late malignant fever in the
city of Philadelphia, etc.

Which being read and considered, was approved, and the members, named in said
articles by William Hamilton, are appointed trustees, and requested to carry
the same into execution as early as possible.

The committee appointed to present the accounts to the Minister of the French
Republic Report, that they have performed that service, and that the business
is in train for settlement.

The committee appointed to wait upon Dr. S. Duffield, not being ready to
report are continued.

The destitute and affecting situation of those children, who were deprived of
their parents and friends by the late malignant fever, and who are now under
the care of the committee, being taken under consideration, it is Agreed, that
the peculiar circumstances of these friendless innocents, require the earliest
exertions of the committee, for obtaining suitable and permanent provision for
their support and education; and that a memorial be prepared and presented to
the Legislature for that purpose. The following being produced was read and
approved. The President was requested to sign it, and the members of the
orphan-committee appointed to present it, and use their endeavors to obtain
the objects therein desired. The memorial is as follows, viz.

To the Senate and House of Representatives of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania
in general assembly meet:
The memorial of the committee appointed by the citizens of Philadelphia for
the relief of the sick, etc.

Respectfully shows,

That in the discharge of the trust committed to them by their fellow-citizens,
a number of children who were deprived of their parents by the late sickness,
were presented to the consideration of the committee, for whom they have
hitherto provided out of the donations which have been so liberally handed to
them by the generous and humane of this and other states.

That the number of children who have thus come under the notice of the
committee amount to one hundred and ninety four, of whom eighty two have been
delivered to their surviving friends, nineteen have died, and ninety three
remain still under the care of the committee, thirty eight of whom are sucking
infants.

That the committee having nearly completed the business for which they were
appointed, and feeling anxious for the future welfare of these Innocents, so
peculiarly placed by divine providence under the care of the public, request
the General Assembly, as the fathers of the people, to take the case of these
orphans into their serious consideration, and make such further provision for
their maintenance and education, as in their wisdom shall seem proper.

Signed at the request of the Committee, MATTHEW CLARKSON, President,

The managers Report, that they will furnish an inventory of the property which
is at Bush-Hill, at next meeting.

DECEMBER 28, 1793
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Samuel Benge, James Swain, Peter Helm,
James Sharswood, Thomas Wistar, Treas. John Letchworth, John Connelly, Stephen
Girard, Henry Deforest Thomas Savery, James Kerr, John Haworth, and Caleb
Lownes, Secretary.
The following donations were received since the last meeting:

Forty five dollars and twenty five cents from the inhabitants of Carnavon
township, Lancaster county, delivered by Edward Bonsall.

Ten dollars from Joseph Kirkbride, Esquire, of Bordentown, New Jersey.

Eighty nine dollars from the inhabitants of Allen-Town, New Jersey, forwarded
by the Rev. Joseph Clarke.

The committee appointed to execute the articles of agreement with William
Hamilton, Esquire. Report, that they shall soon complete the business committed to
them.

The committee appointed to wait on Dr. Duffield, not being prepared to report,
are continued.

The committee appointed to present the memorial on behalf of the orphans
Report, that they have performed that service.

The managers Report, that the following property remains at Bush-Hill, viz.

INVENTORY of Sundry Articles under lock in the M^^sion-House at Bush-Hill.
Stored in Room, No. 9.
217 Blankets, 15 ditto, new, 103 Bed Cases, 94 Pillow cases, 19 Feather beds,
three of which are claimed, 23 Feather pillows and 2 bolsters, 3 of which are
claimed, 8 Mattrasses, 92 Sheets, 34 Ruggs and quilts, 2 Table cloths, 20 Old
coats, 15 do. cotees, 25 Waistcoats, 19 pair of trowsers, 1 do. breeches, 11
Old hats, 1 band-box and bonnet, 4 Petticoats, (...) shirts, 1 Old ditto check,
3 ditto shifts, 28 Tent cloths,
Stored in Room, No. 12.
10 Shovels, 13 Pairs of Tongs, ^1 ditto Andirons, 2 Iron cranes, with 3 Hooks
and 2 Dogs, 2 Glass lanther^s 1 Iron ash-bucket ^7 Tin candlesticks 6 Iron
ditto, 49 Knives and a carving knives 31 forks, and 1 ditto, 4 pairs of
snuffers, 9^ Tin spoons 1 Coffee mill 2 Tin ladles 1 Iron ditto 1 Chopping
knife 1 Hammer 1 Sp^ke (...) 1 Iron pot of 10 gallons, 2 ditto of 8 ditto, 3
ditto, of 5 ditto, 1 Small do. of 1 do. 5 Pot hooks, 2 Iron skillets, 1
Drying Pan, 1 Old tin sauce-pan, 1 Flesh fork, 2 Iron teakettles, 25 Queen's
ware plates, 2 ditto, bowls, 6 ditto, saucers, 8 ditto, cups, 3 large milk
pans, 2 Earthen basins, 2 ditto, dishes, 70 ditto, plates, 2 ditto, stewing
pots and (...) 1 ditto, pint bowl, 16 ditto quart mugs, 10 ditto, pint ditto,
47 ditto, do porringers, 7 ditto, salt do. 5 ditto, pitchers of 3 gallons, 18
ditto, do. of half gallon, 5 ditto, do. small, 48 ditto, chamber pots, 3 Tin
porringers, 6 Red chairs, 5 Green do. 12 Scrubbing brushes, 4 Hand do. 6
sweeping do. 2 White-wash do. 3 Pieces of stove pipes, 1 Large tea cannister, 1
Small do. 1 Small looking-glass, 3 lbs of coffee, lb of pepper, 1 White tea
pot, 1 Quart bottle, 1 Si^ve, 1 Lime squeezer, 1 Ink stand, 6 Pine table^, 11
Apothecary bottles of 1 Gallon, empty, 2 Ditto, Gallon, do. 1 Ditto, 1 gallon
of Rose water, 1 Ditto, 1 gallon of Rose tincture, 1 Ditto, 1 gallon, extract
of Saturn, full, 1 Ditto, 1 do. 1 pint of tincture of bark, 1 Ditto, 1 do. 1
do. of Spirit of Nitre, 1 Black bottle, gallon with some oil of Vitriol, 1
Ditto, with fruit tincture, 1 Ditto, ditto, of Laudanum, 1 Ditto, ditto, with
pint of Bark, 1 Ditto, ditto, with do. of Assafoetada, 1 Ditto, 1 pint, with
pint of Hartshorn, 1 Apothecary bottle of 1 quart, with 1 pint of Cinnamon
water^ 1 Ditto, ditto, tincture of Castor, 1 Ditto, ditto, lb of Gum Aliba, 3
Glass Jars of 1 gallon, empty, 1 Ditto, with 1 lb of Spanish flies, 1 Ditto,
with Gum, near full, 1 Ditto, of 1 pint of Assafoetida, full, 1 Ditto, 1 do.
full, 1 Ditto, 1 pint empty, 1 Ditto, do. with castor, 1 Bla^k square bottle
gallon with 3 lb. g^ll nutts, 1 Ditto, do. full epicacuanha, 1 Paper containing
2 lb. of nitre, 1 Ditto, 3 lb. of Cammomile flowers, 1 China jar of gallon with
2 lb, gum, 5 Ditto, do. of ointment, 1 Ditto, do. empty, 1 Galley pot,
containing elder ointment, 2 Large china jarrs 4 gallons with tops, empty, 1
Ditto, 1 do. with salve, 5 Ditto, do. each empty, 1 Brock with little honey, 1
Keg containing 6 lb. of ginger, 1 Bundle of white skins, 1 box containing 50
lb. whitning, 1 Tub and 1 box containing 100 lb of glauber salts, 1 Apothecary
bottle of gallon containing pint lavender wa^e, 6 lb. of rosin, 2 Seringers, 1
Glass pestel and mortar, 2 Marble do. 2 Funnels, 1 Box containing sundry Doct.
instruments, with (...) pair scales and w^^. 1 Case and three new razors.
Stored in the Cellar.
147 Common bedsteads, 1 Large bathing tub, 2 Small do. 1 Milk cow out of
doors, 1 New frame building 60 feet front by 18 feet deep with windows, etc.
complete. 1 Washing to tub, 20 Buckets, 1 Rum keg 5 gallons empty.
Stephan Girard, Manager. Joshua Freeman, Clark.


The bedsteads obtained from the prison in the early stage of the disorder are
returned to the place from whence they were taken.

The committee appointed to wait upon the guardians of the poor Report, that
having had a conference with that body, they had agreed to appoint a committee
to communicate to this committee the result of their determinations concerning
the poor at Bush-Hill.

The said committee appearing inform that the guardians of the poor are
prepared and willing to receive such poor persons, at present at Bush-Hill, as
are in a condition to be removed, and who are destitute of the means of
providing for themselves.

DECEMBER 31st, 1793.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, Samuel Benge, John
Haworth, James Sharswood, Thomas Wistar, Treas. Henry Deforest, James Swain,
John Letchworth, John Connelly, James Kerr, Stephen Girard, Thomas Savery, and
Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
Seventeen hundred and fifty one dollars and eighty seven cents were received
from the auctioneer, being the neat proceeds of the donation in vinegar,
candles and lemon juice from Boston.

Seventy seven dollars and thirty three cents were received from New-Hanover
and Marlborough townships, Montgomery county, by the hands of John Richards,
Esquire.

A committee of three members from the guardians of the poor attending, a
conference was had respecting the manner and time of removing the indigent at
Bush-Hill to the Almshouse; Israel Israel, John Connelly and Caleb Lownes,
with the managers, are appointed a committee to inspect the state of the
patients, and cause such as are in a condition to be removed, to be conveyed
there are early as possible, and make report

The apology offered by Thomas Wistar, the treasurer, for not attending the
meetings of the committee for some time past, on account of his health, which
rendered it unsafe for him to go abroad in the evenings, was accepted.

Stephen Girard produced the following propositions relative to preparing the
business, so as to enable the committee to resign the trust committed to their
charge, viz.

To the Committee for the relief of the sick, etc.
GENTLEMEN,
As a manager of the Hospital at Bush-Hill and the one who organized that
institution, I think that as we are advancing toward the moment of closing the
business entrusted to our care by our fellow-citizens, it is my duty to state
to you my ideas upon that subject (...) the following manner:

FIRST. That the managers shall not admit into the Hospital any patients to
become chargeable to the public, except those who may have an order of
admittance from the committee, and the managers shall also take proper steps to
reduce as much as possible the expenses of said Hospital.

SECOND. The convalescents, old, aged or infirm persons, now in the hospital,
shall be immediately discharged.

THIRD. The sick in the Mansion House shall be taken care of until they are fit
to be discharged or removed with safety.

FOURTH. Two or more members of the committee should be appointed to wait on
the Minister of the French Republic, with directions to give him notice of the
approach of our dissolution, and to request him to provide a place for the
reception of his sick now in the Hospital at Bush-Hill, and also to ask of the
said Minister the payment of a bill handed to him by the committee, which is
still unpaid.

FIFTH. That the committee will take into their consideration the services
which Mrs. Mary Saville, matron of said Hospital, has rendered to our sick
brethren in that institution, and make to this valuable woman such compensation
as they shall think adequate to her merit.

SIXTH. That a sufficient sum of money be immediately borrowed, either from the
banks or private citizens, in the name of the committee, for the purpose of
paying and discharging every debt, etc. relative to the Hospital of Bush-Hill,
and contracted by the committee since the 16th of September last.

SEVENTH. At the period of the dissolution of the Hospital -- an inventory of
every article belonging to it should be made, and after having cleansed the
house, goods and furniture, that the goods should be stored, together with the
drugs, medicine, etc. belonging to the apothecaries and doctors department, in
one or more rooms of the Mansion House under lock.

EIGHTH. With regard to the property belonging to deceased patients at the
Hospital of Bush-Hill, deposited by the managers in the hand^ of the committee,
consisting of Twenty two pounds five shillings and five pence in money, five
pocket-books or bundles of paper, three silver watches, seven pairs of silver
buckles, one pair of silver buttons, one silver tea-spoon, five gold rings,
three and a half pairs of earrings, and one box.

I shall make the following proposals:

NINTH. The money, say twenty two pounds five shillings and five pence, to be
lodged in the hands of the treasurer.

TENTH. The papers and pocket-books, with the inventory of the same, to be
deposited in the hands of the secretary.

ELEVENTH. The silver watches, buckles, etc. to be delivered to Mr. Connelly,
with directions to sell those articles at vendue, and to render an account
thereof to the committee, and the nett proceeds, into the hands of the
treasurer.

I am with Esteem, Gentlemen, Your most obedient, Humble Servant, STEPHEN
GIRARD.
Philadelphia, December 31, 1793.

Which being considered were agreed to, except what relates to making
compensation to the matron, which was referred to Stephen Girard, Israel
Israel, J. Connelly and C. Lownes, who are directed to take her services into
consideration and report thereon.

The committee appointed to wait on Doctor Samuel Duffield, are continued.

On Motion it was Agreed, that the distributing committee proceed to the
delivery of the wood to indigent citizens, who may be thought suitable objects
of this charity.

JANUARY 4th, 1794.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Peter Helm, Samuel Benge, John Connelly,
James Swain, Thomas Wistar, Treas. John Letchworth, Stephen Girard Israel
Israel, James Kerr, James Sharswood, Thomas Savery, Henry Deforest, and Caleb
Lownes, Secretary.
The committee appointed to inspect the state of the Hospital Report, that they
have attended to that service, that they have discharged eleven of the
patients, and that they are of opinion, that although there still remain some
in a very feeble and low state, yet that the whole may with care be removed, in
a few days, without material injury, most of them being in a fair way of
recovery; those having habitations in the city will be able to provide for
themselves, after gaining a little more strength: there yet remain fifteen in
the Hospital.

Whereupon it was Resolved,

That the committee continue their attention to the business and have the house
cleared, the nurses and attendants discharged, and the accounts prepared, in
order to a sinal closure of the business of the committee.

The committee appointed to consider the services of the matron, and what
compensation should be made to her in addition to the stipulated wages at which
she was employed to conduct her department at the Hospital, Report, that they
have made enquiry into her conduct and services, and find that they have been
highly commendable; that she has performed her duties with great propriety and
fidelity; that her unremitted care of the numerous sick, her sympathetic and
maternal attention to the afflicted not only merits the approbation of the
committee, but justly entitles her to the grateful acknowledgements of her
fellow-citizens, and that she ought to be presented with a further
compensation, as a reward and in testimony of the sentiments which the
committee entertain of her services. Which report being approved, it was
Agreed, that the compensation shall be determined at a future meeting.

Israel Israel, John Connelly and Caleb Lownes were appointed to wait on the
Minister of France, and inform him, -- that the committee are bringing their
business to a close, that it will not be in their power longer to continue
their care of the sick French citizens, who were received at Bush-Hill by
request of the secretary of the French Legation; that although by agreement
they were to be removed when the sick citizens should be discharged, they may
nevertheless remain where they are, until a suitable place can be obtained, to
which they may be removed, with convenience to them and our fellow-citizens;
subject however to the directions of the trustees who have that place under
their care.

On Motion Resolved, that the President, S. Girard, James Sharswood, John
Letchworth, Thomas Wistar, John Connelly and Caleb Lownes, be a committee to
enquire into the unfinished business necessary to be brought forward, and
report thereon.

Stephen Girard produced an additional proposition for the consideration of the
committee, which being considered of great consequence to the health of our
fellow citizens, it was Agreed, that it be recommended with the others, to be
promoted as far as the opportunities and influence of the committee will permit.

Which proposition is as follows:

To the Committee for the relief of the sick, etc.
GENTLEMEN,
In our answer to the Governor's letter, respecting our opinion in taking the
necessary steps to prevent as much as possible, a future calamity in the city
and suburbs, we have omitted that essential part of cleansing the docks, which
the filth and dirtiness at low water contributes greatly in giving an
infectious air through the whole city.

In order to make proper observations on that subject, I propose to leave it to
a committee of four, who will report thereon the next meeting.

I am with Esteem, Gentlemen, Your most obedient Servant, STEPHEN GIRARD.
Jan. 4th, 1793.

A committee of three members from the society for promoting first day or
Sunday schools attended and offered to receive the orphans under our care, to
partake of the benefits designed by that institution, which was taken under
consideration, and agreed to be referred till next meeting.

JANUARY 8th, 1794.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. John Letchworth, James Kerr, James
Swain, Peter Helm, James Sharswood, Israel Israel, John Haworth, Henry
Deforest, Thomas Wistar, Treas. John Connelly, Stephen Girard, Samuel Benge,
Jacob Weaver, and Caleb Lownes, Sec.
One hundred and ninety dollars were received from Joseph Shotwell of
Bridgetown or Raway, New Jersey, being the donation before mentioned in page 72.

The secretary handed the following sums to the committee, which were directed
to be paid to the treasurer, to be applied agreeably to the design of the
donors, viz.

Eighty eight dollars received from Montgomery county by the hands of James
Morris, Esquire, and eleven dollars and eighty ninetieths from Mount-Holly by
Peter Shiras, Esquire.

The committee appointed to settle with William Hamilton, Esquire, having
performed that business, the committee are enabled to answer the question
proposed to them by the guardians of the poor, relative to affording assistance
in discharging the debt arising from the possession of the property at
Bush-Hill, for the use of the afflicted citizens, it was on Motion Resolved,
that the committee formerly appointed to wait upon the guardians of the poor be
directed to communicate to them the terms upon which the settlement was made,
and request information what they will contribute toward the payment thereof.

The committee appointed to wait on the Minister of France Report, that they
have had a conference with the secretary of the legation, who informed them,
that the minister had agreed to take charge of the sick French people at
Bush-Hill on the 13th instant, and to provide for them; that he will take such
part of the medicine, kitchen utensils, etc. and such other things as may be
agreed upon; that he will use every endeavor to obtain suitable accommodations
for the sick, and have them removed as soon as possible; and that the amount of
the first bill shall be immediately paid, as well as all future demands, when
called upon therefore.

Stephen Girard is desired to wait on the Minister, and receive the moneys due
for the accommodation, support and attendance of the sick and wounded
abovementioned.

Stephen Girard and Peter Helm are appointed to value and dispose of such
articles, as may be wanted for the use of the French; they are requested to
desire the aid of Dr. Deveze in the above business.

The Legislature having the subject of providing for the orphans before them,
the proposition of the society for promoting first day or Sunday schools is
agreed to be deferred to a future day.

JANUARY 11th, 1794.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Stephen Girard, James Kerr, Henry
Deforest, Thomas Wistar, Treas. Jacob Whitman, Israel Israel, Peter Helm, John
Letchworth, James Sharswood, John Connelly, Samuel Benge, and Caleb Lownes,
Sec.
One hundred and thirty one dollars were received from Darby, by the hands of
Thomas Park, and twenty dollars and seventy five cents from Moor's-town, by
the hands of Richard Smith.

The committee appointed to discharge the patients, nurses, etc. from Bush-Hill
Report, that they have discharged all those that were able to remove to the
city; that those who were indigent and infirm, and had no other means of
relief, are sent to the Almshouse; that they have discharged all the nurses
and attendants, except the matron and women employed in washing the bedding,
and other articles necessary to be preserved or disposed off.

The committee think it a duty incumbent on them, to add that in the
performance of this service, the affectionate and tender expressions of the
patients, and the kind manner in which the separation between them and the
worthy matron and faithful attendants took place, affords the strongest reason
to conclude, that the arduous undertaking has been performed with every
attention and tenderness, which the nature of the afflicting calamity would
permit; and that the survivors will long remember, with grateful sentiments,
the benefits which they have derived from an institution, supported by the
liberal donations of sympathising fellow citizens, in this and neigbouring
States.

The committee further inform that twelve couples, who were either patients or
employed in the service of the Hospital at Bush-Hill, have been married since
the commencement of that institution; and one other person, who was employed
there, has taken a wife in the city.

The committee, appointed to distribute the beef presented by John Nicholson,
Esquire, Report, that upon examining the casks, they find it has suffered a
little by the loss of pickle. Peter Helm and Henry Deforest are appointed a
committee to distribute it, without delay, to the poor, agreeably to the design
of the donor.

Twelve barrels of flour were received from Donegal township, Lancaster county,
forwarded from Jacob Graybill's mill, accompanied by a letter from Paul
Zantzinger Esquire, at Lancaster.

On Motion Resolved, that the treasurer, by public advertisement, request all
persons having demands against the committee to produce them immediately, in
order to a final settlement.

JANUARY 18th, 1794.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Thomas Savery, Samuel Benge, James
Sharswood, John Haworth, Stephen Girard, John Letchworth, Israel Israel, James
Kerr, Henry Deforest, James Swain, and Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
Stephen Girard presented the keys of the Hospital at Bush-Hill: The property
belonging to the committee, mentioned in the inventory, is deposited in the
Mansion House, and is committed to the care of the trustees appointed to the
charge of that place, until further orders shall be taken thereon. He also
presented three thousand and seventy dollars and thirty nine cents, which sum
he had received from the Minister of France, for the accommodation and support
of the French citizens at Bush-Hill.

The following donations have been received.
Ninety dollars from Jeremiah Yello^ of Baltimore. One hundred and thirty seven
dollars and eighty seven cents, from Northumberland county, by the hands of
Frederick Antes, Esquire. Thirty four dollars and sixty seven cents, from
citizens of Philadelphia, resident in and near Darby. Four dollars and sixty
seven cents from a person unknown, presented by Israel Israel. One hundred
dollars from Samuel Chew, Esquire, of Chester town, Maryland.
The following parcels of flour have been received as donations from Lancaster
county, and as the whole were not entered in the minutes at the time they were
received, Resolved, that the list be now inserted; and is as follows: Donations
in Flour received from Lancaster County.
Townships. By whom forwarded. Waggoner's Names. Warwick, J. Gingrict, M.
Miller, 14 Cocolico, P. Martin, E. Bar, 12 Manor, V. Rummel, J. Goodman, A.
Hare, 11 Lampeter, C. Lower, 14 C. Yosedi, C. Doner, 14 John Smith, 7 Ditto,
and Strasburg, E. Moore, 13 48 Earl F. Seiger, J. Brightenstein 14 Ditto, P.
Werrentz, 14 Ditto, H. Tanny, 11 Ditto, 15 54 Manheim, J. Baughman, L. Holl, 14
M. Mayer, B. Bastian, 13 25 Con^stogo, J. Baughman, J. Bar's team, 15 Donegal,
J. Graybill's mill, V. Wishaupt, 12 Neighb. of the borough, R. Hare's do. 6, C.
Stower's do. 4, J. Stigelman, 10 Rapho, M. Kauffman, 13 Brought to the city,
and put down by the waggoners, without giving an account from what township
they were sent, 22 Barrels, 236

The committee appointed to enquire into the business that remains unfinished,
Report, that attention has been paid thereto, -- and propose that a person be
appointed to collect all the debts due to the committee, which being
considered, -- Stephen Girard was requested to employ a suitable person to make
out the accounts and produce them as early as it can be effected.

Stephen Girard and John Connelly are requested to dispose of the property left
by deceased persons at Bush-Hill, and produce an account thereof.

JANUARY 21st, 1794.
Present, James Swain, Samuel Benge, John Connelly, John Letchworth, Stephen
Girard James Sharswood, Israel Israel, James Kerr, Thomas Wistar, Treas. Henry
Deforest, and Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
The Secretary Reports, that the sum of two thousand dollars has been paid to
William Hamilton, Esquire. for the use of Bush-Hill, and five hundred dollars in
lie^ of repairs; agreeably to the direction of the committee of the 24th
December.

The President Reports, that Doctor Deveze has been paid the sum of fifteen
hundred dollars; agreeably to the direction of the committee.

Stephen Girard Reports, that sundry articles at Bush-Hill will be necessary
for the use of the sick French people, who are there; for the purchase whereof
application has been made, Agreed, that he dispose of them and render accounts.

On motion, Resolved, that James Kerr, and Samuel Benge, be a committee to
apply to Joseph Ogden for an account of the dead by him interred during the
late calamity -- ascertain the number; and make report.

JANUARY 24th, 1794.

The evening being stormy, there was no meeting.

FEBRUARY 1st, 1794.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. James Kerr, James Sharswood, Thomas
Wistar, Treas. Thomas Savery, John Letchworth, Samuel Benge, Stephen Girard and
Caleb Lownes, Sec.
Forty five dollars and eighteen cents were received from Providence township,
Montgomery county, by the hands of the Rev. Slator Clay. One hundred and fifty
dollars from Bucks county, by Isaac Chapman Esquire. Forty three dollars and
fifteen cents, from Chanceford township, York county, by J. Short. Eighteen
dollars and thirty five cents from New Holland Lancaster county, by the hands
of Frederick Seiger. And sixty two dollars from St. John's church, Salisbury
township, Lancaster county, by the hands of John Hopkins and James Henderson.

The committee appointed to settle with Dr. Sommerkamp, Report, that as they
could not agree to admit his bill without the inspection of persons of skill in
such business, the have agreed to refer it to arbitration.

The committee appointed to apply to John Swanwick, concerning the use of the
house occupied by the orphans, Report, that having informed him of the desire
of the committee to compensate him for the use of that building, he cheerfully
relinquished all claim upon the committee, and added, that he had no demand to
make, nor would he receive any thing for the use thereof.

Israel Israel presented eight dollars and sixteen cents from Alexander
Addison, agreeably to his direction, as per minutes of the 3d, December.

Stephen Girard Reports, that he has disposed of a quantity of the property, at
Bush-Hill, to the French Minister, for the use of the French patients, to the
amount of 1008.27 dollars, which he now presents to the committee,

William Zane presented to the Treasurer the balance of the donations from the
Citizens of Philadelphia, residing in and near Darby, amounting in the whole to
1555.9 as per the following list, viz.

List of Donations by Citizens of Philadelphia, resident in and near Darby.
Dols. Cts. Dols. Cts. Thomas Armatt, 20 Captain Art, 5 George Ashton, 20
Thomas Affleck, 10 Thomas Billington, 20 T. Harrison, Shoe. 2 William Brown, 20
Raper Hoskins, 20 William Bell, 20 Robert Hare, 40 Thomas Bickham, 2 Henry
Ingle, 5 Thomas Bliss, 5 James Josiah, 10 Theodore Bliss, 4.67 William Kinsey,
8 George Bickham, 50 Daniel King, 5 Will. Crumpton, 5 John Kincaid, 5 James
Carson, 5 Peter Kuhn, 20 Sam. Claphampson, 20 James Lyle, 20 Robert Coe, 8
Isaac Lloyd, 30 Joseph Cauffman, 5 Thomas Leiper, 50 John Caldwell, 20 John
Lupton, 20 Eli Canby, 4.67 E. E. Maddock, 5 Cash,.50 W. L. Maddock, 5 Ditto, J.
L. 10 John Morgan, 1 Ditto, 1.57 James Milligan, 20 Ditto, 3.80 William Milnor,
10.21 Ditto, 5 Jos. P. Norris, 50 Ditto, 6.67 Philip Nicklin, 20 Ditto, 5 James
Oldden, 20 Adam Diehl, 5 Isaac Pearson, 10 Andrew Davis, 5 John Poultney, 20
John Elmslie, jun. 40 James Pemberton, 20 Jeremiah Fisher, 10 Isaac Price, 16
William Guier, 10 Thomas Parker 12 John Guier, 10 Samuel Price, 20 Joseph Gray,
8 John Ross, 10 Joseph Govett, 8 Ross and Simpson, 20 Elisha Gordon, 8 Matthias
Sadler, 10 Herbts and L^x, 16 John Sproa^, 10 Gavin Hamilton, 20 David Seckel,
10 Ed. Hanlon, 1 Laurence Seckle, 10 Henry Seickle, 10 James Thompson, 1
William Sheaff, 100 Edward Tilghman, 50 John Stapleton, 5 John Thompson, 20
James B. Smith, 10 Thomas Willing, 60 Joseph Sharpless, 10 William Weaver, 37
Woolman Sutton, 5 William Weed, 10 Jesse Sharpless, 20 George Weed, 20 Henry
Sheaff, 20 William Wood, 10 Leeson Simmons, 10 John Wharton, 50 James Smith,
jun. 20 John Wall, 30 John Swire, 20 William Wells, 5 John E. Sword, 20 William
Zane, 40 James Todd, 20

FEBRUARY 5th, 1794.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Israel Israel, John Letchworth, Thomas
Wistar, Treas. Thomas Savery, Samuel Benge, James Sharswood, James Swain, and
Caleb Lownes, Sec.
Samuel Benge presented ten dollars, a donation forwarded by the hands of
Thomas Us^ick, from "a friend to the afflicted" for the use of the orphans --
which was delivered to the Treasurer to be appropriated agreeably to the design
of the donor.

The committee appointed to forward the unfinished business Report, that they
still continue their attention thereto and that they hope that the whole will
be ready to be closed in about two weeks.

FEBRUARY 9th, 1794.
A stormy evening -- no meeting.

FEBRUARY 12, 1794.
Present James Sharswood, Chairman, pro. tem. John Letchworth, Secretary, pro.
tem. Samuel Benge, Thomas Wistar, Treas. John Haworth, James Swain, John
Connelly, Peter Helm, Matthew Carey, Thomas Savery,
The committee of accounts Report, that on examining the accounts of James
Wilson, deceased, they find that all the transactions therein mentioned have
taken place previous to the organization of this committee, and the whole are
blended with those of the guardians of the poor; they therefore recommend that
the said accounts be referred to the consideration of that body; which being
approved, it was on Motion Resolved, that John Connelly, John Haworth and
Thomas Wistar be a committee to wait upon the board of guardians with the
accounts, and to request that they will take measures for the discharge of them.

Seventy two dollars and fifty eight cents were paid by Israel Wheelen to the
treasurer, being the balance of donations from the north-west district of
Chester county, amounting in the whole ^o eleven hundred and sixty dollars and
forty six cents.

FEBRUARY 15th, 1794.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. John Letchworth, Matthew Carey, Thomas
Wistar, Treas. James Sharswood, Stephen Girard, Israel Israel, John Connelly,
Samuel Benge, and Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
The treasurer Reports, that he has discharged the obligations to the bank of
North America, for six thousand five hundred dollars* and that the President
and Directors have declined receiving interest for the use thereof. The early
and ample supplies furnished by the Bank, the offers of money to any amount,
and the many friendly aids received from it, demanding the grateful
acknowledgements of the committee.

It was therefore on Motion Resolved, that the President be requested to
present the thanks of this committtee to the President, Directors and Company
of the Bank of North America, for the prompt, liberal, and friendly and
afforded by them to the committee, in their endeavors to relieve their
afflicted fellow-citizens during the prevalence of the late malignant disorder.

The President communicated the following letter:

Albany, January 28 1794. DEAR SIR,
WE have the honor to to transmit you the sum of 866 40/100 dollars collected
by voluntary donation pursuant to the enclosed resolves.

We should have addressed you at an earlier period, if we had not been
prevented by the distresses of our fellow citizens, occasioned by a ^^re which
has recently destroyed the most flourishing part of our city, and from its
consequences been the means of (...) the sum we expected to raise for the
relief of the poor in Philadelphia.

We sincerely deplored the loss of the many valuable citizens you were deprived
of by the late contagious disorder, and rejoice that all fears of its return
are at length dissipated.

We are Sir with sentiments of esteem your very humble servants, Goldsbrow
Banyar, Jacob Ja. Lansing, Barent G. Staats, Stephen Lush, John H. Wendell,
Jeremiah Lansing, Abraham Ten Eyck, K. K. Van Rensselaer. Matthew Clarkson, Esquire.



Philadelphia, February 14, 1794. GENTLEMEN,
I HAVE received your favor of the 28 ultimo covering a note of the bank of
New York for 866 40/100 dollars a donation from a number of the citizens of
Albany, for the relief of the poor of this city. This testimony of symphathy
for our distress, at a time when you are laboring under the effects of a
dreadful calamity which has reduced the most flourishing part of your city to
ashes, enhances the value of the donation and of the obligation conferred.

With sentiments of esteem and gratitude.

I am Gentlemen, Your most obedient Servant, MATTHEW CLARKSON.
(...). Banyar, I. I. Lansing, Staats, Lush, W^^d^ll, I. Lansing, Ten Eyck, and
Van Rensselaer,

John Connelly having been repeatedly attacked by the late prevailing fever,
was prevented giving regular attendance at the meetings of the committee -- and
when able to be abroad was constantly employed in visiting the sick whose
destitute situation rendered such friendly offices more than usually necessary.

The Secretary Reports, that he has received the following donations, for the
relief of the afflicted, viz. From Thomas Palmer, late of this city now in
New York, merchant, thirty dollars.

Samuel Livezey of Montgomery county, eight do.

Aaron Middleton, balance of the donations collected by the inhabitants of
Woodbury, fifty seven dollars and ninety cents.

From the inhabitants of Montgomery county, by James Morris, ten dollars.

George Rieff, from several townships in said county, eight pounds seven and
eleven pence halfpenny.

Fifty three dollars and seventy eight cents were received from Isaac Chapman,
Esquire. of Bucks county.

The committee appointed to wait upon the guardians of the poor Report, that
they have delivered to them the accounts of James Wilson deceased, which they
have agreed to discharge.

On Motion Resolved, that James Sharswood, John Connelly, and Caleb Lownes, be
a committee, to prepare a report to our fellow citizens, to be delivered to
them at the general meeting.

It was also Agreed, that the copy right of the proceedings of this committee,
now in the press, be vested in Matthew Clarkson, John Connelly and Caleb Lownes
in trust, for the use of the members thereof, the ne^t proceeds of which to be
disposed of as the said members or a majority of them or a majority of the
survivors of them shall determine.

FEBRUARY 18, 1794.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Thomas Savery, James Sharswood, John
Letchworth, John Connelly, Thomas Wistar, Treas. Samuel Benge, Matthew Carey,
James Kerr, James Swain, Stephen Girard, Caleb Lownes, Secretary.
The committee to whom was referred the examination of the accounts of Joseph
Ogden Report, that it appears that he has buried 502 persons in Potters Field
by orders from the committee and 506 in the Potters Field and the New Ground,
from the Hospital, making together 1008, which at five shillings each, is two
hundred and fifty two pounds, that he has received thirty seven pounds ten,
that there remains due two hundred and fourteen pounds ten shillings, which
being considered was approved and the Treasurer directed to discharge the same.

The orphan committee presented the following inventory of property at the
orphan house, -- Additional buildings, one ten plate stove with eighteen feet
of pipe, one six plate do. eighteen feet of pipe, one six windsor chairs, one
large trunk, one do. iron pot, one do. washing kettle, thirty four tin cups,
twenty four pewter spoons, one large tin coffee pot, one coffee mill, two pair
flat irons, five washing tubs, four pine tables, six do. benches, seven water
buckets, four flat candlesticks, fifteen pair rose blankets, thirty nine single
indian do. twenty seven straw matrasses, twelve board bedsteads, fifteen small
sheets, three narrow table cloths, two iron ranes, one axe, one wheel barrow,
one water cask, one cradle one large ironing table.

John Connelly Reports, that he has disposed of the property left by deceased
persons at Bush-Hill; the nett proceeds whereof amounts to thirty three dollars
and six cents.

FEBRUARY 22d, 1794.
Present, James Sharswood, Chairman Pro. tem. James Kerr, Thomas Wistar, Treas.
Peter Helm, Matthew Carey, James Swain, John Letchworth, Israel Israel, Samuel
Benge, John Haworth, and Caleb Lownes, Sec.
Samuel Benge delivered to the Treasurer two dollars, which he received from
the estate of James O'Mahony; for a coffin.

The orphan committee Report, that they have sold eleven barrels of flour at
42s. the amount whereof they delivered to the Treasurer.

FEBRUARY 24, 1794.
Several members attended, but no particular business being brought forward,
adjourned.

MARCH 1st, 1794.
Present, Stephen Girard, John Connelly, Samuel Benge, Thomas Wistar, Treas.
James Sharswood, John Letchworth, Peter Helm, James Kerr, Matthew Carey, and
Caleb Lownes, Sec.
The committee of accounts Report that the referees to whom the adjustment of
Doctor Sommerkamp's bill was referred, have awarded that the sum of 1110.50
dollars be paid to him.

The Secretary Reports that he has received seventeen pounds two shillings and
six pence the proceeds of flour a donation from the inhabitants of Charlestown
township.

John Letchworth presented one dollar, a donation from Thomas Watson.

MARCH 4, 1794.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Jmes Sharswood, Thomas Wistar, Treas.
John Letchworth, Matthew Carey, John Connelly, Israel Israel, James Kerr, and
Caleb Lownes, Sec.
On Motion Resolved, that the trustees of Bush-Hill, cause all the bedding and
drapery which remain there, to be washed again, well aired, and so disposed of
as to prevent any future danger, and that the Treasurer pay to them fifty
dollars for this purpose.

The subject of compensating Mary Saville being again taken into consideration,
it was Agreed that as the committee have not funds to reward her, that her
meretorious services be stated to the general meeting of the citizens.

On Motion Resolved, that the Treasurer pay into the hands of the orphan
committee the sum of three hundred dollars to enable them to discharge the
debts due from that institution, and for the present support of the orphans,
until more effectual measures shall be provided.

The committee appointed to draw up a report of the proceedings of this
committee, to be laid before their constituents, produced an Essay -- which
being considered, and having undergone some alterations was agreed to.

The Secretary is desired to request the attendance of the Citizens, at the
City-Hall on Saturday the 8th Instant at 3 o'clock, to receive the said report,
which is as follows --

HAVING been appointed a Committee on the 14th of September last, at a meeting
of the citizens, called by the Mayor, for the purpose of alleviating the
sufferings of our fellow-citizens, who were laboring under the afflicting
sickness, which then prevailed; we have requested your attendance, in order
briefly to report to you our proceedings; referring you for more particular
information to our minutes, which are in the press, and to our accounts, now
produced for your inspection.

Upon entering on the duties of our appointment, we found many families of the
poor struggling under disease and want. And that the house of William Hamilton,
at Bush-Hill, which had been taken possession of, and converted into an
hospital, for their accommodation, contained several sick persons in a
deplorable situation. Two of our members offering their services to superintend
that institution, they were appointed managers thereof, and by their exertion
and attention it was conducted with order and regularity. About one thousand
persons were removed to it (in carriages provided for the purpose) and supplied
with every requisite, to render them comfortable, that the exigency of the
times and our situation would admit of.

Notwithstanding the great mortality which prevailed there, we think ourselves
warranted in the belief, that much distress was prevented and the sufferings of
many greatly alleviated. We cannot with propriety omit informing you, that the
tenderness and care exercised by Mary Savill (the matron of the hospital) to
the sick, were such as intitles her to your generous notice.

The extreme distress to which many families were reduced rendering it
impossible for them to procure the interment of their deceased connections, it
became one of our most pressing duties to provide for the burial of such
persons, and therefore we procured coffins and carriages, and employed suitable
persons to attend to this mournful part of the service.

In the progress of the disease, many children were bereft of their parents,
and the general distress preventing individuals from attending to their exposed
situations, we were impelled to take charge of such orphans, and of course it
became necessary to provide a a suitable house, with a matron and attendants
and a number of wet nurses This was done and the whole placed under the
direction of four of our members especially appointed for that purpose: of one
hundred and ninety-two of these helpless innocents, who came under our care,
ninety-four have been reclaimed by their friends, twenty seven have died, and
seventy-one yet remain; on whose behalf we have applied to the Legislature, but
as they have not come to a determination on our application, we therefore
earnestly recommend these orphans to your immediate attention.

The calamitous state of the city caused an universal stagnation of business
and increased the number of the indigent so much, that in order to obtain a
knowledge of their real situation and guard against imposition, in relieving
their wants, we found it necessary to call for assistance; when a number of
respectable inhabitants of the city and suburbs came forward to our aid, under
the title of the Assistant Committee, who rendered very essential service by
recommending suitable objects; which facilitated the distribution of money,
provisions and firewood, from the 14th October to the 23d November, to upwards
of one thousand families, weekly.

These different operations requiring considerable funds, and the major part of
the overseers of the poor, as well as most of the officers of government and
police being removed; recourse was had to the president and directors of the
bank of North America, who cheerfully accommodated us with six thousand five
hundred dollars; which we have been enabled to repay by the subsequent
liberality of our fellow citizens of this and other states, whose donations to
us have amounted to twenty nine thousand and eighty five dollars seventy seven
cents, besides which we have received 5316 dollars, 32 cents, for sundries
mentioned in our accounts; which sums fall short of that expended by us, three
thousand two hundred and forty five dollars twelve cents.

The mode of supplying this deficiency you will doubtless conceive to be a part
of the business of the present meeting.

As no public provision is made in case we should be visited with a similar
affliction (to which all great commercial cities are exposed) it was deemed
essential, after compensating the proprietor of Bush-Hill for the use made of
his property, to secure a resort to it again, should it be found necessary,
before the 25th of March, 1795; this was done and it is still in our possession
-- wherein are deposited such articles as remain on hand belonging to the
Hospital. The appropriation of these articles is an object which will claim
your attention.

The consideration of the propriety of establishing an Hospital in the
neighborhood of this city, for persons afflicted with infectious diseases,
which at the time of our appointment was referred to us, would have claimed our
more particular attention, had not the subject through the recommendation of
the Governor, been taken up by the legislature.

We think it proper to inform you, that on the 13th day of October, a number of
sick and wounded Frenchmen arrived here, on board the ship Citizen of
Mars^ill^es from the hospital of Cape Francois; which alarming the inhabitants,
we at the pressing solicitation of the secretary of the French legation, and to
dispel the public fears, admitted these diseased strangers into part of the
buildings at Bush-Hill, the expenses which occurred, have been reimbursed.

Although we have to lament the loss of Andrew Adgate, Jonathan D. Sergeant,
Joseph Inskeep and Daniel Offley, four of our member^, who faithful to the
trust reposed in them, perseveringly discharged, with the most benevolent
attention, its various duties, until dea^^ put a period to their exertions, and
they fell themselves under the blow they were warding o^^ from other^^ yet
while we look back with mournful regret to the l^ss of our companions,
gratitude to the supreme disposer of events requires our acknowledgment of his
interposition in the preservation of our own lives, and those of so many of our
fellow citizens.

By desire of the Committee, MATTHEW CLARKSON, President.
Philadelphia March 8th, 1794.
A STATEMENT of the Expenditures of the Members of the Committee, appointed for
the Relief of the Sick, etc.
Members Names. Bus^hill, sick, coffins, etc. Poor. Orphan House. In^id^^^^
charges. Total. Samuel Benge, 1197 85 591 87 49 25 117 84 1956 8^ James
Sharswood, 101 63 1034 42 1598 96 18 2^53 1 Israel Israel, 456 19 799 81 6^ 24
6 35 1327 59 Thomas Harrison, 97 68 97 68 Stephen Girard, 2930 9 2930 9 Peter
Helm, 1218 17 1218 17 John Haworth, 175 17 1087 60 13 16 2275 93 Jacob Whitman,
50 50 Thomas Savery, 272 44 47 29 60 31 380 4 James Swain, 287 76 2384 59 2672
35 James Kerr, 502 1^99 37 531 69 16 65 2349 71 Matthew Carey, 1^ ^5 54 71 ^6
46 Henry Deforest, 4454 ^6 ^^0 26 149 60 110 39 4974 41 Andrew Adgate, 93 58 93
58 Joseph Inskeep, 193 98 103 2 298 98 John Letchworth, 256 74 498 96 455 62 ^0
8 1221 40 Caleb Lownes, 2900 29 145 77 90 3136 6 Thomas Wistar, 6941 99 466 35
794 82 386 8^ 858^ 99 23079 72 9781 4 ^808 65 722 85 3639^ 26 Dr. The Citizens
of Philadelphia, etc. In account with the Committee, etc.
To cash expended, per account of particulars. 36392. 26 To the following debts
(...); To Dr. Somerkamp, 1110. 50 John St^^l, 3. 66 Joseph Fry, 10 Wistar and
Cook, 106 A note credited among donation payment r^^uled 25 1^55. 16 3^6^^. 42
To balance of the above, 3245. ^^ Cr.
By donations r^^. in cash, 29^^^ ^7 By ^ash of French patients, 30^^ 3^ By do.
of do. and others, 2^45 93 By balance due the com. 3^^^ ^3 37^47 4^

It was on motion of A. J. Dallas, Esquire. seconded by Jonathan B. Smith, Esquire.
unanimously

Resolved, that a committee be appointed to prepare an instrument, expressive
of the most cordial, grateful and fraternal thanks of the citizens of
Philadelphia, for the important, hazardous, and successful services which were
rendered by the committee of health during the calamity that lately afflicted
the city and make report to the next general meeting of the citizens.

Resolved, That the committee so appointed do consider and report at the next
meeting of the citizens, what measures it will be expedient to adopt for
carrying into effect the benevolent measures, recommended in the report of the
Committee of health.

Resolved, That the citizens aforesaid do meet in the City-Hall, on Saturday
next, the 15th Instant, at 5 o'Clock in the afternoon, to receive the report of
their committee.

The following committee was appointed to carry into effect the said
resolutions, the Hon. Thomas M'Kean, Esquire. A. J. Dallas, Anthony Morris,
Jonathan B. Smith, John Swanwick, Charles Biddle, and Doctor William Rogers.

THOMAS M'KEAN, Chairman. ANTHONY MORRIS, Secretary.


MARCH 7, 1794.
Present, Matthew Clarkson, President. Stephen Girard, James Sharswood, Israel
Israel, Thomas Wistar, Treas. Samuel Benge, John Letchworth, Matthew Carey,
John Haworth, John Connelly, Peter Helm, James Swain, and Caleb Lownes,
Secretary.
The following sums were delivered to the treasurer, viz. Eighteen pounds,
eighteen shillings and nine pence, received from the Rev. Mr. M'Kennan's
congregation of Presby^^rians, residing in Mill-Creek Hundred, New Castle
county, in the State of Delawa^^.

Thirty dollars from the Free-Masons of this city, by Israel Israel, for the
use of the Orphans.

Sixteen dollars and twenty eight cents by John White, Druggist, on a
settlement of his account.

Eleven pounds twelve shillings and seven pence by John West, Lumber merchant,
on a settlement of his account.

Eighty seven pounds one shilling and eleven pence by Stephen Girard, being
moneys collected for patients who were at the Hospital at Bush-Hill.

On Motion it was Agreed, that the treasurer pay Joseph Fry, ten dollars, for
his attendance on the committee in making fires, etc.

APPENDIX.
A List of persons admitted into the Hospital at Bush-Hill, showing the times
of their admission, death, convalescence or discharge.
Time of admission. Persons Names. Time of death, convalescence or discharge.
Observations. A 1793. Sept. 18 Andre John, Sept. 25 Dead, 23 Alley William, 25
Dead, 20 Alyert Peter, Oct. 4 Dead, Advulten Mary, Sept. 25 Dead, Alexander
Rebecca, 26 Dead, 24 Allen Joseph, 24 Dead, 27 A Coachman, 29 Dead, 28 Agge
Peter, 29 Dead, Oct.1 Anderson Robert, Oct. 7 Convalescent, 2 A^leys Polly, 5
Discharged, Archer Margaret, 6 Convalescent, Andrew Charles, 6 Convalescent, 7
Anders Susanna, 22 Dead, 10 Armstrong James, 12 Dead, Allen Mary, 13
Convalescent, 11 Anderson Margaret, 23 Convalescent, 12 Allegue Elizabeth, 15
Dead, 15 Armat Susanna, 18 Ashman Peter, Nov. 2 Conv. and discharged, 20 An old
man his name unknown, Oct. 21 Dead, 29 Allen Richard, Nov. 20 Discharged, B
Sept. 11 Boldin Lydia, A nurse, Bogs Jenny, Discharged, Bu^hman Sally, Dec. 7
Convalescent, Bryant Stephen, Burk Kitty, Sept. 28 Dead, 12 Beaty John, Dead,
Brown Godlie^, Dead, 14 Bryan Rebecca, Nov. 6 Conv. and discharged, Buckman
George, 18 Blackman Timothy, Berkeloe Polly, Benjamin Dolly, Oct. 9
Convalescent, 19 Brewer James, Bunting Mary Ann, Brown George, Dead, Bell John,
Sept. 30 Dead, 20 Byrnes William, Dead, 21 Burges Ann, 23 Bicklediet Jane,
Dead, 1793, Sept. 23 Bru^ner Francis, Sept. 26 Dead, Baron Lewis, 25 Dead, Boy,
24 Dead, Bell Samuel, Oct. 9 Convalescent, Bickley Mary, Dec. 7 Convalescent,
24 Bart. Augustine, Sep. 28 Convalescent, Barry William, Convalescent,
Bull^d^t, 28 Dead, Buchanan George, 28 Conv. and discharged, Bliney Elizabeth,
24 Dead, Brook Francis, Convalescent, Blackledge Rebecca, Convalescent, Brown
Henry, 25 Dead, 26 Burns Mrs. 30 Dead, Burnet Moses, 28 Dead, 28 Butter John,
30 Dead, Burden John, Oct. 5 Convalescent, 29 Beats Abraham, 2 Dead, Bennet
Samuel, 4 Dead, Boyd Daniel, Nov. 5 Discharged, Oct. 1 Br^^lin Samuel, Oct. 2
Dead, Bry^n Elizabeth, 11 Convalescent, Brie Damasey, 9 Convalescent, Burk
Catherine, 12 Convalescent, Barnes Hannah, 3 Convalescent, Back Elizabeth, 3
Dead, 3 Bourowson Anthony, (...) Convalescent, Belsman Hannah, 4 Convalescent,
Bennet Hannah, Dec. 22 Discharged, 4 Braily John, Oct. 7 Dead, Blackley Eliza,
Dec. 6 Dead, 5 Bush Christian, Oct. 5 Convalescent, 6 Baptist John, 12 Dead,
Betsey, (a black) 7 Dead, 7 Burrows Robert, 10 Dead, Bra^house Bernard, 7 Dead,
Burns John, 10 Dead, Bailey George, Nov. 16 Discharged, Bevans M^ry, Oct. 11
Dead, Biben William, 9 Convalescent, 8 Brown William, 9 Dead, Betenger George,
14 Dead, Brislin Catherine, 11 Dead, 9 Brinkley Thomas, Nov. 9 Run away, 10
Braid Lucy, Oct. 13 Convalescent, Bride Rose, 10 Dead, 11 Burn Mary, Oct. 12
Dead, 12 Brady Hugh, 16 Dead, Brown Anne, 13 Discharged, Britton Kitty, 14
Dead, 13 Burkett Margaret, 20 Dead, 1793, Oct. 14 Bo^^ee Michael, Nov. 19
Discharged, 15 Burton Hannah, 17 Convalescent, Batey Susannah, Oct. 18 Dead, 17
Bermingham Thomas 21 Dead, Brocas Sarah, 27, Convalescent, Balkley George,
Dead, Breleu Eliza, 18 Dead, 18 Byron Mary, Barret Bridget, 2^ Dead, Bell
Susannah, Dec. 13 Discharged, Beaufort Elizabeth, Oct. 19 Dead, 21 Be Samuel,
23 Convalescent, 22 Barry Thomas, 24 Dead, 23 Batey Mary, Nov. 2 Run away, 24
Bulger Martin, 25 Button Thomas, Dec. 3 Run away, Brug^low Jonathan, Nov. 1
Convalescent, 26 Br^eman John, Barnes Jesse, (Black) 17 Discharged, Beeves
Margaret, 12 Dead, Brady Michael, Oct. 27 Dead, 28 Bush Elizabeth, Nov. 6 Dead,
29 Brant Jacob, 6 Dead, Brown Henry, 19 Discharged, C Sept. 11 Connor Peter, 14
Connor Elizabeth, Convalescent, 16 Cochran Alexander, Coffee James, 17 Crane
Edward, 18 Claphart Michael, Dead, Cozina Mary, Carr William, Carr John, Dead,
Clapper Lewis, Cannon Daniel, Connor Dennis, 20 Cain Ephraim, 21 Coffee
William, Sept. 24 Dead, 23 Christy Andrew, 28 Dead, Calleghan Martha, 25 Dead,
Collon Julian, Oct. 1 Dead, Correll Patrick, Convalescent, Conrads Elizabeth,
Convalescent, Christy Mary, Sept. 30 Dead, Creery Hannah, Discharged, 24 Carray
Francis, Convalescent, Cunningham Michael 26 Dead, Cunningham Matthew. Dead,
Collins Judith, Dead, Clifton Sarah, 26 Dead, 26 Clark John, Convalescent,
1793, Sept. ^27 Campbell James, Oct. 2 Dead, 28 Craig Samuel, Discharged,
Church ^egers, Sept. 30 Dead, Oct. 1 Columbus Christian, Oct. 2 Convalescent,
Crain Thomas, Convalescent, Creamer Philip, 5 Convalescent, Caphart George,
Dead, Cole Dinah, 4 Convalescent, Crasby John, 5 Convalescent, 2 Cline George,
4 Dead, Clarkson John, 12 Convalescent, Conkey Jane, 2 Dead, Clarkson James, 6
Dead, 3 Collins Susanna, 17 Convalescent, Cauise Walter, 6 Convalescent, 4
Corroy Michael, 5 Dead, Conklin John, 8 Dead, 5 Contant Charles, 5 Dead, Cope
George, 7 Dead, Conley Sarah, 7 Dead, Cr^nkle Philip, 6 Dead, 6 Carss William,
8 Dead, Carss and Child, 11 Dead, Chapman Dorothy, 7 Dead, 7 Conrad Maria, 10
Dead, Cradet Anthony, 12 Dead, Clause Anne, 9 Convalescent, Calley Daniel, 9
Dead, Calvis Poblic, 11 Dead, 8 Cobey Deborah, 11 Convalescent, Catherine, 16
Dead, Cook Henry, 9 Dead, Chesher Eliza, 12 Dead, Clow And. (his girl) 9 Dead,
9 Clyme Hugh, 10 Dead, Cappy Caleb, 22 Dead, Curry James, 10 Dead, Carberry
Christopher, Run away, Campbell Joseph, 11 Convalescent, 10 Clamper Thomas, 11
Dead, Clayton Fanny, 17 Dead, Cline David, 16 Dead, Carlton Mary, 29 Run away,
Catherwood Sarah, 12 Dead, Clymer Sophia, Dead, Carrens Mrs. and Son, 11 Dead,
Carrol Mary, Dead, Campbell James, Dead, 11 Caus^y William, 13 Convalescent,
Care Catherine, 13 Dead, 12 Cole Mary, 14 Convalescent, 14 Camu^ James, 16
Dead, 1793, Oct. 14 Copenage Elizabeth, 15 Run away, 15 Clark Elizabeth, 17
Dead, Carens Elizabeth, 17 Dead, 17 Cambay Gilmet, 28 Dead, Clinger Frederick,
19 Run away, Coctwebb Nathaniel, Cunningham Ann, 19 Dead, 18 Chapman Eleanor,
28 Convalescent, 19 Carter Rebecca, 24 Convalescent, Cox Barney, 21 Dead, 20
Co^ly Martha, 22 Dead, 21 Cox Alexander, 23 Dead, 22 Conroy Michael, 29
Convalescent, Connor Michael, 29 Convalescent, Coleman Dorothy, 25 Dead, 23
Carney Arthur, 24 Craps George, 30 Dead, Condit Robert, 25 Dead, Connor Peter,
29 Convalescent, 26 Cross Daniel, 31 Dead, 27 Connelly George, Nov. 12 Dead,
Cuthbert Rosanna, 28 Clark John, 30 Dead, 30 Coffee Michael, Nov. 2
Convalescent, Nov. 6 Cook Elizabeth, 15 Conv. and dischar. 9 Chumporee Joseph,
12 Cainer John, 19 Dead, D Sept. 11 Dolanson James, Discharged, Debarbout John,
Dead, Dolly, (a black woe.) Discharged, Dally Mary, Convalescent, Dowalt
William, 14 Daltom John, Dawson Mary, Dead, Dickey John, 15 Donicken Mary,
Dead, 16 Dougherty George, Convalescent, 17 Donahoe John, Dead, 18 Dumot John.
Dennison Dolly, Dyer Julia, Dersh Mary, Dorsey George, Divins Patrick, 24
Dougherty George. Oct. 2 Convalescent, Davin, alias Dover Patrick, 11
Convalescent, 26 Davis Richard, Nov. 19 Run away, Drosing Peter, Sept. Durang
Rosanna, Oct. 11 Dead, 1793, Oct. 3 Dudman John, Oct. 6 Dead, 4 Durnick Philip,
Dead, Durien Jane, 7 Convalescent, Dugan Ann and her child, Child dead, woman
gone to town, 6 D^^bar Charles, 8 Dead, Dicks Abraham, Run away, 8 Dougherty
Rose, 22 Convalescent, Daily Bridget, 11 Dead, Dougherty Henry, 12 Dead, 9
Doyle James, 11 Dead, 10 Devat John, 15 Convalescent, Dorsey Anthony, 18
Convalescent, Delap Samuel, 13 Dead, 11 Durien Peter, Nov. 11 Dead, 12 Do^gny
Peggy, Oct. 15 Dead, Duffield Ezen. Dead, 13 Dickenson William, 24 Dead, De^r
James, Convalescent, 14 De^^^ Ezekiah, 19 Dead, 14 Dix^n Elizabeth, 15 Dead,
Dawsey Catharine, 23 Convalescent, 15 Douglass Mary, Nov. 2 Convalescent,
Douglass Charlotte, Oct. 23 Dead, 16 Dixson John, 17 Run away, Doyle Peter, 21
Dead, 17 Dela^ William, Nov. 30 Convalescent, Duffee Michael, Do^dney William,
Nov. 17 Dead, Drum Eleanor, Oct. 19 Dead, 19 Dickinson Sarah, 20 Dead, Deuan
Marg^^^^, 21 Dead, 23 Dickson William, 27 Convalescent, 29 Demay Romain,
Donaldson James, 31 Dabesac John, E Sept.11 Ellery William, Dead, Edmonston
William, 15 Evans Sarah, Oct. 19 Convalescent, 23 Edleborough Tim.
Convalescent, Etner Adam, Sept. 29 Dead, 26 Elsy, (a black) Oct. 4 Dead, Oct. 1
Edenfield Mary, 2 Dead, 2 English John, 11 Dead, 7 Estick John, Convalescent,
Estick Sarah, 18 Dead, 8 Elwine Andres, 12 Dead, Elwine Philip, Nov. 16 Conv.
and discharg. Oct. 11 Elliot John, Oct. 14 Dead, Elliot Mary, 13 Dead, 13 Elder
Sarah, 15 Dead, 18 Early John, jun. Nov. 10 Discharged, 1793, Oct. 19 Everhard
David, Oct. 23 Convalescent, 20 Early John, sen. 25 Dead, 22 Elenberger Lonia,
Dec. 3 Discharged, 28 Evans Rowland, Nov. 1 Dead, F Sept. 11 Fuller John, 12
Farrel Mary, Dead, 13 Foster Nancy, Dead, Fitzgerald Barney, For a Nurse. 14
Fisher Hetty, Convalescent, 15 M'Farle^ Nancy, Dead, 16 Fisher Catharine, Sept
24 Dead, 17 Frazer Thomas, Discharged, 18 For^yth Betsy, Convalescent, Fellows
Captain, 19 Fagen William, 23 Forse John, Dead, Foster Anne, 28 Conv. and
discharg. Fisher Christianna and her a children, Oct. 3 Discharged, 24 Fisher
Robert, Sept. 24 Dead, Forgee John, Dead, Febias Tobia^, Dead, 26 Faulse
George, Convalescent, Foltor Jacob, Convalescent, 27 Flour Margaret, Dead 29
Forest Thomas, 30 Dead, Oct. 1. Frank, (a negro) Oct. 2 Discharged, Fisher
Anthony, 6 Convalescent, 2 Faires Mary, 2 Dead, Fraim Catherine, 4 Dead,
Forepaw Margaret, Convalescent, 3 Forard Elizabeth, 6 Convalescent, 4 Finehouse
Joseph, Run away, Fort on Elizabeth, 14 Discharged, 5 Fisher Samuel, 8 Dead, 6
Far^en Edward, Convalescent, 7 Francis Rebecca, 19 Dead, Finlay Sarah, 9 Went
to Town, ^oyer Garret, Dead, 8 Field Charles, 12 Dead, 9 Fitzgerald Catherine,
11 Convalescent, Fielder Jacob, Dead, Frow^elt Jacob, Dec. 3 Dead, 10 Farren
John, Oct. 12 Dead, Finlay Samuel, 30 Convalescent, Firmer Hannah, 17 Dead, 1^
Fa^ter Matthew, 13 Convalescent, 13 Finley William, 15 Run away. 14 Fry Henry,
19 Convalescent, 17 Fisher Henry John, 21 Fenton Widow, ^7 Dead, 22 Fulton
John, 31 Convalescent, France George, 25 Dead, 25 Fi^^er Anthony, 28 Dead, Nov.
2 Fogel Lewis, 3 Foster Maranda, Flin Mary, Nov. 4 Dead, 10 Farrel Samuel, 14
Conv. and dischar. G Sept. 11 Grover Margaret, Dead, Gibbs Betsey, Discharged,
13 Goetzen Henry, Dead, 14 Gilbert Sally, Dead, 17 Greaves Katey, 11 Gyeryerk
John, Gartin John, 19 Garred Elizabeth, 23 Graham Thomas, Sept. 29 Dead, Gregg
Ann, a black, 24 Dead, Granly Ann, Conv. and dischar. Griffee Levander, 24
Dead, Gibson Ann, Dead, 24 Green Peter, 24 Run away, 27 Griffin John, 27 Dead,
Grammar Jonathan, Oct. 1 Dead, Gabriel ^erdinand, 2 Dead, 28 Griggen William,
29 Dead, Glancy Jane, 6 Dead, and her child sent to Or. house, Guier Juda, 2
Dead, Oct. 1 Gabriel Mary, 2 Dead, 3 Garter Andrew, 5 Dead, 4 Greenlap
Archibald, 8 Dead, Glogan Mary, 6 Convalescent, Grindle Margaret, 5 Dead,
Gordon Rebecca, 11 Convalescent, 5 Gardener Morto, 5 Dead, 6 Green John, 7
Dead, 7 Greenville William, 8 Dead, Gilmore William, Nov.5 Convalescent, Gill
Andrew, Oct. 14 Convalescent, 8 Griffin Sellwood, 9 Dead, Gravenstein Wm. Dead,
9 Ginder John, Nov. 8 Discharged, Guel Henry, Oct. 11 Dead, Greim Mary, Dec. 14
Convalescent, Gardener Alexander Runaway, 10 Guye Ann, Oct. 15 Convalescent,
Gorgan's Ann, 28 Convalescent, Gregory Malcom, 12 Dead, 11 Gibard John, Nov. 9
Dead, Green's Susanna, Oct. 19 Dead, 13 Gardener Mary, 21 Dead, 1793, Oct. 14
Ga^slin William, 15 Dead, 15 Gassner Sarah, 19 Dead, 20 Girard, 23 Dead, 22
Gordon Elisha, Dec. 25 Discharged, 23 Gordon Mary, Nov. 16 Conv. and dischar.
26 Grady Mary, 6 Convalescent, 27 George James, Dec. 10 Discharged. 29 Greenman
Joseph, Nov. 2 Convalescent, Nov. 3 Guire Ann, 25 Gingon Jacque, Dec. 12 Dead,
H Sept. 11 Hammond Jacob, Dead, Hammond Marg. Dead, Harper Elizabeth,
Discharged, Harper Alexander, Discharged, Ham Catharine, Dead, 14 Hannis (a man
so named) Dead, Ha^ton Christopher Dead, Han^on Patrick, Discharged, 15 House
Joseph, Hopple Lewis, Oct. 1 Dead, 16 Halford John, 18 Henry Catharine, 19
Horner Joseph, 20 Hawthorn Hugh, Hill James, 23 Hews Rebecca, Sept. 27 Went to
town, Hugan Ann. Oct. 7 Convalescent, Hicks Priscilla, 3 Convalescent, 24
Harlin James, Holklow William, Sept. 26 Dead, 26 Hughs Andrew, 28 Dead, 27
Hulford Dianna, Dead, 28 Henrietta Rosanna, Oct. 3 Convalescent, 29 Hay Joseph,
Sept. 30 Dead, Harrison Margaret, Oct. 7 Dead, Oct. 1 Hay Sarah and son,
Convalescent, 2 Hill Robert, 8 Dead, H^dner Kitty, 12 Convalescent, 3 Holi^es
Sarah, 4 Dead, Harris (...) and child. 8 Dead, child conv. Hamilton James, Dead
Harris John, Convalescent, Horn Henry, 4 Dead, 4 Hausten Henry, 12 Dead, Hones,
(a lad) 11 Convalescent, Holl^son Hugh, Nov. 1 Convalescent, Hendeson Mary, 5
Dead, 5 Harm Alexander, 7 Dead, 1793, Oct. 5 Hayes Jacob, 11 Dead, Ha^^shorn
Sarah, Convalescent, 6 Henzey Michael, 9 Dead, Hoffman Nicholas, 7
Convalescent, Harrison Hannah, 11 Convalescent, 7 Harper Elizabeth, 11
Convalescent, 9 Houchen Elizabeth, 30 Dead, Hughs Mary, 12 Convalescent, 10
Hotman John, 13 Dead, Hale Thomas, 10 Discharged, Hocknoble Chr^^^^ 17 Dead,
Henry Anna, 16 Discharged, 11 Harding Edward, 12 How Thomas, 13 Dead, 14
Harbear John, 1^ Dead, 17 Hotman Anthony, ^1 Dead, 19 Hainsey Hannah, 19 Dead,
20 Harrison James, 21 Dead, Hanish Andrew, Dead, 26 H^as^er John, 28 H^ghes
Garnet, Nov. 14 Dead, Hamilton Samuel, 17 Convalescent, I Sept. 11 Justice
David, 14 Irwin Oliver, 17 Jordan John, Sept. 25 Dead, Isaac a Black, 18 (...)
Peter, 23 Id^^man Mary, 30 Dead, Juda (a black wom.) Dead. 24 Jones John,
Convalescent, 27 Jameson Edward, Oct. 1 Dead. Jameson ^l^anor, Sept. 28 Dead,
Oct. 2 Jenkins Mary, Oct. 15 Convalescent, 5 Johnson Phi^^^s, 9 Convalescent,
Johnson Susanna, 12 Dead, ^^^in James. Dead, 7 Johnson John, 29 Convalescent, 8
J^^es Joe^. Convalescent, 9 Johnson William, 10 Discharged, 1^ Jordan^ Samuel,
18 Dead, 18 Jones ^h^^philus, Nov. 15 Convalescent, Johnson Margaret, Jones
Ann. Oct. 23 Convalescent, 20 Johnson Samuel, Nov. 17 Convalescent, 29 Joseph a
Neg^^^, Dec. 3 Dead, Nov. 2 Johnson Margaret, 22 Joseph Ja^q^^^g, K 1793, Sept.
11 Kelly William, Dead, Kelser Henry, 15 King^er David, Sept. 24 Dead, 18 Kean
Henry, Kitchen Henry, 19 King Elizabeth, Kinsinger Geo. and his four children.
20 Kinsinger Christo. Kean John, 23 King Elizabeth, Gone to Town well, Kites
Elizabeth, Dead, Kingsenger Kitty, Discharged, Kinsenger Peter, Sept. 26 Dead,
24 Kinsenger Casper, 24 Dead, 25 Kennon John, 26 Dead, Knox Adam, Oct. 4 Dead,
Oct. 1 Kitts Casper, Sept. 24 Dead, 2 K^tting Lucy, Oct. 3 Dead, King Margaret,
6 Convalescent, 3 Kinsey Margaret, 5 Dead, 9 K^rbeck John, 10 Dead, 15 Kenny
John, 2^ Kenton Elizabeth, Nov. 4 Dead, Nov. 12 Kellum Custes, Dec. 11
Discharged, L Sept. 14 Lewis M^r^^, Dead, Latsey Bets^, 15 Levingston John,
Dead, 18 Lewis Mary, 19 Lo^tes James, Linz^y Elizabeth, 23 Lich Peter, Oct. 7
Convalescent, Ludwick Thomas, Sept. 25 Dead, Levarine Hannah, 27 Went to Town
well. Lowden Rebecca, Oct. 11 Dead, 25 Lown James, Nov. (...) Dead, 26 Ligg^rt
Peter, Oct. 1 Dead, 27 Laetitia, a young woe. Sept. 2^ Dead, Oct. 1 Lee
Elizabeth, Oct. 3 Convalescent, Layman Mary, 11 Dead, 4 Lee Thomas, 4 Dead, 5
Lorton Hannah, 12 Dead, Long Richard, 8 Dead, 6 Leonard Ahner, Dead, Lamb
Elizabeth, Convalescent, 7 Levers Mary, 8 Convalescent, Lee Mary. 12 Dead, 8
Lewis William, 14 Dead, 1793, Oct. 9 Long Frederick, 14 Dead, 10 Lowden John,
15 Dead, Lasher Mary, 12 Dead, 11 Loud^nsleger Eliz. 31 Convalescent, Long
Mary. Dec. 6 Convalescent, Ludwick John, Dead, 12 Leller Samuel, 18 Dead, 13
Landre Joseph, 24 Dead, 18 Lloyd Catherine, 19 Dead, 19 Le Prevat, Nov. 27
Discharged, Lynem J. Oct. 24 Convalescent, 22 Lask^y Patrick, 24 Dead, 24 Lee
John, 25 Dead, 25 Leonard Philip, 20 Convalescent, 31 Lid^^ir Robert, Nov. 4
Dead, M Sept. 11 Morton Francis, Discharged, Morrel Johnson, Sep. 28
Discharged, M'Eroy Margaret, Discharged, Moore David, Dead, Miland Johnston, 12
M'R^in Sally, Dead, M'Crever Margaret Dead, 13 M'Irvis Margaret, 15 M'Farlin
Nancy, Dead, M'Ginly Fanny, M'Elm^s William, 16 M'Coy Ali^n, Convalescent, 17
Maxfield Abbey, Mullen Mary, Dead, 18 M'Clarey Hanna, M'Donnel John, M'Mullen
Neil, Dead, 19 M'Man^^^iara Joh. M'Cannon Marg. Murray Sarah, 23 Miller Mrs. 24
Dead, M'Crapper Mil^y, Oct. 9 Dead, Malowny John, Sept. 24 Dead, Moore Jane,
Oct. 3 Dead, M'Clean Elizabeth, Sept. 24 Dead, M'Cas^^y M. Ann, Convalescent,
24 M'Laughlin Wm. 25 Dead, M'Garn^y Peter, Run away, Ma^field Elizabeth, 28
Dead, 25 M Donald John, Oct. 4 Discharged, 26 Murphy Richard, 23 Dead, Min^^
William, Sept. 30 Dead, 1793, Sept. 26 M'Kinsey Mary, Run away, M'Clar
Elizabeth, Dead, Maxwell M^rg. 27 Dead, 27 M'Neal Mary, Mo^li^er Catherine, 28
Dead, 28 Mos^s (a negro) Convalescent, M'Garvey Peter, Oct. 1 Dead, M'Cormick
Them, 3 Dead, M'Call^^ter Daniel, Dead, M'Kinsey Elizabeth 2 Convalescent, 29
M^sera Thomas, Sept. 30 Dead, M'Morris James, Oct. 2 Dead, M'Rudy Johna^^as 4
Dead, M'Rare^y John Mu^en Patrick, 2 Dead, Oct. 1 M^son John. 1 Dead, M^^^sey
Christian, 7 Convalescent, M'Ca^l Jane, 21 Dead, Madue Elizabeth, 4 Dead, Murry
Kitty. Myers Eleanor Anne Miller Da^^el, 2 Convalescent, M'^^rn^out John, Nov.
25 Discharged, M'Ca^^es James, 2 Mi^chel John, Oct. 9 Convalescent, M'Cl^re
Andrew, Dead, Maxfield Thomas, 19 Convalescent, M^^ari^^n Ann. 7 Dead, 3
M'^owen Elizabeth 5 Convalescent, Mason Sarah. 4 Discharged, M'Cowen Archibald
5 Dead, M'Murren (...), 9 Dead, Myers Adam, 4 Dead, 4 M'Grace William, 6
Convalescent, M'Gree ^har^^s 5 Convalescent, Murray Eleanor 11 Dead, Mullen
Catherine 8 Dead, 5 M^^^^r Daniel, 6 Convalescent, M'Couchin Mary, 30 Conv. and
discharged, M'^^^e Joseph, 5 Dead, M'Nal John, 6 Dead, 6 Murphy Timothy, 9
Dead, M'Clean John, 12 Dead, 7 M'^^hanuan Mary, 13 Dead, Morris Robert, Dec. 3
Run away, M'Clashin^ Edward Convalescent, Miller James, Oct. 11 Convalescent, 8
M'Ca^ey James, Convalescent, M'Cannon Ann, 17 Run away, Mu^^ord (...), 14
Convalescent, Miller Marg. 12 Dead, 1793, Oct. 8 M'Alpin Alex. 15 Dead, 9 Myers
Michael, 14 Dead, Morgan Hannah, 11 Convalescent, Miller Susanna, 13 Dead,
M'Namara James, 12 Dead, 10 Mahome Margaret, 13 Convalescent, M'Gomery Elizab.
Dead, Mason Annabaptiste Dead, Martand Philip, 13 Dead, M'Greegle -- 12 Dead,
M'Kee David, Dead, 11 Milld^ir James, 13 Dead, M'Lane Roger, 12 Dead, Minster
Charles, 15 Dead, 12 Moody William, 14 Convalescent, M'Grace James, Runaway,
Mill Walter, 16 Dead, M'Graith Henry, Nov. 4 Conv. and discharged, Mo^^itt
Mary, Oct. 14 Run away, 13 Mosero Christian, 15 Dead, M'Coy John, 16 Dead,
M'Clean Jane, 14 Dead, 14 M'Clean -- 17 Dead, 15 Moore Mary, Dec. 17
Discharged, M'Alpin Sarah, Oct. 18 Discharged, M'Donald Ann, M'Creery Ann, 18
Convalescent, M'Aff^r^y John, Nov. 22 Convalescent, M'Coy Allen, Oct. 20
Convalescent, M'Cue Con -- 16 Convalescent, M'Mahon Elizab. 25 Made nurse and
di^. 17 Miller Christopher, 19 Dead, M'Lean Alexand. Nov. 23 Dead, M'Gee Mary,
Oct. 18 Dead, M'Laughlin Mary, M'Knab Kitty, 19 Convalescent, 19 M^ren John, 21
Dead, M'Care John, Dead, Major Francis, 22 Dead, M'Car^y Rel^y, 20 M'Lane
Elizabeth, M'^^down William, 21 Dead, 21 M'Farden Enos, 25 Dead, M'Cloud
Augustine, M'^^roy James, Nov. 6 Convalescent, Mud^skie Jacob, Oct. 23
Convalescent, 22 Myrietta John, Dead, Moore Charlotte, 26 Convalescent, 23
M'Cary Archibald, 23 Dead, 24 M'Cue John, Nov. 13 Convalescent, 26 Moore James,
16 Conv. and discharg. 27 Masare Juda, Oct. 30 Dead, 1793, Nov. 1 M'Kenna
Andrew, Dead, 5 Miller Mary, Nov. 8 Dead, 7 Martin Fraincis, 8 M'Rainey James,
9 Dead, 14 Monarcue John, N Sept. 11 Naley Polly, Dead, Nixon Peter, Noer
Th^o^o^ia, Discharged, 23 Nennerson Thomas, Oct. 3 Dead, Nevil Timmons, Sept.
25 Dead, 24 Newton Isabella, Sent to the orphan house Oct. 2 Napp Samuel, Oct.
4 Dead, 6 Newingham Anth. 9 Dead, Nann William, 10 Dead, 9 Navarre -- 17 Dead,
18 Newhouse Catherine Nov. 28 Dead, 18 Ne^f Thomas Oct. 22 Dead, O Sept. 14
Oldbrooks John, Discharged, 18 Oliviris Lewis, 23 O Hagan Terrance,
Convalescent, 24 O Co^n Dennis, Sept. 25 Dead, 27 Orange Edward, Dead, Oct. 1 O
Donald John, Oct. 4 Dead, 4 O ^ercue Rachel, Nov. 8 Convalescent, 8 Osgood Ann,
Oct. 9 Dead, 13 Osburn Mrs, 19 Convalescent, 18 O Ne^^ Catherine, 18 Dead,
Osburn Ruth, 26 Convalescent, P Sept. 11 Parker Ann, Dead, 13 Parker Eleanor,
Dead, 15 Perang^ Anthony, Dead, Perkinson John, Pytring Ab^gal, 23 Pat^rpager
S. J. Sept. 25 Dead, 26 Pea John, Oct. 1 Dead, Pallock Martha, 2 Dead, 27 Parks
Eleanor, Dead, Pusey Elizabeth, Sept. 27 Dead, Pope Margaret, Nov. 2
Convalescent, 28 Palmer Thomas, Oct. 6 Convalescent, Price Christian, Oct. 1
Price Te^^y, Oct. 1 Dead, 2 Pike James, 2 Dead, 1793, Oct. 3 Pearson David,
Oct. 29 Convalescent, 4 Perry William, 5 Dead, Price Thomas, 7 Dead, 8 Prayer
Francis, 11 Convalescent, 9 Petermary Alex, Convalescent, 10 Pearce James, 12
Dead, Porter Charles, Dead, 15 P^^al John, 16 Dead, Pep^rs Ann, 13 Dead, 17 Pay
John, 18 Dead, 18 Palmer Samuel, 21 Dead, 19 Peterson Richard, Dead, Price
Joseph, Nov. 18 Discharged, Perkins Sarah, Dead, 23 Pross^r Daniel, 23
Discharged, 26 Pr^^^in Stephen, Oct. 28 Dead, Porcupine Samuel, Q Oct. 14 Quen
Thomas, Oct. 17 Convalescent, R Sept. 11 Riddle Spencer, Dead, 12 (...) woman,
Dead, Ra^^ton ^et^y, Reed Mr. Dead, 14 Ricky Frederick, Dead, 18 Robins
Isabella, Sept. 25 Convalescent, 23 Roberts William, Sept. 2^ Dead, 25 Rou^^^y
Francis, Oct. 7 Convalescent, Randall (...), Convalescent, 27 Richardson T^o.
Oct. 3 Dead, Redman Hannah, Sept. 28 Went home, 28 R^^se Jonathan, Dead, 29
Richardson Joseph, alias John, Oct. 3 Dead, Oct. 1 Rouse Elizabeth, Dec. 22
Discharged, Ry^n Mary, Oct. 4 Convalescent, Richards ^^us, Discharged, 2
Ri^gway John. Dead, Re^^^^e^ John, 5 Dead, 3 R^s^ Jane, 7 Convalescent, 5
Rogers John, 6 Run away (...) ^^ri^topher, 12 Dead, 9 R^nard Peter, 11 Go (...)
to town well, 10 Richardson Barbary, 10 Dead, 14 Ro^^an John, 15 Dead, Ry^^
Jane, and her child. Dec. 23 Discharged, 16 Remer As^la^, Oct. 17 Dead, 17 Ryan
Elizabeth, 19 Discharged, 1793, Oct. 18 Riffen Margaret, Nov. 26 Convalescent,
19 Reynold Mary, Oct. 20 Dead, 20 Ribanhouse Bloom, 28 Convalescent, 25
Roderick Michael, Dec. 17 Discharged, Read Michael, Nov. 20 Run away, 26 Rea
Mary, Nov. 3 Reedy Catharine, Nov. 9 Convalescent, S Sept. 11 Smith Jerret,
Dead, Smith James, Dead, Sights John, Dead, Sign Nancy, Dead, 12 Sulivan
Daniel, Discharged, 13 Summers Nelly, Dead, Silvia Peter, 14 Sexton Catharine,
Dead, Stremback John, Dead, 15 Stanley Nancy, Sept. 28 Conv. and discharged, 16
Shiels Catharine, Solomon Ebenezer, Styles Joshua, Oct. 3 Convalescent, Styler
John, 17 Shriver Thomas, 18 Sylvester Sally, Skelly Kitty, Sc^^las Isaac, Nov.
9 Discharged, Smith Laurence, Sickerson James, Spencer Henry, Sept. 23 Dead,
Smith Casper, 19 Sickle John, Swallow James, Short William, Steiner John, Slay
John, 23 Smith Richard, Oct. 9 Convalescent, Spee King Abraham, Sol^er Mary,
Oct. 3 Convalescent, Stewart David, Sept. 24 Dead, Shaw Kitty, Convalescent,
Sickson Kitty, 29 Dead, 24 Summers Peter, 24 Dead, Shriber Thomas, Dead, 26
Sheet William, Died in the Cart. Semina, a black, Convalescent, 27 Smith Ann,
Convalescent, 28 Stackhouse Benj. Oct. 3 Dead, Syler Jacob, 21 Convalescent,
Steward Jane, 3 Convalescent, 29 Scott Andrew, 4 Dead, Summers Elizabeth, 8
Dead, Oct. (...) Smith Jacob, (...) Convalescent, 1793, Oct. 1 Summers Edward,
26 Dead, Smith Andrew, 2 Dead, Shankling James, 8 Dead, Splitspike Sophia, a
Black, 3 Dead, 2 Scott John, 7 Dead, Smith Mary, Convalescent, Steward James,
11 Dead, 3 Standlin James, Convalescent, Stravers Nicholas, Simpson John, 5
Dead, Silvas Joseph, 13 Dead, Scott John, Convalescent, 4 Scantling Elizabeth,
Oct. 7 Convalescent, 5 Shearman Elizabeth, 11 Dead, Smith John, 6 Dead, 6
Steward James, 7 Convalescent, Shreader Henry, 12 Dead, Steward Elizabeth, 9
Convalescent, 7 Steel John, Dead, Smith Margaret, Nov. 17 Convalescent, 8
Stevenson James, Oct. 10 Dead, 9 Scantling Thomas, 29 Convalescent, Scott
Perigan, Nov. 2 Discharged, Sweeney Ann, Oct. 11 Dead, 10 Smith James, 11 Dead,
Sims John, 13 Dead, Stormetz Jonathan, Dead, 11 Stelwill Elizabeth, 12 Strong
Elizabeth, Oct. 17 Discharged, 13 Selervin^ John, Discharged, Shearwood John,
14 Dead, Shreminger John, Nov. 1 Dead, Sinkler Susanna, Oct. 31 Convalescent,
14 Stanch Lucas, 15 Dead, Swan Elizabeth, Nov. 1 Dead, 15 Smith Matthew, Oct.
16 Dead, 16 Sooks Elizabeth, 17 Dead, 17 Seed John, Nov. 1 Dead, Smith William,
Dec. 23 Sent to the Orp. house, Schreminger Mary, Oct. 18 Convalescent, Stain
James, Convalescent, 18 Suay Antoine, Nov. 14 Dead, 19 Sergeant James, Oct. 21
Convalescent, Siper W. John, 20 Dead, 20 Smith Lewis, 21 Dead, Smith Barbary,
27 Dead, 21 Stewart William, Nov. 30 Run away, 23 Sel^wine Mary, Oct. 27 Dead,
24 Stouts George, 24 Run away 26 Strange Mary, Nov. 26 Convalescent, 27 Steaten
Harriet, 11 Discharged, 29 Smith James, Nov. 1 She^gan Daniel, Nov. 6 Dead, T
Sept. 11 Timothy, a black man, Dead, 13 Taite Robert, Dead, Tatson John, Dead,
16 Topham Matthew, 17 Traylor James, 18 Tomson Elizabeth, Dead, Thornton
Daniel, 23 Thompson John, Dead, 24 Tobo Peter, Sept. 24 Dead, 27 Turner John,
Oct. 7 Discharged, 28 Thomas Hannah, 3 Dead, Troutioine William, Went to Town
well. 29 Turnbull William, Sept. 29 Dead, Oct. 3 Thomas Richard, Oct. 5 Dead, 6
Teteres John, 9 Dead, Trades Eleanor, Nov. 4 Dead, 8 Teis^er A. Oct. 9 Dead,
Tiese Jacob, 10 Dead, 11 Topping John, 15 Convalescent, 13 Timothy (a black) 27
Dead, 17 Trabar Pierre, 21 Dead, 20 Thomas Margaret, 22 Dead, Tacy, (a blak) 27
Dead, 22 Tutang John, Tula Andrew, 26 Dead, 28 Turean Sarah, 29 Dead, 29 Tailor
Richard, 30 Discharged, V Sept. 11 Vandeegrift Lydia, Dead, Oct. 1 Vandergrift
Matthew. 6 Dead, 7 Uttenberger Peter, 13 Dead, 17 Vicker Peter, 19 Dead, 23 Unis
Henry, 30 Dead, W Sept. 11 Wright George, Wiseman William, Dead, Williamson
Billy, Dead, 19 Williams Thomas M Dead, 20 Waggoner William, Webb Elizabeth, 23
Wilkins Thomas, Sept. 24 Dead, White Elizabeth, Run away, 24 Walker George,
Dead, Worm Thomas, Convalescent, 27 Wilson Fanny (a black, Oct. 2 Convalescent,
28 Woman, her name unknown Sept. 30 Dead, Willis Sarah, Convalescent, 29 Waine
Michael, Run away, Oct. 1 Wain Ten^y, Oct. 3 Dead, Woolson Eleanor, 4
Convalescent, Wisket Eliz. and child 11 Convalescent, Williamson Mary, 3 Dead,
1793, Oct. 1 Wily Sarah, Dec. 26 Discharged, 2 Williams James, Oct. 5 Dead,
Wall William, Dead, 3 Wil^^ Thomas, 7 Dead, 4 Wou^^ard Catherine Nov. 26
Convalescent, 5 Watson Oliver, Oct. 5 Convalescent, Walker ^^ddy, 7
Convalescent, Wale Ann, Wilson Jane, Oct. 8 Dead, 7 Wise John, 9 Convalescent,
Worrell Thomas, Nov. 7 Discharged, 8 Williams Elizabeth, Convalescent, 9
Williams John, Run away, Williams Mary, 9 Convalescent, Williams John, 10 Dead,
10 Walker William, 12 Dead, Witman John, 10 Dead, Williams Thomas, Dead, W^b^y
Mar. and Kit. 11 Dead, Warner Mary, 13 Dead, Woodman Joseph, Dead, 11 Wharton
Haga, Oct. 18 Convalescent, 12 Wilson Elizabeth, 15 Dead, Williamson Violet, 12
Dead, 13 Ward Jeremiah, 22 Dead, Williams Hannah, 14 Convalescent, 14 Wilson
James, Oct. 17 Dead, White Dorothy, 19 Convalescent, 15 White (...), 17
Convalescent, 16 White James, 19 Dead, 17 W^gn William, 18 Dead, Workman Jane,
19 Convalescent, 19 (...) Philip, Convalescent, 21 W^^f Martin, 23 Dead,
Wheeler M^^^y, Williams John, Oct. 23 Dead, 22 Walker John, 27 Watts James, 27
Dead, 30 Wilkin Sarah, Nov. 1 Dead, Nov. 4 W^^^inson Thomas, 9 Discharged, 15
Waters B^ly, 25 Dead, 17 White Peter, 29 Dead, Y Sept. 19 York Nelly, 23 Yorks
Eleanor, Sept. 24 Dead, 24 Yo^k Grier John, Convalescent, Oct. 4 Yopes Mitchel,
Oct. 7 Dead, 11 Young P^^mber, 12 Dead, 16 Young Mary, Dec. 15 Dead, 18 Young
Catherine, Oct. 21 Dead, Z Zeigler George, Zeigler Christopher, 20 Zimmerman
Israel, The Number of Houses, Deaths, etc. in the respective Streets, Alleys,
and Courts in the City of Philadelphia, taken by Order of the Committee.
MARKET STREET AND NORTH THEREOF. HOUSES DEAD. WHITE INHABITANTS. BLACKS. SOUTH
OF MARKET STREET. HOUSES DEAD. WHITE INHABITANTS. BLACKS. SHUT OPEN FLED. REM.
FLED. REM. SHUT OPEN FLED REM. FLED REM. Market Street, October 5, 162 112 39
799 794 8 55 Water Street, November 22, 88 48 56 2^5 31^ 2 10 Water Street,
October 5, and 7, 74 51 131 221 281 4 27 Front Street, 157 61 94 666 511 28 101
Front Street, October 8, 103 62 126 381 417 1 39 Second Street, 145 83 92 609
524 25 91 Second Street, October 9, 117 52 120 451 403 7 22 Third Street, 94 39
87 364 241 24 42 Third Street, October 10, 94 58 38 420 465 11 26 Fourth
Street, 52 55 61 213 3^9 7 74 Fourth Street, 53 44 42 138 500 7 35 Fifth
Street, 18 63 31 128 289 5 58 Fifth Street, October 11, 50 54 29 162 410 2 22
Sixth Street, 12 29 15 51 225 2 35 Sixth Street, 26 55 13 119 353 1 34 Seventh
Street, 3 7 2 14 59 0 0 Seventh Street, 22 26 8 106 170 1 7 Eighth Street, 8 24
18 62 211 0 16 Eighth Street, 21 34 3 89 229 0 13 Ninth Street, 2 5 1 2 38 0 0
Ninth Street, October 12, 5 12 3 19 75 1 2 Penn Street, 22 17 14 111 1^8 3 8
Arch Street, October 16, 91 90 92 433 512 9 47 Chestnut Street, 88 56 88 484 338
18 32 Race Street, 103 85 118 373 644 6 32 Walnut Street, 48 53 84 211 4^6 9 74
Vine Street, South Side, 24 31 37 81 167 1 8 Spruce Street, 54 63 55 243 399 9
57 Ell^ry's Alley, 14 5 23 6 42 0 0 Pine Street, 29 39 19 1^9 2^4 14 17
Drinker's Alley, 1 1 8 0 4 0 0 South Street, North Side, 10 18 5 31 ^3 4 28
Coates' Alley, 1 3 11 13 26 0 0 Laetitia Court, 3 11 18 24 64 0 0 New Street,
36 20 46 92 180 3 0 Black Horse Alley, 8 1 6 1^ 30 0 0 Moravian Alley, 10 11 37
26 50 0 0 Strawberry Lane, 1 2 0 0 8 0 4 Church Alley, October 19, 13 3 3 52 35
1 1 Strawberry Alley, 23 13 23 10^ 75 2 0 Watkins' Alley, 5 1 11 20 12 0 0
Elbow Lane, 9 8 11 6^ 29 2 8 Quarry Street, 7 5 10 18 53 0 4 Beetle's Alley, 3
5 5 8 36 0 5 Cherry Alley, 31 39 28 99 268 0 25 Carter's Alley, 13 10 14 (...)
59 0 0 South Alley, 5 10 2 15 69 0 1 Gray's Alley, 6 10 1^ 2^ 43 0 13 North
Alley, 6 10 2 36 70 0 4 Norris' Alley, 7 5 6 43 14 0 4 Sugar Alley, 21 22 4 79
148 0 14 Dock Street, 14 25 ^8 5^ 134 0 5 Stirling Alley, 4 6 9 13 41 0 0 Union
Street, 26 41 28 127 228 2 30 Crown Street, 4 8 7 10 125 0 0 Cypress Alley, 3 7
20 2^ 4^ 0 1 Apple Tree Alley, 7 11 18 17 57 0 7 Pear Street, 7 6 19 17 53 0 5
Cresson's Alley, 6 18 8 51 72 0 10 Lombard Street, 19 60 25 68 297 13 44
Shiv^ley's Alley, 8 22 3 25 105 0 11 Misslin's Alley, 3 6 7 1 21 0 0 Filbert
Street, 1 6 1 6 37 0 0 El^^ley's Alley, 4 8 9 24 39 0 6 Pewter-Platter Alley,
11 19 32 56 105 0 3 Laurel Court, 3 3 6 19 17 0 1 Coombs' Alley, 8 13 29 37 81
0 5 Shipp^n's Alley, 2 19 11 5 102 0 26 Chancery Lane, December 2, 6 5 9 22 31
0 0 Willing's Alley, 1 4 6 3 30 0 1 Hoffman's Alley 3 10 1 21 51 0 0 Blackberry
Alley, 1 5 3 3 16 0 2 Bakers' Alley, 0 5 3 0 19 0 7 Carpenter Street, 1 3 0 2
17 0 7 B^nners' Alley, 1 0 0 7 0 0 0 Crooked Billet, 1 0 0 7 0 0 0 Branch
Street, 10 10 20 37 90 0 0 Gaskell Street, 10 15 7 5 113 0 7 Brooks' Court, 2 5
2 14 17 0 1 George Street to South Street, 1 6 1 8 22 0 5 Fea^ris' Alley, 2 5 4
11 33 0 0 Little Water Street, 2 12 5 1 69 4 1 Groffs' Alley, 0 4 5 8 18 0 0
Lodge Alley, 1 0 1 6 0 0 0 M'Culloughs Alley, 2 6 10 6 34 1 0 Relief Alley, 3 0
1 8 6 0 0 Mulberry Court, 4 0 1 14 0 0 0 Stamper's Alley, 1 13 6 5 67 0 8
Priests' Alley, 1 1 0 5 0 0 6 Taylor's Alley, 0 2 1 3 6 0 1 Says' Alley, 1 1 0
5 0 0 6 York Court, 1 1 2 5 0 1 6 Shepperds' Alley, 1 7 5 7 14 0 0 Zachary's
Court, 0 2 0 0 13 0 0 Steinmet^^' Alley, 0 8 0 0 25 0 0 Patton's Alley, 2 3 3 8
14 0 0 Stiles' Court, 1 0 1 7 0 0 0 Smith's Alley, 0 3 5 0 18 0 0 Market Street
and Northward, 1178 1066 1152 4627 7332 64 474 South of Market Street, 1009 969
1068 4289 6133 174 833 The Number of Houses, Deaths, etc. in the respective
Streets, Alleys, etc. in the Northern Liberties and District of Southwark.
NORTHERN LIBERTIES. This account was taken between the 8th and 16th of
November 1793. HOUSES DEAD. WHITE INHABITANTS. BLACKS. DISTRICT OF SOUTHWARK.
This account was begun the 22d November and returned the 28th 1793. HOUSES
DEAD. WHITE INHABITANTS. BLACKS. SHUT OPEN FLED. REM. FLED. REM. SHUT OPEN
FLED. REM. FLED. REM. Water Street, 8 17 27 47 84 0 1 Swanson Street, 33 76 8^
234 561 3 19 Front Street, 59 118 80 400 676 10 49 South P^^n Street, 3 7 (...)
9 79 0 3 Second Street, 40 113 96 263 901 3 38 Front Street, 43 121 11^ 184 791
2 13 Third Street, 20 79 29 119 492 0 1 Second Street, 26 80 5^ 172 505 5 17
Fourth Street, 8 0 1 4 61 0 3 Third Street, 10 48 2^ 47 211 0 34 Fifth Street,
6 7 1 32 34 1 1 Fifth Street, 0 14 (...) 4 103 0 5 Seventh Street, 3 21 5 12
125 0 0 Cedar Street, South Side, 9 3^ ^2 58 177 0 19 Eigth Street, 2 30 4 18
165 0 0 Shippen Street, 19 44 27 85 212 1 49 Vine Street, North side, 21 30 22
128 174 10 8 Almond Street, 15 26 14 77 174 6 3 Callow-Hill Street, 35 59 53
229 391 0 10 Catharine Street, 11 38 28 42 156 1 32 Margaretta Street, 0 7 5 0
32 0 0 Christian Street, 20 53 38 81 342 3 3 Noble Street, or Bloody-Lane, 7 21
12 38 122 0 4 Church Alley, 3 4 2 8 29 0 0 Still-House Alley, 5 4 11 9 25 0 0
Love Lane, or Prime Street, 3 11 5 0 69 0 0 Artillery Lane or Duke Street, 6 29
16 37 149 0 26 Mary Street, 4 3 4 26 26 0 0 Tallman's Alley, 0 7 5 0 40 0 0
Queen Street, 10 21 12 41 106 0 5 Green Street, 13 35 27 85 207 0 6 Parram's
Alley, 0 3 3 0 10 0 0 Coate's Street, 5 33 16 24 148 0 32 Meade's Alley, 1 11
28 2 43 0 10 Brown Street, 1 39 7 5 1^5 0 15 German Street, 7 38 11 46 256 0 3
Charlotte Street, 0 17 1 3 78 0 0 Plumb Street, 9 46 27 44 275 1 4 Gold Street,
1 4 1 12 15 0 0 Moll Fuller's Alley, 0 8 4 3 48 0 4 Budd Street, 9 38 24 55 178
0 0 George Street, 7 16 7 43 117 0 8 Cable Lane 23 12 28 103 61 1 1 Vernon
Street, 5 13 20 21 72 0 0 Coate's Court, 3 4 6 11 11 0 0 Ball Alley, 0 6 1 3 30
0 3 St John's Street, 4 45 16 26 260 0 6 Crab Tree Alley, 1 10 3 9 66 2 0 St
Tammany Street, 1 8 6 3 48 0 2 Oak Street, 0 10 2 0 63 0 0 Rowe's Alley, 0 6 6
1 36 0 0 Willow Street, 5 13 7 26 91 0 1 Wood's Alley 11 16 25 29 108 1 0
District of Southwark, 239 742 527 1239 4521 24 234 Crown Street, 1 5 3 4 26 2
1 Northern Liberties, 302 822 546 1751 4943 28 205 Anne Street 5 5 6 28 20 0 0
North. Liberties and Southwark 541 1564 1073 2990 9464 52 439 Market Street and
Northward, 1178 1066 1152 4627 7332 64 474 302 822 546 1751 4943 28 205 South
of Market Street, 1009 969 1068 4289 6133 174 833 Total, 2728 3599 3293 11906
22929 290 1746 The average POPULATION Of the CITY of PHILADELPHIA, viz. Market
Street and North thereof 6.09 persons to a House. To the Southward thereof 6.07
ditto. NORTHERN LIBERTIES 6.64 ditto. DISTRICT OF SOUTHWARK 6.67 ditto. Of the
CITY and SUBURBS collectively 6.348 ditto. A List of the Interments in the
Burial (...) in the City of Philadelphia, the Northern Liberties and District
of Southwark: with a Meteorological account of the Weather.
BAPTISTS. EPISCOPAL. GERM. JEWS. KENSINGTON. MORAVIANS. METHODISTS.
PRESBYTERIANS. POTTER's FIELD QUAK. ROMANS C. SWEEDS. UNIVERSALISTS. TOTAL.
WINDS. WEATHER. THERMO. BAROMETER 1793, AUGUST, CHRIST C. St. PETER. St. PAUL.
LUTHER. CALVIN. FIRST. SECOND. THIRD. ASSOCIATE REFORMED FRIENDS. FREE QUAK.
St. MARY. TRINITY. At 6 A.M. At 3 P.M. At 6 A.M. At 3 P.M. At 6 A.M. At 3 P.M.
At 6 A.M. At 3 P.M. Thursday 1 1 2 1 1 2 1 1 9 W N W N W Cloudy Fair 65 77
29.95 30. Friday 2 1 2 1 1 1 2 8 N W S W Fair Fair 63 81 30. 1 30. 1 Saturday 3
1 1 1 2 2 2 9 N N N E Fair Fair 62 82 30. 5 29.95 Sunday 4 1 4 1 1 2 1 10 S S W
Fair Fair 65 87 29.97 30. Monday 5 1 1 5 1 2 10 S S W S W Fair Fair 73 90 30.05
30. 1 Tuesday 6 1 2 3 S W W Cloudy Fair 77 87 30.02 30. Wednesday 7 1 1 2 7 1
12 N W W Fair Fair 68 83 30.12 30. 1 Thursday 8 1 1 1 1 1 5 S S E S S E Fair
Rain 69 86 30. 1 29.95 Friday 9 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 2 11 S S W S W Cloudy Fair 75 85
29. 8 29.^5 Saturday 10 1 1 2 1 1 6 W S W Fair Fair 67 82 29. 9 29. 9 Sunday 11
4 2 1 7 S W W S W Cloudy Cloudy 70 84 30. 30. Monday 12 1 2 2 5 W W Fair Fair
70 87 30. 30. Tuesday 13 2 1 1 1 2 1 2 1 11 S W W do. do. 71 89 30.5 30.
Wednesday 14 1 1 2 4 S W S W do. Rain 75 82 30. 29.95 Thursday 15 2 1 1 2 3 9 N
N E N E Rain Cloudy 72 75 30. 30. 1 Friday 16 1 1 1 1 2 1 7 N N E N E Fair Fair
70 83 30. 1 30. 1 Saturday 17 1 1 1 1 1 1 6 S W S W do. do. 71 86 30. 1 30.
Sunday 18 1 2 1 1 5 Calm S W do. do. 73 89 30. 1 30. Monday 19 1 1 1 1 1 3 1 9
N N do. Cloudy 72 82 30. 1 30. 1 Tuesday 20 1 1 1 1 3 7 N N E N N E do. Fair 69
82 30. 1 30. 1 Wednesday 21 2 1 1 1 2 1 8 N N N E do. do. 62 83 30.15 30.25
Thursday 22 1 1 2 2 3 4 13 N E S E do. do. 63 86 30. 3 30.35 Friday 23 1 3 1 1
2 2 10 Calm S do. do. 63 85 30.25 30.15 Saturday 24 1 3 1 1 3 5 2 1 17 Calm
Calm Cloudy Rain 73 81 30. 1 30. 1 Sunday 25 1 3 1 2 1 1 1 2 12 N E N E Rain
great rain 71 66 30. 1 30. 1 Monday 26 2 2 4 1 2 1 1 1 3 17 N E N E Cloudy
Cloudy 59 69 30.15 30. 2 Tuesday 27 1 1 3 1 2 1 2 1 12 N E N E do. do. 65 73
30. 2 30. 2 Wednesday 28 5 3 2 3 1 2 2 1 3 22 S Calm do. Clearing 67 80 30. 2
30.15 Thursday 29 4 2 1 4 2 2 3 3 2 24 Calm S W do. Fair 72 86 30.16 30.15
Friday 30 1 1 3 3 1 3 4 4 20 Calm S W Fair Fair 74 87 30. 1 30. 1 Saturday 31 2
1 (...) 1 3 3 17 S W N W Rain Fair. 74 84 30. 30. SEPTEMBER Sunday 1 1 4 2 2 1
1 5 1 17 Calm S W Fog Fair 71 86 30. 29.30 Monday 2 3 1 1 2 4 5 2 18 S W S W
Fair Fair 73 86 29.75 29.8 Tuesday 3 1 1 2 3 1 3 11 N W N do. do. 60 30.
Wednesday 4 (...) 1 4 3 2 1 2 2 2 2 1 23 W W do. do. 55 75 30.15 30.15 Thursday
5 4 2 3 1 1 1 1 1 5 1 20 S E S do. Cloudy 62 80 30.15 30. 1 Friday 6 2 (...) 5
1 2 1 2 2 7 1 1 24 W S W W do. do. 70 89 29.97 29.95 Saturday 7 1 3 1 1 1 1 7 2
1 18 W N W N W do. Fair 65 77 30. 30. Sunday 8 2 1 4 4 1 1 1 4 2 16 3 2 2 42
Calm Calm Cloudy Cloudy 64 70 30. 1 30. 1 Monday 9 1 2 7 1 1 1 1 13 1 3 32 S E
N W Rain Fair 66 80 30. 30. Tuesday 10 3 1 5 1 1 1 1 2 4 6 3 1 29 N N N E Fair
Cloudy 64 72 30. 30. Wednesday 11 2 1 3 3 1 1 8 2 1 1 23 N N E N Cloudy Fair 62
72 30. 1 30. Thursday 12 1 2 6 2 2 2 1 1 10 3 2 33 N W N N W Fair do. 58 76
29.96 29. 9 Friday 13 1 1 8 2 1 1 1 1 10 7 3 1 1 37 N W N do. do. 57 72 29.95
30. Saturday 14 2 1 2 5 2 2 3 3 1 15 4 4 4 48 N W N W do. do. 58 79 30. 30. 5
Sunday 15 4 2 9 1 2 1 1 3 1 14 10 5 1 1 56 N S do. do. 65 80 30. 29.97 Monday
16 4 2 1 12 7 3 1 2 3 1 14 10 4 3 1 67 S S W Cloudy do. 70 84 29. 9 29. 8
Tuesday 17 1 1 1 21 7 3 1 4 2 20 7 5 2 81 N N do. Cloudy 66 67 29 8 29.85
Wednesday 18 3 4 10 4 3 2 4 2 19 7 6 2 2 68 N Fair 44 30. 3 Thursday 19 4 2 9 5
2 2 3 2 23 5 4 61 Clam S W Fair Fair 45 70 30. 4 30.35 Friday 20 3 1 1 7 1 5 1
2 2 2 27 9 3 3 67 do. S E Hazey Hazey 54 69 30 3 30.15 Saturday 21 3 3 8 2 4 1
2 1 21 6 6 57 do. Calm Cloudy Fair 59 78 30. 29. Sunday 22 6 1 7 6 7 1 2 3 1 1
33 6 1 1 76 do. do. Cloudy Fair 63 83 30. 30. Monday 23 1 3 2 8 6 9 4 21 7 5 2
68 do. S E do. Cloudy 62 81 30. 1 30. 1 Tuesday 24 5 2 12 4 8 4 4 2 38 8 9 96 N
E E N E do. Fair 65 70 30. 2 30. 2 Wednesday 25 4 2 2 15 5 7 4 4 2 25 8 6 3 87
N E N E do. Cloudy 61 68 30.15 30. Thursday 26 2 1 6 5 1 3 1 25 5 1 1 1 52 N N
do. Fair 58 79 29. 8 29. 7 Friday 27 3 1 1 6 5 2 2 1 4 1 14 14 6 60 N W N W do.
Fair 64 29. 7 Saturday 28 1 1 1 4 5 2 1 1 1 29 2 3 51 N W N W Fair do. 54 73
30. 5 30.15 Sunday 29 4 3 7 3 2 2 2 3 1 14 10 4 1 1 57 N E E N E Cloudy do. 57
74 30. 3 30. 3 Monday 30 4 1 2 4 6 2 1 3 22 8 6 1 3 63 Calm S W Foggy do. 57 75
30. 35 30. 3 A List of the Interments in the Burial (...) in the City of
Philadelphia, the Northern Liberties and District of Southwark: with a
Meteorological account of the Weather.
1793, OCTOBER, BAPTISTS. EPISCOPA. GERM. JEWS. KENSINGTON. MORAVIANS.
METHODISTS. PRESBYTERIANS. POTTER's FIELD QUAK. ROMANS C. SWEEDS. UNIVERSALISTS.
TOTAL. WINDS. WEATHER. THERMO. BAROMETER. CHRIST C. St. PETER. St. PAUL.
LUTHER. CALVIN. FIRST. SECOND. THIRD. ASSOCIATE REFORMED FRIENDS. FREE QUAK.
St. MARY. TRINITY. At 6 A. M. At 3 P. M. At 6 A. M. At 3 P. M. At 6 A. M. At 3
P. M. At 6 A. M. At 3 P. M. Tuesday 1 4 2 5 12 3 5 1 3 4 21 8 4 2 74 S W S W
Cloudy Fair 64 80 30 15 30. 5 Wednesday 2 2 1 1 5 5 3 1 2 2 31 9 3 1 66 W N N W
do. do. 70 72 29. 9 30. 5 Thursday 3 3 1 3 1^ 4 2 1 2 3 3 33 7 5 1 78 W S W
Fair do. 50 72 30. 2 30.15 Friday 4 1 2 4 6 5 1 2 1 27 3 3 2 1 58 S W W Cloudy
Cloudy 59 72 29. 75 29. 7 Saturday 5 2 1 11 3 3 1 2 3 26 12 1 2 4 71 N N Fair
Fair 58 66 30. 30. 1 Sunday 6 2 5 1 14 4 1 2 1 34 5 5 2 76 N E W do. do. 4^ 66
30. 3 30. 3 Monday 7 7 3 1 1^ 7 2 2 1 5 1 2 25 9 1 2 2 82 Calm Fair do. 46 30.
45 Tuesday 8 3 2 3 21 6 3 1 2 1 2 33 5 3 2 3 90 N N do. do. 53 63 30. 6 30. 6
Wednesday 9 2 1 1^ 8 3 1 1 1 2 1 50 4 7 1 1 102 N W N W do. do. 53 70 30. 5 30.
4 Thursday 10 7 2 26 6 1 1 2 2 2 31 6 3 1 2 1 93 E N W do. do. 49 74 30. 2 30.
2 Friday 11 4 2 5 21 (...) 2 1 3 2 50 12 3 1 5 119 W W do. do. 51 74 30. 29. 85
Saturday 12 1 2 2 17 12 8 1 4 1 44 11 6 1 1 111 S W N W Rain Rain 58 64 29. 6
29.55 Sunday 13 6 3 2^ 5 4 1 1 1 48 9 4 1 1 104 N W N W Fair. Fair. 49 69 29.
85 29. 9 Monday 14 2 1 1^ 7 2 1 1 5 29 5 2 2 7 81 S W S W Calm do. 52 76 30. 05
30. Tuesday 15 3 (...) 1 14 7 3 1 2 1 29 9 4 1 2 80 S W N Fair Rain 56 54 29.
75 29. 8 Wednesday 16 1 1 2 10 2 2 2 4 2 2 29 4 6 1 2 70 N N W N do. Fair 37 53
30. 30. Thursday 17 5 3 2 1^ 7 1 3 28 10 3 2 80 N E N E do. do. 37 60 30. 1 30.
1 Friday 18 2 1 11 3 2 1 4 1 22 5 5 1 1 59 N W N W do. do. 41 62 30. 1 30. 1
Saturday 19 2 3 14 2 2 1 4 1 27 2 4 2 1 65 N N Cloudy do. 51 66 30. 29.9 Sunday
20 2 3 11 (...) 1 3 2 17 4 4 1 1 55 N W N Fair. do. 44 54 30. 30. Monday 21 4
(...) (...) 1 2 3 1 24 4 5 2 1 59 N N W do. do. 49 59 30. 30. 2 Tuesday 22 2 19
(...) 2 2 2 3 2 2 31 7 5 2 1 82 N W N W do. do. 51 65 29. 6 29. 5 Wednesday 23
1 1^ 7 1 1 3 23 5 3 54 W W do. do. 47 60 29. 8 29. 8 Thursday 24 1 1 8 4 3 17 2
2 38 W N W do. do. 36 59 30. 3 30. 4 Friday 25 5 8 2 2 1 (...) 1 1 10 1 1 1 35
S S Cloudy Fair and high wind) 46 71 30. 4 30. 3 Saturday 26 2 1 5 2 1 1 1 1 5
2 1 1 23 Calm S W do. Cloudy 60 72 30. 2 30. 2 Sunday 27 1 1 1 2 1 6 1 13 N N E
N N E do. do. 44 44 30. 3 30. 3 Monday 28 1 1 5 3 1 2 6 4 1 24 N N do. do. 34
37 30. 2 30. 1 Tuesday 29 1 4 2 1 6 (...) 1 17 N N W N W Fair Fair 28 44 29. 85
29. 85 Wednesday 30 1 1 3 1 2 6 2 16 Calm S W Hazey Hazey 28 49 30. 1 30. 1
Thursday 31 7 3 8 1 2 21 Calm N N E Cloudy Rain 42 45 30. 15 30. 2 NOVEMBER.
Friday 1 1 1 2 5 3 1 13 N N E N E Rain Cloudy 40 41 30. 1 30. 1 Saturday 2 1 3
2 2 8 2 3 21 N N E N E Fair Fair 32 49 30. 3 30. 25 Sunday 3 1 1 5 2 1 4 1 15
Calm S W Cloudy Cloudy 43 56 30. 1 30. Monday 4 1 (...) 5 1 6 1 15 S W S W do.
Fair 55 67 29. 8 29. 9 Tuesday 5 2 2 1 6 3 14 N E N E Rain Rain 50 54 30. 15
30. 1 Wednesday 6 1 1 5 1 3 11 S S Cloudy Cloudy 63 67 29. 8 29. 65 Thursday 7
2 1 1 1 5 4 1 15 Calm S W Fair Fair 44 64 29. 8 29. 8 Friday 8 1 1 3 2 1 8 S S
W S W Fair do. 43 56 29. 8 29. 85 Saturday 9 (...) 3 1 6 S W S W do. do. 42 64
29. 9 29. 95 August, In the whole 27 16 5 55 17 In the whole 25 In the whole 12
13 16 2 39 43 In the whole 46 3 6 325 September, ^4 43 29 2^2 92 82 4 34 60 42
6 14 474 159 94 19 24 1442 October, 76 45 36 365 142 57 9 26 ^5 47 4 19 776 163
99 30 45 2 1996 November, 6 5 18 9 5 1 0 2 45 13 12 2 118 60 1^^ 10^ ^70 ^40
^60 ^2 169 13 32 73 ^2^ 107 12 33 1334 378 39 281 Thirty (...) number were of
the German part of St. Mary's Congregation, whereof a daily account of
interments was not kept.
54 75 2 4044

A SUMMARY of the Donations received from sundry Persons and places for the use
of the poor and afflicted, etc.
In PENNSYLVANIA. Philadelphians, at and near Dols. Cts. Germanton see page 111
2472. Darby, do. 175 1559.9 Wilmington, do. 119 480. In the City and other
places, viz.
Dols. Cts. Dols. Cts. John Todd, jun. 20 A Friend of the afflicted by T.
Ustick 10 Thomas Fisher 50 Samuel Fisher, 50 A person unknown by Israel Israel
4.67 Miers Fisher, 50 Nathaniel Falconer 50 A ditto 10 George Peddle, 10 A do.
by C. Jarvis 133.34 Matthew Spillard 10 Thomas Watkins 1 "A friend" 15 J. Moore
10 Do. per C. Watkins 5.25 J. Douglass 10 Benjamin Fuller 100 James Read 200
Alexander Christie 10 Thomas Palmer 30 Tench Coxe 50 John Wilson 16 John Vicars
5 Samuel Miles 30 Joseph Keen 10 Stephen Collins 30 Alex. Wilco^ks 50 Zacheus
Collins 30 Samuel Cou^y 10 Charles Shoemaker 10 P. W. Gauladet 50 Robert
Coltman 8 Citizen Genet 200 Captain Burrows 10 543.1 745.25 745.25 1288.26
5799.35 Philadelphia co. Kingsessing Philip Price 206.45 Oxford, G. Ashbridge
250.13 456.58 Dols. Cts. Chester Coun. Downingstown J. Whelen 1160.46 West
Chester W. Gibbons 491. Charleston M. Pennebaker 280. Birmingham Casp. Wistar
100. 2031.46 Bucks County Newtown I. Chapman 1989.78 Bensalem R. Gibbs 16.
2005.78 Delaware Co. Darby and vicinity N. Newlin 1125.24 Darby J. Pearson
153.33 Springfield T. Levis 13. 1291.57 Lancaster Co. Cocalico P. Martin 10
Leacock I. Israel 80.30 Chestnut Level Rev. J. Lata 86.67 R. Coleman 80. Earl
township F. Seig^r 65. Muddy Creek Allegheny H. Moehler 50.66 Lancaster (...)
Zantzinger 588.70 Conestogo J. Baughman 25.33 Leacock J. John's 92.4 L. Britain
L. Hollingsworth 64.97 Donegal J. Whitehill 41.75 New Holland F. Seiger 18.35
Salsbury St. J. Hopkins and 62. John's Chapter J. Henderson 62. 1265.77 And 236
barrels of flour per page 172. York County, Borough J. Short 271.27 Chanceford
do. 21. do. do. 43.45 335.72 Northumberland Co. Fred. Antis 137.87 Dols. Cts.
Cumberland Co. Carlisle J. Hamilton 14. Berks County Oley D. Udre and T. Lee
170.66 Carnarvon E. Bonsall 45.25 Hamburgh J. Meyer 53.33 269.24 Montgomery C.
Cheltenham J. Shoemaker 122. Potts Grove J. C. Stocker 135.18 Norristown J.
Pugh and T. W. Tallman 160. Trap P. Muhlenberg 50. Horsham, Moreland and Upper
Dublin S. Erwin 261.73 Perkiomy, etc. C. Donnacker 73.42 Whitpain J. Morris
332.56 Montgomery R. Lollor 100. New Hanover J. Richards 77.33 Providence Rev.
S. Clay 45.18 S. Levizey 8. Upper Merion Rev. S. Clay 129.34 Lower Merion do.
114.3 do. Geo. Davis 58.58 Lower Salford Geo. Reiff 356.67 2024.2 Northampton
Co. Dryland Congregation S. Drisbach 12.87 Moretown do. do. 15.27 Allen and
Lehigh do. 37.45 English Congrega. Allen Township do. 79.16 Allen Township do.
10. Ger. Reformed congregation John Arndt 67.50 222.25 Franklin Co.
Chambersburg E. Crawford 474.62 Washington County Alexander Addison 8.16 Total
donations of Pennsylvania 16336.39 Dols. Cts. Received from patients, etc.
Peter Tobo's estate 6. John J. Perrins, do. 10. R. Keen, nursing an orphan 8.80
French Soldiers 3070.39 Sales of effects at Bush-Hill 1008.27 of sundries
1212.86 5316.32 State of NEW YORK.
New York Common Council of the city 5000. Hallam and Henry 260. 5260. Albany
Goldsbro', Banyar and others 866.40 Kingston Rev. Stephen Voorhies 45. 6171.40
State of NEW JERSEY.
Mount Holly Peter Shiras 278.46 Woodberry A. Middleton and J. Jessup 330.40
Elizabeth Town Elias Boudinot 150. Evesham J. Collins and E. Evans 309.96
Trenton A. G. Claypool and P. Gordon 341.66 Princetown John Little 294. Newark,
Pat. Soc. J. Pintard and U. Ogden 77.12 Bridgetown Joseph Shotwell 190.
Gloucester Coun. Marmaduke Cooper 120. Burlington County Joseph M. Lawry 238.41
Chester Township Richard Smith 22.16 Allentown Rev. Joseph Clark 89. Bordentown
Joseph Kirkbride 10. Morristown Richard Smith 20.75 Mannington Thomas Waters
125. 2596.92 State of DELAWARE.
Dols. Cts. Red Lion Hundred by Israel Israel 27.35 Mill Creek Hundred Rev.
M'Kennan's congregation by George Latimer 50.50 A person unknown by do. 500.
Pencader Hundred W. Coock 64. 641.85 State of MASSACHUSETTS.
Boston By J. C. Jones, etc. 819.49 do. 80. Net proceeds of a cargo 1751.87
2651.36 State of MARYLAND.
Chester Town Samuel Chew 100. Baltimore Jesse Hollingsworth 30. Jeremiah
Yellot 90. 220. State of VIRGINIA.
Winchester By Robert M'Clay 350.81

A Summary of DONATIONS in Provisions, etc. Received from: Haddonfield,
Gloucester County, forwarded by Thomas Redman and others, viz.
304 fowls, 335 lb. veal 552 lb. mutton and lamb 4 sheep 1 lamb 143 lb. of
cheese, 87 lb. of butter, 4 bushels of Corn, 1 barrel and 15 gallons of Vinegar
53 bushels of sweet Potatoes, 37 dozen of eggs, 177 lb. of ham, 1 gall. 30 lb.
and a small quantity of honey, 2 calves feet, 1 do. head, 1 bushel of buckwheat,
a small quantity of centuary and pipcisaway, 97 cords of wood. Widow Grub, at
Chester, a bundle of children's clothing. Major M'Pherson, Northern Liberties,
a steer and a cart load of vegetables. Major T. W. Moore, vegetables, etc.
Captain Barry, of N. L. a cart load of vegetables and veal. W. W. Burrows,
vegetables, etc. Major Lennox, ditto, Vegetables, veal, etc. Jonathan Williams,
ditto, 10 Sheep and vegetables. Doctor Logan, ditto, 3 cart loads of turnips,
etc. Benj. Rittenhouse, Norrington, 100 bundles of straw. Doctor Shannon,
ditto, - ditto. Potts-Grove, by I. C. Stocker, 2 turkies, 106 fowls, a barrel
of Centaury and 14 Sheep. Potts-Grove and Douglass township, by Joseph Potts,
212 fowls. Trap, by Peter Muhlenberg, 120 fowls, 3 bundles of clothing, a load
of vegetables, 10 Sheep, and 4 bags of flour. John Wilcocks, 4 Sheep, John
Nicholson, 6961 pounds of beef, and 35 barrels of flour. Caspar Wistar,
Birmingham, 132 fowls. Abington township, by Jonathan Shoemaker and Geo.
Fisher, 26 fowls, 22 lb. of Cheese, 40 lb. of butter, 8 bushels of Potatoes,
and 56 lb. of flour. Wilmington, by Robert Ralston, 2 barrels of Limes, and
firewood. Lancaster Borough, by Paul Zantzinger, forty three bundles of
clothing. Evesham, New Jersey, by E. Evans and Job Collins, provisions of
various kinds to the value of L36. Salem do. by John Redman, 133 fowls, 3
cheese, 7lb. butter, 1 gammon, 2 sheep, 19 lb. of lard. Mount Holly, by Peter
Shiras, 9 cheese, 40 bushels of potatoes, and one ham. Delivered by John Guin,
354lb. buckwheat meal, 8 bushels indian meal, 100lb. wheat flour, 13 bushels of
potatoes, 11 couple of fowls, 8lb. of butter and half a bushel of corn.
FIRE WOOD
From Wilmington 10. Burlington City 53 Burlington County 62 Gloucester County
107 234 cords

OMISSION
At the top of page 190 read

At a meeting of the Citizens at the City Hall March 8th, 1794.

The Hon. Thomas M'Kean, Esquire. Chairman.

Anthony Morris, Esquire. Secretary.

FINIS.

