SLAVES IN ALGIERS; OR, A STRUGGLE FOR FREEDOM: A PLAY, INTERSPERSED WITH
SONGS, IN THREE ACTS.

BY MRS. ROWSON.

AS PERFORMED AT THE NEW THEATERS, IN PHILADELPHIA AND BALTIMORE.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR, BY WRIGLEY AND BERRIMAN, no. 149,
CHESNUT-STREET. M, DCC, XCIV.

COPY-RIGHT SECURED ACCORDING TO LAW.

TO THE CITIZENS OF THE UNITED STATES OF NORTH AMERICA.

THIS FIRST DRAMATIC EFFORT IS INSCRIBED,

BY THEIR OBLIGED FRIEND, AND HUMBLE SERVANT, S. ROWSON.

PREFACE.
IN offering the following pages to the public, I feel myself necessitated to
apologize for the errors which I am fearful will be evident to the severe eye
of criticism.

The thought of writing a Dramatic Piece was hastily conceived, and as hastily
executed; it being not more than two months, from the first starting of the
idea, to the time of its being performed.

I feel myself extremely happy, in having an opportunity, thus publicly to
acknowledge my obligation to Mr. Reinagle, for the attention he manifested, and
the taste and genius he displayed in the composition of the music. I must also
return my thanks to the Performers, who so readily accepted, and so ably
supported their several characters: Since it was chiefly owing to their
exertions, that the Play was received with such unbounded marks of approbation.

Since the first performance, I have made some alterations; and flatter myself
those alterations have improved it: But of that, as well as of its merits in
general, I am content to abide the decision of a candid and indulgent Public.

Some part of the plot is taken from the Story of the Captive, related by
Cervantes, in his inimitable Romance of Don Quixote, the rest is entirely the
offspring of fancy.

I am fully sensible of the many disadvantges under which I consequently labor
from a confined education; nor do I expect my style will be thought equal in
elegance or energy, to the productions of those who, fortunately, from their
sex, or situation in life, have been instructed in the Classics, and have
reaped both pleasure and improvement by studying the Ancients in their original
purity.

My chief aim has been, to offer to the Public a Dramatic Entertainment, which,
while it might excite a smile, or call forth the tear of sensibility, might
contain no one sentiment, in the least prejudicial, to the moral or political
principles of the government under which I live. On the contrary, it has been
my endeavor, to place the social virtues in the fairest point of view, and
hold up, to merited contempt and ridicule, their opposite vices. If, in this
attempt, I have been the least successful, I shall reap the reward to which I
aspire, in the smiles and approbation of a Liberal Public.

PROLOGUE, To the New Comedy of SLAVES IN ALGIERS.
Written and Spoken by Mr. FENNEL.
WHEN aged Priam, to Achilles' tent
To beg the captive corse of Hector went,
The silent suppliant spoke the father's fears,
His sighs his eloquence -- his prayers his tears.
The noble conqueror by the sight was won,
And to the weeping sire restored the son.
No great Achilles holds your sons in chains,
No heart alive to friends' or father's pains,
No generous conqueror who is proud to show,
That valor vanquished is no more his foe; --
But one, whose idol, is his pilfer'd gold,
Got, or by piracy, or subjects sold.
Him no fond father's prayers nor tears can melt,
Untaught to feel for, what he never felt.
What then behooves it, they who helped to gain,
A nation's freedom, feel the galling chain?
They, who a more than ten year's war withstood,
And stamped their country's honor with their blood?
Or, shall the noble Eagle see her brood,
Beneath the pirate kite's fell claw subdued?
View her dear sons of liberty enslaved,
Nor let them share the blessings which they saved?
-- It must not be -- each heart, each soul must rise,
Each ear must listen to their distant cries;
Each hand must give, and the quick sail unfurled,
Must bear their ransom to the distant world.
Nor here alone, Columbia's sons be free,
Wherever they breath there must be liberty.
-- There must! there is, for he who formed the whole,
Entwined blessed freedom with the immortal soul.
Eternal twins, whose mutual efforts fan,
That heavenly flame that gilds the life of man,
Whose light, 'midst manacles and dungeons drear,
The sons of honor, must forever cheer.
What tyrant then the virtuous heart can bind?
It Is vices only can enslave the mind.
Who barters country, honor, faith, to save
His life, though free in person, is a slave.
While he, enchain'd, imprisoned though he be,
Who lifts his arm for liberty, is free.
Tonight, our author boldly dares to choose,
This glorious subject for her humble muse;
Though tyrants check the genius which they fear,
She dreads no check, nor persecution here;
Where safe asylums every virtue guard,
And every talent meets its just reward.
Some say -- the Comic muse, with watchful eye,
Should catch the reigning vices as they fly,
Our author boldly has reversed that plan,
The reigning virtues she has dared to scan,
And though a woman, plead the Rights of Man.
Thus she, with anxious hope her fate abides,
And to your care, the tender plant confides,
Convinced you will cherish, what to freedom's true;
She trusts its life, to candor and to you.
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
MULEY MOLOC, (Dey of Algiers,) Mr. Green. MUSTAPHA, Mr. Darley, jun. BEN
HASSAN, (a Renegado,) Mr. Francis. SEBASTIAN, (a Spanish Slave,) Mr. Bates.
AUGUSTUS, (American Captive,) Master T. Warrell. FREDERIC, (American Captive,)
Mr. Moreton. HENRY, (American Captive,) Mr. Cleveland. CONSTANT, (American
Captive,) Mr. Whitlock. SADI, Master Warrell. SELIM, Mr. Blissett.
WOMEN,
ZORIANA, (Moriscan Woman,) Mrs. Warrell. FETNAH, (Moriscan Woman,) Mrs.
Marshall. SELIMA, (Moriscan Woman,) Mrs. Cleveland. REBECCA, (American Woman,)
Mrs. Whitlock. OLIVIA. (American Woman,) Mrs. Rowson. Slaves. -- Guards, etc.
SLAVES IN ALGIERS; OR, A STRUGGLE FOR FREEDOM.
ACT I.
SCENE I. Apartment at the Dey's.
FETNAH and SELIMA. FETNAH. WELL, it is all vastly pretty, the gardens, the
house and these fine clothes, I like them very well, but I don't like to be
confined.


SELIMA. Yet, surely, you have no reason to complain; chosen favorite of the
Dey, what can you wish for more.


FETNAH. O, a great many things -- In the first place, I wish for liberty. Why
do you talk of my being a favorite; is the poor bird that is confined in a
cage (because a favorite with its enslaver) consoled for the loss of freedom.
No! though its prison is of golden wire, its food delicious, and it is
overwhelmed with caresses, its little heart still pants for liberty: gladly
would it seek the fields of air, and even perched upon a naked bough, exulting,
carrol forth its song, nor once regret the splendid house of bondage.


SELIMA. Ah! but then our master loves you.


FETNAH. What of that, I don't love him.


SELIMA. Not love him?


FETNAH. No -- he is old and ugly, then he wears such tremenduous whiskers; and
when he makes love, he looks so grave and stately, that I declare, if it was
not for fear of his huge scymetar, I should burst out a laughing in his face.


SELIMA. Take care you don't provoke him too far.


FETNAH. I don't care how I provoke him, if I can but make him keep his
distance. You know I was brought here only a few days since -- well, yesterday,
as I was amusing myself, looking at the fine things I saw every where about me,
who should bolt into the room, but that great, ugly thing Mustapha. What do you
want, said I? -- Most beautiful Fetnah, said he, bowing till the tip of his
long, hooked nose almost ouched the toe of his slipper -- most beautiful
Fetnah, our powerful and gracious master, Muley Moloc, sends me, the humblest
of his slaves, to tell you, he will condescend to sup in your apartment to
night, and commands you to receive the high honor with proper humility.


SELIMA. Well -- and what answer did you return.


FETNAH. Lord, I was so frightened, and so provoked, I hardly know what I said,
but finding the horrid looking creature didn't move, at last I told him, that
if the Dey was determined to come, I supposed he must, for I could not hinder
him.


SELIMA. And did he come?


FETNAH. No -- but he made me go to him, and when I went trembling into the
room, he twisted his whiskers and knit his great beetle brows. Fetnah said, he
you abuse my goodness, I have condescended to request you to love me. And then
he gave me such a fierce look, as if he would say, and if you don't love me,
I Will cut your head off.


SELIMA. I dare say you were finely frightened.


FETNAH. Frightened! I was provoked beyond all patience, and thinking he would
certainly kill me one day or other, I thought I might as well speak my mind,
and be dispatched out of the way at once.


SELIMA. You make me tremble.


FETNAH. So, mustering up as much courage as I could; great and powerful Muley,
said I -- I am sensible I am your slave; you took me from an humble state,
placed me in this fine palace, and gave me these rich clothes; you bought my
person of my parents, who loved gold better than they did their child; but my
affections you could not buy. I cannot love you. -- How! cried he, starting from
his seat: how, cannot love me? -- and he laid his hand upon his scymetar.


SELIMA. Oh dear! Fetnah.


FETNAH. When I saw the scymetar half drawn, I caught hold of his arm. -- Oh!
good my lord, said I, pray do not kill a poor little girl like me, send me home
again, and bestow your favor on some other, who may think splendour a
compensation for the loss of liberty. -- Take her away, said he, she is beneath
my anger


SELIMA. But, how is it Fetnah, that you have covceived such an aversion to the
manners of a country where you were born.


FETNAH. You are mistaken. -- I was not born in Algiers, I drew my first breath
in England; my father, Ben Hassan, as he is now called, was a Jew. I can
scarcely remember our arrival here, and have been educated in the Moorish
religion, though I always had a natural antipathy to their manners,


SELIMA. Perhaps imbibed from your mother.


FETNAH. No; she has no objection to any of their customs, except that of their
having a great many wives at a time. But some few months since, my father, (who
sends out many corsairs,) brought home a female captive, to whom I became
greatly attached; it was she, who nourished in my mind the love of liberty, and
taught me, woman was never formed to be the abject slave of man. Nature made us
equal with them, and gave us the power to render ourselves superior.


SELIMA. Of what nation was she?


FETNAH. She came from that land, where virtue in either sex is the only mark
of superiority. -- She was an American.


SELIMA. Where is she now?


FETNAH. She is still at my father's, waiting the arrival of her ransom, for
she is a woman of fortune. And though I can no longer listen to her instructions,
her precepts are engraven on my heart, I feel that I was born free, and while I
have life, I will struggle to remain so.

SONG.
I.
THE rose just bursting into bloom,
Admired wherever it is seen;
Diffuses round a rich perfume,
The garden's pride and queen.
When gathered from its native bed,
No longer charms the eye;
Its vivid tints are quickly fled,
'Twill wither, droop, and die.
II.
So woman when by nature dressed,
In charms devoid of art;
Can warm the stoic's icy breast,
Can triumph over each heart.
Can bid the soul to virtue rise,
To glory prompt the brave,
But sinks oppressed, and drooping dies,
When once she is made a slave. Exit.

SCENE II. Ben Hassan's House.
REBECCA, (Discovered reading.) The soul, secure in its existence, smiles
At the drawn dagger, and defies its point.
The stars shall fade away, the sun itself
Grow dim with age, and nature sink in years,
But thou shall flourish in immortal youth,
Unhurt, amidst the war of elements,
The wreck of matter, or the crush of worlds.
[Lays down the book.] Oh! blessed hope, I feel within myself, that spark of
intellectual heavenly fire, that bids me soar above this mortal world, and all
its pains or pleasures -- its pleasures! Oh! -- long -- long since I have been
dead to all that bear the name. -- In early youth -- torn from the husband of
my heart's election -- the first only object of my love -- bereft of friends
cast on an unfeeling world, with only one poor stay, on which to rest the hope
of future joy. -- I have a son -- my child! my dear Augustus -- where are you
now? -- in slavery. -- Grant me patience Heaven! must a boy born in Columbia,
claiming liberty as his birthright, pass all his days in slavery. -- How often
have I gazed upon his face, and fancied I could trace his father's features;
how often have I listened to his voice, and thought his father's spirit spoke
within him. Oh! my adored boy! must I no more behold his eyes beaming with
youthful ardour, when I have told him, how his brave countrymen purchased their
freedom with their blood. -- Alas! I see him now but seldom; and when we meet
to think that we are slaves, poor, wretched slaves each serving different
masters, my eyes overflow with tears. -- I have but time to press him to my
heart, entreat just Heaven, to protect his life, and at some future day restore
his liberty.


Enter BEN HASSAN. BEN HASSAN. How do you do, Mrs. Rebecca?


REBECCA. Well, in health, Hassan, but depressed in spirit.


BEN HASSAN. Ah! dat be very bad -- come, come, cheer up, I vants to talk vid
you, you must not be so melancholy, I be your very good friend.


REBECCA. Thank you, Hassan, but if you are in reality the friend you profess
to be, leave me to indulge my grief in solitude, your intention is kind, but I
would rather be alone.


BEN HASSAN. You likes mightily to be by yourself, but I must talk to you a
little; I vantsh to know ven you think your ransom vil come, it is a long time,
Mrs. Rebecca, and you knows. --


REBECCA. Oh yes, I know, I am under many obligations to you, but I shall soon
be able to repay them.


BEN HASSAN. That may be, but it is a very long time, since you wrote to your
friends, it is above eight months; I am afraid you have deceived me.


REBECCA. Alas! perhaps I have deceived myself.


BEN HASSAN. Vat, den you have no friends -- you are not a voman's of fortune?


REBECCA. Yes, yes, I have both friends and ability -- but I am afraid my
letters have miscarried.


BEN HASSAN. Oh! dat ish very likely, you may be here dish two or three years
longer; perhaps all your life times.


REBECCA. Alas! I am very wretched. weeps.


BEN HASSAN. Come, now don't cry so; you must consider I never suffered you to
be exposed in the slave market,


REBECCA. But, my son. -- Oh! Hassan; why did you suffer them to sell my child?


HASSAN. I could not help it, I did all I could -- but you knows I would not
let you be sent to the Dey, I have kept you in my own house, at mine own
expense, (aside) for which I have been more than doubly paid.


REBECCA. That is indeed true, but I cannot at present return your kindness.


BEN HASSAN. Ah! you be very sly rogue -- you pretend not to know how I loves
you.


REBECCA. Aside What means the wretch.


BEN HASSAN. You should forget your Christian friends, for I dare say they have
forgot you. -- I will make you my vife, I will give you von, two, tree slaves
to vait on you.


REBECCA. Make me your wife! why, are you not already married?


BEN HASSAN. Ish, but our law gives us great many vives. -- our law gives
liberty in love; you are an American and you must love liberty.


REBECCA. Hold, Hassan; prostitute not the sacred word by applying it to
licentiousness; the sons and daughters of liberty, take justice, truth, and
mercy, for their leaders, when they list under her glorious banners.


BEN HASSAN. Your friends will never ransom you.


REBECCA. How readily does the sordid mind judge of others by its own
contracted feelings; you, who much I fear, worship no deity but gold, who could
sacrifice friendship, nay, even the ties of nature at the shrine of your
idolatry, think other hearts as selfish as your own; -- but there are souls to
whom the afflicted never cry in vain, who, to dry the widow's tear, or free the
captive, would share their last possession. -- Blessed spirits of philanthropy,
who inhabit my native land, never will I doubt your friendship, for sure I am,
you never will neglect the wretched.


BEN HASSAN. If you are not ransomed soon, I must send you to the Dey.


REBECCA. Even as you please, I cannot be more wretched than I am; but of this
be assured; however depressed in fortune, however sunk in adversity, the soul
secure in its own integrity will rise superior to its enemies, and scorn the
venal wretch, who barters truth for gold.


Exit. BEN HASSAN -- Solus. It Is a very strange voman, very strange indeed; she
does not know I got her pocketbook, with bills of exchange in it; she thinks I
keep her in my house out of charity, and yet she talks about freedom and
superiority, as if she was in her own country. It Is devilish hard indeed, when
masters may not do what they please with their slaves. Her ransom arrived
yesterday, but den she don't know it -- Yesh, here is the letter; ransom for
Rebecca Constant, and six other Christian slaves; vell I will make her write
for more, she is my slave, I must get all I can by her. Oh, here comes that
wild young Christian, Frederic, who ransomed himself a few days since.


Enter FREDERIC. FREDERIC. Well, my little Israelite, what are you muttering
about; have you thought on my proposals, will you purchase the vessel and
assist us?


BEN HASSAN. Vat did you say you would give me?


FREDERIC. We can amongst us, muster up two thousand sequins, it is all we have
in the world.


BEN HASSAN. You are sure you can get no more?


FREDERIC. Not a farthing more.


BEN HASSAN. Den I will be satisfied with dat, it will in some measure reward
me -- (aside) for betraying you.


FREDERIC. And you will purchase the vessel.


BEN HASSAN. I will do every thing that is necessary -- (aside) for my own
interest.


FREDERIC. You have conveyed provision to the cavern by the sea side, where I
am to conceal the captives, to wait the arrival of the vessel.


BEN HASSAN. Most shartingly, I have provided for them as -- (aside) as secure
a prison as any in Algiers.


FREDERIC. But, are you not a most extortionate old rogue, to require so much,
before you will assist a parcel of poor devils to obtain their liberty.


BEN HASSAN. Oh! Mr. Frederic, if I vash not your very good friend, I could not
do it for so little; the Moors are such uncharitable dogs, they never think
they can get enough for their slaves, but I have a vasht deal of compassion; I
feels very mush for the poor Christians; I should be very glad (aside) to have
a hundred or two of them my prisoners.


FREDERIC. You would be glad to serve us?


BEN HASSAN. Shartingly. (Aside) Ven I can serve myself at the same time.


FREDERIC. Prithee, honest Hassan, how came you to put on the turban?


BEN HASSAN. I Will tell you.

This song was not written by Mrs. Rowson.
SONG.
Ven I vas a mighty little boy,
Heart-cakes I sold and pepper-mint drops;
Wafers and sweet chalk I used for to cry,
Alacumpaine and nice lolly-pops,
The next thing I sold vas the rollers for the macs
To curl dear hair, 'twas very good;
Rosin I painted for sealing wax
And I forged upon it vel brand en vast houd.
Next to try my luck in the alley I vent,
But of dat I soon grew tired and wiser;
Moneys I lent out at fifty per cent.
And my name was I. H. in the Public Advertiser.
The next thing I did was a spirited prank,
Which at one stroke my fortune was made;
I wrote so very like the cashiers of the bank,
The clerks did not know the difference, and the moneys was paid.
So, having cheated the Gentiles, as Moses commanded,
Oh! I began to tremble at every gibbet that I saw;
But I got on board a ship, and here was safely landed,
In spite of the judges, counselors, attorneys, and law.

FREDERIC. And so to complete the whole, you turned Mohammedan.


BEN HASSAN. Oh 'twas the safest way.


FREDERIC. But Hassan, as you are so fond of cheating the Gentiles, perhaps you
may cheat us.


BEN HASSAN. Oh no! I swear by Mahomet.


FREDERIC. No swearing, old Trimmer, if you are true to us, you will be amply
rewarded, should you betray us, (sternly) by heaven you shall not live an hour
after. -- Go, look for a vessel, make every necessary preparation; and
remember, instant death shall await the least appearance of treachery.


BEN HASSAN. But I have not got moneys.


FREDERIC. Go, you are a hypocrite; you are rich enough to purchase an hundred
vessels, and if the Dey knew of your wealth --


BEN HASSAN. Oh! dear Mr. Frederic, indeed I am very poor, but I will do all
you desire, and you vill pay me afterward. (Aside) -- Oh, I wish I could get
you well paid with the bastinado. Exit.


FREDERIC -- Solus. I will trust this fellow no farther, I am afraid he will
play us false -- but should he, we have yet one resource, we can but die; and
to die in a struggle for freedom, is better far than to live in ignominious
bondage. Exit.


SCENE III. Another Apartment at the Dey's.
ZORIANA and OLIVIA. ZORIANA. Alas! it was pitiful, pray proceed.


OLIVIA. My father's ill health obliging him to visit Lisbon, we embarked for
that place, leaving my betrothed lover to follow us -- but ever we reached our
destined port, we were captured by an Algerine corsair, and I was immediately
sent to the Dey, your father.


ZORIANA. I was then in the country, but I was told he became enamoured of you.


OLIVIA. Unfortunately he did; but my being a Christian has hitherto preserved
me from improper solicitations, though I am frequently pressed to abjure my
religion.


ZORIANA. Were you not once near making your escape.


OLIVIA. We were; my father, by means of some jewels which he had concealed in
his clothes, bribed one of the guards to procure false keys to the apartments,
but on the very night when we meant to put our plan in execution, the Dey,
coming suddenly into the room, suprized my father in my arms.


ZORIANA. Was not his anger dreadful?


OLIVIA. Past description; my dear father was torn from me and loaded with
chains, thrown into a dungeon* where he still remains, secluded from the
cheering light of heaven; no resting place but on the cold, damp ground; the
daily portion of his food so poor and scanty, it hardly serves to eke out an
existence* lingering as it is forlorn.


ZORIANA, And where are the false keys?


OLIVIA. I have them still, for I was not known to possess them.


ZORIANA. Then banish all your sorrow; if you have still the keys, tomorrow
night shall set us all at liberty.


OLIVIA. Madam!


ZORIANA. Be not alarmed sweet Olivia, I am a Christian in my heart, and I love
a Christian slave, to whom I have conveyed money and jewels, sufficient to
ransom himself and several others; I will appoint him to be in the garden this
evening, you shall go with me and speak to him.


OLIVIA. But how can we release my father.


ZORIANA. Every method shall be tried to gain admittance to his prison; the
Christian has many friends, and if all other means fail, they can force the
door.


OLIVIA. Oh! heavens, could I but see him once more at liberty, how gladly
would I sacrifice my own life to secure his.


ZORIANA. The keys you have, will let us out of the house when all are locked
in the embraces of sleep; our Christian friends will be ready to recieve us,
and before morning we shall be in a place of safety; in the mean time, let hope
support your sinking spirits.

SONG.
Sweet cherub clad in robes of white,
Descend celestial Hope;
And on thy pinions, soft, and light,
Oh bear thy votary up.
It Is thou can sooth the troubled breast,
The tear of sorrow dry;
Can lull each doubt and fear to rest,
And check the rising sigh.
Sweet cherub etc.

Exeunt. SCENE IV. A garden -- Outside of a house, with small high lattices.
HENRY and FREDERIC. FREDERIC. Fearing the old fellow would pocket our cash and
betray us afterward, I changed my plan, and have entrusted the money with a
Spaniard, who will make the best bargain he can for us: have you tried our
friends, will they be staunch?


HENRY. To a man; the hope of liberty, like an electric spark, ran instantly
through every heart, kindling a flame of patriotic ardour. Nay, even those whom
interest or fear have hitherto kept silent, now openly avowed their hatred of
the Dey, and swore to assist our purpose.


FREDERIC. Those whose freedom we have already purchased, have concerted proper
measures for liberating many others, and by twelve o'clock to morrow night, we
shall have a party large enough to surround the palace of the Dey, and convey
from thence in safety the fair Zoriana. (Window opens and a white handkerchief
is waved.)


HENRY. Soft; -- behold the signal of love and peace.


FREDERIC. I Will catch it as it falls. (He approaches, it is drawn back.)


HENRY. It Is not designed for you, stand aside. (Henry approaching; the
handkerchief is let fall, a hand waved, and then the lattice shut.) It Is a
wealthy fall, and worth receiving.


FREDERIC. What says the fair Mohammedan?


HENRY. Can I believe my eyes; here are English characters; and, but I think
it is impossible, I should say, this was my Olivia's writing.


FREDERIC This is always the way with you happy fellows, who are favorites
with the women; you (...) the willing fair one, and dote on those who are only
to be obtained with difficulty.


HENRY. I wish the lovely Moor had fixed her affections on you instead of me.


FREDERIC. I wish she had with all my soul -- Moor or Christian, slave or free
woman, it is no matter; if she was but young, and in love with me, I Would kneel
down and worship her. But I Am a poor miserable dog, the women never say civil
things to me.


HENRY. But, do you think it can be possible that my adorable Olivia is a
captive here?


FREDERIC. Prithee man, don't stand musing and wondering, but remember this is
the time for action. If chance has made your Oliva a captive, why, we must make
a bold attempt to set her at liberty, and then I suppose you will turn over the
fair Moriscan to me. But what says the letter.


HENRY. (Reads.) "As you have now the means of freedom in your power, be at the
north garden gate at ten o'clock, and when you hear me sing, you will be sure
all is safe, and that you may enter without danger; do not fail to come, I have
some pleasant intelligence to communicate." Yes, I will go and acquaint her
with the real state of my heart.


FREDERIC. And so make her our enemy.


HENRY. It would be barbarous to impose on her generous nature. -- What? --
avail myself of her liberality to obtain my own freedom; take her from her
country and friends, and then sacrifice her a victim to ingratitude, and
disappointed love.


FREDERIC. Tush, man, women's hearts are not so easily broken, we may, perhaps,
give them a slight wound now and then, but they are seldom or never incurable.


HENRY. I see our master coming this way; begone to our friends; encourage them
to go through with our enterprise: the moment I am released I will join you.


FREDERIC. 'Till when adieu.


Exeunt severally. ACT II.
SCENE I. Moonlight. -- A Garden.
ZORIANA and OLIVIA. ZORIANA. Sweet Olivia, chide me not; for though I Am fixed to
leave this place, and embrace Christianity, I cannot but weep when I think what
my poor father will suffer. Methinks I should stay to console him for the loss
of you.


OLIVIA. He will soon forget me; has he not already a number of beautiful
slaves, who have been purchased, to banish me from his remembrance.


ZORIANA. True, but he slights them all; you only, are the mistress of his
heart.


OLIVIA. Hark, did you not hear a footstep?


ZORIANA. Perhaps it is the young Christian, he waits the appointed signal; I
think all is safe, he may approach.

SONG.
WRAPPED in the evening's soft and pensive shade,
When passing zephyrs scarce the herbage moves;
Here waits a trembling, fond, and anxious maid,
Expecting to behold the youth she loves.
Though Philomela on a neighboring tree,
Melodious warbles forth her nightly strain*
Thy accents would be sweeter far to me,
Would from my bosom banish doubt and pain.
Then come dear youth, come haste away,
Haste to this silent grove,
The signal's given, you must obey,
It Is liberty and love.

Enter HENRY, HENRY. Lovely and benevolent lady, permit me thus humbly to thank
you for my freedom.


OLIVIA. Oh Heavens, that voice!


ZORIANA. Gentle Christian, perhaps I have over-stepped the bounds prescribed
my sex. I was early taught a love of Christianity, but I must now confess, my
actions are impelled by a tenderer passion.


HENRY. That passion which you have so generously avowed, has excited my utmost
gratitude, and I only wish for power to convince you, how much you have bound
me to your service.


OLIVIA. Oh! (faints.)


ZORIANA. What ails my friend, help me to support her; she is an amiable
creature, and will accompany us in our flight.


ZORIANA. She revives; how are you? -- Speak; my Olivia.


HENRY. Olivia, did you say?


OLIVIA. Yes; Henry, your forsaken Olivia.


HENRY. Oh my beloved! is it possible that I see you here in bondage; where is
your father?


OLIVIA. In bondage too -- but, Henry, you had forgot me; you could renounce
your vows and wed another.


HENRY. Oh no; never for one moment has my thoughts strayed from my Olivia -- I
never regretted slavery, but as it deprived me of your sweet converse, nor
wished for freedom, but to ratify my vows to you.


ZORIANA. -- (Aside.) How? mutual lovers! my disappointed heart beats high with
resentment, but in vain; I wish to be a Christian, and I will, though my heart
breaks, perform a Christian's duty.


HENRY. Pardon, beauteous lady, an involuntary error. I have long loved this
Christian maid; we are betrothed to each other. This evening I obeyed your
summons, to inform you, that grateful thanks and fervent prayers, were all the
return I could make for the unmerited kindness you have shown me.


OLIVIA. Generous Zoriana, blame not my Henry.


ZORIANA. Think not so meanly of me, as to suppose I live but for myself --
that I loved your Henry, I can without a blush avow, but, 'twas a love so pure,
that to see him happy, will gratify my utmost wish; I still rejoice that I Have
procured his liberty, you, shall with him, embrace the opportunity, and be
henceforth as blessed -- (aside) as I am wretched.


HENRY. You will go with us,


ZORIANA. Perhaps I may -- but let us now separate; -- to morrow, from the
lattice, you shall receive instructions how to proceed: in the mean time here
is more gold and jewels. I never knew their value, till I found they could
ransom you from slavery.


HENRY. Words are poor.


ZORIANA. Leave us, my heart's oppressed, I wish to be alone; doubt not the
safety of your Olivia; she must be safe with me, for she is dear to you.


[Henry kisses her hand, bows and exit. -- They stand sometime without
speaking.] ZORIANA. Olivia!


OLIVIA. Madam!


ZORIANA. Why are you silent, do you doubt my sincerity!


OLIVIA. Oh no -- but I was thinking, if we should fail in out attempt; if we
should be taken.


ZORIANA. Gracious heaven forbid!


OLIVIA. Who then could deprecate your father's wrath. Yourself, my Henry, and
my dearest father, all, all, would fall a sacrifice.


ZORIANA. These are groundless fears.


OLIVIA. Perhaps they are; but yet, I am resolved to stay behind,


ZORIANA. Do not think of it.


OLIVIA. Forgive me; I am determined, and that so firmly, it will be in vain to
oppose me. -- If you escape -- the Power who protects you, will also give to me
the means of following; should you be taken, I may perhaps move the Dey to
forgive you* and even should my prayers and tears have no effect, my life shall
pay the forfeiture of yours.


ZORIANA. I will not go.


OLIVIA. Yes, gentle lady, yes; you must go with them; perhaps you think it
will be a painful (...) to meet your father's anger; but indeed it will not;
the thought of standing forth the preserver of the dear author of my being, of
the man who loves me next to heaven, of the friend who could sacrifice her own
happiness to mine, would fill my soul with such delight, that even death, in
its most horrid shape, could not disturb its tranquillity,


ZORIANA* But, can you suppose your father, and your lover,


OLIVIA. You must assist my design, you must tell them I am already at liberty,
and in a place of safety; when they discover the deception, be it your task, my
gentle Zoriana, to wipe the tear of sorrow from their eyes. Be a daughter to my
poor father, comfort his age, be kind and tender to him, let him not feel the
loss of his Olivia. Be to my Henry, (Oh! my bursting heart) a friend, to sooth
him in his deep affliction; pour consolation on his wounded mind, and love him
if you can, as I have done.


Exeunt. SCENE II. Dawn of day -- another part of the garden -- with an alcove.
Enter FREDERIC. What a poor unfortunate dog I am; last night I slipped into
the garden behind Henry, in hopes I should find some distressed damsel, who
wanted a knight errant, to deliver her from captivity; and here have I wandered
through windings, turnings, alleys, and labyrinths, till the Devil himself
could not find the way out again: some one approaches -- by all that is lovely
it is a woman -- young, and handsome too, health glows upon her cheek, and good
humor sparkles in her eye; -- I Will conceal myself, that I may not alarm her.


Exit into the alcove. Enter FETNAH. SONG.
Aurora, lovely blooming fair,
Unbarr'd the eastern skies;
While many a soft pellucid tear,
Ran trickling from her eyes.
Onward she came, with heartfelt glee,
Leading the dancing hours;
For though she wept, she smiled to see,
Her tears refresh the flowers.
Phoebus, who long her charms admired,
With bright refulgent ray;
Came forth, and as the maid retired,
He kissed her tears away.
What a sweet morning, I could not sleep, so the moment the doors were open, I
came out to try and amuse myself. -- It Is a delightful garden, but I believe I
should hate the finest place in the world, if I was obliged to stay in it,
wether I would or no. If I am forced to remain here much longer, I shall fret
myself as old and as ugly as Mustapha. That Is no matter, there is nobody here to
look at one, but great, black, goggle-ey'd creatures, that are posted here and
there to watch us. And when one speaks to them, they shake their frightful
heads, and make such a horrid noise -- lord, I wish I could run away, but
that is impossible; there is no getting over these nasty high walls. I do wish,
some dear, sweet, Christian man, would fall in love with me, break open the
garden gates, and carry me off.


FREDERIC. (Stealing out.) Say you so my charmer, then I Am your man.


FETNAH. And take me to that charming place, where there are no bolts and bars;
no mutes and guards; no bow-strings and scymetars. -- Oh! it must be a dear
delightful country, where women do just what they please.


FREDERIC. I Am sure you are a dear, delightful creature.


FETNAH. (Turning, see's him, and shrieks.)
FREDERIC. Hush, my sweet little infidel, or we shall be discovered.


FETNAH. Why, who are you; and how came you here?


FREDERIC. I am a poor forlorn fellow, beautiful creature, over head and ears
in love with you, and I came here, to tell you how much I adore you.


FETNAH. (Aside.) Oh dear! what a charming man. I do wish he would run away
with me.


FREDERIC. Perhaps this is the lady who wrote to Henry, she looks like a woman
of quality, if I may judge from her dress. I Will ask her. -- You wish to leave
this country, lovely Moor?


FETNAH. Lord, I Am not a Moriscan; I hate 'em all, there is nothing I wish so
much as to get away from them.


FREDERIC. Your letters said so.


FETNAH. Letters!


FREDERIC. Yes, the letters you dropped from the window upon the terrace.


FETNAH. (Aside.) He takes me for some other, I Will not undeceive him, and may
be, he will carty off. -- Yes, sir; yes, I did write to you.


FREDERIC. To me!


FETNAH. To be sure; did you think it was to any body else?


FREDERIC. Why, there has been a small mistake.


FETNAH. (Aside.) And there is like to be a greater if you knew all.


FREDERIC. And, do you indeed love me?


FETNAH. Yes, I do, better than any body I ever saw in my life.


FREDERIC. And if I can get you out of the palace, you will go away with me?


FETNAH. To be sure I will, that is the very thing I wish.


FREDERIC. Oh! thou sweet, bewitching, little --


[Catching her in his arms.] MULEY MOLOC. -- without. Tell him, Fetnah shall be
sent home to him immediately.


FETNAH. Oh lord! what will become of us? that is my lord the Dey -- you will
certainly be taken.


FREDERIC. Yes, I feel the bow-string round my neck already; what shall I do --
where shall I hide.


FETNAH. Stay, don't be frightened -- I Will bring you off; catch me in your arms
again.


(She throws herself in his arms as though fainting.) Enter MULEY and MUSTAPHA.
MULEY. I tell thee, Mustapha, I cannot banish the beautiful Christian one
moment from my thoughts. The women seem all determined to perplex me; I was
pleased with the beauty of Fetnah, but her childish caprice. --


MUSTAPHA. Behold, my lord, the fair slave you mention, in the arms of a
stranger.


FREDERIC. (Aside.) Now, good-bye to poor Pil-garlick.


FETNAH. (Pretending to recover.) Are they gone, and am I safe. -- Oh!
courteous stranger, when the Dey my master knows --


MULEY. What Is the matter Fetnah; who is this slave?


FETNAH. (Kneeling.) Oh mighty prince, this stranger has preserved me from the
greatest outrage.


MULEY. What outrage?


FETNAH. Now, do not look angry at your poor little slave, who knowing she had
offended you, could not rest, and came early into the garden, to lament her
folly.


FREDERIC. (Aside.) Well said, woman.


MULEY. Rise, Fetnah; we have forgot your rashness -- proceed.


FETNAH. So, as I was sitting, melancholy and sad, in the alcove, I heard a
great noise, and presently, four or five Turks leaped over the wall, and began
to plunder the garden; I screamed; did not you hear me, Mustapha


FREDERIC. (Aside.) Well said, again.


FETNAH. But, the moment they saw me, they seized me, and would have forced me
away, had not this gallant stranger run to my assistance -- they, thinking they
were pursued by many, relinquished their hold, and left me fainting in the
stranger's arms.


MULEY. It Is well.


MUSTAPHA. But, gracious sir, how came the stranger here?


FREDERIC. (Aside.) Oh! confound your inquisitive tongue.


MULEY. Aye, Chrstian; how came you in this garden?


FETNAH. He came from my father. did not you say my father sent you here?


FREDERIC. -- (Aside.) (Bows.) -- Now, who the devil is her father?


FETNAH. He came to beg leave to gather some herbs for a sallad, while they
were still fresh with morning dew.


FREDERIC. (Aside.) Heaven bless her invention!


MULEY. Go to your apartment.


FETNAH. Oh dear! if he should ask him any questions when I am gone, what will
become of him. Exit.


MULEY. Christian, gather the herbs you came for, and depart in peace. --
Mustapha, go to my daughter Zoriana; tell her I Will visit her some two hours
hence, 'till when, I Will walk in the refreshing morning air.


Exit Muley and Mustapha. FREDERIC. -- Solus. Thanks to dear little infidel's
ready wit; I breath again -- Good Mr. Whiskers I am obliged by your dismission
of me -- I will depart as fast as I can; and yet I cannot but regret leaving my
lovely little Moor behind -- who comes here -- the apostate Hassan. -- Now
could I swear some mischief was a foot. -- I Will keep out of sight and try to
learn his business.


Retires. Enter BEN HASSAN and MUSTAPHA. BEN HASSAN. Indeed, I am vashtly sorry
that my daughter has offended my good lord the Dey; but if he will admit me to
his sublime presence, I can give him intelligence of so important a nature, as
I makes no doubt, will incline him to pardon her, for my sake.


MUSTAPHA. I will tell him you wait his leisure. Exit.


FREDERIC. The traitor is on the point of betraying us. -- I must if possible
prevent his seeing the Dey. [ Runs to Ben Hassan with all the appearance of
violent terror.] Oh! my dear friend Hassan, for heaven's sake what brought you
here; don't you know the Dey is so highly offended with you, that he vows to
have you impaled alive.


BEN HASSAN. Oh dear! Mr. Frederic, how did you know.


FREDERIC. It was by the luckiest chance in the world; I happened to be in this
garden, when I overheard a slave of yours informing the Dey, that you had not
only amassed immense riches, which you intended to carry out of his
territories; but, that you had many valuable slaves, which you kept concealed
from him, that you might reap the benefit of their ransom.


BEN HASSAN. Oh, what will become of me! -- but, come, come; Mr. Frederic, you
only say this to frighten me.


FREDERIC. Well, you will see that; for I heard him command his guards to be
ready to seize you, when he gave the signal, as he expected you here every
moment.


BEN HASSAN. Oh! what shall I do?


FREDERIC. If you stay here, you will certainly be bastinadoed -- impaled --
burnt.


BEN HASSAN. Oh dear! Oh dear!


FREDERIC. Make haste my dear friend; run home as fast as possible; hide your
treasure, and keep out of the way.


BEN HASSAN. Oh dear! I wish I was safe in Dukes place. Exit.


FREDERIC. Let me but get you once safe into your own house, and I Will prevent
your betraying us I Will warrant.


Exit. Fetnah's Apartment. FETNAH and SELIMA. FETNAH. Now will you pretend to
say, you are happy here, and that you love the Dey.


SELIMA. I have been here many years; the Dey has been very good to me, and my
chief employment has been to wait on his daughter, Zoriana, till I was
appointed to attend you, to you perhaps, he may be an object of disgust; but
looking up to him, as a kind and generous master, to me he appears amiable.


FETNAH. Oh! to be sure, he is a most amiable creature; I think I see him now,
seated on his cushion, a bowl of sherbet by his side, and a long pipe in his
mouth. Oh! how charmingly the tobacco must perfume his whiskers -- here,
Mustapha, says he, "Go, bid the slave Selima come to me" -- well it does not
signify, that word slave does so stick in my throat -- I wonder how any woman
of spirit can gulp it down.


SELIMA. We are accustomed to it.


FETNAH. The more's the pity: for how sadly depressed must the soul be, to whom
custom has rendered bondage supportable.


SELIMA. Then, if opportunity offered, you would leave Algiers.


FETNAH. That I would, most cheerfully.


SELIMA. And perhaps, bestow your affections on some young Christian.


FETNAH. That you may be sure of; for say what you will, I am sure the woman
must be blind and stupid, who would not prefer a young, handsome, good humoured
Christian, to an old, ugly, ill natured Turk.


Enter SADI -- with robe, turban, etc. FETNAH. Well, what is your business?


SADI. I -- I -- I -- I Am afraid I Am wrong.


SELIMA. Who sent you here?


SADI. I was told to take these to our master's son, young Soliman. But some
how, in the turnings and windings in this great house, I believe I have lost
myself.


SELIMA. You have mistaken --


FETNAH. Mistaken -- no, he is very right; here give me the clothes, I Will take
care of them, (takes them) there, there, go about your business, its all very
well. -- (Exit Sadi) Now, Selima, I Will tell you what I Will do; I Will put these on
-- go to the Dey, and see if he will know me.


SELIMA. He Will be angry.


FETNAH. Pshaw! your'e so fearful of his anger, if you let the men see you are
afraid of them, they will hector and domineer finely, no, no, let them think you
don't care whether they are pleased or no, and then they will be as condescending
and humble. -- Go, go -- take the clothes into the next apartment. (Exit
Selima.) Now, if by means of these clothes, I can get out of the palace, I Will
seek the charming young Christian I saw this morning, we'll get my dear
instructress from my fathers, and fly together, from this land of captivity to
the regions of Peace and Liberty.


END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I. A kind of Grotto.
FREDERIC, HENRY, SEBASTIAN, and SLAVES. SEBASTIAN. Now, if you had trusted me,
at first, I Will answer for it, I had got you all safe out; aye, and that dear,
sweet creature, madam Zoriana too -- what a pity it is she is Mohammedan, your
true bred Mahometans never drink any wine -- now, for my part, I like a drop of
good liquor, it makes a body feel so comfortable, so -- so, I don't know
howish, as if they were friends with all the world -- I always keep a friend or
two hid here, (takes out some bottles) mum, don't be afraid, they are no tell
tales -- only when they are trusted too far.


FREDERIC. Well, Sebastian, don't be too unguarded in trusting these very good
friends to night.


SEBASTIAN. Never fear me; did not I tell you I Would show you a place of safety;
-- well, havn't I performed my promise: -- When I first discovered this cave,
or cavern, or grotto, or cell, or whatever your fine spoken folks may call it;
this, said I, would be a good place to hide people in; -- so I never told my
master.


HENRY. This fellow will do some mischief, with his non-sensical prate.


FREDERIC. I don't fear him, he has an honest heart, hid under an appearance of
ignorance, it grows duskish, Sebastian, have we good centinals placed at the
entrance of the cell?


SEBASTIAN. Good centinals! why do you suuppose I would trust any with that
post but those I could depend on?


HENRY. Two hours past midnight we must invest the garden of the Dey; I have
here a letter from Zoriana, which says, she will, at that time be ready to join
us -- and lead us to the prison of my Olivia's father; Olivia is by some means
already at liberty.


SENTINEL -- without. You must not not pass.


FETNAH. No -- but I must, I have business.


SEBASTIAN. What, what, what is all this? Exit.


FETNAH. Nay, for pity's sake, don't kill me. Re-enter Sebastian, forcing in
Fetnah habited like a boy.


SEBASTIAN. No, no, we wont kill you, we'll only make you a slave, and you know
that is nothing.


FETNAH. (Aside.) There is my dear Christian, but I will not discover myself, till
I try if he will know me.


HENRY. Who are you, young man* and for what purpose were you loitering about
this place.


FETNAH. I am Soliman, son to the Dey, and I heard by chance, that a band of
slaves had laid a plot to invest the palace, and so I traced some of them to
this cell, and was just going --


FIRST SLAVE. To betray us.


SECOND SLAVE. Let us dispatch him, and instantly disperse till the appointed
hour.


SEVERAL SLAVES. Aye, let us kill him.


HENRY. Hold; why should we harm this innocent youth.


FIRST SLAVE. He would be the means of our suffering most cruel tortures.


HENRY. True, but he is now in our power; young, innocent, and unprotected. Oh
my friends! let us not, on this auspicious night, when we hope to emancipate
ourselves from slavery, tinge the bright standard of liberty with blood.


SLAVES. It Is necessary; our safety demands it.


(They rush on Fetnah, in her struggle her turban falls off -- she breaks from
them, and runs to Frederic.) FETNAH. Save me, dear Christian! its only poor
little Fetnah.


FREDERIC. Save you my sweet little Infidel -- why, I Will impale the wretch, who
should move but a finger against you.


SEBASTIAN. Oh! Oh! a mighty pretty boy to be sure.


FREDERIC. But tell me -- how got you out of the palace, and how did you
discover us.


FETNAH. I have not time now, but this I will assure you, I came with a full
intention to go with you, if you will take me, the whole world over.


FREDERIC. Can you doubt --


FETNAH. Doubt, no to be sure I don't, but you must comply with one request,
before we depart.


FREDERIC. Name it.


FETNAH. I have a dear friend, who is a captive at my father's; she must be
released, or Fetnah cannot be happy, even with the man she loves. (Draws aside,
and confers with Henry.)


SEBASTIAN. Well, here am I, Sebastian; who have been a slave, two years, six
months, a fortnight and three days, and have, all that time worked in the
garden of the Alcaide, who has twelve wives, thirty concubinus, and two pretty
daughters; and yet not one of the insensible husseys ever took a fancy to me.
-- It Is devilish hard -- that when I go home, I cannot say to my honored
father, the barber, and to my reverend mother, the laundress -- this is the
beautiful princess, who fell in love with me; jumped over the garden-wall of
his serene holiness her father, and ran away with your dutiful son, Sebastian
-- then, falling on my knees -- thus.


HENRY. What Is the matter, Sebastian? There is no danger, don't be afraid, man.


FREDERIC. Sebastian, you must take a party of our friends, go to the house of
Ben Hassan, and bring from thence an American lady. I have good reason to think
you will meet with no opposition; she may be at first unwilling to come, but,
tell her -- friends and countrymen await her here.


FETNAH. Tell her, her own Fetnah expects her.


FREDERIC. Treat her with all imaginable respect: -- Go, my good Sebastian; be
diligent, silent, and expeditious. You, my dear Fetnah, I will place in an
inner part of the grotto, where you will be safe, while we effect the escape of
Olivia's father.


FETNAH. What, shut me up! -- Do you take me for a coward?


HENRY. We respect you as a woman, and would shield you from danger.


FETNAH. A woman! -- Why, so I am; but in the cause of love or friendship, a
woman can face danger with as much spirit, and as little fear, as the bravest
man amongst you. -- Do you lead the way, I Will follow to the end. Exit Fetnah,
Frederic, Henry, etc.


SEBASTIAN. -- Solus. Bravo! Excellent! Bravissimo! -- Why, it is a little body;
but ecod, she is a devil of a spirit. -- It Is a fine thing to meet with a woman
that has a little fire in her composition. I never much liked your
milk-and-water ladies; to be sure, they are easily managed -- but your spirited
lasses require taming; they make a man look about him -- dear, sweet, angry
creatures, here is their health. This is the summum-bonum of all good: -- If
they are kind, this, this, makes them appear angels and goddesses: -- If they
are saucy, why then, here, here, in this we'll drown the remembrance of the
bewitching, froward, little devils -- in all kind of difficulties and
vexations, nothing helps the invention, or cheers the courage, like a drop from
the jorum.

SONG.
WHEN I was a poor, little innocent boy,
About sixteen or eighteen years old;
At Susan and Marian I cast a sheep's eye,
But Susan was saucy and Marian was shy*
So I flirted with Flora, with Cecily and Di.
But they too, were frumpish and cold.
Says Diego, one day, what ails you I pray?
I fetched a deep sigh -- Diego, says I,
Women hate me. -- Oh! how I adore 'em.
Pho* nonsense, said he, never mind it my lad.
Hate you, then hate them boy, come, never be sad,
Here, take a good sup of the jorum.
If they are foolish and mulish, refuse you, abuse you,
No longer pursue,
They Will soon buckle too
When they find they are neglected,
Old maids, unprotected,
Ah! then it is their turn to woo;
But bid them defiance, and form an alliance,
With the mirth-giving, care-killing jorum.
I took his advice, but was sent to the war,
And soon I was called out to battle;
I heard the drums beat, Oh! how great was my fear,
I wished myself sticking, aye, up to each ear
In a horse-pond -- and skulk'd away into the rear.
When the cannon and bombs 'gan to rattle,
Said I to myself, you're a damned foolish elf,
Sebastian keep up, then I took a good sup.
Turkish villains, shall we fly before 'em;
What, give it up tamely and yield ourselves slaves,
To a pack of rabscallions, vile infidel knaves,
Then I kissed the sweet lips of my jorum.
No, hang 'em, we'll bang 'em, and rout 'em, and scout 'em.
If we but pursue,
They must buckle too:
Ah! then without wonder,
I heard the loud thunder,
Of cannon and musquetry too*
But bid them defiance, being firm in alliance,
With the courage-inspiring jorum. Exit.

SCENE II. Ben Hassan's House.
REBECCA and AUGUSTUS. AUGUSTUS. Dear mother, don't look so sorrowful; my
master is not very hard with me. Do pray be happy.


REBECCA. Alas! My dear Augustus, can I be happy while you are a slave? my own
bondage is nothing -- but you, my child.


AUGUSTUS. Nay, mother, don't mind it; I am but a boy you know. -- If I was a
man --


REBECCA. What would you do my love?


AUGUSTUS. I Would stamp beneath my feet, the wretch that would enslave my mother.


REBECCA. There burst forth the sacred flame which heaven itself fixed in the
human mind; Oh! my brave boy, (embracing him) ever may you preserve that
independent spirit, that dares assert the rights of the oppressed, by power
unawed, unchecked by servile fear.


AUGUSTUS. Fear, mother, what should I be afraid of? an't I an American, and I
am sure you have often told me, in a right cause, the Americans did not fear
any thing.

Enter HASSAN. So, here is a piece of vork; I'se be like to have fine deal of
troubles on your account. Oh! that ever I should run the risque of my life by
keeping you concealed from the Dey.


REBECCA. If I am a trouble to you, if my being here endangers your life, why
do you not send me away?


BEN HASSAN. There be no ships here, for you to go in; besides, who will pay me?


REBECCA. Indeed, if you will send me to my native land, I will faithfully
remit to you my ransom; aye, double what you have required.


BEN HASSAN. If I thought I could depend --


Enter SERVANT SRRVANT. Sir, your house is is surrounded by armed men.


BEN HASSAN. What, Turks?


SERVANT. Slaves, Sir; many of whom I have seen in the train of the Dey.


BEN HASSAN. Vhat do they vant?


SERVANT. One of my companions asked them, and received for answer, they would
show us presently.


SEBASTIAN -- without Stand away, fellow; I will search the house.


REBECCA. Oh heavens! what will become of me?


BEN HASSAN. What will become of me? Oh! I shall be impaled, burnt,
bastinadoed, murdered, where shall I hide, how shall I escape them. -- (Runs
through a door, as though into another apartmsnt.)


SEBASTIAN -- without. This way, friends; this way.


REBECCA. Oh, my child, we are lost!


AUGUSTUS. Don't be frightened, mother, through this door is a way into the
garden; If I had but a sword,, boy as I am, I Would fight for you till I died.


Exit with Rebecca. Enter SEBASTIAN etc. SEBASTIAN. I thought I heard voices
this way; now my friends, the lady we seek, is a most lovely, amiable creature,
whom we must accost with respect, and convey hence in safety -- she is a woman
of family and fortune, and is highly pleased with my person and abillities; let
us therefore, search every cranny of the house till we find her; she may not
recollect me directly, but never mind, we will carry her away first, and assure
her of her safety afterward; go search the rooms in that wing, I will myself,
investigate the apartments on this side. (Exit slaves.) Well I have made these
comrades of mine, believe I am a favored lover, in pursuit of a kind mistress,
that is something for them to talk of; and I believe many a fine gentleman is
talked of for love affairs, that has as little foundation; and so one is but
talked of, as a brave or gallant man, what signifies whether there is any
foundation for it or no; -- and yet, hang it, who knows but I may prove it a
reality, if I release this lady from captivity, she may cast an eye of
affection, -- may -- why I dare say she will. -- I am but poor Sebastian, the
barber of Cordova's son, it is true; but I am well made, very well made; my leg
is not amiss, -- then I can make a graceful bow; and as to polite compliments,
let me but find her, and I Will show them what it is to have a pretty person, a
graceful air* and a smooth tongue. -- But I must search this apartment. Exit.


SCENE III. Another apartment.
Enter BEN HASSAN, with a petticoat and robe on, a bonnet, and deep veil in his
hand. BEN HASSAN. I think now, they vill hardly know me, in my vife's clothes;
I could not find a turban, but this head dress of Rebecca's vill do better,
because it vill hide my face -- but, how shall I hide my moneys: I Have got a
vast deal, in bills of exchange, and all kinds of paper; if I can but get safe
off with this book in my pocket. I shall have enough to keep me easy as long as
I live. (Puts it in his pocket and drops it.) Oh! this is a judgment fallen
upon me for betraying the Christians. (noise without) Oh lord! here they come.
(ties on the bonnet, and retires into one corner of the apartment.)


Enter SEBASTIAN etc. SEBASTIAN. There she is, I thought I traced the sweep of
her train this way, don't mind her struggles or entreaties, but bring her away.
-- Don't be alarmed, madam, you will meet with every attention, you will be
treated with the greatest respect, and let me whisper to you there is more
happiness in store for you, than you can possibly imagine. Friends convey her
gently to the appointed place. (They take up Hassan and carry him off.)


BEN HASSAN. Oh! -- o -- o -- o!


Exit. Enter AUGUSTUS and REBECCA. AUGUSTUS See, my dear mother, there is no
one here, they are all gone; it was not you, they came to take away.


REBECCA. It is for you, I fear, more than for myself, I do not think you are
safe with me, go, my beloved, return to your master. --


AUGUSTUS. What, go and leave my mother, without a protector?


REBECCA. Alas? my love, you are not able to protect yourself -- and your
staying here, only adds to my distress; leave me for the present; I hope the
period is not far off, when we shall never be separated.


AUGUSTUS. Mother! dear mother! -- my heart is so big it almost choaks me. --
Oh! how I wish I was a man.


Exit Aug. REBECCA -- Solus. Heaven guard my precious child -- I cannot think
him quite safe any where -- but with me, his danger would be imminent; the
emotions of his heart hang on his tongue; and the least outrage, offered to his
mother, he would resent at peril of his life. -- My spirits are oppressed -- I
have a thousand fears for him, and for myself -- the house appears deserted --
all is silent -- what is this, (takes up the pocketbook) Oh! heaven! is it
possible! bills, to the amount of my own ransom and many others -- transporting
thought -- my son -- my darling boy, this would soon emancipate you -- here is a
letter addressed to me -- the money is my own -- Oh joy beyond expression! my
child will soon be free. I have also the means of cheering many children of
affliction, with the blessed sound of liberty. Hassan, you have dealt unjustly by
me, but I forgive you -- for, while my own heart overflows with gratitude for
this unexpected blessing, I will wish every human being as happy as I am this
moment.


Exit. SCENE IV. Dey's Garden.
ZORIANA -- Solos. How vain are the resolves, how treacherous the heart of a
woman in love; but a few hours since, I thought I could have cheerfully
relinquished the hope of having my tenderness returned; and found a relief from
my own sorrow, in reflecting on the happiness of Henry and Olivia. -- Then why
does this selfish heart beat with transport, at the thought of their
separation? Poor Olivia -- how deep must be her affliction. -- Ye silent
shades, scenes of content and peace, how sad would you appear to the poor
wretch, who wandered here, the victim of despair -- but the fond heart, glowing
with all the joys of mutual love, delighted views the beauties scattered round,
thinks every flower is sweet, and every prospect gay.

SONG.
In lowly cot or mossy cell,
With harmless nymphs and rural swains*
It Is there contentment loves to dwell,
It Is there soft peace and pleasure reigns;
But even there, the heart may prove,
The pangs of disappointed love.
But softly, hope persuading,
Forbids me long to mourn;
My tender heart pervading,
Portends my love's return.
Ah! then how bright and gay,
Appears the rural scene,
More radiant breaks the day,
The night is more serene.

Enter HENRY. HENRY. Be not alarmed madam. I have ventured here earlier than I
intended, to enquire how my Olivia effected her escape.


ZORIANA. This letter will inform you -- but early as it is, the palace is
wrapped in silence, my father is retired to rest -- follow me, and I will
conduct you to the old man's prison.


HENRY. Have you the keys?


ZORIANA. I have; -- follow in silence, the least alarm would be fatal to our
purpose. Exeunt.


SCENE V. The Grotto again.
SEBASTIAN, leading in BEN HASSAN, SEBASTIAN. Beautiful creature, don't be
uneasy, I have risked my life to procure your liberty, and will at the utmost
hazard, convey you to your desired home: but, Oh! most amiable -- most divine
-- most delicate lady, suffer me thus humbly on my knees to confess my
adoration of you; to solicit your pity, and --


BEN HASSAN. (In a feigned tone.) I pray tell me why you brought me from the
house of the good Ben Hassan, and where you design to take me.


SEBASTIAN. Oh! thou adorable, be not offended at my presumption, but having an
opportunity of leaving this place of captivity, I was determined to take you
with me, and prevent your falling into the power of the Dey, who would no
doubt, be in raptures, should he behold your exquisite beauty. -- Sweet
innocent charmer* permit your slave to remove the envious curtain that shades
your enchanting visage.


BEN HASSAN. Oh no! not for the world; I have in consideration of many past
offenses, resolved to take the veil and hide myself from mankind for ever.


SEBASTIAN. That my dear, sweet creature, would be the highest offense you
could commit. -- Women were never made, with all their prettiness and softness,
and bewitching ways, to be hid from us men, who came into the world for no
other purpose, than to see, admire, love and protect them. -- Come, I must have
a peep under that curtain; I long to see your dear little sparkling eyes, your
lovely blooming cheeks -- and I am resolved to taste your cherry lips. (In
struggling to kiss him, the bonnet falls off.) Why, what in the devil's name,
have we here?


BEN HASSAN. Only a poor old woman -- who has been in captivity --


SEBASTIAN. These fifty years at least, by the length of your beard.


FREDERIC. -- without. Sebastian -- bring the lady to the water side, and wait
till we join you.


BEN HASSAN. I wish I was in any safe place.


SEBASTIAN. Oh ma'am you are in no danger any where -- come make haste.


BEN HASSAN. But give me my veil again, if any one saw my face it would shock
me.


SEBASTIAN. And damme, but I think it would shock them -- here, take your
curtain, though I think to be perfectly safe, you had best go barefaced.


BEN HASSAN. If you hurry me I shall faint, consider the delicacy of my nerves.


SEBASTIAN. Come along, there is no time for fainting now.


BEN HASSAN. The respect due --


SEBASTIAN. To old age -- I consider it all -- you are very respectable. -- Oh!
Sebastian what a cursed ninny you were to make so much fuss about a woman old
enough to be your grandmother. Exeunt.


SCENE VI. Inside of the Palace.
MULEY and MUSTAPHA. MULEY. Fetnah gone, Zoriana gone, and the fair slave
Olivia?


MUSTAPHA. All, dread sir.


MULEY. Send instantly to the prison of the slave Constant, it is he who has
again plotted to rob me of Olivia, (exit Mustapha.) my daughter too he has
seduced from her duty; but he shall not escape my vengeance.

Re-enter MUSTAPHA. Some of the figutives are overtaken, and wait in chains
without.


MULEY. Is Zoriana taken?


MUSTAPHA. Your daughter is safe; the old man too is taken; but Fetnah and
Olivia have escaped.


MULEY. Bring in the wretches. -- (Henry, Constant, and several slaves brought
in chained.) -- Rash old man -- how have you dared to tempt your fate again* do
you not know the torments that await the Christian, who attempts to rob the
haram of a Musselman?


CONSTANT. I know you have the power to end my being -- but that is a period I
more wish than fear.


MULEY. Where is Olivia?


CONSTANT. Safe I hope, beyond your power. Oh! gracious heaven, protect my
darling from this tyrant; and let my life pay the dear purchase of her freedom.


MULEY. Bear them to the torture: who and what am I, that a vile slave dares
brave me to my face?


HENRY. Hold off -- we know that we must die, and we are prepared to meet our
fate, like men: impotent vain boaster, call us not slaves; -- you are a slave
indeed, to rude ungoverned passion; to pride, to avarice and lawless love; --
exhaust your cruelty in finding tortures for us, and we will smiling tell you,
the blow that ends our lives, strikes off our chains, and sets our souls at
liberty.


MULEY. Hence take them from my sight; -- (Captives taken off.) -- devise each
means of torture; let them linger -- months, years, ages, in their misery.


Enter OLIVIA. OLIVIA. Stay, Muley, stay -- recall your cruel sentence.


MULEY. Olivia here; is it possible?


OLIVIA. I have never left the palace; those men are innocent, so is your
daughter. It is I alone deserve your anger -- then on me only let it fall; it
was I procured false keys to the apartments; it was I seduced your daughter to
our interest; I bribed the gaurds, and with entreaty won the young Christian to
attempt to free my father; then since I was the cause of their offenses, it is
fit my life should pay the forfeiture of theirs.


MULEY. Why did you not accompany them?


OLIVIA. Fearing what has happened, I remained, in hopes, by tears and
supplications, to move you to forgive my father, Oh! Muley, save his life, save
all his friends; and if you must have blood, to appease your vengeance, let me
alone be the sacrifice.


MULEY, Aside. -- (How her softness melts me.) -- Rise Olivia -- you may on
easier terms give them both life and freedom.


OLIVIA. No -- here I kneel till you recall your orders; haste, or it may be
too late.


MULEY. Mustapha, go bid them delay the execution.


Exit Mustapha. OLIVIA. Now teach me to secure their lives and freedom, and my
last breath shall bless you.


MULEY. Renounce your faith -- consent to be my wife. -- Nay, if you hesitate
--


OLIVIA. I do not -- give me but an hour to think.


MULEY. Not a moment, determine instantly; your answer gives them liberty or
death.


OLIVIA. Then I am resolved. Swear to me, by Mahomet, an oath I know you
Musselmen never violate -- that the moment I become your wife, my father and
his friends are free.


MULEY. By Mahomet I swear, not only to give them life and freedom, but safe
conveyance to their desired home.


OLIVIA. I am satisfied; -- now leave me to myself a few short moments, that I
my calm my agitated spirits, and prepare to meet you in the mosque.


MULEY. Henceforth I live, but to obey you. Exit.


OLIVIA. On what a fearful precipice I stand; to go forward is ruin, shame and
infamy; to recede is to pronounce sentence of death upon my father, and my
adored Henry. Oh insupportable! -- there is one way, and only one, by which I
can fulfiill my promise to the Dey, preserve my friends and not abjure my
faith. -- Source of my being, thou can read the heart which thou have been
pleased to try in the school of adversity, pardon the weakness of an erring
mortal -- if rather than behold a father perish; -- if, rather than devote his
friends to death, I cut the thread of my existence, and rush unbidden to thy
presence. -- Yes, I will to the mosque, perform my promise, preserve the valued
lives of those I love; then sink at once into the silent grave, and bury all my
sorrows in oblivion.


Exit. SCENE VII. Another apartment.
Enter OLIVIA with MULEY MOLOC. MULEY. Yes on my life they are free, in a few
moments they will be here.


OLIVIA. Spare me the trial; for the whole world I would not see them now, nor
would I have them know at what a price I have secured their freedom.


Enter HENRY and CONSTANT. CONSTANT. My child. --


HENRY. My love --


OLIVIA. My Henry -- O my dear father? -- pray excuse these tears.

Enter MUSTAPHA. Great sir, the mosque is prepared, and the priest waits your
pleasure.


MULEY. Come, my Olivia.


HENRY. The mosque -- the priest -- what dreadful sacrifice is then intended.


OLIVIA. Be not alarmed -- I must needs attend a solemn rite which gratitude
requires -- go my dear father -- dearest Henry leave me; and be assured, when
next you see Olivia, she will be wholly free.


Enter REBECCA. REBECCA. Hold for a moment.


MULEY. What means this bold intrusion?


REBECCA. Muley, you see before you a woman unused to forms of state, despising
titles: I come to offer ransom for six Christian slaves. Waiting your leisure,
I was informed a Christian maid, to save her father's life, meant to devote
herself a sacrifice to your embraces. I have the means -- make your demand of
ransom, and set the maid, with those she loves, at liberty.


MULEY. Her friends are free already; -- but for herself she voluntarily
remains with me.


REBECCA. Can you unmoved, behold her anguish; -- release her Muley -- name but
the sum that will pay her ransom, it is yours.


MULEY. Woman, the wealth of Golconda could not pay her ransom; -- can you
imagine that I, whose slave she is; I, who could force her obedience to my
will, and yet gave life and freedom to those Christians, to purchase her
compliance, would now relinquish her for paltry gold; contemptible idea. --
Olivia, I spare you some few moments to your father; take leave of him, and as
you part remember his life and liberty depends on you. Exit.


REBECCA. Poor girl -- what can I do to mitigate your sufferings?


OLIVIA. Nothing -- my fate alas! is fixed; but, generous lady -- by what name
shall we remember you -- what nation are you of?


REBECCA. I am an American -- but while I only claim kindred with the
afflicted, it is of little consequence where I first drew my breath.


CONSTANT. An American -- from what state?


REBECCA. New York is my native place; there did I spend the dear delightful
days of childhood, and there alas, I drained the cup of deep affliction, to the
very dregs.


CONSTANT. My heart is strangely interested -- dearest lady will you impart to
us your tale of sorrow, that we may mourn with one who feels so much for us.


REBECCA. Early in life, while my brave countrymen were struggling for their
freedom, it was my fate, to love and be beloved by a young British officer, to
whom, though strictly forbid by my father, I was privately married.


CONSTANT. Married! say you?


REBECCA. My father soon discovered our union; enraged, he spurned me from him,
discarded, cursed me, and for four years I followed my husbands fortune, at
length my father relented; on a sick bed he sent for me to attend him; I went
taking with me an infant son, leaving my husband, and a lovely girl, then
scarcely three years old* -- Oh heavens! what sorrows have I known from that
unhappy hour. During my absence the the armies met -- my husband fell -- my
daughter was torn from me; what then availed the wealth my dying father had
bequeathed me; -- long -- long did I lose all sense of my misery, and returning
reason showed me the world only one universal blank. The voice of my darling
boy first called me to myself, for him I strove to mitigate my sorrow; for his
dear sake I have endured life.


CONSTANT. Pray proceed.


REBECCA. About a year since I heard a rumor that my husband was still alive;
full of the fond hope of again beholding him, I, with my son embarked for
England; but before we reached the coast we were captured by an Algerine.


CONSTANT. Do you think you should recollect your husband.


REBECCA. I think I shuold -- but fourteen years of deep affliction has
impaired my memory and may have changed his features.


CONSTANT. What was his name? -- Oh! speak it quickly.


REBECCA. His name was Constant -- but wherefore --


CONSTANT. It was -- it was -- Rebecca, don't you know me?


REBECCA. Alas -- how you are altered. -- Oh! Constant, why have you forsaken
me so long?


CONSTANT. In the battle you mention, I was indeed severely wounded, nay, left
for dead in the field; there, my faithful servant found me, when some remaining
signs of life encouraged him to attempt my recovery, and by his unremitting
care I was at length restored; my first returning thought was fixed on my
Rebecca, but after repeated enquiries all I could hear was that your father was
dead and yourself and child removed farther from the seat of war. Soon after, I
was told you had fallen a martyr to grief for my supposed loss. -- But see my
love, our daughter, our dear Olivia; heaven preserved her to be my comfertor.


OLIVIA -- (Kneeling and kissing Rebecca.) My mother, blessed word; Oh! do I
live to say I have a mother.


REBECCA. Bless you my child, my charming duteous girl; but tell me, by what
sad chance you became captives?


CONSTANT. After peace was proclaimed with America, my duty called me to India,
from whence I returned with a ruined constitution. Being advised to try the air
of Lisbon, we sailed for that place, but Heaven ordained that here in the land
of captivity, I should recover a blessing which will amply repay me for all my
past sufferings.


Enter MULEY MULEY. Christians you trifle with me -- accept your freedom go in
peace, and leave Olivia to perform her promise -- for should she waver or draw
back -- on you I will wreak my vengeance.


REBECCA. Then let your vengeance fall -- we will die together; for never shall
Olivia, a daughter of Columbia, and a Christian, tarnish her name by apostasy,
or live the slave of a despotic tyrant.


MULEY. Then take your wish -- who is there?

Enter MUSTAPHA -- (hastily) Arm, mighty sir -- the slaves throughout Algiers
have mutinied -- they bear down all before them -- this way they come -- they
say, if all the Christian slaves are not immediately released, they will raze the
city.


REBECCA. Now! bounteous heaven, protect my darling boy, and aid the cause of
freedom.


MULEY. Bear them to instant death.


MUSTAPHA. Dread sir -- consider.


MULEY. Vile abject slave obey me and be silent -- what have I power over these
Christian dogs, and shall I not exert it. Dispatch I say -- (Huzza and clash of
swords without.) -- Why am I not obeyed? -- (Clash again -- confused noise --
several Hazza's, --)


AUGUSTUS -- without. Where is my mother? save, Oh! save, my mother.


FREDERIC -- speaking. Shut up the palace gates, secure the guards, and at your
peril suffer none to pass.


AUGUSTUS -- Entering. Oh! mother are you safe.


CONSTANT. Bounteous heaven! and am I then restored to more -- much more than
life -- my Rebecca! my children! -- Oh! this joy is more than I can bear.


Enter FREDERIC, FETNAH, SEBASTIAN, BEN HASSAN, SLAVES, etc. SEBASTIAN. Great
and mighty Otttoman, suffer my friends to show you what pretty bracelets these
are. -- Oh, you old dog, we'll give you the bastinado presently.


FREDERIC. Forbear Sebastian. -- Muley Moloc, though your power over us is at
end, we neither mean to enslave your person, or put a period to your existence
-- we are freemen, and while we assert the rights of men, we dare not infringe
the privileges of a fellow creature.


SEBASTIAN. By the law of retaliation, he should be a slave.


REBECCA. By the Christian law, no man should be a slave; it is a word so
abject, that, but to speak it dies the cheek with crimson. Let us assert our
own prerogative, be free ourselves, but let us not throw on another's neck, the
chains we scorn to wear.


SEBASTIAN. But what must we do with this old gentlewoman?


BEN HASSAN. Oh, pray send me home to Duke's place.


FREDERIC. Ben Hassan, your avarice, treachery and cruelty should be severely
punished; for, if any one deserves slavery, it is he who could raise his own
fortune on the miseries of others.


BEN HASSAN. Oh! that I was but crying old clothes, in the dirtiest alley in
London.


FETNAH. So, you will leave that poor old man behind?


FREDERIC. Yes, we leave him to learn humanity.


FETNAH. -- (Going to Ben Hassan.) Very well, good bye Frederic -- good bye
dear Rebecca: while my father was rich and had friends, I did not much think
about my duty; but now he is poor and forsaken, I know it too well to leave him
alone in his affliction.


MULEY. Stay, Fetnah -- Hassan stay. -- I fear from following the steps of my
ancestors, I have greatly erred: teach me then, you who so well know how to
practice what is right, how to amend my faults.


CONSTANT. Open your prison doors; give freedom to your people; sink the name
of subject in the endearing epithet of fellow-citizen; -- then you will be
loved and reverenced -- then will you find, in promoting the happiness of
others, you have secured your own.


MULEY. Henceforward, then, I will reject all power but such as my united
friends shall think me incapable of abusing. Hassan, you are free -- to you my
generous conquerors what can I say?


HENRY. Nothing, but let your future conduct prove how much you value the
welfare of your fellow-creatures-to-morrow, we shall leave your capital, and
return to our native land, where liberty has established her court -- where the
warlike Eagle extends his glittering pinions in the sunshine of prosperity.


OLIVIA. Long, long, may that prosperity continue -- may Freedom spread her
benign influence through every nation, till the bright Eagle, united with the
dove and olive branch, waves high, the acknowledged standard of the world.


THE END.
EPILOGUE.
WRITTEN AND SPOKEN BY MRS. ROWSON.
PROMPTER. -- behind. COME -- Mrs. Rowson! Come! -- Why don't you hurry?


MRS. R. -- behind. Sir I am here -- but I Am in such a flurry,
Do let me stop a moment! just for breath, Enter.
Bless me! I Am almost terrified to death.
Yet sure, I had no real cause for fear,
Since none but liberal -- generous friends are here.
Say -- will you kindly overlook my errors?
You smile. -- Then to the winds I give my terrors.
Well, Ladies tell me -- how do you like my play?
"The creature has some sense," methinks you say;
"She says that we should have supreme dominion,
"And in good truth, we are all of her opinion.
"Women were born for universal sway,
"Men to adore, be silent, and obey."
True, Ladies -- bounteous nature made us fair,
To strew sweet roses round the bed of care.
A parent's heart, of sorrow to beguile,
Cheer an afflicted husband by a smile.
To bind the truant, that is inclined to roam,
Good humor makes a paradise at home.
To raise the fallen -- to pity and forgive,
This is our noblest, best prerogative.
By these, pursuing nature's gentle plan,
We hold in silken chains -- the lordly tyrant man.
But pray, forgive this flippancy -- indeed,
Of all your clemency I stand in need.
To own the truth, the scenes this night displayed,
Are only fictions -- drawn by fancy's aid.
It Is what I wish -- But we have cause to fear,
No ray of comfort, the sad bosoms cheer,
Of many a Christian, shut from light and day,
In bondage, languishing their lives away.
Say! -- You who feel humanity's soft glow,
What rapturous joy must the poor captive know;
Who, freed from slavery's ignominious chain,
Views his dear native land, and friends again?
If there is a sense, more exquisitely fine,
A joy more elevated, more divine;
It Is felt by those, whose liberal minds conceived,
The generous plan, by which he was relieved.
When first this glorious universe began,
And heaven to punish disobedient man;
Sent to attend him, through life's dreary shade,
Affliction -- poor dejected, weeping maid.
Then came Benevolence, by all revered,
He dried the mourner's tears, her heart he cheered;
He wooed her to his breast -- made her his own,
And Gratitude appeared, their firstborn son.
Since when, the father and the son has joined,
To shed their influence over the human mind:
And in the heart, where either deign to rest,
Rise transports, difficult to be expressed.
Such, as within your generous bosoms glow,
Who feel returned, the blessings you bestow.
Oh! ever may you taste, those joys divine,
While Gratitude -- sweet Gratitude is mine.


