AN ORATION, COMMEMORATIVE OF THE NINETEENTH ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN
INDEPENDENCE, DELIVERED AT THE BAPTIST MEETING HOUSE IN PROVIDENCE, ON THE
FOURTH DAY OF JULY, A. D. 1794.

BY GEORGE TILLINGHAST, A. M.

The Gods in Bounty work up Storms about us,
That give Mankind Occasion to exert
Their hidden Strength; and throw out into Practice
Virtues which shun the Day, and lie concealed
In the smooth Seasons and the Calms of Life!
ADDISON'S CATO. PRINTED AT PROVIDENCE, BY CARTER AND WILKINSON, and sold at
their Book-Store, opposite the Market.

Respectfully inscribed to the FREEMEN of the Town of PROVIDENCE.
GENTLEMEN,
AT the instance of your committee, the following pages are submitted to the
press; and if the sentiments which they contain, should be so fortunate as to
meet your courteous reception, it will supercede the necessity of apologizing
for the imperfect manner in which they are announced.

I am, Gentlemen, with professions of the utmost deference and respect, your
very obedient humble servant, The AUTHOR.
Providence, July 5, 1794.
AN ORATION.
AMONG the obligations resulting to individuals from a state of civil society,
we may estimate those duties which are assigned to us, upon particular
occasions, by the spontaneous voice of our fellow-citizens.

OF this class, is the summons which I have received to appear before this
enlightened and patriotic assembly!

AN institution, which has for its object the commemoration of the feelings and
principles which led to the declaration of American Independence, cannot but
reflect the highest honor on those who have stepped forward to promote it. And
your patriotism, my friends, could not have been more eminently displayed, than
by the resolution which you have passed, in your corporate capacity, for
dedicating this day to so noble a purpose!

ANOTHER year has now elapsed, since the return of this anniversary was first
publicly celebrated within these walls. And when it is recollected that the
reverend Gentleman Dr. HITCHCOCK.
who then addressed you was so happily qualified to embellish the subject, and
was himself a partaker in the scenes which he delineated, I cannot but
experience an additional motive for entreating the exercise of your candid
interpretations in favor of his successor.

TO mark with precision the complicated events which paved the way to the
American revolution, would exceed the limits of our duty, and is a task which
falls with more propriety to the province of the historian. His business it is
to unfold the first dawnings of freedom, to trace her in her feeble
corruscations, and to follow her progressive advances to that ever memorable
period when she burst forth into a blaze of irresistible effulgence! When we
penetrate into the recesses of antiquity, when we review the causes which
exiled our pious ancestors from their native shores, we cannot but discern the
wisdom of that divine economy which has ordained, that the wrongs of the
oppressor shall recoil, in the event, to that corrupted source from whence they
have derived their origin. Such a natural abhorrence has the mind to a state of
servitude and subjection, that no attempts are esteemed too hazardous to escape
from their galling fetters! An ocean tempestuous and untried, a wilderness
immeasurable and unexplored, an enemy savage and relentless, furnished no
obstacles sufficient to damp the ardour of men, who were determined to flee
from the iron rod of religious oppression. The same undaunted spirit which
actuated those heroic adventurers against the efforts of ecclesiastical
tyranny, was manifested a century afterward, by their descendants, against the
evils of political usurpation: "For from the first establishment of the English
colonies, they had received impressions favorable to democratic forms of
government; their dependent situation forbade any inordinate ambition among
their native sons, and the humility of their society, abstracted as they were
from the splendor and amusements of the old world, held forth but few
allurements to invite the residence of such from the mother country as aspired
to hereditary honors." Happily for the peace of mankind, such is the
established order of things, that pride and ambition are commonly destined to
counteract their own purposes. -- Great Britain at the peace of seventeen
hundred and sixty-three had arisen to the pinnacle of national glory! Her
armies were considered as invincible, and her fleets rode triumphantly and
without a rival upon the ocean. Her territorial acquisitions were immense! and
had she possessed the wisdom to have availed herself of such splendid
advantages, she might have been spared from the humiliation of submitting to a
dismemberment, which now rankles at her heart, and which her pride will never
suffer her to forget! But envious of the increasing greatness of her colonies,
she readily seized on the most trifling pretenses for subjecting them to her
improvident exactions. Forgetful of Magna Charta, her own boasted palladium,
she hesitated not to violate its elementary principles, in support of her
unrighteous demands; and in the paroxysm of her folly she attempted an
experiment in the science of legislation, which was to monopolize all the
benefits to be derived from the colonies, without extending toward them those
parental offices which were due as an equivalent. This wretched expedient
prevailed for a time, and during its continuance the colonial trade was enjoyed
exclusively by Great Britain; and so immensely did this intercourse contribute
to her wealth and aggrandisement, that in the year seventeen hundred and
seventy-four, her export trade to the colonies alone amounted to six millions
sterling, and upwards Parliamentary debates.
; a sum nearly equal to that branch of her trade with the whole world beside!
But the nation which is infatuated with her successes, knows no bounds to her
ambitious desires! It was not sufficient for that unnatural parent to prey upon
the vitals of the colonists (whom she had insidiously denominated her children)
by draining from them their internal resources, without attempting at the same
time to establish a supreme control over their persons.

THE British parliament accordingly declared, "that they had, and of right
ought to have, power to bind the colonies in all cases whatsoever." Stamp acts,
and declaratory acts, followed each other in swift succession, and all dictated
upon the same principles of systematic oppression. It is presumed to be
unnecessary, at this time, to recite the multifarious and ridiculous catalogue
of acts which received the sanction of the British parliament, for the
subjugation of America.

TO this refined audience it may be deemed sufficient to remark, that they are
all faithfully recorded, and will be faithfully transmitted to remote
posterity, as monuments of indelible infamy to the British nation.

TO men who had acquired just ideas of personal liberty, and the rights of
property, the omnipotence of parliament had no terrors. A resistance which had
commenced in principle, was not to be suppressed by any means short of rational
conviction. And in despair of accomplishing that, Great Britain had recourse to
those disgraceful auxiliaries, which have ever been employed by despotic powers
in the support of their arbitrary measures.

FOREIGN mercenaries were transported across the Atlantic, for the diabolical
purpose of embruing their hands in the best blood of American citizens. From
the manner of that hostile procedure was deduced the treacherous policy, which
was intended to be observed toward the American colonies. It was apparent to a
corrupt and vindictive administration, that native Englishmen, notwithstanding
the vile methods which had been used to alienate their affections, still
retained a fraternal sentiment for their transatlantic brethren; a sentiment
which could not fail to render them the unfit instruments of ministerial
barbarity. At the arrival of those despicable hirelings upon the American
shores, fresh causes of irritation ensued; and the crisis was at hand when the
political contest was to be decided by an appeal to arms! The morning of the
nineteenth of April, seventeen hundred and seventy-five, was destined to be the
period of the actual commencement of hostilities, and the Commons of Lexington
were consecrated to immortality, by receiving the first effusions of American
blood!

WELL might one of the His Excellency SAMUEL ADAMS, Esquire governor of
Massachussetts. See Gordon's history of the American war.
patriots of that day exclaim, that such a glorious morning had never before
beamed upon his view!

HIS prophetic eye, glancing with the rapidity of lightning, penetrated into
the great events which were to succeed; his anticipations were happily
fulfilled, and as a recompense for his eminent services, he now enjoys the most
honorable of all testimonials, the gratitude and confidence of a free people!

THE sanguinary system which had thus commenced on the part of Great Britain,
excited the just indignation of every American who coveted the salvation of his
country; an enthusiasm, powerful as the electrical spark, transfused itself
from breast to breast, and the most vigorous preparations were made to resist
the formidable approaches of tyranny, or to perish in the attempt!

AS a preliminary step, it was deemed an object of the first importance with
the colonies, to dissolve in a formal manner the remains of their political
connection with the kingdom of Great Britain; to disclaim every idea of
dependence upon any foreign power, and to assert their right to an equality
among the nations of the earth!

THE solemnity of this procedure was dictated by the "respect which was due to
the opinions of mankind," and carried with it an impression of the sacred
principles upon which it was founded. -- Such, my respected audience, was the
declaration of American Independence! -- an event which constitutes an
important era in the annals of mankind. And whether we view it as a measure
distinguished for boldness of conception, the energy of its execution, or the
magnanimity which it reflected upon those illustrious characters who ushered it
into existence, it is equally entitled to our profoundest veneration! To behold
a revolution in government accomplished in so short a space of time, and
without its usual concomitants of murder and devastation, is a phenomenon
which was reserved for the United States of America! But to preserve this new
state of things; -- to maintain the noble structure which had thus been reared
by the hands of the people, against a host of external enemies, it was
necessary to embark in a defensive system of warfare.

THE glorious issue is known to us all -- and my fellow-citizens will spare me
from the recital of those calamitous scenes, the recollection of which will
serve but to awaken fresh pangs in the soul!

BUT no motives can dissuade us from testifying our respect for those immortal
heroes who have fallen in the defense of the dearest rights of men! -- Eager to
be enrolled as the martyrs of American freedom, they have anticipated the
inestimable blessing; and to the wisdom and firmness of their applauding
countrymen, have they consigned the task of guaranteeing the enjoyment of that
celestial boon.

"How sleep the brave, who sink to rest
"By all their country's wishes blessed!
"When spring, with dewy fingers cold,
"Returns to deck their hallowed mould,
"She there shall dress a sweeter sod,
"Than fancy's feet have ever trod."
IN turning our attention to the man, who was designated from Heaven to conduct
the armies of the United States through a long and perilous conflict, and who
now presides at the head of their government with a sublimity of character
unexampled in all former ages -- what a crowd of reflections rush upon the
mind! Absorbed with the mingled emotions of gratitude and astonishment, we
cannot render him the just tribute of our affections, without approximating his
exalted qualifications to the divine nature; nor without speeding a fervent
ejaculation to the Throne of Grace, that he may long -- very long, be spared by
an indulgent providence, as a humiliation to the pride of kings, and as a
preeminent example to this lower world, of the dignity to which human nature is
capable of attaining!

THE war, which had terminated so honorably for the United States, did not
leave them without an accumulation of those distresses, which are inseparable
from contending nations. The public mind was too much engrossed by the
magnitude of the prize which had been gained, to apply an effectual remedy to
the evil, until it had arisen to an alarming height. But when the necessity
became more obvious, by the increasing pressure of emergencies, and disunion
was about to erect her standard among the States, the republican virtues were
again called into action. The world was once more to be astonished by a new
display of the American character! and the fact will scarcely be accredited by
posterity, that thirteen discordant States, opposite in habits, and apparently
divided by interest, should mutally agree to sacrifice every private
consideration, for the attainment of the general good. "It was obviously
impracticable in the federal government of these States, to secure all rights
of independent sovereignty to each, and yet provide for the interest and safety
of all. Individuals entering into society, must give up a share of liberty, to
preserve the rest. The magnitude of the sacrifice must depend as well on
situation and circumstance, as on the object to be obtained." In short, a form
of government was adopted which has rendered the United States happy at home,
and respectable abroad. Under its auspicious administration, we have beheld an
accession of glory which has excited the envy and admiration of the world. It
is not our business to lavish encomiums upon the flattering complexion of
public affairs. An appeal to the existing state of the Union, will furnish the
most conclusive evidence of the truth of facts.

BUT imperfection is the lot of humanity, and national as well as individual
blessings are not imparted without a tincture of alloy. In the career of our
prosperity, we have not enjoyed an exemption from the intrigues of foreign
powers. In the exercise of that implacable resentment which has ever actuated
the councils of an insidious foe, the United States have been assailed by
injuries in every shape; and to involve them in the unfathomable vortex of
European corruption, no artifice has been left unemployed. Our commerce has
been shamefully spoliated, -- our territories are invaded, and in the insolence
of her aggressions, that haughty nation has even presumed to menace our
Atlantic frontier with a naval armament!

BUT in taking a survey of this patriotic assembly, our apprehensions are in
some measure removed by the confidence which their spirited appearance
inspires. Among those who are ever ready to maintain the post of honor, we
behold the disciples of Cincinnatus, a band of patriots, whose services have
justly endeared them to their country.

"Yes! social friends! undoubted is your claim,
For patriot deeds deserve a patriot's name."
WE also recognize those citizen soldiers, who, in assuming the badges of that
estimable character, have pledged themselves to oppose a shield of valor
against every hostile attempt upon the rights of man. And under the auspicious
guidance of that spirit of decision which marks the Executive of our own State,
what flattering expectations may not be formed from this military assemblage,
should the deprecated period arrive, when the clouds which obscure our
political horizon shall be condensed to a storm! -- As a subject which is
infinitely dear to ourselves, we cannot forbear at this time from offering our
warmest congratulations for the successful struggles of our magnanimous allies
in the cause of freedom! Let us cherish a belief, that the stupendous
revolution which they have so nobly accomplished, has derived its origin from
the immutable laws of nature. And if in emerging from the abyss of barbarism,
to which they have paid their homage for so many centuries, the finer traits of
humanity should on some occasions appear to have been defaced, let us unite
with sincerity in bewailing the event; but let us be equally sincere in
ascribing the calamity to its proper source. Animated by the example of the new
world, may our sister republic enjoy the same happiness in the result, which
has awaited our own. In confident expectation that such will be the issue, and
that the day is fast approaching, when the oppressed of all the earth shall
rend their chains asunder,

"Do thou, great LIBERTY, inspire our souls!
"And make our lives in thy possession happy,
"Or our deaths glorious in thy just defense!"
FINIS.

