UNITED STATES, 15th January, 1794. GENTLEMEN of the SENATE, and of the HOUSE
of REPRESENTATIVES.
I LAY before you, as being connected with the Correspondence, already in your
possession, between the SECRETARY of STATE, and the MINISTER PLENIPOTENTIARY of
the French Republic, the copy of a letter from that Minister, of the 25th of
December, 1793; and a copy of the proceedings of the Legislature of the state
of South Carolina.

Go: WASHINGTON.

COLUMBIA, 7th December, 1793. SIR,
I HAVE the honor of transmitting to you, the Resolves of the Legislature of
this state, with a number of affidavits, setting forth, that certain persons in
this state, have been enlisting men for the service of the French Republic, to
go on an expedition against a power, not at war with the United States. The
investigation of the whole business* is fully expressed, in the report of the
committee.

I have the honor to be, With great respect and esteem, SIR, Your most obedient
and most humble servant, WILLM. MOULTRIE.

The PRESIDENT of the United States of America.
P. S. In the message with which the resolves and affidavits were sent to me, I
am desired to request, that the names of the several deponents, who have given
testimony in the business, may not be made known. The reasons which suggest
this secrecy, must be obvious.



STATE OF SOUTH CAROLINA. IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, December 6th, 1793.
The Committee to whom was referred the business of examining into, and
ascertaining the truth of a report that an armed force is now levying within
this state, by persons under a foreign authority, without the permission, and
contrary to the express prohibition of the government of the United States, and
of this state, REPORT,
THAT they have made diligent enquiry respecting the truth of this report, and
have collected such evidence relating thereto as was immediately within their
reach -- that your committee are perfectly satisfied, from the information, on
the oaths of diverse credible persons, which they have received, that William
Tate, Jacob R. Brown, William Urby, Robert Tate, Richard Speak, citizens of
this state, and other persons unknown to your committee, also citizens of this
state, have received and accepted military commissions from M. Genet, minister
plenipotentiary from the republic of France to the United States of America,
authorizing them, and instructions requiring them, to raise, organize, train,
and conduct troops, within the United States of America -- That the avowed
purpose for which these troops are now raising, is, to rendezvous in the state
of Georgia, and from thence to proceed into the Spanish dominions, with a view
to conquest or plunder, as their strength might enable, or opportunity might
tempt them -- That in the event of a French fleet approaching the coasts of the
southern states, a junction and co operation with it is contemplated by the
persons abovementioned; but that though this was the avowed object of these
troops and their leaders, among themselves; from the injunction to conceal the
whole system from persons not initiated, and the subordination established to
Mr. Genet, the author of the plan, and the source of authority to the officers.
It is probable that the corpse, when raised, must yield to any change of
destination which the judgment or inclination of Mr. Genet may point out to
them -- That several of the persons above named, received, together with their
commissions, instructions by which they were to regulate their enrollments of
men, stating the pay, rations, clothing, plunder, and division of conquered
land, to be allotted to the officers and men who should enter into this
service, and marking the proportions of the acquisitions to be reserved to the
republic of France -- That the persons above named, in pursuance of the powers
vested in them by the said commissions, and in obedience to the instructions of
M. Genet and his agents, particularly M. Mangourit, who signed some of the
papers, have proceeded by themselves, and by their agents, without any
authority from the United States, or from this state, to enroll numbers of the
citizens of this state, whom they deluded with the hopes of plunder and the
acquisition of riches, in the service of the republic of France, to be subject
to the orders of Mr. Genet, the Minister Plenipotentiary of France.

That Stephen Drayton and John Hamilton, also citizens of this state, have made
application to the good citizens thereof to engage in this scheme of raising
men in this state for the service of France, to act under the orders of M.
Genet, and to commit acts of hostility against nations at peace with the United
States of America; and have avowed that they acted by the authority of M.
Genet, the Minister Plenipotentiary of the Republic of France; that upon the
whole of the information which your committee have been able to obtain, this is
a daring and dangerous attempt by a foreign minister to intermeddle in the
affairs of the United States, to usurp the powers of government, and to levy
troops in the bosom of the union, without the authority, and contrary to the
express sense of the government of the United States, and in violation of the
laws of nations --

That the direct tendency of these measures of the foreign minister is to
disturb the internal tranquillity of the United States, and to involve them in
hostilities with nations with whom they are now at peace, which sound policy
requires should be preserved. -- That in the opinion of your committee this
attempt is the more dangerous and alarming as many citizens of the United
States have been thereby seduced from their duty by insidious arts practiced on
their kindred affection to the French republic; and have been drawn into a
scheme, in the execution of which they have usurped the functions of
government, and exercised the power of the sword, which the wisdom of the
constitution has vested exclusively in the Congress and President of the
United States. -- That this committee therefore recommend that the governor of
this state be requested to issue his proclamation, forbidding all persons from
enrolling any of the citizens of this state, and prohibiting the citizens from
enlisting under any officers, or for any purposes not previously sanctioned by
the government of the United States, or of this state; and also forbidding all
unlawful assemblages of troops, unauthorised by government; and that the
governor be requested to exert the whole public force to the utmost extent, if
necessary, to insure obedience to his proclamation.

That in the opinion of this committee, the said William Tate, Jacob R. Brown,
Robert Tate, Stephen Drayton, John Hamilton, and Richard Speak, have been
guilty of high crimes and misdemesnours; and they recommend that the
attorney general and solicitors be directed, forthwith to institute, or cause
to be instituted and conducted, prosecutions in the proper courts of law,
against the said William Tate, Jacob R. Brown, Robert Tate, Stephen Drayton,
John Hamilton, and Richard Speak, for accepting, or engaging to accept
commissions from a foreign power, to raise troops within the United States, and
for going about within the state, levying or attempting to levy troops, and for
seducing, and endeavoring to seduce the citizens of this state, to enroll
themselves for foreign service, to commit acts of hostility against nations,
with whom the United States are at peace, without the permission of the
government, and contrary to the proclamation of the President of the United
States, declaring these states to be in a state of neutrality and peace.

That copies of the evidence collected by this committee, together with the
proceedings of this House thereon, be forwarded immediately to the President of
the United States, and to the executives of the states of North Carolina and
Georgia, for their information.

Resolved unanimously, That this House do concur in the said report.

Ordered, That the report and resolution be sent to the Senate, for their
concurrence.

By order of the House, JOHN SANDFORD DART, C.H.R.

IN THE SENATE, December 7 th, 1793.
Resolved unanimously, That this House do concur with the House of
Representatives, in the foregoing report and resolution.

Ordered, That the report and resolutions be sent to the House of
Representatives.

By order of the Senate, FELIX WARLEY, C. S.
A true copy, and which I attest,

JOHN SANDFORD DART, Clerk of the House of Representatives.
Columbia, December the 9th, 1793.


THE STATE OF SOUTH CAROLINA. By his Excellency William Moultrie, Governor and
Commander in chief in and over the state aforesaid. A PROCLAMATION.
WHEREAS information has been given to me, that an armed force is now levying
within this state by persons under a foreign authority, without the permission,
and contrary to the express prohibition, of the government of the United
States, and of this state: and whereas measures of this fort, if permitted by
government, must tend to disturb the internal tranquillity of the United States,
and involve them in hostilities with nations with whom they are now at peace,
which sound policy requires should be preserved; and as many of the citizens of
this state may be induced, by the insidious arts of the persons acting under
the foreign authority as aforesaid, in violation of every law, as well of the
United States, as that of nations, to enlist themselves, and engage in a scheme
so replete with injury to this country. -- I do therefore, in order to put an
immediate stop to such unlawful and pernicious practices, issue this my
proclamation, hereby strictly forbidding any person to enrol any of the
citizens of this state, and prohibiting the citizens thereof from enlisting
under any officer, or other person, for any purpose not previously sanctioned
by the government of the United States, or of this state. And I do positively
forbid all assemblages of troops, unauthorized by government, under pain of
suffering the penalties declared by law for such offenses.

GIVEN under my hand, and the seal of the State, in the town of Columbia, this
9 th day of December, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and
ninety three, and of the independence of the United States of America the
eighteenth. WILLIAM MOULTRIE.
By the Governor's commmand, PETER FRENEAU, Secretary.

SOUTH CAROLINA.
(...) makes oath, that Robt. Tate applied to this deponent during the sitting
of the Pinckney court November term last, and urged him to accept an
appointment in a body of troops that was to be raised in this state under
French commissions; which troops were to go on an expedition against the
Spanish possessions, on some part of the American continent -- And this
deponent adds that Robt. Tate expressly told him that he was then acting under
a French commission from the French government and was determined to inlist men
as soon as possible.

Sworn before me this 2 d December 1793.
A true copy and which I attest JOHN SANDFORD DART, Clerk of the House of
Representatives
Columbia December 9, 1793.
SOUTH CAROLINA,
BEFORE me personally appeared (...) of Pendleton county, who being duly sworn,
deposes as follows -- That is to say, that on Sunday the twenty fourth of
November last, he, this deponent, was in company with Mr. William Tate, and
lodged in the same house with him, at Cambridge -- That the said William Tate,
showed unto this deponent, a certain paper written in French, and also in
English, and under the hand and seal of Citizen Genet, Minister
Plenipotentiary, from the Republic of France, to the United States of America,
which paper was a commission, directed to the said William Tate, constituting
and appointing him a colonel, in the service of the French Republic -- That he
also saw in the possession of the said William Tate, another paper signed by
Citizen Genet (as well as this deponent can recollect) being a plan for the
formation of a military corpse, ruled like a brigade return, with columns
specifying the number of officers and men, the pay, the rations, and the
proportion of spoil each one was to have -- This deponent, thinks they
specified one lieutenant colonel, a second lieutenant colonel, captains, and
from thence down; containing thirty two commissioned, and non commissioned
officers, and one hundred and twenty four privates -- That the number of
battalions was unlimited. That the spoil was to be so distributed, as to leave
a certain portion thereof to the French nation, viz. two parts; but into how
many parts the whole was to be divided, the deponent cannot recollect -- The
said William Tate, informed this deponent, that in pursuance of his
instructions, he had sent out several persons, to enlist men in this state,
into the French service; that if the measures taken, should be successful,
blank commissions would be sent on from the Northward, and each person would
receive a commission, according to the number of men he should enlist -- The
deponent says, that this was set forth in the instructions; this deponent,
further says, that the said William Tate, told this deponent, that the object
of the enlistment was, to march to South America, and attack the Spanish
dominions. This deponent, farther says, that he saw at the same time, in the
possession of the said William Tate, other papers, relative to the foregoing
transactions, signed by Monsieur M. A. B. Mangourit, the particular purport,
whereof this deponent, cannot now recollect.

Sworn the 2 d day of December 1793, before me.
A true copy and which I attest JOHN SANDFORD DART, Clerk of the House of
Representatives.
Columbia, 9th December 1793.
SOUTH CAROLINA,
BEFORE me personally appeared, (...) who being duly sworn, deposes and says,
that on Saturday the 30th day of November last, as he was on his way to
Columbia, to attend his duty in the House of Representatives, and in crossing
the ferry at Granby, he fell in company with two men, one of whom, addressing
him, mentioned that he had heard, that he, this deponent, was one of their
party (meaning, as this deponent received the impression at the time the party
for inlisting and raising men for the French service) the other person added,
that he, and his companion, had their company filled up, and pulling a paper
out of his pocket, said it was his commission, and offered to show it to this
deponent; this deponent told him he would not wish to deceive him, for that he,
this deponent, was not of his party, and did not look at his commission or
papers. One of the men told this deponent, that he hoped to see him, this
deponent, in the new country, and that they were to have their rendezvous in
Georgia; he asked this deponent, whether he had seen Capt. Tate, that he was
informed, Capt. Tate had been at his, the deponent's house* Dept. replied, that
he had not seen him, that he did not know him, and that he had not been at his
house that he knew of.

Sworn the 2 d day of December 1793, before me.
A true copy and which I attest. JOHN SANDFORD DART, Clerk of the House of
Representatives.
Columbia, 9 th December, 1793.
STATE OF SOUTH CAROLINA.
(...) of the county of Laurens, being duly sworn, makes oath, that on or
about the twelfth day of November, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven
hundred and ninety-three, Capt. William Urbey, of the county of (...) told this
deponent that he held a commission to raise troops, and offered to show his
commission, which Mr. (...) declined seeing. He added to this deponent that he
was authorized to raise troops, which this deponent understood was for foreign
service -- That this deponent was made to understand that Capt. William Tate
was to be commandant of the troops to be raised -- Dr. Jacob R. Brown also
communicated to this deponent that he was a lieutenant colonel, and he showed
to him a paper which stated the pay, rations, proportion of spoil, number of
men to be raised, and battalions, divisions of land, and other particulars.
That the pay fixed was 25 cents per day to privates. That Dr. Jacob R. Brown,
on showing him this paper, asked this deponent if he would advise him to engage
in this business, but this deponent declined giving any advice. That this
deponent understood that the source of all power and the spring of action in
this business was Mr Genet, the ambassador from the republic of France, from
whom all these things originated. He understood this from Dr. Jacob R. Brown.
This deponent also understood the number of men to be raised was five thousand.
This deponent saw a paper in the hands of Dr. Brown, or Capt. Urbey, which was
an enrolement of men, which was signed by about ten men, who had enlisted in
the above mentioned service. This deponent thinks that both of the papers he
saw were headed partly with initial letters; he does not recollect the purport
of the heading*

This deponent understood from both Urbey and Brown, that the business was to
be conducted secretly.

Sworn to before me this 2 d December, 1793.
A true copy, and which I attest, JOHN SANDFORD DART, C. H. R.
Columbia, December 9 th, 1793.
SOUTH CAROLINA, to wit.
BEFORE me personally appeared, (...) who being duly sworn, deposes as
follows: That some time about the middle of November last, Stephen Drayton
Esqr. and Major Hambleton, called at the house of this deponent, and mentioned
to this deponent as a very advantageous plan that was a foot, to get as many
men as possible to agree to assemble by small parties upon some of the shores
near Charleston or elsewhere, and that a French fleet was to attend for the
purpose of receiving them, and that the object was, to make a descent upon some
of the Spanish Islands, that would be a very lucrative conquest, if effected --
They mentioned that Mr. Tate had gone forward on the same business to Mr.
Genet, to obtain commissions; and this deponent understood from the said
Stephen Drayton and Major Hambleton, that they the said Stephen Drayton and
Major John Hambleton, were acting under the authority of the Minister of the
French Republic at the time. This deponent was thereupon, applied to by the
said Stephen Drayton, to be concerned in the enterprise, adding, that this
deponent could be advanced to a pretty high commission. This deponent
immediately refused to have any connection, or be at all concerned in the
enterprise, and thereupon suggested doubts of the legality of the undertaking,
in as much as it would be inconsistant with the Proclamation of the President
of the United States; adding, that it would in all probability, be taken notice
of by the executive of this State.

Sworn the 3 d day of December 1793, before me.
The within a true copy and which I attest JOHN SANDFORD DART, Clerk of the
House of Representatives.
Columbia, December 9, 1793.
PHILADELPHIE, le 25 Xbre. 1793 -- l'an 2 de la Republique Francaise, une et
indivisible. Le Citoyen Genet, Ministre Plenipotentiair^ de la Republique
Francaise pres les Etats Unis, a Monsieur Jefferson, Secretaire d' Etat des
Etats Unis. MONSIEUR,
J'APPRENDS par les rapports du consul de la Republique a Charlestown, et par
les papiers publics que la legislature de la Caroline du Sud, avoit fait
arreter differentes persons accusees d'avoir recu de moi des commissions a
l'effet de lever une force armee dans cet etat pour le service de la
Republique. Sentant qu'une pareille demarche, si elle etait veritable
offenserait la souverainete du peuple Americain, Je m'empresse de vous
affirmer, monsieur, que je n'ai autorise en aueune maniere le recrutement, la
formation, ou le rassemblement d'une force armee, ni d'aucun corpse sur le
terretoire des Etats Unis; mais en meme temps je suis trop franc pour vous
deguiser, qu'autorise par la nation Francaise a delivrer des brevets a ceux de
vos concitoyens qui se sentiroient animes du desir de fervir la plus belle des
causes, J'en ai accord a plusieurs braves republicains de la Caroline du Sud
don't l'intention in'a paru etre en s'expatriant, de se render che^ des tributs
Indiennes independantes, anciennes amies et alliees de la France pour render,
s'ils le pouvaient de concert avec nous aux Espagnols et aux Anglais le mal que
les gouvernemens de ces deux nations avoient la lachete de fair depuis
longtems a vos concitoyens sous le mon de ces sauvages de meme que depuis peu
sous celui des Algeriens.

Je vous previens, monsieur, queje publierai cette declaration, afin de calmer
les inquietudes et de dissiper les doutes auxquels la denunciation faite a la
legislature de la Caroline a pu donner lieu.

Agreez mon respect, GENET.

TRANSLATION.
PHILADELPHIA, 25th December, 1793 -- 2d year of the French Republic, one and
indivisible. The Citizen Genet, Minister Plenipotentiary from the Republic of
France to the United States, to Mr. Jefferson, Secretary of State of the United
States. SIR,
I LEARN by the reports of the consul of the Republic, at Charleston, and by
the public papers, that the legislature of South Carolina, had caused to be
arrested, different persons, accused of having received from me commissions for
the purpose of levying an armed force in that state, for the service of the
Republic. Conceiving that such conduct, if it were true, would offend the
sovereignty of the American people, I hasten to affirm to you, sir, that I have
not authorized in any manner, the recruiting, the formation, or the collecting
of an armed force, or of any corpse in the territory of the United States; but
at the same time, I am too frank to disguise from you, that, authorized by the
French nation, to deliver commissions to those of your fellow-citizens, who
should feel themselves animated with a desire of serving the best of causes, I
have granted them to several brave republicans of South Carolina, whose
intention appeared to me to be to expatriate themselves, and to go among the
independent Indian tribes, ancient friends and allies of France, in order to
retaliate, if they could, in concert with us, on the Spaniards and English, the
injury which the government of these two nations had the baseness, for some
time to commit on your fellow-citizens, under the name of these savages, in
like manner, as is lately done under that of the Algerines.

I notify you, sir, that I shall publish this declaration, in order to calm
inquietudes, and to dissipate the doubts to which the denunciation made in the
legisture of Carolina, might give rise.

Accept my respect, GENET.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE, to wit.
I HEREBY certify, that the foregoing papers, consisting of seventeen pages of
writing, are truly copied from the originals (except the omission of certain
names therein, agreeably to the letter of 7th December, 1793, from Gov.
Moultrie) on file in the office of the Department of State.

GEO. TAILOR, jr. Chief Clerk.
14th January, 1794.

