LECTURE; CONTAINING A SHORT HISTORY OF MECHANICS, AND OF USEFUL ARTS AND
MANUFACTURES, Reverently DEDICATED to the respectable supporters of LIBERTY and
PROPERTY, THE MECHANICS OF THE UNITED STATES, But particularly addressed and
delivered to the Mechanics of Philadelphia, By their faithful servant and
fellow labourer, ABSALOM AIMWELL, ESQUIRE.

By these we support our families, and enrich our country.

REPRINTED IN CATSKILL. M,DCC,XCV.

Mechanics' Lecture.
MY FRIENDS,
WE find recorded in the sacred Scripture, that he who had but one talent, went
and hid it in the earth. But I, though I have but half a talent, am determined
to use it to the best advantage.

Much of your time and money has been already spent in hearing LECTURES. --
Lectures on philosophy -- Lectures on grammar -- Lectures on languages, both
dead and living, have been delivered. Lectures on heads, and hearts, have been
heard with great applause. Lectures on politics, from New Hampshire to Georgia
-- yea, from beyond Babylon, from China to Chippawa, have sounded in our ears.
Long lectures on law are daily delivered, to the great perplexity of all
jurymen. Lectures on physic, or, more learnedly, upon materia medica, some of
you may have heard; and our churches echo and re-echo with lectures on
divinity. -- But no lecture, to my knowledge, has been delivered to MECHANICS
worthy to engage their attention: -- I, therefore, who had the good fortune to
be born the son of a mechanic, have taken on me the important task of lecturing
to that respectable part of the community.

Taking it for granted, gentlemen MECHANICS, that you possess those sentiments
of candor, and generosity, which are more ready to excuse faults than to impute
them, even where they really are, I do the more cheerfully speak.

I shall attempt to treat of your different professions separately; though it
cannot be expected that every profession will be fully treated of. My abilities
are unequal, abilities superior to mine would be unequal, to such a task. -- I
shall therefore dwell, only on those branches which appear most important, and
necessary to the good of society.

Were I addressing an audience of country gentlemen, on the pleasing subject of
agriculture, I should probably begin with our first parents, Adam and Eve, in
their primogenial state: -- But, when I have the honor of addressing MECHANICS,
and treating of ARCHITECTURE, the sublime subject requires that I begin long
before the days of Adam: -- for who but an all-wise and omnipotent ARCHITECT,
could plan the heavens, and bring into existence an universe of worlds! In the
language of the poet, All nature is but ART unknown to thee,
All chance, DIRECTION! which thou can not see.


Cast your thoughts back into eternity! There, before creation began, the
philosophic eye discovers an infinite maze, which the wisdom of man is unable
to comprehend. All then was one continued ocean of chaes, without a bottom, and
without a share; the center of which was every where, and the circumference no
where. God, the great Architect of worlds was the center: He, by infinite
wisdom, called that glorious luminary the sun into existence; then, with his
almighty compasses, swept the circling path of every world. He was the first
MECHANIC. He laid the foundation of the earth, that it should never be removed;
and it was HE who spread the beautiful curtains of heaven, bespangled with
brilliant stars. -- "When we consider the heavens, the work of his fingers, the
sun and the stars, which he has ordained," we are filled with the same
sentiments of adoration which impelled good old David to cry cut -- Lord! what
is man that thou art mindful of him, or the son of man that thou visitest him!
By one all sublime ARCHITECT, the heavens were framed -- worlds, mountains,
rivers, beasts, and birds, were made; and by the same Almighty MECHANIC man was
formed -- and to crown the whole, woman being taken from man, came forth double
refined, the most perfect work of all creation. Here we observe, that, the
Almighty did, not only plan his own work, but did execute it Himself. This may
serve to us as a perpetual example of industry: -- for if the Deity Himself,
did not think it degrading his character to labor, how despicable must that
man appear who despises labor, or a labourer!

I now proceed to consider mortal man as a MECHANIC. The first man and woman
were at the beginning gardeners; for we read, that they were put into the
garden of Eden, to keep it and to dress it. But when the curiosity of Eve,
prompted by the devil, had ruined for ever her peace of mind; honest Adam, like
every fond husband, grieved at the pensive tears of his beloved rib, could not
endure to see her unhappy alone; and knowing that misery loves company, he also
tasted the delicious morsel. Then, and not till then, they discovered their
want of clothes. Necessity, the mother of cunning ARTS, soon put it into their
heads to few fig leaves together, by which they furnished themselves with
aprons. Thus we see that the first man was a MECHANIC. And what was his trade?
-- A TAILOR! -- and his wise a tayloress; for they both sewed. -- I know it has
been a common saying, that it takes nine tailors to make one man; but we find
the truth is, that one tailor was the father of all men. Kings and queens,
princes and princesses, emperors and nabobs, lords and beggars, are all the
descendants of one TAILOR!! -- If we could be brought to realise this truth,
with what reverence should we bow to that ancient and venerable order of the
needle and thread! I know it will be argued by needlemakers, that before Adam
could sew he must have had a needle. But we may suppose that a thorn, with a
piece of tough bark answered for the first needle and thread.

I shall attempt to draw some good instruction from each trade as I pass along.
The fig leaves, you know could have answered but little purpose alone; but a
number of them joined together, did answer a very good purpose. This teaches
us, that man can be of little service to the world while alone, but being
united, nothing is too hard for him to accomplish. Even one man properly united
was capable of peopling the whole world!

As it is the business of a tailor to sew many pieces together, in order to
make one garment; so in society, let them endeavor to sew every member together
in order to promote the general good -- to unite neighbors together, with the
basting threads of love, and sew them fast with the cords of virtue: But, cut
off all the fragments and tatters of society, with the shears of denial; stab
the wicked with the sharp bodkins of conscience, and press down tyranny with an
iron goose.

That which was most necessary was first attended to, namely, an apron: and
after our first parents had given themselves a tolerable suit of fig leaves,
it is probable the next thing that claimed their attention, was a house, to
screen them from the inclement storms. A hollow tree might have answered for a
short time, but as that could not have been convenient, a house must have been
built. Now in building a house, gentlemen, which mechanic is first employed? --
Certainly the

MASON.
The mason lays the foundation, and without a foundation you know the building
could not stand. -- There is a society scattered abroad over the earth, which
call themselves free masons -- yet some of them are the greatest slaves in the
world; and slaves to the worst of masters, passion and vice. Can such be called
Free Masons? No: but every MASON in Pennsylvania, who is twenty-one years old,
is truly a free mason.

The art of masonry we find to be very ancient; for, to say nothing of the
foundations of the earth, laid by the first grand master mason, we shall begin
with the mighty tower of Babel.

Men fearing that a flood of waters would again deluge the earth, for their
mutual safety, assembled together, and formed one grand congress of the world:
at which they agreed to build a tower, whose top should reach heaven; that when
the waters should come again, they might fly thereto and be safe. And what but
the solid work of MASONS could be deemed sufficient to lay the foundation of
such a work! -- Stones formed by the hand of Nature, being the most permanent
of all materials, were probably made use of to lay the foundation of this
mighty fabric. But here the ambitious views of man were blasted. -- The
Almighty King of heaven and earth, who knows best what is good for man, would
not suffer him in his mortal state, thus to scale the walls of heaven. HE,
being perfect master of all languages, as well as arts and sciences, descended
from his lofty throne and confounded the language of man; and introduced new
languages which the sons of men could not understand. This alone was sufficient
to frustrate their design; for when the masons called for mortar, the
attendants brought stone; and when they called for stone, the attendants
brought mortar. Their words founded as uncouth to one another, as dead
languages found nowadays to living ears. Mad and perplexed at their own
confused jargon, "they left off to build," and separating from each other,
spread themselves over the face of the earth, and laid the foundations of
cities.

The pyramids of Egypt, those amazing piles, which has been the astonishment of
many ages, and which seem to bid defiance, even to time itself, none but Masons
could build. That stupenduous wall which separates China from Tartary, fifteen
hundred miles in length, very thick and very high, was built by the masons of
China, to prevent the incursions of the Tartarian robbers. It has already borne
the storms, of more than eighteen hundred years, and will probably remain the
admiration of many ages yet unborn.

The magnificent walls of Babylon, have been much celebrated by historians; but
the wild ambition of a tyrant warrior, levelled them to the ground. Though the
plan of this famous city of Philadelphia, so justly admired for its regularity,
was drawn from ancient Babylon; yet it was you, gentlemen Masons, and your
fathers, who laid its foundations.

CARPENTERS.
Much is due to Masons for laying foundations and raising walls; but without
CARPENTERS, their work would be incomplete; for a house, without a roof, would
be but a poor shelter, and without the inside work would be but a shell. Though
you might build a house, yet it would smoke without a chimney; and a smoky
house always makes a scolding wife; and two such evils would be intolerable:
Therefore you cannot build a house complete, without the assistance of Masons;
but a stable perhaps you may. And a stable, we are informed, was the
birthplace of the Prince of Carpenters; that divine Mechanic, who taught men
that profession alone, was not sufficient to support them, either in this
world, or the world to come. HE broke off the shackles of superstition, which
had long been rivetted on the minds of men; and taught, that true religion
consisted in doing to others those things which we would that others should do
unto us. HE, by divine precepts, by his moral life, and virtuous examples, is
justly esteemed the Savior of men. This was the CARPENTER, the son of Joseph.
His abilities were too great, and his genius too extensive, to be confined to
wood: He therefore laid by perishable things, and, with divine wisdom, framed a
building, wide as the world, deep as its center, and more durable than pillars
of brass. The stars shall fade away, the sun himself grow dim with age, and
nature find in years, but this building, founded on truth, shall stand secure
amidst the war of elements, the wreck of matter, and the crush of worlds.

What profession of mechanics can boast of a building capable to outride the
tempest of an universal deluge? None but carpenters can share this glory; and
ShipCarpenters only. Noah the great ship-wright of the old world, was the man
highly favored of God. He had ability to construct a ship sufficient to buffet
the foaming billows of an angry sea, that spread death and destruction all
around. While he, with his family, rode unconcerned above the drowning world;
and from the antedeluvian shores landed safely on the mountain of Ararat.

It Is needless to dwell on the many advantages arising to the world from
carpenters. Each of us feel our obligations to them, while in our houses we are
screened from the wintry blast! Securely we may fit and defy the angry storm
driving at our windows. To them the sailer is indebted for his winged dwelling
while he plows the ocean. Commerce proclaims your utility to the world, for you
are the life of merchants. Yonder HALL Carpenters' Hall in Philadelphia.
stands a monument of your industry; and we hope it may long stand to
perpetuate the memory of its virtuous founders, to their virtuous posterity. In
that hall was assembled the first Congress of the American world: that august
assembly, who, like good carpenters, framed the thirteen states into one united
empire.

As it is your business, gentlemen carpenters, of many pieces to form one
complete frame; so let it be your care, not only to make the frame of
government as perfect as possible, but often to examine it, and see that none
of the timbers become defective. You, together with masons, are the proper
persons to examine frames and foundations.

JOINERS AND CABINET-MAKERS.
GENTLEMEN,
Your trades cannot be considered in so fundamental a light as carpenters and
masons; yet, they will readily grant, that their work is not complete till the
Joiner gives it the finishing stroke. Let it be your care to join brethren, and
cement them together like a glue joint.

As cabinet-making is a branch of business more particularly interesting to the
Ladies, I shall now address the makers of tables, trunks, drawers, etc. As your
work is for the ladies, it is and ought to be the genteelest of all wooden
work. With what pleasure do you finish a chair, knowing who is to sit in it?
With what neatness do you finish a case of drawers, knowing what fine things
are to rest in them? And with what anxiety does a young journeyman finish the
head-board of the most necessary part of a bride's furniture? -- As you are
employed in the service of the ladies, I think your labor must be a continual
pleasure.

We have this inference to draw from your trade; that, in all ages of the
world, and in all kingdoms, the wisest men have, or ought to have been
concerned in the CABINET. Solomon, with all his wisdom, must have been very
famous in the cabinet? and we find him to be the greatest favorite of the
ladies in all the Bible. So great was his gallantry, that, though he had three
hundred wives, his concubines far exceded that number! Who then, would not wish
to be a cabinet-maker!

But you, as well as all other mechanics, are greatly indebted to the Smiths: I
therefore now turn more immediately to you

GENTLEMEN SMITHS, BOTH BLACK AND WHITE.
The conveniences and advantages, arising to all mechanics from the labor of
your hands are very great. -- But suffer me to depart a little from the direct
chain of my discourse. -- Curiosity is natural to the soul of man as well as
woman; and perhaps some may be curious to know whether the author of this
Lecture sprung from a good family or not. Now I care not a straw whether a man
sprung from a lord or a beggar, provided he be a good man: but some people
consider a man worthy or unworthy, not according to his virtues and vices, but
according to his family. If he chance to be from a high family, that makes
ample amends for all his vices. -- To make this digression, gentlemen, I have
the example of the great and learned Dr. S -- s, president of Yale college. In
a sermon This sermon, we are informed is deposited in a Museum in the city of
London, as a great curiosity.
at the close of the late war, which he delivered before the General Assembly
of Connecticut, were these words, "O England, I once loved thee with the duty
of a son; for I am a descendent of thy nobles, and the fourth from Sir Adam
Knapton." In imitation of this polite philosopher and patriotic sage, I have
informed you, that I had the honor to be born the son of a mechanic. I cannot
boast nobility of blood from an ancient race of profligate lords; yet I boast
of blood more noble -- for my father was a BLACKSMITH. And though I am not able
to trace back his pedigree, through the dark ages of monkish ignorance; yet I
have no doubt but he was a descendant from Pythagoras, that philosoper of
philosophers, that great Blacksmith, who to his immortal honor, by smiting on
his anvil, first discovered the harmony of sounds. He discovered that sounds
were grave or acute, in proportion to the weight of his anvil: by which music,
that most divine and pleasing of all sciences, has been greatly improved. He
was probably the son of Tubal Cain, the first man who was cunning enough to
work in brass and iron: And Tubal Cain must have been a near relation of Jubal,
the grandson of Adam, who was the first, according to Moses, that ever played
on the harp and organ. Thus, gentlemen, you see that I am descended from a
family as ancient as that of the kings of England, and a race as much more
noble, as their virtues were superior.

But to return to you, gentlemen Smiths, I have before observed, that the
advantages arising to all mechanics from the labor of your hands are very
great: -- without you, they could do nothing. You furnish the lords of the soil
with plowshares, by which they are enabled to feed the world with bread. You
furnish the soldier with weapons to defend his country, and he, when occasion
requires, stands ready to beat down the foe. If a few Blacksmiths, with red hot
nail-rods, could vanquish a legion of British troops Some years ago, when a
British regiment of Scotsmen were stationed in this city a fray happened
between some of them and a number of blacksmiths. The smiths armed themselves
with red hot nail rods, and, notwithstanding the mickle broad swords, drove the
highland laddies off the field to their barracks.
, what army could be able to withstand your force united?

It is said in the heathen theology, that you are the descendents of Vulcan,
god of subterranean fires, and that he came from heaven, and set up a smith's
shop in the island of Lemnos, where he forged thunder bolts for his father
Jupiter. Whether this story be true or not, it matters not; -- but certain it
is, that you have power to heap live coals of fire on the heads of your
enemies; and you can soften steel, which is harder than a lady's heart. You
have the advantage of all other professions; for should the iron hand of
poverty bear hard upon you, you can sell even your vises for bread! You can
hammer the hardest metals into what shape you please; and none know so well as
you do, the necessity of striking while the iron is hot.

As the cinders separate from the pure iron, so let the wicked be separated
from all your societies. While you are blowing the bellows for a welding heat,
you have this lesson of morality constantly whispering in your ears; that life
itself is supported by the puff of a bellows, and when that cease to blow,
man dies like the sparks of your fire.

Be it your care to soften the hard hearts of men and women with the gentle
fire of love, and blow into their minds the true principles of religion. As you
weld together the sinks of a chain, so let every member of your society be
welded together in one chain of virtuous frienship.

BAKERS.
I have been at a loss whether to consider Bakers as mechanics, or not: But
whoever sees them catch their loaves so dexterously, must confess that their
trade is an art at least. And if we consider the many kinds of creatures which
come from their manufactories, such as sheep, hogs, elephants, birds, women and
men on horseback, appearing at the windows of every cake shop, we must conclude
that Bakers are Mechanics.

I think it is the prophet Malachi who tells us, that "the day of the Lord shall
burn as an oven, and all the wicked, yea all the ungodly, shall be burnt to
ashes," as you burn your faggots.

We all acknowledge our obligations to the bakers; for bread is the staff of
life. You, gentlemen bakers, not only feed the poor with bread, but the rich
also. You not only feed the hungry, but you warm the naked, whenever they
approach your oven. If ye make your loaves good weight, happy are ye; for the
Bible says, that, a just weight and balance are the Lord's.

BARBERS.
I have been at a loss whether to consider Barbers in the line of Mechanics, or
to class them with the nobility; -- but when I see a head come from under their
hands, I can no longer doubt of their proceeding by mechanical operations.
Though the nature of their profession seems more suitable to the genius of an
aristocracy, than to that of a republican government; yet, as a race of
nobility is repugnant to the nature of our constitution, I shall consider that
very numerous part of the community among the order of good citizens.

You, gentlemen Barbers, often give the empty head of an empty sop, the white
appearance of a wise sage. You (...) upon many a blockhead, some of which can
feel (...) hot irons and sharp pins, and some cannot. The beau is not complete
till you give him the finishing touch; -- then he sallies forth like a
butterfly, the gaudy being of a summer's day.

Your ingenuity and usefulness appears most conspicuous in the carding machine;
which is the invention of one of your fraternity in England. Studying out the
plan of a machine for craping hair more expeditiously, he had the happiness to
hit on the carding machine, greatly to the improvement of cotton manufactories.

I am not well enough acquainted with the history of Barbers to trace out their
pedigree, or to enumerate many of their heroic deeds; one alone is sufficient
to hand them down in the list of high same, to the latest posterity; -- for
when the united power of the Philistines was not sufficient to subdue the
intrepid Sampson, one Barber could shave his head, and render him weak like
another man. Thus, he who had the dexterity to catch three hundred foxes; the
strength to tear a lion in pieces; to carry away the gates of Gaza on his
shoulders, bars and all; to lay three thousand men dead in heaps upon heaps,
with the jaw bone of an ass; and to pull down a huge play house at one jerk; he
who could do all this, fell by the hand of a Barber!!!

WEAVERS
Are a class of men very useful in the world; and we are all under great
obligations to them, for our fine clothes, and our warm clothes.

Fig Leaves could answer only for a temporary dress: but as soon as Eve had
learnt to spin, the ingenuity of Seth contrived to weave what his mother had
spun. No^ (...) I only conjecture; and why may not I be allowed to make some
conjectures, as well as another preacher? Seth then we conclude was the first
Weaver. So if this be true, and I have heard no one doubt it, Weavers must be
very ancient. Fine linen, we read, was manufactured in Egypt at an early period.

Nothing remarkable has occurred to my memory, respecting WEAVERS in the bloody
fields of battle. This indicates their peaceable disposition, which is
infinitely more commendable than the character of those who are full of strange
caths, and bearded like the pard, jealous in honor, sudden and quick in
quarrel, seeking the bubble reputation even in the cannon's mouth. -- Yet I
make no doubt but they are as ready as others, to stand forth in defense of
their country whenever it becomes necessary.

Afflicted Job compares the life of man to a weaver's shuttle: and very justly,
for life, like the thread from your shuttle, is constantly spinning off.
Similar to this were the divine sentiments of Plato, when he said, "The
sceptered king, the burdened slave,
The humble and the haughty die;
The rich, the poor, the base, the brave,
In dust, without distinction, lie!
Go search the tombs where monarchs rest,
Who once the greatest titles wore;
Of wealth and honor now berest,
And all their glories are no more!
So through the air the meteor flies,
And spreads along its gilded train;
When shat -- it is gone; its beauty dies --
Dissolves to common air again.
So it is with us -- "


And since we imitate the meteor, in the shortness of our lives; let us also,
like the meteor, while we do live, give light to all around us.

The profession of Weavers, we must conclude, was in high repute in England, at
the birth of the British Spectator; for in one of these celebrated volumes we
find recorded the following epitaph: "Here lies Daniel Saul;
Spittalfield's WEAVER -- and that is all!"
That is, all that he ought to be. When a great lord among men dies, we often
see a long string of epitaph, enumerating a thousand virtues which he never
had; and which no body will believe he had. But when the poet speaks of the
Weaver, he says, Spittalfield's weaver, and that is all. All that is good, he
undoubtedly meant; all that he ought to be.

As your web, gentlemen Weavers, can be of no service until it is woven; so
neither can a number of people accomplish any thing of consequence until they
are united. Be it therefore your care, not only to warp and weave your cloth
well together; but also to do your endeavor to warp men into principles of
virtue, justice, and morality.

FULLERS.
The Fuller is only improving and finishing what the Weaver began; and
notwithstanding the pounding and noise they make, could have no business were
it not for the Weavers.

I can give information of nothing remarkable respecting Fullers. But a
fulling- mill was once known to frighten, not only poor Sancho, who was
naturally timorous, but struck terror to the courageous heart of Den Quixote de
la Mancha. After his bloody engagement with the windmill, he was under
trembling apprehensions from the thumps of a fulling-mill; until his faithful
squire Sancho informed his worship there was no harm.

A Fuller never returns so many yards of cloth as he receives; but what he
loses in length and breadth, he makes up in thickness. "This is as true, as
said a preacher, as that logwood will die hats."

HATTERS.
The Hatter's trade, is, in nature, much the same as that of the Fuller; only
that the Hatter always keeps his apprentices and journeymen in hot water. This
cannot be imputed to ill nature, neither; for I once knew a Hatter the best
natured man that could be. Coming home late in the night, unexpectedly, he
found a British officer in the house: yet he retained his good nature, and told
the captain, that "he had mistrusted him a good while; but if ever he caught
him doing so again, he would throw his shoes and stockings right out at the window,
let it rain as hard as it would."

A Hat is not only serviceable in screening our heads from the soorching sun;
but, like charity among good Christians, it often covers a multitude of sins.

From the crown of the head we now direct your attention to the soal of the
foot, to consider the works of the Shoemaker. But previous to the shoemaker we
ought to consider the

TANNER.
The Tanner can take a horny hide, and make it into the most pliable leather,
which answers many valuable purposes, besides making soals for men and women's
shoes.

TANNERS were some of the first Christians at Joppa; for we read that St. Peter
lodged there with one Simon a tanner: and doubtless Simon the Tanner was a very
zealous Christian, or else St. Peter would not have associated with him.

We also read in another history, written, if I mistake not, by the renowned
Esop, that Tanners, anciently, were some of the first politicians; for, says
that great and crooked backed historian, "when a town was in danger of being
besieged, the wise inhabitants held a consultation which was the best method to
fortify it: A grave skillful MASON gave in his opinion,
That nothing but stone could secure the dominion:
A CARPENTER said, that, though that was well spoke,
Yet, 'twere better by far to defend it with oak:
A TANNER, much wiser than both these together,
Said, try what you will, friends, there is nothing like LEATHER."


Here I must remark, that the word Tanner is by some translators, rendered
Currier; but I find it is all one in the original Creek. Yet in this instance I
think it ought to be translated Tanner; because, had they agreed to fortify the
town with leather, it need not have been curried; and besides, the leather must
have first come from the Tanner. In this I have the decided opinion of the
famous Vatt Barkooze, first Tanner in the city of Leatherhide; as also of the
great Mr. Tanooze, who served a faithful apprenticeship with Barkooze; and he
was a very pious and learned man.

But to return to you, gentlemen

SHOEMAKERS AND COBBLERS.
Notwithstanding your work is continually trod upon, it is still in very great
demand; yea, the more it is trod upon and kicked about, the better for you,
because it then comes to your hands again; and thus the good man's works do
follow him.

Wax is a term frequently made use of in scripture, by way of similitude; --
The proudest hills like wax did melt, etc. Now it may be disputed what kind of
wax is here spoken of: but I am of opinion (and few divines of note will
contradict me) that the wax here spoken of, is no other than shoemaker's wax.
Wax, we know when it is cold and hard will take no impression, but fly with a
small touch; yet after being warmed and mollified a little, you may mould it
into what shape you please. So it is with man; ask a favor of him when he is
out of humor, he will be surly and crabbed; but mollify him a little with
civil words, and he will become pliable like wax.

You know, gentlemen, when it is very cold, your thread is apt to break, and
your work will rip; but when it is neither too hot nor too cold, your work will
be good. This teaches us, that a moderate temper of mind is the best to
transact business in; for when we do things with cold indifference, or in the
heat of passion, it will seldom bear (...).

You are the most contented people in the world, and consequently the most
happy. It seems you have adopted this as a principle, that a light heart and a
thin pair of shoes, will bear you above the srowns of fortune. We seldom find
you aspiring after kingdoms and empires, and getting your brains knocked out for
your trouble. If you only can get sufficient elbow-room, it is all that you
require: this is undoubtedly your right, and whoever encroaches thereon, ought
to get a sudden blow from the awl have, when you draw your thread. You not only
defend your private interest, but none are more ready to stand forth in defense
of their country; for it is well known, that when necessity requires, you are
ready to use your awl even to the last, for the public good. And
notwithstanding this public spirit of generosity so peculiar to you, we always
find you, particularly COLLERS, on the mending hand.

GENTLEMEN DYERS,
Though you are but few in number, yet these few take out more spots from
society than all other men. When our garments become fullied, we have only to
send them to the DYER, and he purges away all stains. He not only purges away
stains, but makes his work appear in proper colors. When any thing is held up
to view in false colors, whether it be a person's coat or his character, it is
the business of every good Dyer to make it appear in the most favorable color
possible. You have the power to change the color of cloth as you please;
excepting, that which is really black you cannot make white. In this the

PAINTER
Has the advantage. He can make that which is black appear white, and that
which is white appear black, or any other color that he chooses. The Painter
and the

SCULPTOR
Like the Poet, must have the moving principles of their arts planted in them
by the hand of nature: for there was never a good sculptor, painter, or poet,
to whom nature has not been liberal of her favors. In this respect the painter
and sculptor take the right hand of all arts.

The Sculptor may carve an image, and the Painter give it a color which may
externally vie, even with the works of the Deity. But come to examine it, we
find a lifeless form; a shape without sense. This cannot fail to impress the
mind of the workman with the most exalted ideas of that all-wise Sculptor, who
not only made man a perfect image, but had power to animate that image, and
endow it with rational faculties.

Dryden tells the story of Pygmalion the Carver, an old bachelor and pretended
woman hater; who in the fifty-ninth year of his age, being out-standed in the
field of love, was determined to have no farther connection with the sex. But
he could not be at peace when he had lost sight of them; yet, possessed of more
fortitude than Galvon, would not blow out his brains neither. -- He determined
to have one of his own make; and accordingly set himself to work, and carved
the image of a lady -- so beautiful, that he fell desperately in love with the
work of his own hands. But she, unmoved at his wooing tales, treated him with
colder indifference than any one he had before paid his addresses to. He
therefore humbly prayed to the gods (who were very numerous in those days) to
give life to his beloved idol. The gods, out of pity, granted his request. She
opened her eyes; Life wondered up and down through all her frame, and lighted
every charm.

Swift to her arms the lover flew,
Grown young again the curtain drew:
Nor was she coy nor proud at all,
But with her hand gave heart and all.
Few arguments there needed to prevail,
A storm of kisses poured as thick as bail.
I have told this story for the comfort of old Bachelors; for I feel within me
a heart of philanthropy for all mankind: and there may possibly be some old
bachelors even among Mechanics. Such I advise not to despair; for, though the
sooner the better, it is never too late to do good. And Mr. Pope says, The blessed
to day are as completely so,
As who began a thousand years ago.


COOPERS.
You are constantly employed for the good of mankind. In every ship, and in
every house, we discover the works of the Cooper. Without Coopers we could have
neither pipes of wine, hogsheads of sugar, nor barrels of flour; for without
them, there would be neither pipes, hogsheads, nor barrels.

We are told in maiden story, that when the entreaties of an honest lover could
not prevail over the hard heart of the lady's father, she suffered a Cooper to
head her up in one of her father's empty wine pipes. Then the lover purchased
the pipe as it was, by which means the lady became his property; -- and this
produced the famous old ballad of Love in a Tub. So much was he indebted to a
Cooper! I mention this, because every trade should have something remarkable.

The Cooper lectures more upon heads than any other man; for every cask must
have two heads. When he is setting hoops, and rattling away with his adz and
driver, he cannot help marking the difference between a full cask and an empty
one. The empty cask makes a great noise, while the full one will only chack;
which of course leads him to make this comparision, that a wise man, like a
full cask, says but little; while an empty fool is all noise to no purpose.

MUSICAL INSTRUMENT MAKERS.
Tubal, one of the grand-sons of Adam, was the first inventor of musical
instruments, and father of such as play on the harp and organ.

If David, with his Jews harp alone, could drive the devil out of Saul, and
restore his wandering senses; -- if too soft breathing flute can soothe us to
pleasure; if the cheerful violin can wake our spirits up to joy; if the solomn
sounds of the church organ can raise our spirits to heavenly meditations, and
fit our hearts for sacred devotion, -- how much are we indebted to those
promoters of harmony, and rational delight, the musical instrument makers?

It Is said, that Music has charms to soothe the savage breast, to soften rocks,
and bend the sturdy oak, etc. Timotheous with his music "raised a mortal to the
skies;" and Cecilia "drew an angel down;" -- and by music Orpheus charmed his
wife from hell. Yet, notwithstanding all these wonderful effects, there are
three kinds of animals which hate music; -- a hog, an ass, and the devil. This
we see in part verified in our churches: for when good music, whether vocal or
instrumental, is introduced into a church, there are always a number of people
who are possessed of the spirit of one of the above animals, to such a degree,
that they immediately, at the sound thereof, go away, just as the evil spirit
did from Saul, when David played before him. In short, it will always drive the
devil out of them, or drive them out of the church.

CLOCK MAKERS.
The Clock Maker measures time for us in a cloudy day: -- and when the sun has
gone down in the western sky, and all the stars are dancing about the pole, the
clock reminds us of the passing hour.

Dr. Young says, The dock strikes one. We take no note of time, but by its
loss. To give it then a tongue is wise in man. As if an angel spoke, I hear the
solemn sound; it is the knell of my departed hours! Where are they? With the
years beyond the stood.

An ingenious piece of clock-work not only tells us the time, but represents
the movements of those heavenly bodies which mark the varied seasons of the
year. For the perfection of this piece of celestial mechanism, the Orrery, the
world is indebted to our ingenious countryman.

When the Clock and Watchmakers are regulating their wheels, weights, and
springs, they must, (in these times of political enquiry) naturally be led into
philosophical reflections on the complicated machinery of government. By
observing the motions of their wheels within wheels, and the power requisite to
keep them all turning; -- this must teach them how exceedingly difficult it is
to fix the balance of power, so as to keep all the wheels of government in
right motion; and to prevent them from interfering, or bearing too hard against
each other.

COACH MAKERS.
Chariot making is more ancient than the earth itself; for, according to the
opinion of Milton (which seems to be the prevailing opinion of modern divines)
the trade was carried on in heaven, long before the earth was made. -- "Now
storming sury rose, and clamor, such as heard in heaven till now was never;
arms on armor, clash'd horrible discord; and the madding wheels of brazen
chariots raged: dire was the noise of conflict; all heaven refounded, and had
earth been then, all earth had to her center shook."

When Pharaoh was about to pursue the Israelites, he "made ready his chariot --
and took with him six hundred chosen chariots; and all the chariots of Egypt."
And when they had got into the dry Red sea, "the Lord looked through the pillar
of fire, and of the cloud, and troubled the host of the Egyptians, and took off
their chariot wheels, that they drove them heavily."

Elijah the prophet was carried up to heaven in a chariot of fire; and it is
probable that Enoch the son of Jared and father of Methuselah, was likewise
taken up in a chariot: for we read, that after he had lived three hundred and
sixty-five years, "he was not, for God took him." And why should not Enoch ride
to heaven in a chariot as well as Elijah?

In many places of the Bible we read of chariots; but I do not recollect any
mention made of coaches: which leads us to conclude, that coaches are not so
ancient as chariots. But the art of making coaches and chariots seem nowadays
to be all one.

All pleasureable carriages are considered as articles of luxury, and entirely
unnecessary in a country like ours: but as this city manufactures many of them
for other countries, and thereby brings us money, it must be looked upon as a
very advantageous business both to individuals, and to the community at large.

Both in the times of the Old Testament and the New, chariots seem to have been
the favorite carriages; for we read, in the eighth chapter of Acts, that when
the great African eunuch belonging to Candace, queen of the Ethiopians, came to
Jerusalem to worship, he rode in his chariot, and read Esaias the prophet.
"Then the Spirit said unto Philip, Go near and join thyself unto this chariot.
And the eunuch desired Philip to come up and fit with him. -- Then Philip
opened his mouth, and preached to him JESUS;" By which the eunuch was converted
to Christianity as he rode in his chariot. And when they came to a water, "he
commanded the chariot to stand still; and they both went down into the water,
both Philip and the eunuch, and he was baptized by him."

All these old affairs, I have quoted for the same reason that other preachers
quote, because I could not myself, think of any thing so well adapted to the
purpose.

SADDLERS.
Every saddler, who is master of his business, must know what kind of a curb is
necessary to restrain the rage of an unruly horse; and the strength of a rein
requisite for that curb. This must lead him into reflections highly favorable
to the rulers of a people. He sees the necessity of curbs and reins to restrain
the unruyl passions of men, so as to prevent their injuring one another. He
must also see the absolute necessity of having a skilful man to hold those
reins.

If any one should dispute the usefulness of SADDLERS, let him ride a trotting
horse then miles, bare-back, and that will reduce him to reason.

SAIL MAKERS
Add wings to commerce, while the ROPE MAKER, besides furnishing Justice with
balters, gives sinews to these wings; without which our ships would make but a
heavy passage through the deep. Saint Paul, that most learned and obstinate of
all Christians, was a sail maker; for we read in the eighteenth chapter of the
Acts, that "Paul departed from Athens and came to Corinth; and found a Jew
named Aquilla, born in Pontus, lately come from Italy, with his wife Priscilla;
and because he was of the same craft he abode with them, and wrought (for by
their occupation they were tent makers)" -- or sail makers; -- which I suppose
is all one in the Greek.

PRINTERS.
To crown all the ARTS and SCIENCES, Printing was invented about three hundred
years ago, to the great improvement of literature. Before that time, all books
were tediously transcribed with a pen; consequently the knowledge of letters
could not be general among mankind.

It Is needless to expatiate on the many advantages arising to the public from
the knowledge which is diffused among the people, by the ART of PAINTING.
Liberty of the press, and a favorite volume in sheets, is the prevailing
sentiment of the enlightened Printers of the present age. Every one must be
sensible of its utility, and none but tyrants wish to restrain the liberty of
the press, while it is conducted with propriety.

It is needless to have recourse to antiquity for characters eminent in this
profession. Poor Richard's Almanac alone, would be sufficient to immortalize
the whole fraternity, -- to say nothing of its enlightened author: -- whose
genius so animating to the rights of man, has, like the shock of electricity,
roused up the spirit of liberty, and struck off the hand of oppression, which
was bearing hard upon our country. The shock of his electrical apparatus has
been sensibly felt across the Atlantic, and has made the thrones of tyrants
shake to their centres. He yet lives, This Lecture was written before Dr.
FRANKLIN'S death.
blessed be God, justly exalted in that high seat, where he shines the Light of
PHILOSOPHERS, the Glory of PRINTERS, the Pride of MECHANICS, and the brightest
Ornament of HUMAN NATURE: -- waiting, with philosophic patience, the happy
moment when he shall rise above all earthly things, to shine superior, a fixed
star of the first magnitude.

MECHANICS' SONG.
YE merry mechanics come join in my song,
And let the brisk chorus come bounding along
Though some may be poor, and some rich there may be,
Yet all are contended and happy and free.
Happy and free, happy and free,
Yet all are contented and happy and free.
2.
Ye TAILORS! of ancient and noble renown,
Who clothe all the people in country and town;
Remember that Adam your father and head,
Though the lord of the world, was a Tailor by trade.
3.
Ye MASONS! who work in stone, mortar and brick,
And lay the foundations, deep, solid and thick;
Though hard be your labor, yet lasting your fame,
Both Egypt and China your wonders proclaim.
4.
Ye SMITHS! who forge tools for all trades here below,
You have nothing to fear, while you smite and you blow;
All things you may conquer, so happy your lot;
If you're careful to strike while the iron is hot.
5.
Ye SHOE-MAKERS! nobly from ages long past,
Have defended your rights with your awl to the last;
And COBBLERS all merry, not only stop holes,
But work night and day for the good of our soals.
6.
Ye CABINET-MAKERS! brave workers in wood,
As you work for the ladies, your work must be good;
And JOINERS and CARPENTERS far off and near,
Stick close to your trades and you have nothing to fear.
7.
Ye HATTERS! who ost with hands not very fair,
Fix bats on a block, for a blackhead to wear;
Though charity cover a sin now and then,
You cover the heads and the sins of all men,
8.
Ye COACH-MAKERS! must not by tax be controlled,
But ship off your coaches and fetch us home gold; --
The roll of your coach made Copernicus reel,
And fancy the world to turn round like a wheel.
9.
Ye CARDERS and SPINNERS and WEAVERS attend,
And take the advice of poor Richard your friend;
Stick close to your looms and your wheels and your cards,
And you never need fear of the times being hard.
10.
Ye PRINTERS! who give us our learning and news,
And impartially print for Turks, Christians and Jews;
Let your favorite toast ever found through the streets,
The freedom of press, and a volume in sheets.
11.
Ye COOPERS! who rattle with driver and adz,
And lecture each day upon hoops and on heads;
The famous old ballad of Love in a Tub,
You may sing to the tune of your rub a dub dub.
12.
Ye SHIP-BUILDERS! RIGGERS and MAKERS of SAILS!
Already the new constitution prevails;
And soon you shall sec over the proud swelling tide,
The ships of Columbia triumphantly ride.
13.
Each TRADESMAN turn out with his tool in his hand,
To cherish the ARTS and keep PEACE through the land;
Each 'PRENTICE and JOURNEYMAN join in my song,
And let the brisk CHORUS come bounding along.
Come bounding along, come bounding along.
And let the brisk CHORUS come bounding along.
FINIS.

