ARISTOCRACY. An Epic Poem.

-- DE BELLARE SUPERBOS. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR THE EDITOR. 1795.

PREFACE.
AT a time like the present, when the Liberties of the People are in danger;
when the executive and legislative powers have united to denounce the POPULAR
SOCIETIES; and when there is great reason to fear that the supiness of the
friends of Liberty will enable its enemies to accomplish its destruction; it
behooves every lover of his country, every advocate for the equal rights of man,
to awake from the dream of delusive security, and exert every energy of his
nature, to enlighten and preserve his fellow-citizens.

The DEMOCRATIC SOCIETIES have been stigmatized with the opprobrious epithets
of Anarchists and Disorganizers; they have been loudly rated as wanting in
political knowledge, and destitute of integrity; and the public has been
earnestly called upon, not to consider them with the eye of friendliness and
approbation, but with the determined frown of indignation and contempt.

An enquiry naturally arises here -- What have these people done? Wherefore are
we required to suspect or detest them? It would be out of place, were I here to
enter into a formal justification of their principles and conduct; neither do I
design it. It must be left to time, and to the unbiassed judgment of future
generations, to determine heartily on this great question.

But whether the Democratic Societies have, or have not, been successful in the
demonstration; there can be no doubt, in the mind of every intelligent observer
of the condition of our country, that a dangerous Coalition exists ( actively,
if not formally) to destroy the general influence of the people; or, at least,
so to modify it, as may be most advantageous to the personal aggrandisement of
the Coalition.

Those who are best acquainted with the history of these States, as well while
under the authority and control of Great Britain, as since the acknowledgement
of their independence, have not failed to observe that this spirit of
Aristocracy has manifested itself in various ways, and under very various
forms, at different times.

The design of the British Ministry, beyond dispute, was to establish the
political and religious supremacy of their country over ours. A plan was
undoubtedly in agitation to saddle us with an hereditary nobility; and a
sufficient number of right reverend bigots was to be distributed among us, who
might wield the weapons of opinion in support of that power which gave them
being, and maintained them in the enjoyment of its advantages. The revolution
disconcerted these measures. But though, for awhile, it prevented any attempts
to carry them into execution, it did not destroy that secret longing which had
been excited by the artifices of the vile instruments of the mother country.

It might be dangerous, and it certainly would be imprudent, to develope the
secrets of all succeeding attempts. These, fortunately for America, have
hitherto failed of success. GOD grant that all future similar designs may be
equally ineffectual! The surest means of causing them to be so, is, early to
alarm the public mind concerning all men and all motions which appear to aim at
the establishment of an undue influence in the hands of any particular
description of citizens; and (the Honorable Legislator will pardon me if I
misapply his words) gibbet them to public detestation. This is the more
necessary, as it is impossible to determine to what excesses even that
assumption of power, which is apparently most innocent, may lead those who
exercise it: and, as there is reason to fear, there are those in exalted
stations who would gladly sing "the ditty of Republicanism," in derision, at
the funeral of LIBERTY.

My enquiries have led me to examine, with more than common attention, the
subject of Policy, especially the policy of the United States: and this,
because it appears evident to me, that, hitherto, our government is only a
government of expedients; and that the great principle, by which the
complicated affairs of this vast continent are to be directed, is not yet
discovered. To this end, the most exact scrutiny has been made into the
history, manners, circumstances, etc. of this country; and, above all, into the
characters and situations of those persons who have at different periods taken
the lead in civil, social, military, and political life, throughout the several
States. It was in the course of this scrutiny that the following POEM (the
first Book of which is now given to the public) fell into my hands.

The Author of this work was, as acknowledged therein, concerned in one of
those plots against the liberties of the people, of which I have taken notice;
and, I have good reason to believe, more deeply implicated in it than he
assumes to be in the Poem. At any rate, he was the confidential friend of the
man most active in its promotion. To the furtherance of this scheme, not
Americans only, but Foreigners also, were associated; and all their projects
were dear being carried into effect, by the assistance of a number of Foreign
Envoys -- three, in particular -- though but one (probably for poetical
reasons) is taken notice of in the Poem. The causes of their failure are
exhibited at large in the work itself.

The Author submitted in silence to the demolition of his hopes; and solaced
himself by composing this Poem at his country-seat, whither he had retired, and
where he died a few years since, -- with the reputation of a great Patriot! The
manuscript, which probably was never intended for publication, at length passed
into my hands. Hitherto I have kept it (even from the knowledge of my most
intimate friends), together with copies in his own handwriting of a few of the
Author's original letters, as a precious evidence of the factious designs of
certain aspiring characters in our country; and nothing but our present
alarming situation could have induced me to make it public, while so many of
the personages commemorated in it are yet alive. But the lust of power, when
once excited, however it may be repressed for a time, can never be extinguished
but with life. And when I see the same spirit, which has been so often subdued,
again starting into action -- and my countrymen again likely to become its
victims -- I should be wanting in that patriotism by which I profess ever to be
guided, were I to be deterred by fear of any man, however exalted in station,
from making every possible exertion in their behalf.

The publication of this Poem, at this time, appeared to me to promise some
advantage to the general cause of Liberty. It may awaken some attention to our
present condition; and, by showing (even under the guise of interested praise)
the means which have been used to acquire undue consideration and power, teach
my fellow-citizens to look warily about them, and see whether like designs are
not now forming, and whether they ought not to be on their guard. It may serve
to counteract certain political heresies, -- I repeat it again, certain
political heresies -- which have sprung up among us. And it may excite them to
a recollection, that ARISTOCRACY has ever imposed itself upon the necks of all
former Republics, till, by its increasing weight, it has sunk them in slavery;
and rouse into action that energy of Freemen, always superior to the force of
Oppression.

In respect to the literary merit of the Poem, it is probable the opinions of
men will differ, as their own prejudices and wishes are exposed or flattered. I
shall attempt no vindication of it in a critical point of view. But I ought to
exculpate the Author from one charge, to which he may, in the opinions of those
who do not read attentively, have exposed himself: I mean that of
self-vilification.

It is observable that the writer every where represents himself and his
friends as influenced solely by self-interest: and it may seem improbable that
such a confession should proceed from any one who was really so influenced. The
following extract of a letter, by the same hand, will determine the Author's
own opinion on this question. The letter is written to the friend here
celebrated under the name of ARISTUS, and bears date November, 1786.

Let others think as they please: we, who have such ample experience, have long
since discredited the dream of disinterested benevolence. Surely no dispute can
be more ridiculous than those which have arisen on this subject, unless it
should be those respecting the propriety of employing (what are called)
iniquitous means to obtain a good end. Opinions of this sort are well enough to
amuse the vulgar; and to be played off on those weak, but well-designing men,
who must have Scripture for every thing they do. And, in another letter to the
same person, he says -- In the prosecution of this design, I have no doubt of
your inflexible adherence to that maxim which has so long been the governing
rule of our actions, That if the END is desirable, we are not to hold question
respecting the MEANS. Our motto should be RESPICE FINEM, but not in the sense
of the Philosopher.

A more serious objection seems to lie against the machinery of the Poet. Nor
do I know of any justification of it, other than by supposing it a mere play of
the fancy: for it could not be meant by him to insinuate that the designs of
his friend were infernal; and it is certain that the Author regarded Heaven and
Hell, Providence and Futurity, equally fabulous as the theology of the Greeks
or Hindoos, and alike the property of every dealer in rhyme -- to be the
elegant decorations of the Epopea, or the ponderous ornaments of the Sonnet.

Here, then, the Editor takes his leave, for the present, of the reader;
assuring him, that, if this First Book of 'ARISTOCRACY' shall be esteemed of
value, the remaining ones shall be presented to him with all convenient
expedition. The Editor, indeed, designed at first to have published the entire
work: but was deterred from so doing, by a fear lest its size would prevent
that general circulation which might be secured by a less immediately expensive
mode of publication.

PHILADELPHIA, January 5th, 1795. N. B. The Notes are by the Editor.



ARISTOCRACY.
BOOK FIRST.
INTRIGUES, and Heroes, whose unequalled toil
Dared Freedom's progress many a year to foil;
For many a year Columbia's realm who bowed,
Leading, metereous, the deluded crowd:
Illustrious Chiefs! who hoped aloft to rise,
And shine distinguished in the people's eyes;
Themselves alone the helm of state to guide,
Floating triumphant over the subject tide:
Illustrious Chiefs! who sought the bliss divine,
In lordly pomp and titled pride to shine;
While, bent beneath their oligarchic sway,
Their native land should tremble and obey;
With those from European shores who came,
Brethren in toil, and partners of their fame:
What counsels led, what various means employed;
What foes they conquered, what success enjoyed;
What Fates malign against their aims arose,
And bade, in sad despair, their labors close;
While grief and reverence all my soul inspire,
I sing, responsive to the mournful lyre.
Hail, hallowed Sages! venerated Names!
Of war and peace, ye bright conducting flames!
Columbia's glory, Nature's pride and boast!
Though now deserted, desolate, and lost,
O may your fame over Time's dark rage prevail,
And your immortal compeers bid ye hail!
And may this verse, which bears to future days
That fame, receive a portion of your praise!
From one it flows, like you, who scorned to feel
Fraternal interest in the common weal;
Like you, who strove distinction proud to gain,
Shared in your triumph, and divides your pain.
Hail, native stream! O ROWA, hail to thee!
Whose sweet wave winding seeks the neighboring sea;
Whose flowery banks the pastoral city claim,
Which proudly bears the Albion Virgin's name.
How changed the times, since, filled with youthful fires,
Ambitious thoughts, gay hopes, and warm desires,
With great ARISTUS I was wont to rove
(His earliest friend) through every skirting grove;
And on thy margin join in frolic play;
Or with the hook delude the finny prey;
Or, plunging in thy waters, joy'd to lave,
And breast with eager strife thy downward wave!
Alas! how little did each youngling mind
(To every brighter view alike inclined)
Foresee the sorrows which, in slumbers mild,
Portentous hung over each advancing child!
In all the sky of life, our searching eye
No danger saw, no misery could descry.
Our sun of same ran on his glorious way,
And blessed the nations with his setting ray.
We saw him scatter each contending fire,
To match his radiance that should dare aspire;
Nor sink, till, following his resplendent course,
His phoenix offspring rose with equal force.
Ah! dread deception! -- fatal view obscure!
Illusive vision! -- medium most impure! --
What clouds burst threatening from the frowning north!
What fearful flames, what thunders issue forth!
Wide over the horizon see their volumes roll,
And Night tempestuous hangs over either pole.
Now, bent with grief, with disappointment worn,
I seek thy shore, O ROWA! most forlorn.
While great ARISTUS' lordlier soul obtains
On -- bank some solace of his pains,
By thee, O melancholy Stream! my days
Shall slowly pass; while, catching notes of praise,
Drawn from my mournful, yet resounding lyre,
Thy echoing woods shall loftiest deeds inspire.
Yes, native Stream! by thee the song shall rise,
Which bears thy heroes to the distant skies:
Along thy margin shall ARISTUS' name
Re-echo'd reach its well-deserved fame;
And every Chieftain's who, with him allied,
Fell in his cause, or struggled at his side.
What though Contempt and foul Derision join
To dim the luster of their great design;
And Hate and Infamy, united, shed
Their sickly dews on each illustrious head?
What though, like them, by every ill deprest,
Shame, grief, and anger fill the Poet's breast?
Yet shall his ardent and immortal lays
To future ages give their wondrous praise:
And future ages shall exalt the song,
Which dares, in hallowed strains, their praise prolong;
And every sage, and every youth, shall say --
"Such were the men who scorned the people's sway." Our Poet follows the
example of Horace, Ovid, and other great men, in prophesying great reputation
to himself hereafter. How far this prediction of his may be true, we will not
pretend to determine. That which relates to his heroes will be accomplished
exactly at the period when the art of printing is forgotten, and the whole
world subjected to a new feudal system.

Sinking, the Sun withdraws the lightsome day,
His slant beams trembling on the water play;
With dazzling luster all the windows glow
Of yon high dome, which fronts the wave below;
Mild through the ambient wood the splendor streams,
And hills and thickets feel the level beams.
There great ARISTUS, filled with anxious cares,
Wanders absorpt, nor aught of pleasure shares.
His nobler mind aspires to nobler state,
And execrates the slow designs of Fate.
Down the slope way his path the hero takes,
And now the darkness of the vale he seeks:
Uneasy thoughts within his bosom rise,
And tears of indignation fill his eyes.
At length, with sorrowing, but resentful tones,
Burst forth, in sad soliloquy, his moans.
' What Fates disastrous all our labors thwart,
' The toils of Genius, and the attempts of Art!
' In vain we strive, in vain our might essay,
' And see each promised aid our will obey;
' What strength soever, and blessed events conjoin,
' Some Power adverse still foils the bold design.
' Fair plans are formed, immense resources league;
' Prudence and passion, frankness and intrigue;
' All parts in happiest unison progress;
' In every State we seem to meet success;
' The long-sought end within our reach appears;
' Secure, we give the idle wind our fears;
' Glowing with joy, extend the expectant hand,
' And half secure the boon, the prize command; --
' When, unforeseen, some hidden strength prevails,
' Our prospects perish, and our project fails.
' Is there (which yet I question if there be)
' Some Power, exalted over Time and me?
' One who, with every wickedness at war,
' Still makes the virtuous his unceasing care;
' Supports their souls 'mid danger's fierce alarms,
' And guards them safe from sorrows and from harms?
' Who gives to Truth the blessed reward of joy,
' And bids the arts of Vice its peace destroy?
' -- No! -- still be this of vulgar tongues the theme;
' Let Priests, and men priest-ridden, hug the dream:
' Nature alike her various bounty grants;
' With equal care supplies her children's wants,
' Whether, of Christian or of Pagan race,
' To Christ or Brahma they their tenets trace;
' Or whether, following their forefather's path,
' They bow to Moses' or Mohammed's faith.
' From action, not belief, their good they gain,
' And Industry and Art the prize obtain:
' Superior power from art superior flows;
' He best can govern men, the most who knows.
' Such are my thoughts -- yet some mysterious power
' On all my noblest efforts seems to lour:
' Untoward Fate, or all-deciding Chance,
' Bids with slow steps my mighty schemes advance;
' And though, with Cunning, Industry conspires,
' Still damps, with long delay, my glorious fires.
' Of late, how vast the prospect rose to view,
' When last each chieftain to his post withdrew!
' When union'd councils promised bright success,
' And favoring Fortune seemed to woo and bless!
' And now in order meet, and due array,
' Art after art commenced our bold display;
' Month following month new promises arose,
' Portentous omens to suspectless foes;
' Events unhop'd for came to aid our cause,
' And foil, in our behalf, opposing laws.
' Yet, ah! when flattering thus our fortunes shone,
' Their splendor lessened, from some cause unknown;
' And faint, and fainter now, alas! they fade,
' While frowning storms our fairest skies invade.
' Yet not entirely were the cause overthrown,
' But every chief seems stupefied to stone;
' Action, suspended, rests; one listless soul
' Throughout infests the wide and torpid whole:
' Else why, neglected, should events arise,
' Which, ably used, might near secure the prize?
' Events, which, molded by our plastic care,
' Would all our worst disasters well repair.
' But does not Self each hero's bosom fire?
' And shall that vital spark, subdued, expire?
' Expire, while countless honors live to crown
' Its bold exertions with deserved renown?
' Yes, let the rich abjure, the poor despise;
' It Is Self alone which charms each mortal's eyes.
' By this pressed on, we every danger dare,
' In peace that is hidden, or revealed in war.
' Still then shall men, with pride enormous, boast
' Of souls, to all but public welfare lost?
' And though in one dull course they onward move,
' Unsway'd by threatened wrath, or proffered love,
' The idle farce of Patriotism sustain,
' And bask in all the sunny light of gain?
' Fierce indignation rises in my breast
' When I behold their toils by Fortune blessed:
' While we, who vary as each coming day
' In different forms shall public will display --
' And strive, beneath this mask of patriot zeal,
' Our proud aspiring wishes to conceal --
' Or yet, with show of independent mind,
' Still find the bright reward before us fly,
' And rigid Fate each fond request deny.
' And such must be the cursed estate of those
' Whose exaltation from the people flows;
' Who on their fickle voice for power depend;
' Servants to all, yet calling each a friend.
' But O when titled place, and gainful might,
' Over a whole realm maintain usurped right,
' How blessed the man who revels in the joy,
' With strength to make, and vigor to destroy!
' And thanks be thine, O CUNNING! Goddess dear!
' If, though remote, for me such good appear.
' Yes, fond Presumption bids me hope, ere long,
' Aided by thee, to bend the vulgar throng;
' With titled friends, in pomp sublime, to move,
' And hold by Fear what now I gain by Love.
' For though self-interest all my actions sway,
' Nor other motive these my friends obey,
' Yet mutual interest here with pers'nal blends,
' And mutual aid subserves our private ends.
' Each seeks for power, yet each perceives how vain
' Would be the struggle, place or power to gain,
' Without the aid of others to procure,
' Without the aid of others to insure.
' Most fortunate in this my hopes appear;
' Blessed be thy name, O CUNNING! Goddess dear!
' Wherever I look, dependents greet my view,
' Powerful to serve, to all my wishes true.
' Their friend I seem; I aid their petty suits;
' Yet draw, from all their toils, the noblest fruits:
' Nor most distinguished 'mid the mighty whole,
' Yet guide their force, and act the moving soul.
' But why, O why so languid and so slow?
' Why rage they not with action's fiercest glow?
' Now, when events so full of promise rise,
' And clothe in brighter hues our changeful skies?
' Alas! I fear some newfound motives sway
' To other schemes their selfish minds astray;
' Some fairer project leagues with adverse powers
' Those very souls the most engaged in ours.'
' He paused, as lost in thought; then, lifting high
' His hand, while lightnings flashed from either eye --
' By every Power of Hell (if such there are)
' And by my mightier, dearer Self, I swear!
' If once they swerve -- from me no after aid
' Shall any gain; but, all their wiles displayed,
' The astonished people shall their purpose know,
' Though, lost, I sink beneath the whelming woe.' Every literary reader will
admire the accuracy and taste with which our author has, in this speech of his
hero, imitated the pure models of antiquity, and the most celebrated epic poets
of modern ages. The striking turns of thought, and variations of passion, which
appear throughout -- even the very inconsistencies themselves of ARISTUS --
indicate the most profound knowledge of the human heart, as well as a judgment
formed according to the unadulterated rules of the anti^^^

Thus, pressed with various cares, ARISTUS strayed;
And now his footsteps sought the thicker shade,
Where deeper darkness reigned, with stillness joined,
Luring to gravest thought the anxious mind.
And now, where central fire and Night profound
In ten-fold horror lowest Hell surround,
' Mid Pan demonium's walls, in awful state,
High on a throne exalted, SATAN sat.
Around, in order meet, on either hand.
Powers and Dominions, Thrones and Princes stand:
Asphaltic lamps, with intermitting light,
(A sickly ray!) shot through encircling Night:
All were attentive: -- when, in accents dread,
Shaking the sable horrors of his head,
The fearful silence thus the Monarch broke,
And Hell's unfathomed caverns shudder'd as he spoke: --
' Tartarean Potentates, submissive hear!
' And you, ye tenants of the nether sphere!
' While, not unwilling, now your King unfolds
' The secret purpose which his bosom holds.
' Since, sprung from Chaos, self-supported stood
' The earth, and round it rolled the subject flood,
' Ye know, O Powers! with what embitter'd rage,
' Against man, and his proud Maker, war we wage.
' How vast our triumphs, every fiend can tell,
' Who views the fiercely-flaming lakes of hell.
' Disease and Death we introduced, and made
' Unseemly sorrow Heaven's high courts invade;
' And, while his angels wept, man's overthrow
' Hung round the ETERNAL's throne the gloom of woe;
' And (height of victory! our glory's crown!)
' Bade on the cross expire his loved, his only SON.
' Nor hence, in faith's and prophecy's despite,
' Around the globe has ever declined my might.
' Beneath my yoke see Europe sinking low,
' And Asia stoop, and feeble Afric bow,
' Over half the western world my sway extends,
' And, slowly yielding, now the other bends.
' This to promote, new projects now I frame:
' For this, attention to my voice I claim.
' Wide spread over fair Columbia, clothed with power,
' And strength obtaining each swift passing hour,
' What names revered, subservient to my sway,
' Rise, and increase with each successive day!
' Long have I seen, with heart-distracting grief,
' That land to all distressed extend relief;
' Seen sacred order every boon bestow,
' And drive far distant every threatening foe.
' I feared that there, indeed, at length would rise,
' Beloved of men, and cherished by the SKIES,
' A mighty Empire, whose resistless force,
' The world involving in its spreading course,
' Beneath one plan would every State combine,
' The good of man their great, their sole design;
' And hence would flow wealth, liberty, and ease,
' And all earth hail the reign of moral peace.
' But, lo! to Hell more pleasant prospects shine,
' And fair Columbia hastens to be mine.
' Even now, immersed in dark surrounding shade,
' ARISTUS roams, the spirit and the head.
' His mighty soul now labors to extend
' My spreading sway, himself my dearest friend:
' Roused by his arts, through each divided State,
' Obedient to his will, of influence great,
' At whose command the stubborn people move,
' Their power his union'd friends with zeal improve.
' And now, from Europe's shores, the obedient wind
' Wafts to their aid, of no discordant mind,
' A chosen Chief: For an attempt to explain this circumstance, see Preface.
The additional lines, descriptive of the joy of the people, firing of cannon,
etc. must have existed only in the imagination of the Poet, since nothing of
the kind did happen at the time referred to.
--
' Even now his anchors bite the joyful strand,
' And, hark! the people welcome him to land:
' The thundering cannon from their ramparts roar,
' And shouts redoubled shake the trembling shore.
' And you, ye Powers! be 't yours with every art
' To gain fresh converts, and fresh aid impart;
' Assistant rumors and deceptions frame,
' And every soul with newborn rage inflame.
' And be ye faithful -- for, by Hell I swear,
' What Power soever to thwart my will shall dare,
' In fiercest league with Heaven's eternal ire
' The quenchless flames of Hades shall conspire
' To whelm the wretch; who, deep in rain hurled,
' Shall prove the immeasurable wrath of either world.'
He ended threatening -- and terrific struck
His trined spear against the flaming rock
Whereon his throne uprose. The Powers around
In wild dismay swift vanished at the sound:
All Hell with horror shudder'd -- while a stream,
To Earth far shot, of pale sulphurous flame,
With momentary ray illum'd the shade
Where, lost in thought, the sad ARISTUS strayed.
A secret hope quick filled his throbbing breast,
And homeward now with eager haste he pressed:
For black and stormy Night around him roars,
And -- 's billows thunder on his shores. Before the reader passes on to a
future Book, it may be proper to remark, -- That the commendations on the
execution of this Poem are by no means meant as extended to the sentiments
therein expressed. This, the Editor trusts, is sufficiently apparent from his
Preface. Such exclamations of admiration as the author forces from us by the
charms of his verse, may be passed over, without their being looked upon as any
way implicating us in the villainy of the friends of ARISTUS And here it
becomes us to give the author all due credit for the sublime use he has made of
machinery so common as that of the infernal regions. But while the editor
beholds it with wonder, he confesses his inability to explain the difficulty,
which is apparent, in endeavoring to account for its particular application in
this Poem, and by a professed friend of the heroes celebrated. Perhaps the
reader will think some light is thrown upon this dark subject in the succeeding
Books.

END OF BOOK FIRST.

