ARISTOCRACY. AN EPIC POEM.

-- DEBELLARE SUPERBOS.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE favorable reception which the First Book of ARISTOCRACY has met with from
an indulgent Public, encourages the Editor to proceed in the Publication; and,
agreeable to his engagement, to present the Second Book to the notice of his
Fellow-Citizens. As he expected, various judgments have appeared respecting the
Work; but he is happy to observe that all have not misapprehended him. While he
acknowledges, with gratitude, his obligations to some, who have been pleased to
express themselves favorably of his principles and design, he thinks it his
duty to declare that he has been grossly misconceived by others: and he further
esteems it incumbent upon him to make known his determination not to be
deterred from the exercise of, what he considers, an inalienable right, by the
threatened, or actual, interference of any man; how highly soever he may rank
in the good opinion of a certain description of Americans.

PHILADELPHIA, March 26th, 1795.
ARISTOCRACY. BOOK SECOND.
WASHED by the tempest of the gloomy night,
Mild rose the morn, in blushing beauty bright.
Cheerful the hinds awake, from short repose,
Cheerful the city's busy swarms arose.
But, on his couch, to troublous dreams a prey,
In interrupted sleep, ARISTUS lay.
Vainly he languish'd for refreshing rest --
Unkind deserter of the anxious breast --
And vainly strove in Lethean dews to steep
Th'increasing woes of his perturbed sleep;
When now, from SATAN sent, a bolder dream,
On quivering wings, with ampler message came;
And, lightly hovering over th'unconscious Sage,
Bade visionary scenes his mind engage.
ARISTUS saw -- when lo! before his eyes,
A stately dome majestic seemed to rise:
Wide opes the portal, wide the hall expands,
And, full in view, a sumptuous banquet stands.
Around, of various ages, different tongues,
From many doors, rush in the numerous throngs;
And, with obeisance low, and studied phrase,
Of endless gratitude, and pompous praise,
To one, unknown, aloft, to view displayed,
The gathering crowd their uncouth homage paid.
Astonished at a scene so strange, the Chief
Dared not withhold, yet scarce could grant belief;
And round him looked, with anxious doubts oppressed --
When thus the MAN unknown the Chief addressed.
"Why stands ARISTUS wrapped in mute suspense?
"Why bears he still this lethargy of sense?
"Rouse thee ARISTUS! burst thy slothful bands!
"Thy genius asks it, and the time demands.
"Behold, from distant -- 's favoring realm,
"I come, in might thy rivals to o'erwnelm.
"By me shall Order's tyrant spells be broke -- "
The Vision vanished, and the Hero 'woke.
As when an army, far from friendly aid,
Retiring, flee the land they dared invade;
And, night succeeding night, a short repose,
Prone on his arms, is all the warrior knows;
What time the morning casts a doubtful gleam,
Hear sudden burst the foe's revengeful scream;
The loud drums beat, sonorous trumpets sound;
Rude clash of arms, and horses shake the ground;
Start from deluding sleep, and rush to war --
So, from his couch, ARISTUS sprang -- with fear.
What could the portent mean? In deep amaze,
He turns it in his mind a thousand ways;
Doubt after doubt disturbs his laboring brain;
And all his long conjectures prove in vain.
At length, joy-stricken, and with glad surprise,
"Can it be so?" the enraptured hero cries --
"O if it be, in nature's ample round,
"Blessed as ARISTUS, can there one be found?"
Scarce had he ended, when the door expands,
And in his presence faithful Janus stands.
"O Chief beloved!" began the duteous slave --
"Your kind attention let your servant crave.
"A gallant vessel, from the -- shore,
"The gale of eve within our harbor bore.
"Strait to the strand our eager townsmen fly,
"And raise to Heaven the loud, rejoicing cry:
"The crew re-echo, and, with agile bound,
"Spring from the lofty sides, and tread the ground.
"Upon the distant deck, of noblest height,
"A man majestic met our wondering sight;
"Who, slow descending, with a splendid train,
"Seemed proudly pleased, our peaceful shore to gain.
"ENVOY to us, we learnt, the stranger came:
"Each breast with rapture kindled at his name:
"Loud thundering cannon hailed him to our shore,
"And shouting thousands to his mansion bore;
"And, on this day, this morn, with costly ear,
"A feast fraternal for his sake prepare Notwithstanding the remarkable
coincidence of this relation with the passage, in the speech of SATAN, noticed
in the First Book, the Editor, (from the difficulty he meets with in attempting
to connect these circumstances with the arrival of any Foreigner to this
country) still adheres to his opinion -- That they are mere poetical additions
to the fact.
."
As one, who meets a serpent in his way,
Stands riveted to earth, in pale dismay;
But, slow recovering from his icy dread,
Exclaims in rapture when he finds it dead;
So fared the Chief: his soul within him died,
So near the vision with the truth allied Behold here a new proof of the Poet's
profound knowledge of the human heart. ARISTUS, who believes neither in the
existence of God, or Futurity, this very ARISTUS is terrified by a dream. An
accidental resemblance between what past in sleep, and what took place in
reality, shakes his soul with dread, who fears not to deny an intelligent
Creator. -- O mad philosophy!
;"
But, when he found his warmest hopes surpast,
Aside the apprehensive gloom he cast;
Bade faithful Janus from the room depart,
And feasted on the rapture of his heart:
Then, issuing forth, exulting in his thought,
High on his chariot throned, the neighboring city sought.
Meantime, with busy care, and zealous haste,
The people strove to build the rich repast.
Three days of feasting all the city knew,
Nor on the fourth to homely fare withdrew.
But thou, O Muse, the tedious task forego
To deck, in lofty verse, the loathsome show;
Waste not thy powers over Bacchanalian boards;
Kings be thy theme -- Chiefs, Ministers, and Lords.
Yet say, O say, when now from crowds retired,
Crowds who his person gazed, his speech admired,
What thoughts within the ENVOY'S bosom dwelt,
What hopes he harbored, and what wishes felt.
Silent a while the lonely room he cours'd,
Then, from his lips, these accents, joyful, burst.
"O glorious presage of most sure success!
"What aid unlooked for comes, my cause to bless!
"O fortune happier, more resplendent, far,
"Than all the trophies of victorious war!
"The recompense of art, how high, how great!
"Thy art, --, wise Minister of State.
"Great was the project, and profound the plan,
"The fairest empire since the world began,
"With rude division, in the midst to tear,
"And to ourselves secure the noblest share.
"Wonderful thought! but Fate's severe decree
"Withheld the blessed accomplishment from thee.
"By thee the deep foundation firm was laid,
"And by thy hands the mighty arches made;
"But I, more glorious in my nation's eyes,
"Shall bid the superstructure reach the skies.
"Thou, luckless Sage! wast fated to contend,
"And find a foe in him supposed thy friend;
"But I, more happy, see no power oppose,
"Even those I feared seem changed, to friends, from foes.
"Two men, at most, thy mighty plans despoiled;
"While, for my sake, a nation has run wild.
"Statesman revered! from thine eternal home,
"Behold the hour of bright success has come;
"Nor turn astonished, though thou chance to see
"Thy disappointed schemes succeed with me There is no passage, in the whole of
this Poem, which has appeared more obscure to the Editor than the foregoing.
The blank might readily be filled by inserting the name Dundas -- as that is
the name of a well-known Minister of State; and moreover the disposition of the
syllables is agreeable to the melody of the verse. But the apostrophe to the
Spirit of this Minister (whoever he is) forms an objection to the idea of its
being Mr. Dundas, as he is still living. On consulting a literary friend, to
whom I showed this Book, as I was preparing the notes, etc. -- and stating my
difficulties in attempting to solve the question -- he suggested, that,
possibly, a recurrence to the History of the Treaty of (...) of 1732, might
afford a solution. -- The reader must determine.
.
"Thy pupil I, with all thy wisdom fraught;
"Taught by thy lessons, by thine errors taught.
"Thou know the Statesman owns no binding rules,
"Learnt in the precincts of pedantic schools;
"Nor heeds opinions which would bind his faith
"To one sole master, one unvarying path;
"But, as his interest and his judgment guide,
"Forsakes the weaker for the stronger side;
"Abjures this hour what he maintained the last,
"And mourns, in outward guise, his follies past.
"Kings, Lords, or People, as their powers prevail,
"Still ever find him in the heavier scale;
"And now, with duteous loyalty he bends;
"Now, seems devoted to his patrons' ends;
"And bellows now, among the people's friends.
"Nor less does he conform, as best befalls,
"To those, mid whom his fate as Envoy calls;
"A Courtier there, all frippery and grimace;
"Here a bald Patriot, stripped of gaudy lace,
"Cropped hair, unpowder'd, and unshaven face;
"His form and language fitting each extreme,
"His good, his object -- theirs, his constant theme.
"Nor to externals is his truth confined;
"Interest more strong than flattering words can bind.
"This well considered, faithfully applied,
"Instant, what legions range upon my side.
"Where men are free, how powerful is the press!
"If fitly gained, how certain is success!
"Some proper presents to their ^^^ess, shall raise
"The noisy vulgar to be loud in praise.
"And lo! wherever I move, around they throng,
"My name and fame, the burden of their song;
"Feast follows feast, and, as my voice declares,
"Patriot or traitor, every man appears.
"O Goddess! object of my early vows,
"Transcendent CUNNING! deign my cause espouse!
"If former failures have my spirit proved,
"And shown, successless, how sincere I loved;
"If ever on thy shrine my gifts were reared;
"If ever to thy throne my prayers preferred;
"Grant me, O Goddess, in this doomful hour,
"The blessed assistance of thy favoring power!
"O bid delusion, ignorance, and rage,
"And rankling envy, in my cause engage!
"So shall thy servant to thy next decree,
"Bow the low head, and bend th'obedient knee."
Thus spoke the ENVOY -- while his bosom hides
The guile which over his secret thoughts presides.
With the fifth morn, his home ARISTUS sought;
His heart with joy, with schemes his head was fraught;
For, on that day, his house and social board
Were doomed to greet the ENVOY, by their Lord.
He came; the feast was spread; the generous wine
In the cup sparkles; all their faces shine.
And now the Sun, declining, sought the main,
And eve commenced her mild and sober reign;
Fled were the dishes, and the mingling fume,
Of coffee and tobacco, filled the room;
When, from his lofty seat, the mighty MAN,
To great ARISTUS, earnest, thus began.
"Say, noble Chief, nor deem th'inquiry bold,
"To me, thy country's annals deign t'unfold.
"Her wars and sufferings through the east resound,
"And bear her glory to earth's farthest bound:
"Pale Europe trembles at her growing fame,
"And shuddering views fair freedom's spreading flame:
"Warmed by thy genius, France, (her fetters broke)
"Shakes from her galled neck, the tyrant yoke;
"And, to th'astonish'd universe declares,
"Like you she feels, like you, for freedom, dares Nothing could be more
consistent with the principles on which the ENVOY acted, than this address to
ARISTUS. ARISTUS, the native of a republic, and sustaining an office of high
trust and dignity in the councils of that republic, would not be supposed
hostile to liberty. We shall see, hereafter, with what address he discloses his
real feelings; and how readily the ENVOY, once acquainted with them, adapts his
language and conduct to them.
.
"But of events so glorious, to inquire,
"Would show a careless mind, a mean desire;
"Conspicuous and sublime, they seize the heart,
"Nor ask assistance from th'historian's art.
"No! rather let me learn the secret cause
"Of what exists -- of parties, systems, laws.
"What schemes ambition, rivalry, and sear,
"And pride, and honesty, successive rear.
"In short, from independence, to this hour,
"The varied history of wavering power."
"O Sage renoun'd!" ARISTUS swift replies --
"On actions past I turn unwilling eyes.
"The melancholy tale my grief renews,
"Which briefly now my mournful voice pursues:
"For, had you thrice his patience at command,
"The fabled dweller of the Uzzian land ARISTUS, it is observable, loses no
opportunity of casting contempt on all which is commonly deemed sacred. Such
ever is the spirit of Aristocrats. Having succeeded in gaining a belief of
their superiority over their fellow-mortals, they glory in despising what
others venerate; and having deprived men of their rights, they audaciously
would rob the Deity of his supremacy.
;
"And were my lungs endued with triple strength;
"They both must fail, if all were told at length.
"When now the foe had flown our fatal shore,
"And hostile laws and arms were feared no more,
"The bond of union, common danger wrought,
"Each independent State contemned as naught.
"Provincial jealousies, and personal hate,
"Of ancient origin, and later date,
"Hid, in the struggle for the general weal,
"No longer could their hateful forms conceal.
"Passions, opinions, interests, mingling, warred,
"'Till frightened Peace for distant flight prepared.
"A passing mention, given to each, will show
"All that is useful, at this hour, to know;
"And well will point, with what succeeds combined,
"To present knowledge thy discerning mind.
"For this, great ENVOY, with attentive ear,
"The brief, but just, enumeration hear.
"The friends of Britain, ere the war began;
"With those, who, fearful, from the contest ran:
" Men, sore chagrin'd, their mounting wishes crossed;
"And Men, who venturing all, that all had lost:
"Honest of heart, but obstinate of head,
"And by the craft of subtiler men misled,
" Those, who each State a separate State desired;
"Who thought -- (their brains by wild ideas fired)
"That virtue dwelt in rustic guise alone,
"To science, arts, and polisht life, unknown;
"With those, who hoped, by aid of these to rise,
"The nine-days' wonder of admiring eyes;
"The petty lordlings of a petty town:
"With these, be joined, the pedant and the clown --
" That, who would go the way his fathers went;
"And this, on endless innovation bent:
"To these more powerful partisans succeed,
"A people's formidable foes decreed,
" Spirits, once banished the restraints of law,
"Who but in anarchy their interests saw;
"And souls, disdaining ever to obey,
"Who hoped to rear an oligarchic sway:
"All these, with subdivisions, endless, vexed,
"The agitated Nation long perplexed.
"Loud howled the storm; -- in each divided State,
"Four demons urged the furious work of fate.
"TENDER, who laughs at violated right:
"UNFUNDED PAPER, imp of stygian night;
"Fierce COMMUTATION, with a hundred tongues,
"Sounding the peal of visionary wrongs;
"EXCISE and IMPOST, brother friends accursed;
"TESTS, by wild-ey'd Fanaticism nursed;
"And DEBT, the Monster, whose terrific mouth
"Threatened engulphment to to the tardy South;
"With thousand others, whose misshapen frame
"Still balks description, and still wants a name We observe the Aristocrat
throughout this passage. ARISTUS gradually discovers himself to the ENVOY.
Unfunded Paper is ranked among the plagues of a country. Excise and Impost,
too, are put in the list; but the real meaning must be shown. ARISTUS is
speaking of the times preceding the present Constitution, when an unequal
Impost and Excise were levied in several of the States. This it is that excites
his hate; not that universal burden, under which, good democrats now groan.
.
"While thus, from day to day, from hour to hour,
"Dissension gathered an increasing power;
"The Nation's Council slighted or condemned,
"Its calls unheeded, its requests contemned;
"While State with State, by clashing views enraged,
"And selfish (...) -- in contests fierce engaged;
"And each, at home, to discord dire a prey,
"Saw threatening clouds deform the beauteous day;
"As the last project to protract their fate,
"The self-call'd This seems to be a very awkward and obscure sneer upon the
Federal Convention of 1787; the epithet "self-call'd" being equivocal; though
designed, as I suppose, to convey the same meaning with the French expression
soi-disant. ARISTUS, the enemy of Republicanism, (...) involve, in one general
censure, all who savor it, in any shape.
sages of the nation met.
"(The pledge his honor) -- whatsoever he hears --
"Or who the speaker, every statesman swears,
"Whatever the import, from his friends or foes,
"No power on earth shall tempt him to disclose.
"O farce ridiculous! a statesman's oath!
"A statesman's honor! shallow, shallow both!
"This ******* proves, who held the bond so light,
"He scarce preserved it for a single night.
"Nor longer much, though bound by every tie,
"Sacred in honor's and in friendship's eye,
"The far-fam'd Sage, **'s chosen one,
"That prince of turn-coats, peerless ***.
"Of these enough; a different scene, erewhile,
"Shall greet thine eye, and wake th'approving smile:
"Nor need we fear, if ever our purpose ask
"Their plausive aid, to load them with the task.
"Meantime, convened, th'assembled nation sat,
"And opened, in solemn form, the grave debate.
"Long were their toils" -- "But where," the ENVOY cries,
"Where was ARISTUS?" Swift the Chief replies --
"Exalted MAN! forgive my wounded pride,
"Which still its sore chagrins would seek to hide.
"O could thou think it? -- yet, by Hell Profanity -- another characteristic
of Aristocracy: this is the second time that ARISTUS has sworn by Hell.
Profanity, I have been told, was deemed by him a desirable accomplishment: nay,
I have somewhere heard that he even thought it an essential part of female
education.
, it is true --
"Cursed be the occasion, and the rival too!
"Yes -- though as yet upon my chin appeared
"But youthful down, my ardent sword I reared,
"And rushed to combat in my country's cause;
"(For thus was called, my passion for applause --)
"Yet was I lest, neglected, and alone,
"While HE, capricious Fortune's favored son,
"Lost be the memory of his hated name!
"Who still precedes me in the walks of fame;
"Who, as I mount, still towr's above my flight,
"With Jacob-craft*, despoiled me of my right."
Here tears of anguish, such as, erst, in Heaven,
When from their seats his haughty powers were driven,
From SATAN fell -- ARISTUS shed: his rage,
The bitter drops, slow falling, half assuage;
And now, in some faint sort, his calm renewed,
The interrupted tale he thus pursued.
"Long were their toils, their very walls within,
"Discordant interests kept perpetual din;
"Systems, opinions, facts, in ferment strange,
"Now here, now there, their several powers arrange;
"Those ask too much, and these too little give,
"Some credit all, and some will none believe.
"At length the offspring of their union'd might,
"Bursting its prison doors, arose to light;
"Republican proclaimed -- though (half revealed)
"Its robe, one badge of slavery ill concealed;
"Yet so robust of form, that all might say,
"Such strength, with ease, could tear the badge away. --
"And now, through jealousy, or fear, or hate,
"Fierce opposition rose in many a State:
"Furious were all, and 'mid the foremost those
"Who at the birth had labored to oppose.
"GERRY, whose altered mind, in one short year,
"Led him its firm supporter to appear:
"Poor YATES, and LANSING obstinate and warm,
"Once prejudiced, whose spleen no art can charm:
"Thee, LUTHER MARTIN, whose loquacious tongue,
"Thy State throughout, the loud alarm rung:
"But chiefly thee, implacable of zeal,
"Redoubted MASON! challenger of steel!
"With Cutting-box, in letters large, thy Hand
"Long time spread terror through th'astonish'd land. --
"Nor with less fury fresh opponents rose,
"Foes to itself, or to its framers foes;
"Some, long since, steeped in dull oblivion's stream,
"And some, still known to memory by name.
"A few, by changing, or by constant hate,
"Yet held aloft, and ranked among the great. -- An early religious education
supplies ARISTUS with numerous (...) allusions; yet observe how careful he is
to show his contempt for the principles in which he was instructed, by his
parents.

"But these to name would ampler time demand;
"The event, well known to every distant land,
"Asks not the detail, nor requires the care" --
"But where," the ENVOY cries, "ah tell me where!
"Where was ARISTUS? Which contending side
"Chose thee its guardian, genius, glory, guide?"
"O MAN revered!" -- the Hero swift returned --
Red were his eyes, his cheeks with anger burned;
"Silent, at home, neglected, I remained;
"Nor added fortunes, nor distinctions gained."
"And what the cause?" the ENVOY quick demands.
Solemn, ARISTNS lifts on high his hands --
"Were not my prospects dressed in livelier hue,"
He cries, "I well might bid a long adieu,
"A lasting farewell, to all craftful aid;
"Craft then so ill, my numerous cares repaid. --
"Silence, I hoped, whatever the event should prove,
"Would still secure me either party's love. --
"Alas! by each distrusted or abjured,
"I long their hate or their neglect endured.
"Thanks be to CUNNING, whose returning aid,
"Again has raised me, from misfortune's shade;
"Firm in my cause a numerous host allied,
"Their guardian I -- their genius, glory, guide.
"But turn we now -- behold, with wondering eyes,
"From Chaos' realms, a realm well ordered rise;
"An Empire organized now starts to birth;
"A Phoenix 'mid the empires of the earth. --
-- "Cursed be the hour! forever cursed the day!
"Annual, thou Sun, withhold thy gladsome ray!
"Vanish ye stars! thou moon, thy beams deny!
"And let substantial night begloom the sky! --
-- "Those most abhorred, detested by my soul,
"Armed with fresh power, the western world control:
"HE, to whose love a rival was preferred;
"And HE, the rival who my progress barred;
"Out-step'd me first, and all my after days,
"In camp and forum, bore away the praise.
"From hence, great ENVOY of a people kind,
"Thou see confirmed my doubtful, wavering mind.
"Hopeless the summit of that power to gain,
"Which, with such care, I labored to obtain;
"Behold me now the foremost to oppose
"Leagued with the deadliest of its constant foes.
"Deep rankling in my breast, to grief a prey,
"My hated rival's high advancement lay:
"Should chance remove him from his lofty place,
"And, (what I wished) my name the title grace,
"Still would the memory of his earlier fame,
"Blast all my joys, and tarnish all my name.
"What then remained? What purpose, project, plan,
"Might bow the statesman, and disgrace the man?
"Could I, superior, over my rival rise,
"Next to his Patron in the people's eyes --
"Then might I hope the Empire's highest seat;
"Then see my rival humbled at my feet;
"The utmost object of my vows be found:
"And pride, ambition, and revenge, he crowned.
"But, if successless, with redoubled might,
"Each marshalled band should urge the unceasing fight,
"'Till, tottering, from its base, the Fabric fall;
"Destruction's giant mace demolish all;
"While from the ruins, our invigor'd sway,
"Should rear an oligarchie dome to mock the day.
"Such resolutions working in my breast,
"Disturbed my days, my nights deprived of rest;
"For now my soul no glittering prospect cheered,
"Nor blissful presage of success appeared;
"Fancy's gay pictures far and farther fled;
"Dampt were my transports, almost hope was dead.
"But then, when sinking 'neath increasing woes,
"Nor chance seemed left of triumph over my foes,
"Effulgent, from his cloud, the sun of joy
"Burst -- and, with dazzling glory, through the sky,
"Urging his beauteous and resplendent way,
"Dispelled the mists of grief that long obscured my day.
"Nor think, Gay Dweller of our sober shore,
"Fancy's fond dream I spread thine eyes before;
"But mark, from hence, events how wondrous spring,
"And to thy aid unnumber'd forces bring:
"Yes, to thy aid, if silent thou, and bold.
"Firm in our cause thy riper purpose hold.
"Well ordered, now, intelligent, discreet,
"The new-form'd Councils amicably meet;
"Mutual indulgence, mutual candor, shine;
"And gentlest temper, more than half divine.
"Wide spread the tidings, ecstacy and love
"Grow strong, and little jealousies remove.
"Dumb were opposers, stopped the slanderous mouth;
"The North was silent, silent was the South;
"Deep in her cavern, PARTY, with her train,
"Sunk, in despair her empire to regain.
"Hark! what dread sounds the startled ear arrest?
"Lo! what fell forms the Councils fierce invest!
"Loud roars the fearful din; around,
"The walls with clamor and with rage resound;
"Full in the midst, aloft see PARTY rear
"Her hateful form, -- and lo! her train appear!
"O ***! thou lost, thou wretched man!
"Thou who wast formed on Nature's amplest plan!
"Thy mind with learning's richest treasures fraught:
"And made more rich by thy energic thought:
"Thou on whose voice a listening nation hung,
"Blessed but to hear the accents of thy tongue;
"Whose grateful hearts with earnest wishes beat,
"To see thee deck their empire's highest seat;
"Who thought no gift too mighty for thy worth,
"And deemed thy country blessed to give thee birth;
"Who, at each eve, at each returning morn,
"Asked Heaven thy life with glory to adorn; --
"O most unhappy! what disastrous force,
"Far from the right impelled thy devious course?
"What envious demon urged thee to destroy
"Thy growing hopes, a people's growing joy?
"Say, what infernal what malicious fiend,
"With hellish arts divorced thee from thy friend;
"And, from thy heart, in one detested day,
"Rent honor, truth, and happiness, away?
-- "Awed by his genius, by his fame outshone,
"A blow so dire, with glory, I might own;
"Have triumphed in his pain, and rose more bright,
"At his declining and enfeebled light:
-- "But thou, who every saint, (if saints there are),
"Had heard unending, changeless, friendship swear;
"Who each returning eve, each daily sun,
"With him beheld, in council, action, one; --
"Sure on thy face should sit enduring shame,
"Remorseful anguish shake thy guilty frame,
"And infamy eternal blast thy name.
"Now hope revived, and hence increasing power
"Marks our swift progress to the present hour.
"Once, to their force, so great a leader found,
"At home revered, and through the realm renowned,
"Aside th'opposers their concealment threw,
"And fired with tenfold rage the war renew.
"But HE, from whom their hope and courage flowed
"Not yet in open opposition glowed;
"The veil of candor still concealed his aim; --
"Candor his once -- and well established fame:
"Timid of heart, implacable of soul,
"Long, over his speech, his fears maintain control.
"But lo, from Europe, now a Chief returns,
"Within whose breast undaunted courage burns;
"Who, with the force with which his mind conceives,
"To his bold thoughts the aid of action gives;
"And, well instructed in the courtier's art,
"Pursues, remorseless, a determined part. --
"Now friends increase, and see, in every state,
"Where naught but fulsome praise was heard of late,
"The groaning press discharge its factious load,
"And spread its venomed slanders all abroad. --
"Drawn from his hole, unwilling SINBAT see,
"Lured by the golden treachery of a fee;
"His Master's spirit guides his venal press;
"His prose stalks forth in starch and pompous dress;
"Soft tinkling rhimes with leaden luster glow;
"And froth and calumny the land overflow.
"Swift from my prospect now the clouds withdrew,
"And future glories opened on my view;
"Nor did I fail to bless the bounteous day;
"But well resolved to brook no more delay,
"I tried each art, each known expedient used,
"Here favors offered, terrors there infused;
"'Till from his seat, an absent rival thrown,
"I found the hard-earn'd dignity my own.
"Hence a kind presage of success I drew;
"More firmly fixed my purpose to pursue.
"Still to be gained superior power appeared;
"When he should fear me, whom I long had feared.
"But yet no system gave our scattered bands
"The strength which every arduous task demands;
"Scarce to each other were the leaders known,
"Or yet their interests deemed alike, and one.
"Mark then, while I the secret source disclose
"Whence the first compact of our forces rose.
"Thrice had the Sun his annual circuit traced
"And half of his remaining distance passed,
"Whose hoped completion brings the joyful day,
"The sure renewer of expiring sway.
"Think, thou exalted, thou attentive, SAGE,
"What fears, what wishes, in my bosom rage:
"Each artifice I used, employed each plan,
"That ever was practiced, or devised by man;
"Yet was I forced my warmest wish to hide,
"Delay's soul-piercing injury abide;
"And all my power, and all my art, to bend,
"A wretch I loathed and hated to befriend."
Here paused the Chief: with grief and rage oppressed,
Deep sighs convulse his swelling, laboring breast;
Tears fill his eyes: but shame, and native pride,
Aid him in silence his distress to hide;
A feeble smile his countenance illum'd,
While thus th'unfinish'd story he resumed.
END of BOOK SECOND

