THE PROPHECIES, OF RICHARD BROTHERS.

RICHARD BROTHERS.


GOD's AWFUL WARNINGS TO A GIDDY, CARELESS, SINFUL WORLD. BEING A Revealed
Knowledge OF THE PROPHECIES AND TIMES, PARTICULARLY OF THE PRESENT TIME, THE
PRESENT WAR, AND THE PROPHECY NOW FULFILLING. (YEAR OF THE WORLD 5913.)

WRITTEN UNDER THE DIRECTION OF THE LORD GOD. AND PUBLISHED BY HIS SACRED
COMMAND. BY RICHARD BROTHERS.

(...) GOD SAID "LET THERE BE LIGHT."

LONDON -- PRINTED IN THE YEAR OF CHRIST (...) PRINTED BY (...) FOR (...) OF
(...) YORK. 1795.

CONTENTS.
BOOK FIRST.
BEING the first Sign of Warning for the Benefit of all Nations; containing,
among other great and remarkable Things, the Restoration of the Hebrews to
Jerusalem, by the Year 1798, -- under their revealed Prince and Prophet,
RICHARD BROTHERS.

PREFACE.
WHEN I was commanded to write the Chronology of the World, I was immediately
after instructed by Revelation how; without which I could not, nor could any
other Man on the ^ace of the Earth with certainty, however eminent for Wisdom
and Learning he might be: after it was done, the LORD GOD said to me in a
vision at night, -- That is the true Age of the World, and the general computed
one is erroneous.

As the SCRIPTURE is the only great Fountain of Knowledge, or Book of written
Truth in the World; as it contains the sacred Records of those Things which GOD
has predetermined shall be hereafter -- as well as those which have been
already; and as it contains the History of our own Creation, with that of every
living thing besides, It alone, in preference to any Man's opinion, ought to
be, without the least doubt, freely believed and confidently depended on.

Although I am enabled, from revealed Knowledge, to write considerably more
than what this Book contains, and which, in Justice to the Divine Spirit of
Truth from whom it flows, ought to be believed; yet GOD, who instructs me in
all things, that I may show an example of precision to the Learned, and be
admired for it by the Wise; that I may give instruction to the Poor, and
demonstrate the certainty of what I do write to every Man that has the least
knowledge of his Creator, commands me to additionally ^eal its Truth by that
great Testimony of ^criptural ^vidence which no Nation can deny, and which no
human Arguments can oppose.

Therefore, having Authority, I proceed through the Scripture, regularly
uncovering, by revealed knowledge, as I go, its sacred Records WHICH HAVE BEEN
RESERVED FOR ^E, holding each one up for public View, beautiful and clear to
the open mind, that all Men may behold and examine them, that all men may
perceive their Truth and admire, at this late Hour of the World, not only what
was wrote by Daniel at Babylon, EXPLAINED IN LONDON, but likewise a similar
Communication of REVEALED KNOWLEDGE.

IN obedience to the Sacred command of God, whose servant and prophet I am, I
publish this writing, that it may be translated into all languages, for the
information and benefit of all nations.

THE TRUE AGE OF THE WORLD.
Years. Years. Adam was 130 old when Seth was born. -- Lived in all 930 S^th
105 912 Enos 90 905 Cainan 70 910 Mahalaleel 65 895 Jared 162 969 Enoch 65 365
Methuselah 187 969 Lameth 182 777 Noah 500 950 Shem^ as 100 old at the Flood.
1656 from the Creation to the Flood.

The genealogy is reckoned to and from Shem; two years after the flood,
Arphaxad was born to him.

Years. Years. Shem 02 lived after the birth of his son 500 Arphaxad 35 403
Salah 30 403 Eber 34 430 Peleg 30 209 Re^ 32 207 Serug 30 200 Nahor 29 119
Terah 70 lived in all 205 292 from the flood to the birth of Abraham. Abraham
was 100 old when Isaac was born. -- Lived in all 175 Isaac 60 180 Jacob 130 to
his living in Egypt with his children 147 290 430 the children of Israel lived
in ^gypt. 480 from the children of Israel leaving to the foundation of the
Temple.

In the 4th year and * 2d month of Solomon's reign, the foundation of the
Temple was laid.

Years. Years. Solomon reigned 36 after the Temple began building: in all 40
Rehoboam in all 17 began to reign at the age of 41 Abijam 3 As^ 41 Jehoshaphat
25 35 Jehoram 8 32 Ahaziah 1 22 Queen Athaliah 6 Jehoash 40 7 Amaziah 29 25
Azariah 52 16 Jotham 16 25 Ahaz 16 20 Hezekiah 29 25 Manasseh 55 12 Amon 2 22
Josiah 31 8 Jehoahaz 0 3 months 23 Jehoiakim 11 0 25 Jehoiachin 0 3 18 418 6
the beginning of the recorded captivity in the eighth year of Nebuchadnezzar's
reign. Zedekiah Not included in the Chronology.
11 4 429 8 from the foundation of the Temple to its destruction. Nebuchadnezzar
reigned 37 after the recorded captivity began: in all over Babylon 45 (...)
Merodach 11 Belshazzar 22 70 the Jewish captivity at Babylon; that the word of
the Lord to Jeremiah the prophet might be fulfilled, -- which was, -- And all
nations shall serve him, his son, and his son's son. -- Chap. xxvii. 7. 69
Weeks, or 483 Years from the command of Cyrus to restore the Jews to the birth
of Christ, the Messiah and King. 4119 the age of the world when Christ was
born. 1794 5913 the age of the world, this present year of 1794.

The first knowledge of that law, which was committed to writing by Moses, was
given to Abraham at the age of 99; of the world, 2047.

The gospel of salvation was first preached by Christ at the age of 30; of the
world, 4149.

Jerusalem was besieged and taken three different times by Nebuchadnezzar. The
first was in the reign of Jehoiakim, when several of the princes and priests
were carried away to Babylon; among the former was Daniel, and among the latter
was Ezekiel: -- both prophets. The second was in the reign of Jehoiachin, when
the recorded captivity began, and the third was (...) the reign of Zed^kiah,
when the Temple and City were levelled with the ground.

OF THE MESSIAH.
THE PROPHET DANIEL, CHAP. IX. VERSE 25.
KNOW therefore and understand, that from the going forth of the command to
restore (meaning the captivity) and to build Jerusalem to Messiah the Prince,
shall be seven weeks, and threescore and two weeks, the streets shall be built
again, and the wall, even in troublesome times.

Seven weeks and threescore and two weeks, is meant for a time of four hundred
and eighty-three years: which commenced in the first year of Cyrus over
Babylon, when he issued the proclamation to restore the captivity, and
concluded at the birth of Christ.

Two years after the Jews returned from Babylon to Jerusalem they laid the
foundation of the second temple, but were so much interrupted in the building,
as not to be able to complete it until the expiration of eighty-two years.

26 And after threescore and two weeks (which is four hundred and thirty-four
years, meaning from the time the temple was finished to the death of Christ)
shall Messiah be cut off, but not for himself: and the people of the prince
that comes (meaning the Romans) will destroy the city and the sanctuary: it
will be done like the overflowing of a flood; and to the end of war their
desolation is determined.

While war continues in the world, Jerusalem, the capital of the King of Peace
is decreed to lie desolate: the restoration of the Jews will commence with the
destruction of war, to favor their return, and build the city; when all
nations will rejoice with them, and once more receive from Jerusalem the
commands of the living God.

THE PROPHET ISAIAH, CHAP. VII.
14 Therefore the Lord himself will give you a sign: behold, a virgin shall
conceive and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel.

This was the Lord Jesus Christ, who was born of the blessed Virgin, called
Mary.

CHAP. IX.
6 For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the government
shall be on his shoulder: and his name shall be called Wonderful Counselor,
the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace.

This was the Lord Jesus Christ, who was the Messiah and King of the Jews.

7 Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end, upon the
throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with
judgment and with justice, from henceforth, even for ever: the zeal of the Lord
of Hosts will perform this.

THE PROPHET ZECHARIAH, CHAP. XII.
^ And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications: and they shall look to me
that was pierced; and shall mourn, like him that mourns for his only son; and
shall be in bitterness, like him that is in bitterness for his first born.

This verse will be fulfilled by the Jews after their return: it means the Lord
Jesus Christ, who was crucified at the age of thirty-three years and four
months. -- Told me by revelation.

THE DEPARTURE OF THE HEBREWS FROM ALL NATIONS, AND THEIR RETURN TO JERUSALEM.
From the three thousand six hundred and seventeenth year of the world, which
was the third year of Belshazzar King of Babylon, when the vision was shown to
Daniel, of Jerusalem's future desolation, the last dispersion of the Jews, and
their being trod under foot in all nations, to the time of their return in the
latter days, is two thousand three hundred years.

TO make the vision of Daniel, which was explained to me by revelation from the
Lord God, to be more easily understood, read what follows:

The prophet Daniel, after describing the succession of Cyrus and Alexander,
goes on to the time of Christ, the destruction of Jerusalem, and how long it is
to lie desolate; the dispersion of the Jews, and how long they are to be trod
under foot in all nations.

CHAP. VIII.
11 Yea, he magnified himself, even to the Prince of the Host; by him the daily
sacrifice was taken away, and the place of his sanctuary was cast down.

12 And a host was ^en him against the daily sacrifice, by reason of
transgression: and it cast down the truth to the ground, and it practiced and
prospered.

13 Then I heard one saint speaking, and another saint said to that certain
saint which spoke, How long shall be the vision concerning the daily sacrifice,
and the transgression of desolation to give both the sanctuary and the host to
be trodden under foot?

One angel was asking another in the presence of Daniel, that he might hear and
be informed to write down what was said.

The sanctuary meant the second temple, though not built when this vision was
shown to Daniel; the host, the multitude of the people, or the whole nation.

How long shall be the Vision, means, how long is it from this time or year of
showing the Vision to Daniel until it is fulfilled by the restoration of the
Jews in the latter days of the world, when the curse for transgression, which
made the city desolate, will be removed, and the ground of the sanctuary
cleaned.

14 And he said unto me, to two thousand and three hundred days; then shall the
sanctuary be cleaned.

Days are mentioned by the angel instead of years to conceal the meaning of the
prophecy until the proper time is fulfilled, and the appointed person made
known for it to be revealed to: the present is the time that was then intended;
I am the appointed person for it to be revealed to, and the prophet commanded
to make it known.

3017 The year of the world when the vision was shown to Daniel, of Jerusalem's
future desolation, and how long. 2300 From the year of showing the vision, to
the restoration of the Jews, when it will be fulfilled. 5917 The year of the
world, when the Jews will be restored to Jerusalem, which answers to the year
of Christ 1798.

THE RETURN OF THE JEWS TO THEIR OWN LAND IN THE LATTER TIME OF THE WORLD,
RECORDED BY MOSES AND THE OTHER PROPHETS.
THIS Song of Moses, in the thirty-second chapter of Deuteronomy, is the
written testimony given them, between God as Christ, and his people, until
their return to Jerusalem, in the latter days of the world. It begins with
describing Christ preaching the gospel of the kingdom of heaven; afterward the
great destruction of the Jews, which was fulfilled by the Romans, and their
dispersion over the world: the latter part means their restoration, which
invites all nations to rejoice with them for the abundant mercy of God, and his
goodness to their land.

DEUTERONOMY. CHAP. XXXII.
1 Give ear, O ye Heavens, and I will speak; and hear, O earth, the words of my
mouth.

2 My doctrine shall drop as the rain: my speech shall distill as the dew, as
the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon the grass.

3 Because I will publish the name of the Lords ascribe ye greatness to our God.

4 He is the rock, his work is perfect; for all his ways are judgment: a God of
truth, and without iniquity: just and right is be.

Compare this part to the preaching of Christ, in the beginning of the fifth
chapter of the Gospel by St. Matthew, and see how nearly they agree.

21 They have moved me to jealousy with that which is not God: they have
provoked me to anger with their vanities; and I will move them to jealousy with
those which are not a people; I will provoke them to anger with a foolish
nation.

22 For a fire is kindled in mine anger, and shall burn to the lowest ^^ll; and
shall consume the earth with her increase, and set on fire the foundations of
the mountains.

23 I will heap mischiefs upon them: I will spend my arrows upon them.

24 They shall be burnt with hunger, and devoured with burning heat, and with
bitter destruction: I will also send the teeth of beasts upon them, with the
poison of serpents of the dust.

2^ The sword without, and terror within, shall destroy both the young man and
the virgin; the suckling also, with the man of gray hairs.

26 I said, I would scatter them into corners; I would make the remembrance of
them to cease from among men.

27 Were it not that I feared the wrath of the enemy, lest their adversaries
should behave themselves strangely, and lest they should say, Our hand is high,
and the Lord has not done all this.

28 For they are a nation void of counsel: neither is there any understanding
in them.

Had God, in his great anger, destroyed the Jews entirely by the Romans, they
would have ascribed it to their own power; and after nations would not believe
there ever had been such a people on the face of the earth: for which he
dispersed them over the world, to be traveling signs of warning to all
nations, until the determined time of their punishment is expired; when he
will, to fulfill the Scripture, recall them with mercy and everlasting love.

29 O that they were wise, that they understood all this, that they would
consider their latter end.

30 How should one chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight, except
their rock had sold them, and the Lord had shut them up.

36 For the Lord will judge his people, and repent himself of his servants,
when he sees that their power is gone, and there is none shut up or left.

3^ (...) he shall say, where are their gods, their rock in whom they trusted.

38 Which did eat the fat of their sacrifices, and drank the wine of their
drink offering^ Let them rise up and help you, and be your protection.

39 See now, that I, even I am he, (meaning God as Christ, the Messiah,) and
there is no God with me; I kill, and I make alive; I wound, and I heal; neither
is there any that can deliver out of my hand.

40 For I lift up my hand to heaven, and say, I live for ever.

41 If I whet my glittering sword, and my hand take hold on judgment, I will
render vengeance to my enemies, and will reward them that hate me.

42 I will make my arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall devour flesh;
and that with the blood of the slain, and of the captives, from the beginning
of revenges upon the enemy.

43 Rejoice, O ye nations, with his people: for he will avenge the blood of his
servants, and will render vengeance to his adversaries, and will be merciful to
his land, and to his people.

THE PROPHET ISAIAH. CHAP. II.
2 And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord's
house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted
above the hills, and all nations shall flow to it.

3 And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain
of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob: and he will teach us his ways,
and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the (...), and
the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

And he (this prophecy, as every man of understanding in the Scripture must
acknowledge, has never been fulfilled yet; for the time alluded to by the
Prophet, is, according to his own words, in the 2d and 4th verses, in the
latter days of the world: It is a man that is alluded to, composed of flesh and
blood, of the tribe of Judah, of the family of David, and not the Lord Jesus
Christ, as all European nations suppose, that is to fulfill this very exalted
character: going forth by command, and under the mighty power of God, as his
Elijah, the last prophet and messenger, to warn all nations -- to turn the
fathers to the children and the children to the fathers -- to prepare them, by
universal peace, to receive a second time Christ, their God and Creator) shall
judge among the nations and shall rebuke many people; and they shall beat their
swords into ploughshares, and their spears into reaping hooks; nation shall not
lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.

All the nations of Europe acknowledge Christ for the Prince of peace, and that
his doctrine prohibits war; yet to the shame of all nations, they refuse to
obey his commands. For which, as he beseeched before, and no nation would obey,
he will soon command, when all nations must obey, or be burnt with fire.

CHAP. XI.
1 And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch
(meaning myself) shall grow out of his roots:

2 And the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him; the spirit of wisdom and
understanding, the spirit of counsel and might; the spirit of knowledge and of
t^^ fear of the Lord.

3 And shall make him of quick understanding in the fear of the Lord. And he
shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove after the hearing
of his ears:

4 But with righteousness, he will judge the poor, and reprove with equity for
the meek of the earth: and he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth,
and with the breath of his lips he shall slay the wicked.

5 And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the
girdle of his reigns.

6 The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with
the ^id; and the calf, and the young lion, and the fatling together; and little
child shall lead them.

7 And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie down
together: and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.

8 And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned
child shall put his hand on the cockatrice den.

9 They shall not destroy nor hurt in all my holy mountain: for the earth shall
be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea.

10. And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse (meaning myself) which
shall stand for a sign to the people (meaning the Jews) to it shall the
Gentiles seek; and his rest (meaning his government of Jerusalem) shall be
glorious.

When I was writing the first edition of this book, for public information, I
said to God, almost similar to what the prophet Samuel said, when he was
commanded to anoint David to be king of Israel, during the life time of Saul,
for indeed I was fearful of being used i^^ I shall be called a false prophet,
and every body will say, I am arrogating to myself the place of Christ: for the
English and other European nations, professing Christianity, have always
supposed that the rod out of the stem of Jesse, alluded to in this chapter,
meant the Lord Jesus Christ: indeed it does not, but a man composed of flesh
and blood, like one of themselves, who is to be the greatest under heaven, and
more power given to him from God than ever was, or ever will be given to any
other.

Like king David, he will be empowered to command; and like the prophet Elijah
he will be empowered to execute.

The Lord God commands me now to mention these things, to acknowledge the error
(though permitted to remove my unjust apprehensions for the consequences) and
with shame my own criminality for doubting, when he told me and when I knew
from his many records in the Scripture, and from his many revealed promises to
myself -- that he was bound, by the sacred truth of his words, to fulfill his
covenant, and protect me.

This writing I sign and date by command of the Lord God, to remove my feeble
error, and substitute without disguise (for the false opinions of men are to be
changed) his all-just and powerful truth.

RICHARD BROTHERS.
LONDON, 10th of the month called JULY, 1794.
11. And it shall come to pass in that day that the Lord will set his hand
again the second time to recover the remnant of his people, which are left,
from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam,
and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea.

12 And he will set up an ensign for the nations and will assemble the outcasts
of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of
the earth

The first captivity of the Jews was by Nebuchadnezzar, and the second by the
Romans; their residence in Egypt not being the consequence of conquest, is not
accounted as a captivity, because they willingly entered into that country to
be relieved from the distresses of famine in their own. The hard bondage they
were oppressed with proceeded from the Egyptians growing jealous of their quick
multiplication and great numbers: but that did not take place until the death
of Joseph, and until such a considerable time after had elapsed, as to wear
away all remembrance of his name and gratitude for his kindness.

13 The envy also of Ephraim shall depart, and the Adversaries of Judah shall
be cut off: Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim.

14 But they shall fly upon the shoulders of the Philistines toward the west;
they shall spoil them of the east together: they shall lay their hand upon Moab
and Edom; and the children of Ammon shall obey them.

15 And the Lord will utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian Sea: and with
his mighty wind he will shake his hand over the river, and smite it in the
seven streams that men may go over dry-shod.

16 And there shall be a highway from Assyria for the remnant of his people
which are left* like as it was to Israel in the day that he came up from the
land of Egypt.

CHAP. XII.
1 And in that day thou shall say, O Lord, I will praise thee; though thou was
angry with me, thy anger is turned away, and thou comfortest me.

2 Behold God is my salvation; I will trust, and not be afraid: for the Lord
Jehovah is my strength and my song; he also has become my salvation.

Therefore with joy ye shall draw water out of the wells of salvation.

And in that day ye shall say, praise the Lord, call upon his name, declare his
doings among the people, and make mention that his name be exalted. Sing unto
the Lord, for he has done excellent things; this is known in all the earth. Cry
out and shout, thou inhabitant of Zion: for great is the Holy One of Israel in
the midst of thee.

CHAP. LIVE.
1 Sing, O barren, thou that did not bear: break forth into singing, and cry
aloud, thou that did not travail with child; for more are the children of the
desolate, than the children of the married wife, says the Lord.

The married wife means Jerusalem at a former time when rich and full of
inhabitants; the desolate wife means Jerusalem at present: although she is a
heap of rubbish and levelled with the ground, the Jews will return in such
great multitudes, that when rebuilt, her extent and number of people will be
far greater than at any former period.

This is the true meaning of the prophecy, and not the (...) deliverance (...)
is placed at the head of (...) in the ^i^ble.

2 Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth the curtains of
thy habitation: spare not, lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes.

3 For thou shall break forth on the right hand, and on the left; and thy seed
shall inherit the Gentiles, and make the desolate cities to be inhabited.

4 Fear not; for thou shall not be ashamed: neither be thou confounded: for
thou shall not be put to shame; for thou shall forget the shame of thy youth,
and shall not remember the reproach of thy widowhood any more.

5 For thy maker is thy husband; the Lord of Hosts is his name: and thy
redeemer the Holy One of Israel, the God of the whole earth shall he be called.

6 For the Lord has called thee as a woman forsaken and grieved in spirit, and
a wife of youth, when thou wast refused.

7 For a small moment I have forsaken thee, but with great mercies I will
gather thee.

8 In a little wrath I hid my face from thee, for a moment; but with
everlasting kindness I will have mercy on thee, says the Lord my Redeemer.

9 For this is as the waters of Noah to me: for as I have sworn that the waters
of Noah should not go over the earth any more, so have I sworn that I would not
be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee.

10 For the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my kindness
shall not depart from thee; neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed,
says the Lord that has mercy on thee.

CHAP. LX.
1 Arise, shine: for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon
thee.

2 For, behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the
people; but the Lord will rise upon thee, and his glory will be seen upon thee.

3 And the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings to the brightness of thy
rising.

8 Who are these that come as a cloud, and that fly as the doves to their
windows?

9 Surely the isles shall wait on me; but the ships of Tarshish first, to bring
thy sons from afar, their gold and silver with them, to the name of the Lord
thy God, and to the Holy One of Israel, because he has glorified thee.

10 And the sons of strangers shall build up thy walls, and their kings shall
minister to thee; for in my wrath I smote thee, but in my favor I will have
mercy on thee.

11 Therefore thy gates shall be open continually; they shall not be shut day
or night; that men may bring to thee the forces of the Gentiles, and that their
kings may be brought.

12 For the nation and kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish; yea,
those nations shall be utterly wasted.

13 The glory of Lebanon shall come to thee, the fir tree, the pine tree, and
the box together, to beautify the place of my sanctuary: for I will make the
place of my feet glorious.

14 The sons also of them that afflicted thee shall come bending to thee, and
all they that despised thee shall bow themselves down to the soles of thy feet:
and they shall call thee -- The city of the Lord, the Zion of the Holy One of
Israel.

15 Whereas thou have been forsaken and hated, so that no man went through
thee; I will make thee an eternal excellency, a joy of many generations.

16 Thou shall also suck the milk of the Gentiles, and shall suck the breasts
of kings: and thou shall know that I the Lord am thy Savior and thy Redeemer,
the Mighty One of Jacob.

17 For brass I will bring gold, and for iron I will bring silver; for wood
brass, and for stones iron: I also will make thy officers peace, and thy
exactors righteousness.

18 Violence shall no more be heard in thy land, wasting nor destruction within
thy borders; but thou shall call thy walls salvation, and thy gates praise.

19 The sun shall be no more thy light by day, neither for brightness the moon
by night; but the Lord will be to thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy
glory.

20 Thy sun shall no more go down, neither shall thy moon withdraw itself: for
the Lord will be thy everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shall be
ended.

21 Thy people also shall be all righteous, they shall inherit the land for
ever; the branch of my planting, and the work of my hands, that I may be
glorified.

22 A little one shall become a thousand, and a great one a strong nation. I
the Lord will hasten it in due time.

CHAP. LXII.
For Zion's sake I will not hold my peace, and for Jerusalem's sake I will not
rest, until the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and the salvation
thereof as a lamp that burns.

4 Thou shall no more be termed forsaken, neither shall thy land any more be
termed desolate; but thou shall be called Hephzibah, and thy land Beulah. For
the Lord delights in thee, and thy land shall be married.

8 The Lord has sworn by his right hand, and by the arm of his strength; surely
I will no more give thy corn to be meat for thy enemies, and the sons of the
stranger shall no more drink the wine for which thou have labored.

9 But they that gather it shall eat it, and praise the Lord; and they that
bring it together, shall drink it in the courts of my holiness.

10 Go through, go through the gates; prepare ye the way of the people; cast
up, cast up the highway; gather out the stones; lift up a standard for the
people.

11 Behold the Lord has proclaimed to the end of the world, Say ye to the
daughter of Zion, Behold thy salvation comes: behold his reward is with him,
and his work before him.

12 And they shall call them the holy people, the redeemed of the Lord; and
thou shall be called Sought out, a city not forsaken.

CHAP. LXV.
17 For, behold, I create new heavens and a new earth; and the former shall not
be remembered, nor come into mind.

18 But be ye glad, and rejoice forever in that which I create; for, behold, I
create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy.

19 And I will rejoice in ^^^^salem, and be joyful in my people; the (...) of
weeping shall be no more heard in her; nor the voice of crying.

23 They shall not labor in vain, nor bring forth for nothing; for they are
the seed which the Lord has blessed, and their offspring with them.

24 And it shall come to pass, that before they call, I will answer; and while
they are yet speaking, I will hear.

25 The wolf and the lamb shall feed together, and the lion shall eat straw
like the bullock: and, dust shall be the serpent's meat. They shall not
destroy, nor hurt, in all my holy mountain, says the Lord.

This last verse is an allusion to the peace and great happiness that will be
in the land of Israel when the Jews are restored.

CHAP. LXVI.
10 Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad all ye that love her, rejoice with
joy all ye that have mourned for her.

11 (...) ye may suck and be satisfied from the (...) of her consolations; that
ye may mil^ (...) and be delighted with the abundance of her glory.

12 For thus says the Lord; Behold, I will extend peace to her like a river,
and the glory of the Gentiles like a flowing stream; then ye shall suck -- ye
shall be borne upon her sides, and dandled upon her knees.

13 As one whom his mother comforts, so will I comfort you; and ye shall be
comforted in Jerusalem.

14 And when ye see this, your heart shall rejoice, and your (...) shall
flourish like an herb; and the hand of the Lord shall be known toward his
servants, but his indignation toward his enemies.

15 For, behold the Lord will come with fire, and with his chariots like a
whirlwind; to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke with a flame of ^^e.

16 For by his fire, and by his sword, will the Lord plead with all flesh; and
the slain of the Lord will be many.

20 And they shall bring all your brethren for an offering to the Lord out of
all nations, upon horses, and in chariots; upon mules, and upon swift beasts,
to my holy mountain, Jerusalem, says the Lord; as the children of Israel bring
an offering in a clean vessel into the house of the Lord.

21 And I will also take of them for priests and for Levites, says the Lord.

22 For as the new heavens and the new earth, which I will make, shall remain
before me, says the Lord, so shall your feed and your name remain.

23 And it shall come to pass, that from one new moon to another, and from one
sabbath to another, all people shall come to worship before me, says the Lord.

24 And they shall go forth and look upon the carcasses of the men that have
transgressed against me; for their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire
be quenched, that they may be an abhorrence to all flesh.

The new heavens and the new earth, mean an entire regeneration of man through
the power and knowledge from the (...) of God. At present, all nations oppose
(...) gospel of the kingdom of heaven in the two most essential commands for
them to obey, which are, War and Swearing. Remember that form of prayer^ called
the Lord's prayer; which says, Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven.
There is no war in heaven, neither is there any swearing: how is it then that
the people of Europe, the most numerous professing Christianity, and certainly
the most enlightened with knowledge of any in the world, can seriously say to
God, Thy will be done on earth, when they are instructed by their public laws
and forms of worship to oppose it?

Although national laws are undesignedly made to oppose Christ, it is a duty
incumbent on the people to take care that none of their prayers are: but that
every supplication, and all their forms of worship are, as they should be, in
strict obedience to his blessed Gospel of Peace.

THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, CHAP. XXIII.
3 And I will gather the remnant of my flock out of all countries, whither I
have driven them, and will bring them again to their folds; and they shall be
fruitful and increase.

4 And I will set shepherds over them, which shall feed them: and they shall
fear no more, nor be dismayed; neither shall they be lacking, says the Lord.

5 Behold the days are coming, says the Lord, that I will ra^e to David a
righteous branch; and a king shall reign and prosper, and shall execute judg^
(...) justice in the earth.

6 In his (...) shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely and this is the
name wherewith he shall be called, The Lord's Righteousness, (but not the Lord
our Righteousness)

7 Therefore, behold the days are coming, says the Lord, when they shall no
more say, The Lord lives that brought up the children of Israel out of the land
of Egypt.

8 But the Lord lives who brought up and who led the seed of the house of
Israel out of the North Country, and from all countries whither I have driven
them; and they shall dwell in their own land.

CHAP. XXXI.
1 At the same time, says the Lord, I will be the God of all the families of
Israel, and they shall be my people.

2 Thus says the Lord, The people which were left from the sword, found grace
in the wilderness, even Israel, when I went to cause him to rest.

3 The Lord has appeared to me of old, saying, Yes I have loved thee with an
everlasting love; therefore with loving kindness I have drawn thee.

4 Again I will build thee, and thou shall be built, O Virgin of Israel; thou
shall again be adorned with thy tabrets, and shall go forth in the dances, like
them that make merry.

5 Thou shall yet plant vines on the mountains of Samaria; the planters shall
plant, and thou shall eat them as common things.

6 For there shall be a day when the watchmen, on mount Ephraim, shall cry,
Arise ye, and let us go up to Zion to the Lord our God.

7 For thus says the Lord (...) ^ith gladness for Jacob, and shout (...) the
chief of the nations; publish, praise ye, and say, O Lord, save thy people, the
remnant of Israel.

8 Behold, I will bring them from the North country, and gather them from the
coasts of the earth: the blind and the lame, the woman with child, and her that
travails with child together: a great company shall return hither.

9 They shall come with weeping, and with supplications I will lead them: I
will cause them to walk by the rivers of waters, in a straight way, where they
shall not stumble: for I am a father to Israel, and Ephraim is my first born.

10 Hear the word of the Lord, O ye nations, and declare it to the islands afar
off; and say, he that scattered Israel will gather him, and keep him as a
shepherd does his flock.

11 For the Lord has redeemed Jacob, and ransomed him from the hand that was
stronger than he.

12 Therefore they shall come and sing in the height of Zion, and shall flow
together to the goodness of the Lord, for wheat, and for wine, and for oil, and
for the young of the flock, and of the herd; and their soul shall be as a
watered-garden, and they shall not sorrow any more at all.

13 Then shall the Virgin rejoice in the dance, with young men and old
together; for I will turn their mourning into joy, and will comfort them, and
make them rejoice from their sorrow.

14 And I will satiate the soul of the priests with fatness, and my people
shall be satisfied with my goodness, says the Lord.

15 Thus (...) the Lord; A voice was heard in Rama^, ^ation and bitter weeping.
Rachel, weeping for her children, refused to be comforted because they are not.

16 Thus says the Lord; Refrain thy voice from weeping, and thy eyes from
tears: for thy works shall be rewarded, says the Lord; and they shall come
again from the land of the enemy.

17 And there is hope in thy end, says the Lord, that thy children shall come
again to their own border.

21 Set thee up waymarks, make thee high heaps: set thy heart toward the
highway, even the way which thou went: turn again, O Virgin of Israel, turn
again to these thy cities.

22 How long will thou go about, O thou backsliding daughter; For the Lord has
created a new thing in the earth, A woman shall compass a man. (It means Christ
being born of the blessed Virgin.)

23 Thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel: as yet they shall use this
speech in the land of Judah, and in the cities thereof, when I bring again
their captivity: the Lord bless thee, O Habitation of Justice, and Mountain of
Holiness.

24 And there shall dwell in Judah itself, and in all the cities thereof
together, husbandmen, and they that go forth with flocks.

25 For I will refresh the weary soul, and I will comfort every sorrowful soul.

31 Behold the days are coming, says the Lord, when I will make a new covenant
with the House of Israel, and with the House of Judah.

32 Not according to the covenant I made with their fathers, in the day that I
took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt; which covenant
they broke, although I was a husband to them, says the Lord.

33. But this shall be the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel;
after those days, says the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and
write it in their hearts; and I will be their God, and they shall be my people.

34 And they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his
brother, saying, Know the Lord: for they all shall know me, from the least of
them to the greatest, says the Lord: for I will forgive their iniquity, and
their sin I will remember no more.

35 Thus says the Lord, who gives the sun for a light by day, and the
ordinances of the moon and of the stars for a light by night; who divides the
sea when the waves of it roar: the Lord of Hosts is his name.

36 If those ordinances depart from before me, says the Lord, then the seed of
Israel shall also cease from being a nation before me for ever.

37 Thus says the Lord; If heaven above can be measured, and the foundations of
the earth searched out beneath, I will also cast off the seed of Israel, for
all that they have done, says the Lord.

38 Behold the days are coming, says the Lord, when the city shall be built to
the Lord from the tower of Hananeel to the gate of the corner.

39 And the measuring line shall yet go forth over against it on the hill
Gareb, and shall compass about to Goath.

40 And the whole valley of the dead bodies and of the ashes, and all the
fields to the brook of Kidron, to the corner of the horse gate toward the East,
shall be holy to the Lord: it shall not be plucked up, nor thrown down any
more, for ever.

THE PROPHET EZEKIEL, CHAP. XVI.
59 For thus says the Lord God: I will even deal with thee as thou have done,
which has despised the oath, by breaking the covenant.

60 Nevertheless I will remember my covenant with thee in the days of thy
youth, but I will establish to thee an everlasting covenant.

61 Then thou shall remember thy ways and be ashamed, when thou receive thy
sisters, thy elder and thy your ^^r: and I will give them to thee for
daughters; but not by thy former covenant.

62 And I will establish my covenant with thee; and thou shall know that I am
the Lord.

63 That thou may remember and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any
more, because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee for all that thou
have done, says the Lord God.

CHAP. XXXIV.
11 For thus says the Lord God: Behold, I, even I, will both search for my
sheep, and find them out.

12 As a shepherd gathers his flock in the day that his sheep are scattered, so
will I seek out my sheep, and will deliver them from all places where they have
been scattered, before the cloudy and dark day.

13 And I will bring them out from the people, and gather them from the (...),
and will bring them to their own land, and I will feed them on the mountains of
Israel, by the rivers, and make them inhabit the waste places of the country.

22 Therefore I will save my flock, and they shall be no more a prey; and I
will judge between cattle and cattle.

23 And I will set up one shepherd over them, and he shall feed them, even my
servant David: he shall feed them, and he shall be their shepherd.

92 And I the Lord (meaning Christ) will be their God, and my servant David
(meaning his descendant) a Prince among them: I the Lord have spoken it.

CHAP. XXXVI.
6 Prophecy therefore concerning the land of Israel, and say to the mountains,
to the hills, to the rivers, and to the valleys, Thus says the Lord God;
behold, I have spoken in my jealousy and fury, because ye have borne the shame
of the heathen.

7 Therefore thus says the Lord God; I have lifted up my hand, surely the
heathen that are about you shall bear their own shame.

8 But ye, O mountains of Israel, shall shoot forth your branches, and yield
your fruit to my people of Israel: for they are at hand to come.

12 Yea, I will cause men to walk on you, even my people Israel; and they shall
possess thee; thou shall be their inheritance, and thou shall no more
henceforth bereave them of men.

33 Thus says the Lord God; in the day that I clean you from all your
iniquities, I will also cause you to dwell in the cities, and the waste places
shall be built.

34 And the desolate land shall be tilled, which lay desolate in the sight of
all that passed by:

35 And they shall say, This land that was desolate is become like the garden
of Eden; and the waste, and desolate, and ruined cities are fenced, and are
full of inhabitants.

36 Then the heathen that are left round about you shall know, that I the Lord
build the ruined places, and plant that which was desolate: I the Lord have
spoken it, and will do it.

37 Thus says the Lord God; I will yet for this be enquired of by the house of
Israel, to do it for them: I will increase them with men like a flock.

38 As the holy flock, as the flock of Jerusalem in her solemn feasts; so shall
the waste cities be filled with flocks of men: and they shall know that I am
the Lord.

CHAP. XXXVII.
20 And the sticks which thou write on shall be in thy hand before their eyes.

21 And say to them, Thus says the Lord God: behold, I will take the children
of Israel from among the heathen, whither they are gone, and will gather them
on every side, and bring them into their own land.

22 And I will make them one nation in the land, upon the mountains of Israel,
and there shall be one king to them all: they shall be no more two nations,
neither shall they be divided into two kingdoms any more at all.

23 Neither shall they defile themselves any more with their idols, nor with
their detestable things, nor with any of their transgressions: but I will save
them out of all their dwelling places, wherein they have sinned, and clean
them; so shall they be my people, and I will be their God.

24 And David my servant shall be king over them: and they all shall have one
shepherd: they shall also walk in my judgments, and observe my statutes to do
them.

25 And they shall dwell in the land that I have given to Jacob my servant, in
which your fathers have dwelt; and they shall dwell therein, even they and
their children, and their children's children forever; and my servant David
(meaning his visible descendant) shall be their prince for ever.

The vision of Ezekiel, relative to Jerusalem, alludes to the grandeur and
extent of it when rebuilt by the Jews, after their return, in the year of one
thousand seven hundred and ninety-eight: it will be the capital of the world,
and from it will go once more, to all nations, the commands of the living God.

THE PROPHET HOSEA, CHAP. II.
18 And in that day I will make a covenant for them with the beasts of the
field, with the fowls of heaven, and with the creeping things of the ground:
and I will break the bow, the sword, and the battle out of the earth; and they
shall lie down with safety.

19 And I will betroth thee to me forever; yea, I will betroth thee to me in
righteousness, and in truth, in loving kindness, and in mercies.

20 I will even betroth thee to me with faithfulness; and thou s^^lt know the
Lord.

23 And I will sow her to me in the earth, and I will have mercy on her that
had not obtained mercy; (meaning Jerusalem,) and I will say to them which were
not my people, (meaning the Jews during their dispersion,) Ye are my people;
and they shall say, Thou art our God.

CHAP. III.
4 For the children of Israel shall be many days without a king, and without a
prince, and without a sacrifice, and without an image, without an ephod, and
without a teraphim.

5 Afterward the children of Israel shall return and seek the Lord their God,
and David their king; and they shall fear the Lord, and shall know his goodness
in the latter days.

THE PROPHET JOEL, CHAP. III.
1 For behold, in those days, and in that time, when I bring again the
captivity of Judah to Jerusalem,

2 I will also gather all nations, and bring them down to the valley of
Jehoshaphat, to plead with them there for my people, for Israel my heritage,
whom they have scattered among the nations, and for dividing my land.

9 Proclaim ye this among the Gentiles: prepare war, wake up the mighty men,
let all the men of war draw near, let them come up.

10 Beat your ploughshares into swords, and your ^eaping hooks into spears; let
the weak say, I am strong.

11 Assemble yourselves and come, all ye heathen; gather yourselves together
round about; thither cause thy mighty ones to come down, O Lord.

12 Let the heathen be waked, to come up to the valley of Jehoshaphat: for it
is there I will sit to judge all the heathen round about.

14 Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision; for the day of the Lord
is near in the valley of decision.

After the restoration of the Jews, the barbarous nations will send great
armies to invade their lands; God will permit them to advance, that he may
destroy them with his fire from heaven.

15 The sun and moon shall be darkened, and the stars shall withdraw their
shining.

16. The Lord will roar out from Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem; the
heavens and the earth shall shake, but the Lord will be the hope of his people,
and the strength of the children of Israel.

17 So ye shall know that I am the Lord God (directed to all nations) dwelling
in Zion, my holy mountain: then shall Jerusalem be holy, and there shall no
strangers pass through her any more.

18 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the mountains shall drop down
new wine, and the hills shall flow with milk, and all the rivers of Judah shall
flow with waters, and a fountain shall come forth from the house of the Lord,
and water the valley of Shittim.

19 Egypt shall be a desolation, and Edom a desolate wilderness, for their
violence against the children of Judah, and for shedding their innocent blood
in the land.

20 But Judah shall dwell for ever, and Jerusalem from generation to generation.

21 For I will cleanse their blood that I have not cleansed; for the Lord
dwells in Zion.

THE PROPHET AMOS. CHAP. IX.
8 Behold the eyes of the Lord God are upon the sinful kingdom: and I will
destroy it from the face of the earth; but I will not utterly destroy the house
of Jacob, says the Lord.

9 For, lo, I will command, and I will sift the house of Israel from among all
nations, like corn sifted in a sieve, yet the least grain shall not fall upon
the earth.

10 All the sinners of my people shall die by the sword, which say, the evil
shall not overtake nor prevent us.

11 In that day, I will raise up the tabernacle of David that is fallen,
(meaning the restoration of his descendant to the government of the children of
Israel,) and close up the breaches thereof; and I will raise up his ruins, and
build it as in the days of old.

12 That they may possess the remnant of Edom, and of all the heathen which are
not called by my name, says the Lord, who does this.

13 Behold the days will come, says the Lord, that the ploughman shall overtake
the reaper, and the treader of grapes him that sows the seed; the mountain
shall drop sweet wine, and all the hills shall flow with milk.

14 And I will bring again the captivity of my people of Israel, they shall
build the waste cities, and inhabit them; they shall plant vineyards, and drink
the wine of them: they shall also make gardens, and eat the fruit of them.

15 And I will plant them upon their own land; they shall no more be palled up
out of their own land, which I have given them, says the Lord thy God.

THE PROPHET OBADIAH, CHAP. I.
8 Shall I not in that day, says the Lord, even destroy the wise men out of
Edom, and understanding out of the mount of Esau.

9 And thy mighty men, O Teman, shall be dismayed; to the end that every one of
the mount of Esau may be cut off by slaughter.

10 For thy violence against thy brother Jacob, shame shall cover thee; and
thou shall be cut off for ever.

15 For the day of the Lord is near upon all the heathen: as thou have done, it
shall be done to thee; thy reward shall return on thy own head.

16 For as ye have drunk on my holy mountain, (meaning the Turks,) so shall all
the heathen drink continually; yea, they shall drink and swallow down, and they
shall be as though they had not been.

17 But upon mount Zion shall be deliverance, and on it shall be holiness: for
the house of Jacob shall po^^eys all their possessions.

18 And the ^o^se of Jacob shall be a fire, and the house of Joseph a flame,
and the house of Esau for stubble: they shall kindle in them, and devour them;
there shall not be any remaining of the house of Esau: for the Lord has spoken
it.

19 And they of the south shall possess the mount of Esau; and they of the
plains, the Philistines: they shall possess their fields, and Ephraim the
fields of Samaria, and Benjamin shall possess Gilead.

20 And the captivity of the host of the children of Israel shall possess that
of the Canaanites, even to Zerapath, and the captivity of Jerusalem, which is
in Sepharad, shall possess the cities of the south.

21 And saviors shall come up on mount Zion, to judge the mount of Esau; and
then the kingdom shall be the Lord's.

The Turk are descended from Esau, the brother of Jacob; but their Emperor,
and his family, are descended from Jonathan, the son of Saul, king of Israel.
Told me by revelation.

THE PROPHET MICAH, CHAP. IV.
1 But in the last days in shall come to pass, that the mountain of the house
of the Lord shall be established on the top of the mountains; it shall be
exalted above the hills, and people shall flow to it.

6 In that day, says the Lord, I will assemble her that has halted, and I will
gather her that was driven out, and her that I have afflicted.

7 And I will make the remnant that halted, and her that was cast far off, a
strong nation; and the Lord will reign over them in mount Zion, from
henceforth, even for ever.

THE PROPHET NAHUM, CHAP. I.
15 Behold, upon the mountains, the feet of him that brings good tidings, that
publishes peace! O Judah, keep thy solemn feasts, and perform thy vows; for the
wicked shall no more pass through thee; they are entirely cut off.

The beginning of this verse means Christ, preaching the Gospel of peace; the
latter part, when the Jews are established at Jerusalem, after their next
restoration.

THE PROPHET ZEPHANIA, CHAP. III.
13 The remnant of Israel shall not commit iniquity, nor speak lies; neither
shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth; for they shall feed and lie
down, and none shall make them afraid.

14 Sing, O daughter of Zion; shout, O Israel; be glad and rejoice with all thy
heart, O daughter of Jerusalem.

15 The Lord has taken away thy judgments, he has cast out thy enemy; the King
of Israel, even the Lord is in the midst of thee; thou shall not see evil any
more.

16 In that day it shall be said to Jerusalem, Fear thou not; and to Zion, Let
not thy hands be slack.

17 The Lord thy God in the midst of thee, is mighty; he will save, and rejoice
over thee with joy; he will rest in his love, and rejoice over thee with
singing.

18 I will gather them that are sorrowful for the solemn assemblies who are of
thee, to whom the reproach of thee was a burden.

19 Behold at that time I will undo all which afflicts thee; and I will save
her that is stopped, and gather her that was driven out; and I will get them
praise and renown in every land where they have been put to shame.

20 At the time that I bring you again, even the time that I gather you; for I
will get you a name, and make you to be praised among all the people of the
earth, when I turn away your captivity from before your eyes, says the Lord.

THE PROPHET HAGGAI, CHAP. II.
20 And again the word of the Lord came to Haggai, in the four and twentieth
day of the month, saying,

21 Speak to Zerubbabel, governor of Judah, and say, I will shake the heavens
and the earth;

22 And I will overthrow the thrones of kingdoms, and I will destroy the
strength of the kingdoms of the heathen: I will overthrow their chariots, and
those that ride in them; their horses and riders shall come down, every one by
the sword of the other.

The time alluded to by the prophet, is that which is immediately before the
restoration of the Jews, in the latter days of the world; -- the present is it.

23 In that day, says the Lord of Hosts, I will take thee, O Zerubbabel, my
servant, the son of Shealtiel, and will make thee a signet; for I have chosen
thee, says the Lord of Hosts.

The meaning of this verse is, that when the former part of this prophecy is
fulfilling, Zerubbabel will be revived in his descendant, who will be, like
himself, the visible prince and governor of the Jews; the time is nearly come
for this man to be openly revealed, and to have, in all other respects, this
very gracious and very wonderful promise from God fulfilled.

THE PROPHET ZECHARIAH. CHAP. VIII.
7 Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Behold, I will save my people from the east
country, and from the west country:

8 And I will bring them, and they shall dwell in the midst of Jerusalem: they
shall be my people, and I will be their God, in truth and in righteousness.

CHAP. X.
6 And I will strengthen the house of Judah, and I will save the house of
Joseph, and I will bring them again to replace them; for I will have mercy on
them, and they shall be as if I had not cast them off; for I am the Lord their
God, and I will hear them.

7 And they of Ephraim shall be like a mighty man, and their hearts shall
rejoice as through wine; yea, their children shall see it and be glad, their
hearts shall rejoice in the Lord.

8 And I will hiss for them, and gather them; for I have redeemed them, and
they shall increase as they have increased.

9 And I will sow them among the people; and they shall remember me in far
countries, and they shall live with their children, and turn again.

10 I will bring them again also out of the land of Egypt, and gather them out
of Assyria; and I will bring them into the land of Gilead, and Lebanon, and
place shall not be found for them.

CHAP. XII.
1 The burden of the word of the Lord for Israel: says the Lord, who stretches
out the heavens, and lays the foundations of the earth, that forms the spirit
of man within him:

2 Behold, I will make Jerusalem a cup of trembling to all the people round
about, when they shall be in the siege, both against Judah and against
Jerusalem.

3 And in that day I will make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all people;
all that burden themselves with it shall be cut in pieces, though all the
people of the earth be gathered together against it.

4 In that day says the Lord I will finite every horse with astonishment, and
his rider with madness: and I will open my eyes upon the house of Judah, and I
will strike every horse of the people with blindness.

5 And the governors of Judah shall say in their heart, the inhabitants of
Jerusalem shall be our strength in the Lord of Posts, our God.

6 In that day I will make the governors of Judah like a hearth of fire among
wood, like a torch of fire in a sheaf; they shall devour all the people round
about, on the right hand and on the left; and Jerusalem shall be inhabited
again, even Jerusalem in her own place.

7 The Lord also will save the tents of Judah first, to preserve the
distinction of the house of David, that the inhabitants of Jerusalem may not
exalt themselves against Judah.

8 In that day the Lord will defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and he that
is feeble among them, in that day, shall be as David; -- and the house of David
shall be as God; as the angel of the Lord before them.

This prophecy means the same time, and the same invasion of Judah by the
heathen, as that mentioned by the prophet Joel, in the third chapter; which is
explained already.

9 And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will destroy the people of all
the nations, which are come against Jerusalem.

10 And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications; and they shall look to me
that was pierced, and shall mourn like him that mourns for his only son; and
they shall be in bitterness, like him that is in bitterness for his first born.

11 In that day, there shall be great mourning in Jerusalem, like the mourning
of Hadadrimon, in the valley of ^^g^^on.

12 And the land shall mourn, every family apart: the family of the house of
David apart, and their wives apart; the family of Nathan apart, and their wives
apart.

13 The family of the house of Levi apart, and their wives apart (...) the
family of Shemei apart, and their wives apart.

14 All the families that remain, every family apart, and their wives apart.

When the heathen armies invade the land of Israel, it will be with a
resolution to seize on every moveable thing, and destroy the people; the Jews,
then acknowledging the Messiah as God, will believe, under an excess of grief,
that he was crucified. Sensible of their perilous condition, and knowing that
it is he only can save them, they will, every man and family, implore him for
compassion and deliverance.

The Hebrews will be delivered, and the heathen entirely destroyed.

THE PROPHET MALACHI, CHAP. IV.
5 Behold, I send you Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and
dreadful day of the Lord;

6 And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of
the children to their fathers; lest I come and smite the earth with a curse.

The great prophet, alluded to in this chapter, is the same that will be
revealed to the Jews, to order their return to Jerusalem before the expiration
of one thousand seven hundred and ninety-eight; he will possess the spirit of
God, and the power of fire, equal to Elijah; he will make known the judgments
of God, that all nations may be benefitted, and may endeavor to survive them,
when they are commanded to be fulfilled.

The alterations I have made in copying some of the prophecies, is by the
direction and command of the Lord God.

THE JUDGMENTS OF GOD.
THE very loud and unusual kind of thunder that was heard in the beginning of
January, 1791, was the voice of the angel mentioned in the eighteenth chapter
of the revelation, proclaiming the judgment of God and the fall of Babylon the
Great: it was the loudest that ever was heard since man was created, and shook
the whole earth every time the angel spoke; it roared through the streets, and
made a noise over London like the falling of mountains of stones.

Many buildings were damaged at the time of this thunder, and many persons were
frightened by it; the great flashes of lightning proceeded also from the angel,
and were according to the (...) verse, reflected from the brightness of his
glory.

REVELATION TO ST. JOHN, CHAP. XVIII.
1 And after these things I saw another angel come down from heaven, having
great power: and the earth was lightened with his glory.

2 And he cried mightily with a strong voice, (meaning the thunder) saying,
Babylon the Great is fallen, is fallen, etc.

3 For all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and
the kings of the earth have committed fornication with her, and the merchants
of the earth are waxed rich through the abundance of her delicacies.

4 And I heard another voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her, my people
that ye be not partakers of her sins and that ye receive not of her plagues.

5 For her sins have reached up to heaven, and God has remembered her
iniquities.

6 Reward her, even as she rewarded you, and double to her double, according to
her works; in the cup which she has filled, fill to her double.

7 How much she has glorified herself and lived deliciously, so much torment
and sorrow give her; for she says in her heart, I sit a queen, and am no widow,
and shall see no sorrow.

8 Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, death and mourning, and famine,
and she shall be utterly burnt with fire; for strong is the Lord God who judges
her.

The Lord God was so exceeding angry at the time of the loud thunder I have
mentioned in the preceding part, that he determined to leave his other
judgments unfulfilled relative to London, and burn her immediately with fire
from heaven: soon afterward I was informed by revelation of what the thunder
meant, and was commanded to go from London beyond the distance of eighteen
miles. I had similar to the prophet Daniel at Babylon, an attending angel to
explain all the visions, and support me under the grief I was loaded with for
its approaching fall.

The Lord God knowing that I loved him with all my heart, and had often
resisted the calls of hunger and distress, rather than comply with customs that
would offend him, pitied me; for I had beseeched him to let me inform the
people of London of their danger, and try by all possible means to save them;
but was refused permission, because they would imprison and use me very ill for
it.

In addition to all that God had promised and repeated by his angel to make me
happy, he was now pleased to give me another proof of his unalterable regard,
and convince me by it, that, although he could not in justice in his recorded
judgments spare London, yet for my sake he would show mercy to some: and take
care, that by sickness and other causes, to remove the persons I desired should
be saved, to a sufficient distance beyond the limits to be destroyed and sunk.
After thanking the Lord God, I mentioned several, both men and women, and
called the remembrance of his mercy to others whose names I did not know, but
pointed them out in my mind.

Among those I mentioned, was William Pultney, William Pit, Gilbert Elliot,
Charles Gray, the Earl of Buckinghamshire, the Marquis of Lansdowne, the Earl
of Chatham, Maitland, now called Earl of Lauderdale; Henry Phipp, for I
remembered his brother to have done me as act of friendship; John Dalrymple,
John Griffin Griffin, Alderman Pickett, because that during his mayoralty he
opposed by a public advertisement the frequency of taking oaths; in doing so be
honored that all-remembering God, who will in due time as publicly honor him
for it. Wilberforce, Bastard, Sheridan, Philip Stephens, Charles Fox: John
Luke, a poor quaker; Samuel Hood; the King and his family, for they were to be
gathered into London: Ponsonby, for whom I conceived an esteem, from observing
in his countenance openness and honesty; and possessing, as I thought, a heart
similar to my own, I was led to entreat for him: until last year I could assign
no other reason for mentioning that name than what I have given; but the true
one is, that as God had determined not only to keep in London the people then
in it, but likewise to allow great multitudes to be drawn to it from all parts
of the country, he would be found among the number to be destroyed; for which,
to prevent his death in such a place, the Lord God influenced me to regard him,
that I might afterward remember such a person, and be mindful of his safety.

I am not in the least acquainted with the man I have mentioned, whom God was
pleased to distinguish by so great a testimony of his regard, but although I am
not, and our names are different, he is, as well as myself, descended from
David, king of Israel. The Countess of Buckinghamshire, whom I am no more
acquainted with than the stranger I mentioned before, is likewise descended
from David, king of Israel; the family she is married into are also of the
Hebrews, and are descended from Joseph the once president of Egypt.

There are many families of the same origin as those three I have named, made
known to me by revelation, but I am forbid to mention any of them at present
for public knowledge.

After entreating for the persons I have set down, and pointing from my mind to
numbers besides, whose names I did not know, I was, to prepare me for the
designation of God, carried up to heaven in a vision, and saw on my right ^^le,
at a small distance, a beautiful silver white bird in shape of a Dove, but a
little larger; it was the Holy Ghost, and was the very same that descended on
the head of my blessed Savior, when he came up from being baptized in the
river Jordan; he kept between me and Satan, who was then revealed that I might
witness it, and great power given him to visit the earth. -- The Lord God then
spoke to me from the middle of a white shining cloud.

After this I was in a vision, having the angel of God near me, and saw Satan
walking leisurely into London: his face had a smile, but under it his looks
were sly, crafty, and deceitful. On the right side of his forehead were seven
dark spots; he was dressed in white and scarlet robes.

Again I was in a vision, and saw London a scene of confusion; it was effected
on a sudden; all the people were armed and appeared quite furious: I was
carried through the city in the Spirit of God to see all things that were
designed should come to pass, and be informed how quick they could be
accomplished.

After this I was in a vision, and saw a large river run through London
colored with human blood.

Exceedingly unhappy for all that I saw, and which I knew would soon be
fulfilled; I prayed and entreated the Lord God to give me one more instance of
his mighty regard, by sparing London and the great multitude in it. I said, I
acknowledge, O Lord my God, that the people do very wrong, but it is through
compulsion, and for want of knowing better.

The Lord God was so highly displeased, that I should, after all his former
kindness, strain his affection and entreat him to annul his recorded judgment,
as to stop me, and in a voice of great sharpness and anger, said, They have my
blessed Gospel, and will not obey it. The angel that was appointed to give me
instruction forsook me in an instant on hearing this answer. I trembled for my
life, and seemed to be another man; for I was afraid of being destroyed with
the city. -- It was three days after this before the Lord God would be
reconciled to hear my prayers, and speak to me with his former kindness.

In ten days after the three I was in a vision, and being carried up to heaven,
the Lord God spoke to me from the middle of a large white cloud, and said in a
strong clear voice -- All, All. I pardon London and all the people in it for
your sake: There is no other man on earth that could stand before me to ask for
so great a thing.

For ever, O Lord my God, I will praise and thank you for this great instance
of your blessed regard; all Nations will hear it, and may all Nations honor you
by their obedience: your great mercy is over them all, and by its goodness the
world is now safe.

Had London been destroyed in the year of 1791, the place where it stands would
have formed a great bay, or inlet of the channel: all the land between Windsor
and the Downs would have been sunk, including a distance of eighteen miles each
side, but considerably more toward the sea coast; it would be sunk to the
depth of seventy fathoms, or four hundred and twenty feet, that no traces of
the city might be ever found, or even so much as looked for.

21 And almighty angel took up a stone, like a great mill ^ne, and cast it into
the sea, saying. Thus with violence shall that great city, Babylon, be thrown
down, and shall be found no more at all.

That all men of wisdom and discernment may understand, on reading the
revelation, that there are two cities mentioned in it spiritually, under the
names of Babylon the Great, I will assist them by clearly marking out the
distinction.

Rome, the spiritual Babylon, mentioned in the seventeenth chapter, is
described, in the third verse, to be away into the wilderness; meaning, by the
words, into the wilderness, that the city is situated inland.

But London, the spiritual Babylon, also mentioned in the eighteenth chapter,
is described, by St. John, as the greatest seaport for ships, wealth, and
commerce, in the world.

11 And the merchants of the earth shall weep and mourn over her; for no man
buyeth her merchandise any more.

12 The merchandise of gold, and silver, and precious stones, and of pearls,
and fine linen, and purple, and silk, and scarlet, and all thyme wood, and all
manner of vessels of most precious wood, and of brass, and iron, and marble,

13 And cinnamon, and odors, and ointments, and frankincense, and wine, and
oil, and fine flour, and wheat, and beasts, and sheep, and horses, and
chariots, and slaves, and souls of men.

14 And the fruits that thy soul lusted after, are departed from thee, and all
things which were dainty and goodly are departed from thee, and thou shall find
them no more at all.

15 The merchants of these things, who were made rich by her, shall stand afar
off, for the fear of her torment, weeping, and wailing.

16 And saying, Alas! alas! that great city, that was clothed in fine linen,
and purple, and scarlet, and decked with gold and precious stones, and pearls!
for in one hour, such great riches is come to naught.

17 And every ship-master, and all the company in ships, and sailors, and as
many as trade by sea, stood afar off.

18 And cried, when they saw the smoke of her burning, What city is like to
this great city!

19 And they cast d^st on their heads, and cried, weeping and wailing, saying,
Alas! alas! that great city! wherein were made rich all that had ships in the
sea, by reason of her costliness; for in one hour is she made desolate.

20 Rejoice over her thou heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets; for God
has avenged you on her.

Read attentively the eighteenth chapter; and you will perceive described in
it, the prodigious wealth, grandeur, and commerce of London: then remember,
that the very great thunder and lightning I have mentioned, was in the depth of
winter, an unusual time of year for the like; but they were as St. John exactly
describes them, in the first and second verses. Meditate on these things, weigh
them attentively in your mind, and all I have wrote besides; and the Spirit of
God, if you love wisdom, will enlighten your understanding to see, and will
also strike you with a conviction of their truth.

The following would have been the Condition of England, which the Lord God
showed me in the month of July, 1791, had his Judgment of Desolation on the
World been suddenly fulfilled at the appointed Time in 1793.
I was in a vision, and was carried away by the Spirit of God to a field of
young wheat, which was grown about four inches high from the ground: an elderly
English woman stood by me; she had no covering on her head, but over her arms
was an old black silk cloak; it was worn threadbare, and rent in many places.
While I was observing the dress and poverty of the woman, the wheat sprung up
in an instant, and shot out to the size of full ears, the largest I ever saw in
my life: astonished at such a sight, and wondering what it should mean, I
stooped to feel some with my hand; when I had, the woman looked down to me with
a countenance expressive of great distress to implore my pity and assistance,
then turned her face away to the east, and afterward looked up to heaven, as
if she wanted rain and a cool wind.

After this I cast my eyes over the surface of the land; it was scorched to a
dark brown, and frightful to look at: I could see no grass in the meadows, and
the bushes in the hedges were all burnt brown; so great and mighty was the
heat: I could see no beasts in the fields, and the fowls of heaven were all
flown away.

The judgment of desolation being suspended, is the reason that this vision of
famine and distress is also; when it takes place, England, like the woman and
her cloak, (for she was an allusion to this country) will be very poor, worn
out, and rent in many places.

After this I was in a vision, and saw a large sword unsheathed in heaven: soon
after I saw a large cup, full of red wine, and much froth on the top, lifted
up, and held out to all nations.

THE JUDGMENT OF DESOLATION ON ALL NATIONS.
THE thunder that was heard in the evening of the 2d of August, 1793, was the
voice of the angel, mentioned in the nineteenth chapter of the Revelation,
standing in the sun.

VERSE X^II.
And I saw an angel standing in the sun; and he cried with a loud voice,
(meaning the thunder,) saying to all the fowls that fly in the midst of heaven,
Come, and gather yourselves together to the supper of the great God.

18 That ye may eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh of captains, and the
flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses, and of them that sit on them; and
the flesh of all men, both free and bond, both small and great.

The dead will increase so fast, and be in such prodigious numbers, when this
judgment takes place, that the living will not be sufficient to bury them, but
will leave the bodies exposed to the fowls of heaven for meat.

The flashes of lightning, which issued during the thunder, proceeded from the
glory of the angel proclaiming the judgment of God, and resembled in color the
clear day light.

The second thunder, that gave notice of God's approaching judgment, was on
Wednesday evening, the 7th of August 1793, as is mentioned in the seventh of
the Revelation, and was the voice of the angel ascending from the east, having
the seal of the living God.

VERSE II.
2 And I saw another angel ascending from the east, having the seal of the
living God; and he cried with a loud voice (the thunder) to the four angels, to
whom it was given to hurt the earth and the sea;

3 Saying, hurt not the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, till we have
sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads.

The flashes of lightning, which issued during the time of this thunder,
proceeded likewise from the glory of the angel, and resembled in color fine
amber.

The next and last thunder, (if the judgment had not been suspended for my
sake) would be on the 11th of August following, and would have been, according
to the sixteenth chapter of Revelation, the fourth angel pouring out his vial
on the sun.

VERSE VIII.
And the fourth angel poured out his vial on the sun, and power was given him
to scorch men with fire.

9 And men were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the name of God, who
has power over these plagues; and they repented not to give him glory.

The flashes of lightning, during this thunder, which would continue many
hours, would likewise proceed from the glory of the angel, and would be, in
strength and color, like the burning flame.

This thunder would be accompanied by a violent storm of large hail stones,
which, with the lightning, would kill multitudes of people, and destroy the
harvest in many countries.

Soon after this thunder, the short time of four days only, the judgment of God
on the world would begin to be fulfilled. The winds would be suspended in the
firmament, according to the seventh chapter, that breathing might almost cease;
the great body of heat, that would immediately after be poured down from heaven
on the earth, would be so fierce and powerful as to move the world, and kill
every living thing, both man and beast, exposed under it in the open air.

The trees, bushes in the hedges, grass in the meadows, and what corn was left
from the hail, would be cut off and destroyed by this great and mighty heat.
Most of the ships would be destroyed at sea, and all the fish near the surface
killed. Millions of the human race would die in all nations from this burning
heat, and the many plagues it would produce.

The Nineteenth, Seventh, Sixteenth, Sixth, Eighth, and Fourteenth chapters,
mean the same time, the same things; and are as one chapter to fulfill the
judgment of God.

The 15th of August 1793, was the time appointed by the Lord God to fulfill the
parts of the Revelation I have mentioned, and punish the world with desolation;
but from his great mercy and regard for me, that I may be esteemed in this
country, and by all others, when I am revealed, suspended his judgment for a
time -- it hangs however over all nations.

Look at the age of the world; read attentively the chapters I have mentioned,
with what I have wrote besides; and you will discover in your own breast a
light, to see and believe by.

That light, I mean which is often called a certain something, an internal
monitor, that applauds man for courting wisdom, for being just, and doing good;
but that never fails to reproach him for embracing folly, and doing evil: it is
indeed no other than the Spirit of the living God.

All the prophecies given in visions from God, are concealed from the knowledge
of man by mysterious allusions, until the proper time, and the appointed person
for them to be revealed to. For it is not in the cunning of any one man, even
assisted by the wisdom of all the rest on earth, to search out the deep secrets
of God, or with truth to unfold the meaning of his visions: they are wonderful;
they cannot be discovered until God himself pleases to remove the covering of
secrecy; and, through an appointed person, blesses the world with a knowledge
of their true meaning.

The fulfilling of the judgments of God, however destructively they may prove
to the governments and nations which they are directed against, are not allowed
to affect my personal safety, nor operate in the least to my prejudice: for the
certainty of my elevation, to the greatest principality that ever will be, in
the world, cannot be prevented by the rise or fall of any human power on earth;
because it is the repeated covenant of God to my forefathers, and his sacred
promise now by Revelation to myself.

The obscurity of David was no objection, with a discerning God, to make him
the monarch of Israel, and afterward promise the succession to his family
forever; neither is mine now to his fulfilling that promise, and holding me up
to the world, as the visible governor of the Jews. For all the works of God are
wonderful, and very far exceed the capacity of man to know where they begin,
how they are directed, on whom, or which way they will end: -- I that have more
knowledge of them, and of futurity, revealed to me, than any other under the
whole heaven, observe the operation of every new one with more amazement than
the former.

Therefore my present poverty is no obstacle to my future elevation, neither is
it of much concern to myself; for the time of my being revealed, with power
from heaven, is nigh; when God, to manifest his regard, will give me favor with
many, and influence all the people of London to help me.

I am the prophet that will be revealed to the Jews, to order their departure
from all nations, to go to the land of Israel, their own country, in a similar
manner to Moses in Egypt, but with additional power.

I was an officer in the English navy, and necessarily so, although I did not
know it, that the judgment of God on David, king of Israel might be fulfilled,
which was, that the sword should never depart from his house.

It is fifteen hundred years since my family was separated from the Jews, and
lost all knowledge of its origin; the last on record, in the Scripture, is
James: xiii. chap. 55 ver. of St. Matthew. Told me by revelation.

The government of the Jewish nation will, under the Lord God, be committed to
me, that the everlasting covenant from him to David may be manifested in the
visible Prince and Governor of the Jews.

SECOND OF SAMUEL, CHAP. VII.
16 And thy house and thy kingdom shall be established for ever before thee;
thy throne shall be established for ever.

17 According to all these words, and according to all this vision, did Nathan
speak to David.

JEREMIAH, CHAP. XXXIII.
17 For thus says the Lord: David shall never want a man to sit on the throne
of the House of Israel.

19 And the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah, saying,

20 Thus says the Lord, If ye can break my covenant of the day, and my covenant
of the night, and that there should not be day and night in their season,

21 Then may also my covenant be broke with David my servant, that he should
not have a son to reign upon his throne; and with the Levites, the priests, my
ministers.

22 As the host of heaven cannot be numbered, neither the sand of the sea
measured; so will I multiply the seed of David my servant, and the Levites that
minister to me.

23 Moreover, the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah saying,

24 Considerest thou not what this people have spoken, saying, The two families
which the Lord has chosen, he has even cast them off. Thus they have despised
my people, that they should be no more a nation before them.

25 Thus says the Lord, If my covenant be not with day and night, and if I have
not appointed the ordinances of heaven and earth,

26 Then I will cast away the seed of Jacob, and David my servant; so that I
will not take any of his seed to be rulers over the seed of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob; for I will cause their captivity to return, and have mercy on them.

A knowledge of the Scripture, the prophecies I have mentioned, and all that I
have wrote besides, have been communicated to me through visions and
revelations from the Lord God: the prophet Daniel, and St. John the Apostle,
were instructed, in the same manner, to write what they have.

It is by the saving of multitudes; by revealing, not only a true
interpretation of the prophecies, but also a knowledge of the times, and those
secret parts of the Scripture which are not made known to any other man under
heaven, that the Lord God begins with announcing to the world a knowledge of
his mighty judgments, the return of his former mercy to the Hebrews, their
speedy restoration to Jerusalem, and the rise of a favorite family.

RICHARD BROTHERS.
LONDON, No. 57, Paddington Street, 3d of the month called January, 1794.
REVELATION TO ST. JOHN, CHAP. XVII. OF ROME.
1 AND there came one of the seven angels, which had the seven vials, and
talked with me, saying to me, Come hither, and I will show thee the judgment of
the great whore, (meaning Rome) that sits upon many waters, (meaning her
government over many nations.)

2 With whom the kings of the earth have committed fornication, (meaning, they
have been seduced to imitate her evil practices,) and the inhabitants of the
earth have been made drunk with the wine of her fornication, (meaning, they are
likewise deluded to drink deep to a state of insensibility from her vain
doctrines.)

A remarkable instance of this was very lately practiced, and really fulfilled
at Naples; -- which, although governed by a king, is notwithstanding in the sea
of Rome, and about sixty miles distant. In consequence of a violent irruption
of fire out of mount Vesuvius, which is but a few miles from Naples, the
similitude of a human head, called St. Janarius's, was carried in procession,
lifted up, and held out, fully believing, that by honoring the saint, through
even this small part of his image, he himself in heaven, would be influenced to
intercede with God, to stop the great rivers of fire which issued from the
burning mountain.

For a people, calling themselves Christians, which have had the Revelation so
long to warn, and the blessed Gospel so long to instruct them, to embrace at
this late hour of the world, such an act of superstition and delusion, is
indeed astonishing. But it is a part of that great chain of errors, still
continued, which the Roman government, at a former period, most wickedly bound
its people in all nations, but clergy in particular with; and which is plainly
foretold by St. Paul, in the fourth chapter of his First Epistle to Timothy,
verse 1. Now the Spirit (which is the Holy Ghost) speaks expressly, that in the
latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits
and doctrines of devils:

2 Speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their consciences seared with a hot iron:

3 Forbidden to marry, etc.

The papal authority does not allow its clergy to marry, from a belief that a
man, by living in a state of separation from a woman, is better qualified to
fulfill the duties of a priest, more acceptable to God, than a man that is a
husband and father. Such doctrine is an evident proof to every discerning
person, that there is a great departure, or falling away, from the true faith;
to continue then in the practice, after it is explained and made public by
Divine command, is preferring darkness to light, the doctrines of devils to the
good words of God: it is giving a willing heed to the seducing spirits that St.
Paul alludes to. Christ, the Savior of the world, who left his gospel of the
kingdom of peace for the direction of all men, never made any such distinction;
for some of his apostles were married, and some were not: and be, as God the
Father, in the beginning of the creation, blessed Adam and Eve, saying to them,
Be fruitful, and multiply and replenish the earth, etc. repeating the same
after the flood, to Noah and his sons: he never ordered, nor never intended,
the cruel imposition of celibacy on his immediate servants, or any other
description of men.

It is also an abomination to him, because inconsistent with the design of his
creation, that any description of women, under the vain pretense of what is
falsely called religion and piety, of leading a more holy life, of serving God
better, should be shut up forever in monasteries, inhumanly deprived of
becoming wives and mothers.

I am commanded to say, it is grievous and sorrowful to the Lord God to see
nations, which acknowledge him, and which have the whole Scripture to inform
them of his will, paying a blind, an idolatrous obedience to human ordinances,
supported by bad oaths, and sinful vows, in direct opposition to what he
designs, and what in the beginning, the covenant of his blessing prescribes.

CHAP. XVII. CONTINUED.
3 So he carried me away in the Spirit (...) the Wilderness, (meaning into the
country, as if far inland from the sea) where I saw a woman (meaning Rome) sit
upon a scarlet colored beast, (meaning the Pope) full of names of blasphemy,
(his t^^es) having seven heads (alluding to the seven hi^^s on wh^ the city
stands) and ten horns, (meaning the Cardinals.)

4 And the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet color, and decided in gold
and precious stones, and pearls, having a golden ^^p in her hand full of
abominations, and filthiness of her fornication.

5 And upon her forehead was a name written, Mystery -- Babylon the Great, the
mother of harlots (meaning that she as a mother stood exposed for corrupting
with her evil doctrines many cities to the condition of harlots) and
abominations of the earth.

6 And I saw the woman drunk with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood
of the Martyrs of Jesus; and when I saw her, I wondered, greatly astonished.

This Babylon the Great, this mother of harlots, means Rome; but is spiritually
called by those names as an allusion to her excess of guilt as a Babylon, and
corruption of doctrine as a mother.

St. John mentions in the third verse, that he was carried away into the
Wilderness to see Rome; meaning by the words into the Wilderness, that Rome the
city he goes to look at is situated inland: this description is given to make a
distinction between it and London, the maritime Babylon, full of ships, seamen,
and commerce, mentioned in the eighteenth chapter.

The scarlet colored beast, full of names of blasphemy, with seven heads and
ten horns, means the Pope -- in this chapter only, and not in any other part of
the Revelation, is the Pope alluded to under any name -- or under any
signification whatever: neither is Rome but in one part, which is in the
sixteenth chapter and middle of the nineteenth verse.

The Pope, in addition to his many names of blasphemy, likewise assumes the
powers and prerogatives of God, calling himself* Instead of his blessed Savior,
the Supreme Head of the Church: as such he pretends, for it is only pretention
to deceive the ignorant, to be infallible, and to pardon the commission of sin
in others: again, as if sanctified by the Holy Ghost, and commanded immediately
from God to impart freely his mighty blessing and his mighty spirit to whom he
pleases, he ordains as it is called, Bishops, laying hands on them, and saying
at the same time, receive the Holy Ghost; he likewise claims the pre-eminence
of holiness in his person, and obedience to Christ in his actions, above all
the rest of mankind.

There is no man spiritual that is not sanctified by the Holy Ghost, and no man
is sanctified that teaches by his doctrines -- or recommends by his prayers
opposition to Christ the Savior, and disobedience to his Gospel of Peace; for
it is through and by Christ the blessed spirit, is given that sanctifies, which
every man that believes in him, and obeys his commands, may have -- may partake
of its blessing and sweets; some more, some less, in all things, and for all
occasions, as the Lord himself judges proper; but it will be given to every man
in such sufficiency as to make him abundant in knowledge, and teaching him
clearly the ways of Salvation.

Man may give to man a title, but it is God only that can make man spiritual;
it is he and none else that can give the Holy Ghost, the Divine Spirit of
Truth; all other givers among mankind, who say, "by the imposition of our hands
receive the Holy Ghost, whose sins thou do forgive, they are forgiven, and
whose sins thou do retain, they are retained;" are but as so many false
Christ's -- vain pretenders -- blasphemously endeavoring to imitate the true
One.

For a man to attempt to do what the true Christ only can, is attempting an
imposition, and justly constitutes a false Christ. For a man to kneel down to a
man to receive the Holy Ghost and then going forth by the authority of this
false Christ; teaching and preaching under the name of the true Christ, but in
opposition to his commands; deluded by an opinion that he is Spiritual because
his human maker imposed on him to believe so, when in reality he is not,
constitutes a false Prophet.

Those are the kind of people that the Lord Jesus Christ alludes to in the 24th
chapter of St. Matthew, and warns the world to beware of.

There are many that preach and write under the name of Christ, without being
influenced by his Spirit, or commanded by his word: for which, observe all you
that love him, that read this book, that he will not give his blessed Spirit,
which is indeed the Holy Ghost, to any man exalted in pride and living under
names of blasphemy; praying for the success and aggrandizement of particular
men in war, at the expense of ruin, and destruction to others. -- And yet, the
Pope, to impress the multitude round him with reverence and awe, is entitled
Holiness, the Vicar of Christ, Successor to St. Peter, and is accounted
infallible; all such names are an evident demonstration of pride and falsehood;
and as such, he has neither holiness from Christ in his person, nor obedience
to the Gospel of Truth in his actions.

It is for blasphemy, idolatry, deceit, teaching rebellion against Christ, and
for being a shedder of blood by war, that the Pope is called in the Revelation
from God, a scarlet colored beast; under that dreadful name, though knelt to as
divine, and exalted to the height of Heaven by titles, he s^nks down into
perdition; he is a fallen man, and is adjudged by that already testimony of St.
John, to suffer the punishment of everlasting fire.

7 And the Angel said to me, wherefore did thou marvel? I will tell thee the
mystery of the woman, and of the beast that carries her (meaning that governs
her) which has the seven heads and ten horns.

8 The beast that thou saw, was, and is not, and shall ascend out of the
bottomless pit, and go into perdition: and they that dwell on the earth shall
wonder, whose names were not written in the book of life, from the foundation
of the world, when they behold the beast that was, and is not, and yet is.

War, oaths, violence, and bloodshed, in opposition to the commands of Christ
in his gospel of the kingdom of peace, they belong to Satan and his government
of darkness.

ST. MATTHEW, CHAP. IV.
8 Again the devil ^akes him up to an exceeding high mountain, and shows him
all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them;

9 And says to him, all these things I will give thee, if thou will fall down
and worship me.

10 Then says Jesus to him, get thee hence, Satan: For it is written, thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

The Popes having rose to what they are, and established their power by the
sword, is the reason that God mentions in this part of the revelation to St.
John, the beast; or papal authority, to ascend from the bottomless pit: in the
beginning they were great military princes, and governed with large armies; but
latterly their power became weak, and their consequence small; yet
notwithstanding, the vain titles, pageantry, and military parade, are still
preserved and closely embraced by the present.

CHAP. XVII. CONTINUED.
9 And here is the mind which has wisdom. The seven heads are seven mountains
on which the woman sits.

The woman means Rome; and the seven mountains or hills on which the city is
built, are meant by St. John as the seven heads of the Pope.

10 And there are seven kings: five are fallen, and one is, and the other is
not yet come; and when he comes he must continue a short space.

These seven kings mean seven powerful military Popes: they are denominated
kings because they were warlike men, and in other respects governed with the
sword like them.

11 And the beast, that was, and is not, even he is the eighth, is the same as
the seven, and goes into perdition.

This means the last military Pope of Rome; for as the Popedom has rose by the
sword, by the sword also it will fall; and the last Pope alluded to in this
verse, as well as the first military one alluded to in the eighth verse; goes
into perdition.

12 And the ten horns which thou saw, are ten kings, which have received no
kingdom as yet; but receive power as kings one hour with the beast.

13. These have one mind, and shall give their power and strength to the beast.

These two verses mean the cardinals, who are compared to kings in name; but
not in power: they are great, but not independent; they have a great name, but
not independent sovereignty: they are called, like the German electors to the
Emperor, as is mentioned in the seventh chapter of Daniel, the horns of the
beast; because they assist the Pope with their counsel and authority.

14 These shall make war with the Lamb, but the Lamb shall conquer them; for he
is Lord of lords, and King of kings; and they that are with him, are called,
and chosen, and faithful.

The pope and cardinals, by their teaching, practice, and government, are in a
state of opposition to Christ; that is, they practice and encourage, to support
their form of government, Swearing and War; the two principal things which
Christ, above all others, prohibits in the most positive terms. It is for this
opposition to his commands in the Gospel, that they are represented as making
war against him; -- they are permitted, through the patient suffering of God,
to do so, until he can bear no longer with their rebellion; when, to fulfill
this prophecy and his decreed judgment, they will be entirely cut off. Christ,
as supreme head of the church, acknowledges no religion but what he has taught
by his Gospel, which is Christianity; for there is no kind of church but one,
and that is visible man: it consists of one person, as well as a whole
congregation; of one just man in a room, as well as a million any where else;
he came into the world to save sinners, and redeem them from the chains of
eternal death: the blessed Gospel is the great bond of his promises, now put
into the hands of all men that will receive it for their instruction; for
which, all that read or hear it, ought to remember their solemn covenant in
baptism, and take care that on their part, the terms of his salvation are
complied with. To do which, man must, to fulfill the design of his creation,
endeavor to live long, and live happy; to do that, he must abolish War, and
live in constant peace; he must likewise abolish swearing of every kind,
because it leads to falsehood and perjury: and make the innocent words of Yes
or No, the solemn bond of his public truth.

The men that are called preachers of Christianity, instead of assuming vain
titles and lofty political names; instead of assisting in any way at councils
of state, they ought to stand between princes and war, between men and strife,
between nations and bloodshed: they should be true teachers of the Gospel, and,
like the immediate disciples of their blessed Savior, always the Ministers of
Peace.

THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW, CHAP. V.
9 Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God.

CHAP. VI.
7 But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen do: for they
think that they shall be heard for their much speaking;

8 Be not ye therefore like to them; for your Father knows what things ye have
need of before ye ask him.

9 After this manner therefore pray ye: Our Father, who art in heaven; hallowed
be thy name;

10 Thy kingdom come; thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven, etc.

The kingdom of God, which is asked for every time this form of prayer is said,
is to live in peace and righteousness: the government of God, in heaven, is
peace: and his will is, that man on earth should have the same. It is prayed
for every Sunday throughout Europe: and yet, to the blushing shame of man, in a
minute after he forgets it, forsakes the kingdom of peace, and fervently prays
to the same compassionate God to go forth with fleets and armies.

ST. PAUL TO THE GALATIANS, CHAP. I.
2 Grace be to you, and peace from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus
Christ.

3 But though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel to you than
that which we have preached to you, let him be accursed.

To prevent the destruction of man by war and falsehood, Christ, who shed his
blood for the redemption of man, prohibits, in the most plain, clear, and
positive words, all kind of strife, that it should not increase to war; and all
kind of swearing, that it should not multiply into falsehood. These two evils,
enforced by law, and encouraged by religion, under the time of Christianity,
and in contradiction to the blessed Gospel of truth, are the two principal
fountains that deluge the world with sin, and deprive heaven of many.

ST. MATTHEW, CHAP. V.
19 Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and shall
teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven; but
whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be called great in the
kingdom of heaven.

33 Again, ye have heard that it has been said by them of old time, (meaning
the teachers formerly under the law,) Thou shall not forswear thyself, but
shall perform to the Lord thy oath.

34 But I say to you, Swear not at all; neither by heaven, for it is God's
throne;

35 Nor by the earth, for it is his foot stool; neither by Jerusalem, for it is
the city of the Great King.

36 Neither must thou swear by thy head, because thou cannot make one hair of
it white or black.

37 But let your communication be Yea, yea; and Nay, nay; for whatsoever is
more than these comes of evil.

38 Ye have heard that it has been said, (meaning under the law by Moses) an
eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth:

39 But I say to you, that ye resist not evil; but whosoever shall smite thee
on the right cheek, turn to him the other also.

43 Ye have heard that it has been said, Thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate
thy enemy:

44 But I say to you, love your enemies; bless them that curse you, do good to
them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute
you.

45 That ye may be the children of your Father, which is in heaven.

ST. JAMES THE APOSTLE, CHAP. V.
2 But above all things, my brethren, Swear not; neither by heaven, neither by
the earth, neither by any other oath; but let your Yea, be yea; and your Nay,
nay; lest ye fall into condemnation.

THE GOSPEL OF ST. JOHN, CHAP. XII.
43 He that rejects me, and receives not my words, as one that judges him: the
word that I have spoken, (which is the Gospel) tho fame shall judge him in the
last day.

ST. PAUL, SECOND EPISTLE TO THE THESSALONIANS, CHAP. I.
7 And to you, who are troubled, rest with as; when the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from heaven with his mighty angels.

8 In flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey
not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

As circumcision to the Jews was the seal of their covenant with God, and
promise of obedience to his law, so is baptism with Christians the seal of
their covenant with Christ, and promise of obedience to his commands.

When teachers, professing Christianity, have their maintenance and elevation
in the world, dependent on great political warlike governments, and want to do,
from interested motives, what the blessed Gospel prohibits, to add plausibility
to their delusive reasons, as in the legal and religious case of swearing
oaths: they go back to the law of Moses for a precedent, to justify their
apostasy and conduct. The law was for the Jews alone, under the appointed
administration of the Levites and elders, in their own country; nevertheless,
when strangers acknowledged God, and submitted to its rites, they were also
allowed the freedom of its benefit; but when Christ came into the world, for
the redemption of man, he abolished the law, which was temporary, and in its
place gave the Gospel; which is everlasting. That is, he removed the form of
worshipping God by sacrifice; the form of coming at the truth by swearing; and
that of obtaining justice for injury, by reprisal and violence.

We all admire the Lord Jesus Christ for his humility and affection, the
goodness and wisdom that breathes throughout his Gospel, and the sacrifice of
himself for our salvation; yet the generality of the world, as if unmindful of
this wonderful instance of Divine love, not only refuse what they promised in
baptism to obey, but likewise seek, by opposition and war, to destroy his
salvation and happy government of peace. What does a man require from his wife
in marriage, but to love and be faithful to him only? Would he not be jealous,
and very angry, if she obeyed any commands in opposition to his, and honored
another with the endearing name of husband? By the same rule, all that are
baptized, are, by covenant, comparatively married to Christ; for the name of
Christian implies a belief in him, and an obedience to his words. Is it wise or
just then, to obey a doctrine contrary to the commands of thy blessed Lord and
acknowledged Savior? And is it not unkind in thee, O man, to honor thy equal
with his sacred name?

As a man cannot, in justice, be considered as a servant, any longer than while
he obeys the commands of his master, so neither can a man, in truth, be
regarded as a Christian, any longer than while he obeys the commands of Christ.

Hear therefore, all nations, what the Lord God commands me to write, and be
warned by it; that, as a master is compelled to withdraw his allowance of food,
and discharge from his house a servant that will not obey him, so will he
withdraw his loving kindness of peace, and in anger remove from the face of the
earth, that man or family, city or nation, that will only acknowledge Christ in
word, but in practice refuse to obey his commands.

REVELATION XVII. CONTINUED.
15 And he says to me, the waters which thou saw, where the Whore sits, are
people, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues.

16 And the ten horns (meaning the cardinals) which thou saw upon the beast,
(meaning the Pope;) these shall hate the whore, (meaning Rome,) and shall make
her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire.

The cardinals will disagree and quarrel; -- then Rome will be convulsed by
parties: and plundered alternately by each; (which means eating her flesh;) in
doing this they will set the city on fire, and almost destroy it. In due time
after this the latter part of the nineteenth verse, in the sixteenth chapter,
will be fulfilled on Rome, spiritually Babylon, the capital of Italy; when, by
a mighty earthquake, the city, with the ground it stands on, will be lifted up,
shook violently to pieces, and utterly overthrown.

17 For God has put in their hearts to fulfill his will, and to agree, and give
their kingdom to the ^^^st, until the words of God shall be fulfilled.

The cardinals will continue in subjection to the Pope, and agree in their
measures of government, assisting him also with their advice and power until
the time already determined is expired, which is nearly so now; that done, the
minds of the people will be changed, and another spirit will be given to them,
to fulfill the judgment of God, according to this prophecy.

I was not permitted to join this addition to this Book, when first printed,
which is the reason that it was passed over; but now I am commanded by the Lord
my God, to print and join it to the former part, therefore I do.

RICHARD BROTHERS.
LONDON, 20th of the month called SEPTEMBER, 1794.
END OF PART I.
CONTENTS.
BOOK SECOND,
BEING the second Sign of Warning for the Benefit of all Nations; containing,
among other great and remarkable Things, the sudden Fall of the Turkish, German
and Russian EMPIRES.

PREFACE TO BOOK THE SECOND.
LENGTH of time, change of countries and governments, corruption of language,
and hasty copies in writing, before the more exact method of printing became
generally used, has been the means of not only introducing, without design,
into the Hebrew Bible, an insertion of some new words, but likewise an
expulsion of some of the old, which produces a disagreement in some few parts,
and makes it differ now from what it originally was in the times of David,
Solomon, and at the commencement of the Babylonian captivity: some parts of the
English translation are, consequently, erroneous; but they are so immaterial as
not to affect, in the least, the truth of its sacred Records, or the tendency
of its divine instruction.

The few parts of the English translation, which I am instructed to alter in my
writings, the propriety will be allowed by every person that has discernment to
perceive, or conviction to believe: -- beyond the limits of my authority, for
it is prescribed, I am not suffered to proceed in any word or in any way
whatever.

The following are the words which the Lord God spoke to me in a vision, soon
after I was commanded to write and make known his judgments, for the good of
London and general benent of all nations: -- There is no other man under the
whole heaven that I discover the errors of the bible to, and reveal a knowledge
how to correct them, so that they may be restored as they were in the
beginning, but yourself.

Moreover, when I began to write I believed it necessary to adopt the same
language as the Scripture does, regularly imitating it in the words -- ye thee,
and thou; but God spoke to me in a vision of the night, and said -- Write in
the same manner as I always speak to you; write as other men do; write
according to the custom of the country you live in; you will then be better
attended to, and what you write will be more easily understood.

A man that has been an officer in the navy, whose immediate ancestors have
been separated from the Jews such a considerable length of time as to make them
forget they ever belonged to the name, -- such a man declaring himself openly
to the world a prophet of God, the revealed Prince allotted to order the sudden
return of the Hebrews from all nations, and govern them in the land of Israel,
will, with some reason, I allow, excite both astonishment and doubt: but from
the multiplied recorded testimonies I produce, which no other on earth can, it
ought not to prevail with any person as a just objection against believing what
I write.

For observe, some hostile profession was necessary for me to be engaged in, to
fulfill the recorded judgment on the family I am designed to represent in the
seat of government; therefore, with all the certain proofs I have and will
constantly bring forward* with all the just reasons I advance, the surprise and
doubt, entertained at the beginning, ought to vanish in as little time as would
be requisite to read again the book which contains the account.

But remember likewise, from the records of Scripture, that Moses was taken
away in his infancy, and remained separated from his brethren for eighty years;
the first forty of which he was reared in the palace of the king of Egypt, and
educated in the language and customs of the country like one of its own native
princes; yet he was revealed to the Israelites as the prophet of God, to order
their hasty departure from Pharaoh's bondage, and afterward to conduct them to
the Promised Land.

SAUL, the son of Kish, after being anointed king, prophesied in company with
other men, to the great astonishment of all that saw him.

DAVID, king of Israel, the greatest favorite that ever God had on earth, whose
wars th^' many, originated at that time from necessity and justice, never
undertook, but to prevent the introduction of idolatry, and preserve in the
land of Israel a true uninterrupted worship of God, was a prophet; and for
whose sake, in remembrance of his name, besieging armies were destroyed, and
Jerusalem safely delivered* Yet this great monarch this unequalled favorite,
this pattern of mercy to all kings, and who alone, of all men under heaven,
possessed the established promise of everlasting national government, could
not, (but the objection did not proceed from any charge of injustice or sin,)
for, being a man of war, and having shed much blood on the earth, although done
by the express concurrence of the Most High, be permitted to build at Jerusalem
a temple of worship for him: The great honor was given to Solomon a king of
peace, his son and immediate successor so averse though necessitated to order
it was the Creator of the world to the effusion (...) blood and the destruction
of man.

FIRST OF CHRONICLES, CHAP. XXII.
7 And David said to Solomon, My son, as for me it was in my mind to build a
house to the name of the lord my ^od.

8 But the word of the Lord came to me, saying, thou have shed much blood, and
have made great wars; thou shall not build a house to my name, because thou
have shed much blood on the earth in my sight.

9 Behold a son shall be born to thee, who shall be a man of rest, and I will
give him rest from all his enemies round about; for his name shall be Solomon,
and I will give peace and quietness to Israel in his days.

10 He shall build a house for my name; and he shall be my son and I will be
his father; and I will establish his kingdom over Israel for ever.

SAMUEL was not only a priest, but likewise principal judge of Israel, yet he
was a great prophet.

ISAIAH was a prince of the family of David, and likewise a prophet.

EZEKIEL was one of the principal priests,

JEREMIAH one of the poorer; yet both were alike great prophets.

AMOS was a poor herdsman of Tekoa, in the land of Israel;

DANIEL, a captive prince at Babylon, in Assyria; and yet both were great
prophets.

GOD, without being accountable to any man for what he does, will sanctify,
with his blessed Spirit, whom he pleases, however astonishing it may appear,
and however incredible to the self righteous, that any person, in preference to
himself, should receive and be commanded to make known a communication of
revealed knowledge St. Paul was taught a knowledge of the Gospel by revelation,
and instructed likewise how to preach it, before he could be an apostle, and
joined to the ministry of Christ.
; but with God there is no distinction of high or low, rich or poor; in his
presence both are regarded alike, when just; and the Scripture abounds with
many examples recorded on purpose for after ages to imitate.

In the same manner that a knowledge of the Gospel, and how to preach it, was
revealed to St. Paul, a knowledge of futurity, and those parts of the Scripture
I have constantly mentioned, were revealed to me.

GALATIANS, CHAP. I.
11 But I certify to you, brethren, that the Gospel which was preached of me is
not after man;

12 For I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the
revelation of Jesus Christ. EPHESIANS, CHAP. III.
2 If ye have heard of the dispensation of the grace of God, which is given me
toward you:

3 How that by revelation he made known to me the mystery, as I wrote before in
few words.

4 Whereby when ye read, ye may understand my knowledge in the mystery of
Christ.

5 Which in other ages was not made known to the sons of man, as it is now
revealed to his holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit.

A REVEALED KNOWLEDGE OF THE PROPHECIES AND TIMES. PARTICULARLY OF THE PRESENT
TIME, THE PRESENT WAR, AND THE PROPHECY NOW FULFILLING. BOOK THE SECOND.
IN obedience to the sacred command of the Lord God, whose servant and prophet
I am, I publish this writing, that it may be translated into all languages, for
the information and benefit of all nations.

This is the last sign, and last warning, I am commanded to say, that will be
given in writing before I am re^ealed to the Jews, when the commands delivered
to me will be -- to order them to depart in great haste from all nations, and
go to the land of Israel: to repronounce the judgments of God, which have been
suspended hitherto for my sake, and declare them irrevocable.

Of the PROPHECY which relates to the present Time of the WORLD, the present
WAR, and the approaching DISTRESS of all NATIONS. THE PROPHET DANIEL, CHAP. VII.
IN the first year of Belshazzar, king of Babylon, Daniel had a dream, and
visions in the night on his bed; then he wrote the visions, to show the
substance of what they contained.

2 Daniel spoke and said; I saw in my vision by night, and behold, the four
winds of the heaven strove on the great sea.

3 And four great beasts came up from the sea, different one from another.

4 The first was like a lion, and it had eagle's wings: I beheld 'till the
wings were plucked, when it was lifted up on the earth, and made stand on the
feet as a man; and a man's heart was given to it.

The lion means George the Third, the present king of England; plucking the
wings of the lion, means taking away the power of the king, made stand on the
feet as a man, with a man's heart, means his reduction to the condition of
other men, -- and possessing similar thoughts.

It is more than twenty months since I first wrote to the king, queen, and
minister of state, to inform them of many things that would come to pass; that
the time was nearly accomplished for some of the judgments of Go^ be made
manifest, and also that this prophecy was fulfilling: I beseeched them in the
most earnest and respectful language, not to join in the war on any account
whatever, or even encourage it, for the death of Louis the Sixteenth would be
impossible to prevent, it was recorded, and could not be avoided; the
revolution in France, and its consequences proceeded entirely from the judgment
of God to fulfill this prophecy of Daniel: therefore all attempts to overthrow
the judgment, and preserve the monarchy by force, was opposing what was
determined in the Scripture of Truth should most certainly take place.

The aspect of the war was delusive, the encouragements of success that it held
out to princes were deceitful; but those encouragements of delusion were
permitted, to bring many nations under the judgment of God, and punish them for
the heavy guilt of opposing his decrees.

If many had no more to fight against than a few men alone, or nations but one
divided nation to subdue, then it might with reason be expected that the
greatest number would soon overcome the least, and that many strong nations
would soon conquer a weak one: but it is many men fighting against the Spirit
of God, and strong nations laboring in vain with their blood and treasure to
overthrow his Judgment.

The Lord God permits this opposition for three years and a half, to fulfill the
determined part of this prophecy on all that oppose it; -- that done, his
judgments will take place, to punish man and lay waste kingdoms.

St. John the Apostle, in the nineteenth chapter of ^^e Revelation, alludes, to
the present time of the world, and means the same things, though differently
described, as the prophet Daniel does in the seventh chapter; for which I am
commanded to insert a part, that all princes and governments may be publicly
warned, that they may know the consequences of this war, from the judgment of
God, will be -- death to millions, and everlasting distress to all nations.

10 And I fell at his feet to worship him, and he said to me, see thou do it
not; I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren that have the testimony of
Jesus; worship God: for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.

11 And I saw heaven opened; and behold a white horse; and he that sat on him
was called Faithful and True: and in righteousness he does judge and make war.

12 His eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head were many crowns; and he
had a name written that no man knew but he himself.

13 And he was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood: and his name is called,
The Word of God:

14 And the armies which were in heaven followed him on white horses, clothed
in fine linen, white and clean.

The armies are an allusion to the powerful judgments of God, under what -- or
how many different forms their visitation of death is made on the world.

15 And out of his mouth goes a sharp sword, that with it he should smite the
nations: and he will rule them with a rod of iron; and he treads the wine press
of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God.

16 And he has on his vesture and on his thigh ^ame written, King of kings, and
Lord of lords.

17 And I saw an angel standing in the sun; and he cried with a loud voice,
(meaning thunder, which is explained in the first book of Revealed Knowledge)
saying to all the fowls that fly in the midst of heaven, come and gather
yourselves together to the supper of the great God.

18 That ye may eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh of captains, and the
flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses, and of them that fit on them; and
the flesh of all men both free and bond, both small and great.

19 And I saw the beast, and the kings of the earth, and their armies gathered
together, to make war against him that sat on the horse, and against his army.

20 And the beast was taken, and with him the false prophet that wrought
miracles before him, with which he deceived them that had received the mark of
the beast, and them that worshipped his image. These both were cast alive into
a lake of fire burning with brimstone.

21 And the ^emnant were slain with the sword of him that sat on the horse,
which sword proceeded out of his mouth; and all the fowls were filled with
their flesh.

DANIEL, CHAP. VII. CONTINUED.
5 And, behold, another beast; a second, like a bear: and it raised itself up
on one side, with three ribs in its mouth between its teeth; and they said thus
to it, Arise, devour much flesh.

This verse means the present empress of Russia: She is according to the
judgment of God in this prophecy, decreed to suffer death: and by revelation I
am informed it will be done by the hands of man.

6 After this I beheld, and so, another like a leopard: which had on its back
four wings of a fowl; the beast had also four heads, and dominion was given to
it.

The Leopard, means Louis the Sixteenth king of France: the wings of a fowl on
its back, are, like the eagle's on the lion, an allusion to the king's great
moveable power.

The fall of this monarch from a throne, and afterward suffering death, to
fulfill the judgment of God by his prophet Daniel, was impossible for all the
armies of Europe to prevent; equally so as the decreed death of Charles the
First, king of England, which is mentioned by St. John in the thirteenth
chapter and third verse of the Revelation; the deadly wound being healed, in
the same verse, means the recovery of monarchy by the restoration of Charles
the Second.

7 After this I saw in the night visions a fourth beast; and behold, it was
dreadful, and terrible and strong exceedingly; and it had great iron teeth: it
devoured, broke in pieces, and stamped on the residue (meaning the electors)
with its feet; it was different from all the beasts that were seen before, and
it had ten horns.

This great beast, so different from the others, means the present emperor of
Germany; the ten horns, mean the electors, or princes of the empire.

In one part of this chapter the horns are denominated kings; the reason is,
they raise armies, go to war, and govern with absolute power, like them; but
notwithstanding, they all acknowledge the emperor as their chief, and under
that acknowledgment of subjection are solentaly engaged to defend his empire
when called on. For which to conceal the meaning of the prophecy, until the
fullness of time comes and the appointed person for it to be revealed to, the
vision represents the German princes as horns of defense belonging to the
emperor's head.

It devoured, broke in pieces, and stamped on the residue with its feet --
means the entire destruction of the German electors; and tho possession of
their territories by the emperor: he will destroy them, and also spread his
dominion over Italy; threatening at the same time all Europe, and despising its
kings with their feeble efforts to oppose him. Rome will fall under his power,
and so will Venice likewise; the former will be retaken by the French republic,
but the latter will be plundered and almost destroyed. After this, to fulfill
the prophecy and the judgment of God, he will suffer death from the hands of
man.

The orders of the emperor, in the Netherlands, are, that if the Austrian army
should be defeated, and it most surely will; for I am commanded to repeat, as
an example and warning, what the prophet Jeremiah was commanded to say to the
messengers of Zedekiah, king of Judah:

CHAP. XXXVII.
9 Thus says the Lord; Deceive not yourselves, saying, The Chaldeans will
surely depart from us: for they shall not depart.

10 For though he had smitten the whole army of the Ch^^de ^^s that fight
against you, and there remained but wounded men, yet they should rise up, every
man in his tent, and burn this city with fire.

By the same example, if the French army was to be defeated, even again and
again, it should recover and conquer likewise; (that all the judgments of God,
in the seventh chapter of the prophecy of Daniel, may take their course, and be
fulfilled,) to acknowledge the French republic, and make an immediate peace on
the best terms that can be obtained, the interests of other nations will not be
much consulted: time, the threats of a victorious enemy, and the perilous
condition of the German army, will not admit the least delay.

The English will sharply remonstrate against this conduct; for which their
army, however incredible it may appear to the Government now, will be
surrounded, disarmed, and commanded to depart: but their General will be
detained by the Austrian; and by revelation from the Lord God to me, he falls
to the ground.

The emperor, being exhausted of money by the war, but having a large army at
his command, determines, now he has made peace with the French, and quarrelled
with the English, to execute the plan he has for some time conceived the hopes
of being one day able to accomplish -- his father and uncle, strange as it may
appear, yet it is most certainly true, for I am informed by revelation,
conceived the same design, and believed the attempt easily practicable when the
opportunity offered, which is -- the reduction of all Germany, (...) ^^vernment
of himself.

He begins (...) seizing on the electorate of Hanover, and ^^^dering it quite
bare: after this success, his ambition for more extensive dominion will rise;
it will now lead him boldly forward to subject and devour them all. For God, to
fulfill his judgments, and this prophecy of Daniel, in chapter vii. will deliver
him over, to be governed by the secret, but powerful workings of an evil
spirit; because his inclinations are bad: according to all that I informed the
king and queen of, in May and June 1792: as he did Ahab, king of Israel, to
accomplish his fall, and the entire destruction of his family.

FIRST OF KINGS, CHAP. XXII.
4 And he said to Jehoshaphat, Will thou go with me to the battle to Ramoth
Gilead? -- And Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel, I am the same as thou,
my people as thy people, my horses as thy horses.

5 And Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel, Enquire, I pray thee, from the
word of the Lord today.

6 Then the king of Israel gathered the prophets together, about four hundred
men, and said to them, Shall I go against Ramoth Gilead to battle, or shall I
forbear? and they said, Go up; for the Lord will deliver it into the hand of
the king.

7 And Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a prophet of the Lord besides, that
we might enquire of him?

8 And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat* There is one man yet, Micaiah,
the son of I^lah, by whom we may enquire of the Lord: but I hate him, for he
does not prophecy good of me, but evil. And Jehoshaphat said, Let not the king
say so.

11 And Zedekiah, the son of Chenaanah, made horns of iron; and he said, Thus
says the Lord, with these thou shall push the Syrians, until thou continue them.

12 And all the prophets prophesied so, saying, Go up to Ramoth Gilead, and
prosper: -- for the Lord will deliver it into the king's hand.

13 And the messenger that was gone to call Micaiah, spoke to him, saying,
Behold now, the words of the prophets are as one mouth, declaring good to the
king: let thy word, I pray thee be like ^e word of one of them, and speak that
which is good also.

14 And Micaiah said, As the Lord lives, what the Lord says to me, that will I
speak:

17 And he said, I saw all Israel scattered on the hills, as sheep which have
not a shepherd: and the Lord said, These have no master: let them return every
man to his house in peace*

18 And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, Did I not tell thee, that he
would prophecy no good for me, but evil?

19 And he said, Hear thou therefore the word of the Lord: I saw the Lord
sitting on his throne, and all the host of heaven standing by him, (...) right
hand and on his left.

20 And the Lord said, who will persuade Ahab, that he may go up (...) fall at
Ramoth Gilead* and one said in this manner, and another said in that manner.

21 And there came forth a Spirit, and he ^ood before the Lord, and said I will
persuade him.

22 And the Lord said to him, In what manner? And he said, I will go forth, and
I will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets. And he said, Thou
shall persuade him, and prevail also; Go forth, and do so.

23 Now, therefore, behold, the Lord God has put a lying spirit in the mouth of
all these thy prophets, and the Lord has spoken of evil concerning thee.

The Emperor's council will be filled with the same delusive evil spirit, that
they may concur with him, and possess the same violent inclination for war and
human destruction as himself. At this time a fresh decree will be issued from
Vienna, commanding all Germany, and all the people under his government, as he
conquers them by fire and sword, to offer solemn prayers up to the Lord God,
for the further success of his imperial majesty's arms, the entire destruction
of his enemies, and the preservation of himself; styling him, in blasphemy
against God, their most Gracious, Just, and Merciful Sovereign Lord.

The other nations of Europe, afraid, and trembling, will as solemnly implore
the same Lord God for peace and safety, against such a cruel enemy, forgetting,
that it was but a little time before, they ^ere praying in the same strain of
blasphemy as himself -- To destroy their enemies, and give success to their
arms; to that very gracious and compassionate God, who sealed the redemption of
man with his own blood, and strictly commanded all nations, as his children and
people, to live in peace and brotherly love.

Opposition is in vain; he goes through the principalities like a flood, and
collects in his progress a mighty army. The course of the prophecy is, That he
shall conquer and destroy all before him: therefore he certainly will; -- and
take away the treasure of many wealthy cities likewise.

After this, to finish oppression, and fulfill the decreed judgment of God, the
French Republic will be raised against him; his army will be entirely
overthrown in Italy, and himself will be compelled to seek shelter among the
very people whose relations he destroyed, whose towns he plundered and burnt
but a little time before. This is Francis, the present reigning emperor of
Germany, who is described, in chap. vii. ver. 7. of the prophecy of Daniel, as
great, strong, and terrible; stamping under his feet with contempt, and
destroying all the princes round him. His ambition will increase with his
dominion, and his conquest will be so wonderful, for a short time, as to make
all Europe tremble; his end is miserable; and as he treated others without
mercy, no mercy will be shown to him. His death, by the hands of man is
certain, because decreed; and his punishment everlasting, because recorded. To
be related to him now, will be considered hereafter as a capital crime.

DANIEL, CHAP. VII. CONTINUE
8 I considered the horns, and behold there came up among them another litte
horn, before whom there were three of the first horns plucked up by the roots;
and behold, in this horn were eyes like the eyes of man, and a mouth speaking
great things.

This little horn, that grows great, and becomes so ambitious as to pluck up
three of the other horns, to extend his own dominion, is the present King of
Prussia. He is one of the imperial electors, and to fulfill exactly what the
visions of God describe him to be, he confidently calls himself, in great
words, The preponderating member of the Germanic body.

The king of Prussia will acknowledge the French republic, and also make peace
with it: he will oppose the Emperor, and likewise follow his example; by which
his dominions, to fulfill the prophecy, will be enlarged (comparatively for a
moment only) by the addition of three electorates, when the Bear, (meaning
Russia,) watching for the opportunity, will rise and devou^ Prussia at one
side, while the Emperor destroys him at the other. His armies will be defeated,
and his capital set on fire by the Bear^ his life will be taken away from the
earth, and his monarchy, to fulfill the everlasting decrees of the Lord God, in
the prophecy of Daniel, will be destroyed; never, never to be restored any more.

Russia will assist the Emperor in the beginning, to promote her favorite
design of destroying the Turkish empire; she will also quarrel with the Poles
and devour great numbers of them; Warsaw will be set on fire* and the
government entirely changed. At this time the (...) army, (...) as if
imp^^tient for its (...), to (...) and (...) our (...) flesh Turkey and
comparatively run over the l^nd; treading down, and devouring with great fury,
all opposition in its way. At the capital it stops; here are its decreed
bounds; no farther it must go. Here the Russian general divides the spoils of
many cities with his army, and the rich provinces of Turkey between his
officers. Here he despises the oath of fidelity, and throws away the submission
of a subject -- proclaiming himself Emperor of Greece.

After this the Swede will enter Russia, and destroy with great fury; even the
ships of war and capital will not escape. The Russian empire will be convulsed
in many parts by its generals and governors, each rising up in his place, and
claiming an authority to command the other: they will fight until great
multitudes are destroyed, and the country made desolate. The imperial family
will all be cut off, and no successor will for ever after arise: the
Government, at the same time, will be broke to pieces, and utterly dissolved;
never, never to be restored any more.

The Spanish Monarchy will cease by this war, and the Stad^holdership of
Holland will be cut off close to the ground; according to the visions of God to
me, in 1792, and which I communicated at that time by his sacred command to the
king and queen of England.

The king of Sardinia will be dethroned, and the Popedom destroyed forever!
according to the revelation of God to use, and which I communicated to the
English prime minister before the war with France was entered into; concluding
what I wrote to him with these words -- It is not all the navy of England, nor
the armies of Europe united, can prevent the king of Sardinia from being
dethroned.

The death of the French king, as one of the particular number, mentioned in
the seventh chapter of Daniel, decreed to die, took place, to fulfill the
pre-determined judgment of God by this prophet; the monarchy of France is
likewise, by the same judgment, abolished for ever, and the present form of
government established. Therefore marvel no more that it cannot be conquered by
all the armies without, nor destroyed by all the commotions within; if it
could, by human power, the Horn (meaning the king of Prussia) would be the
allotted man to accomplish it: for the meaning of the prophecy is, that he
shall prevail against France for three years and a half, but not to conquer the
whole: he would have faithfully kept with his army in France the promises he
made with his mouth on entering it; which were to deliver over the towns for
plunder, and the people for death, if he was opposed. it is for this that he is
described by Daniel, to have a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies. All
this would have been permitted, because recorded, to fulfill the prophecy; to
hasten his own destruction, and the general fall of European Monarchy.

The Dutch will acknowledge the French republic, and also make a hasty peace
with its the Portuguese will do the same.

TO THE KING AND PARLIAMENT OF GREAT BRITAIN.
HEAR what the Lord God additionally says to me by revelation, and commands me
to write -- France seeing England left alone, deserted by all her allies, will
require, as the conditions of peace, an acknowledgment of the republic, a
restoration of the colonies, and the ships taken away from Toulon. For a short
time he will permit England, as he will Russia and Germany, to succeed in the
acquisition of delusive conquest, but it is the better -- the more effectual,
and more imperceptible to human foresight, to accomplish his judgment on her,
according to the prophecy of Daniel and Revelation of St. John; after that
short time is expired, which is nearly sorrow, new enemies will rise up, some
warring against her openly, others privately; all will prevail, until she that
sirs now as a queen among the nations, is, according to the vision of God, in
my first book, without a covering on her head, worn threadbare, and rent in
many places.

Will England continue this war any longer against a people that have the
judgment of God in their favor? Will she, by a continuance of the present war
against France, enter into another, for the safety of Hanover, against the
Emperor of Germany, who will be rendered invincible for a time as a scourge, to
fulfill the recorded judgments of God? Will she continue this war any longer for
her destruction that she may enter into a fresh one with America to hasten it?
Is the king of England so regardless of his own life, and the preservation of
his family, as to involve them with himself in certain misery and death, by a
longer continuance of this war: Is the government, the parliament, the clergy
and people, so insensible to the blessings of peace, and the happiness of
fortune, as to prefer the absolute certainty of losing all they possess, and
being destroyed themselves, to support a war which, in its consequences, to
fulfill the judgment of God, is designed shall throw down, for ever, the English
monarchy; and from the confusion it will make, throughout the country, involve
almost every family of wealth in beggary and death?

Are you, William Pit, to whom I wrote in May and June 1792, informing you of
the consequences of this war to your country, when the war was not intended, so
insensible to your own preservation and the benefit of your brother, as to
continue any longer a war that will involve both you and him in certain death?
-- What I acquainted you with in 1792, and often since, was made known to me by
visions and revelations from the Lord God. The death of Louis XVI. and the
removal of the English crown from the king's head, to a level with the ground,
according to the seventh chapter of Daniel; the fall of the queen's palace, and
the destruction of the Tower; your own removal from administration, and
afterward death, was among the things which I informed you of would most
certainly come to pass as the evil consequences of this delusive war. My
account to you then, of futurity, concluded with these words -- "The visions
are established, and the things mentioned most certain and true."

When I informed you that England would enter into this war, and the
consequences which would, in despite of all your efforts, flow from it, you
despised me; for at that time, the war was not intended: and to tell of evils
that would most certainly ensue from a thing, when the thing they were to
proceed from was not designed, were to you the effects of folly and deceit.

My knowledge of future things is given me from God; therefore what I wrote was
true: A little time longer, and England will be so much entangled as not to be
able to go forward without feeling the pains of that colonial conquest which is
to be the cause of her death; nor to retire, without falling under that foreign
blow, which will break the empires in pieces, and throw herself down on the
ground; from whence she is never to rise up any more.

Neither evil can be prevented, and both will take place, to fulfill the
judgment of God, according to the prophecy of Daniel and Revelation of St.
John; unless what I write is believed to (...) true, and the advice I give is
strictly followed. -- Fleets and armies are great things to talk of, because
terrible to destroy mankind; but, when opposed by the power of heaven, they
become weak, they lose their force and terror: for most of those in Europe are
destined for the rocks and the flames: They are permitted to conquer a little
for a short time now; but it is, like Russia and Germany, to hasten that
dreadful f^ll of human government which will soon take place in the world: for
they ever have been, in the hand of God, the very instruments to effect what
princes designed to prevent.

On the 12th of the month called May, 1792, I wrote to the king, minister of
state, and speaker of the commons, that no person should be able to say,
hereafter, my conduct was irregular, or in the least disrespectful, to inform
them that I was commanded, by the Lord God, to go to the Parliament House on
the 17th following, and acquaint the members, for their own personal safety,
and the general benefit of the country -- That the time of the world was come
to fulfill the seventh chapter of the prophecy of Daniel, and some of the
judgments of God in the Revelation; that the death of Louis XVI. and the
revolution in France, for the perpetual destruction of its monarchy, was
decreed in the Scripture of truth; and would, against all human opposition,
most surely take place: To inform them that the war, just going to be
commenced, by Prussia and Austria, against France, was the very war alluded to
by St. John, in the Revelation, chap. xix. which God called a war against
himself; -- because it went to oppose his decrees, and because it would be an
effort of kings to overthrow his unalterable judgment. I was commanded to
advise them, (...) was the king and minister of state, not to join in the war,
or even encourage it on any account whatever: To inform them of the approaching
fall of monarchy in Europe, the great (...) this war would be productive of to
(...), but particularly to those that engag^ (...) and likewise to inform them
of their (...) in the jaws of the earth by a pre-determined earthquake,
according to the judgment of God, in chap. xvi. ver. 16, 17, 18, 19, of the
Revelation; and lastly, to entreat them to acknowledge this gracious
communication from God, for their length of life and blessing, by an obedience
to his good advice.

When at the door, on the 17th, I informed the speaker by a letter, that I
waited, and was ready to communicate all that I was commanded. In a few minutes
after a messenger returned, with my own letter, who treated me, in such a
public place particularly, with unfeeling contempt and incivility. The Lord God
spoke to me instantly, on being ordered to go about my business, and said --
Get away, get away from this place; be under no concern, it was not you that
was despised and ordered away, but me, in your person, that sent you.

Soon after my return home I was in a vision and saw a large measuring rod move
through the streets in great haste, and strike many of the houses as it passed,
marking them for their approaching fall. After this I was made to look toward
the Treasury, while the Lord God pronounced, at the same time -- All that side
shall fall. In an instant, the whole place was covered with thick darkness; it
seemed to be everlasting darkness; darkness that should never be removed: And,
again, he pronounced, in quick words, as if displeased -- The whole shall fall.

The information, as will be plainly seen by the date, which I gave to the king
and minister of state, with what I was commanded to offer to the parliament,
was not only before the present war with France was entered into, but also some
length of time before it was ever intended: therefore no person can say, with
justice, that either my conduct in obeying the positive commands of God, or my
endeavors to preserve peace; to preserve this country from the many evils it
has now to encounter with, according to the determined judgment of unerring
prophecy; originated from weak ideas or political motives. No, my knowledge is
given from God; I see all things now as they truly are; and know their
consequences, to change them to what they really will be hereafter.

I am commanded to keep no company, and live retired; that I may avoid the
temptation of political discussion, or any other argument, that would create
animosity and strife.

The Two Parts of the REVELATION, to be fulfilled on LONDON and the ENGLISH
PARLIAMENT; according to the Judgment of God; but are immediately suspended for
my Entreaty. CHAP. XI.
3 AND I will give power to my two witnesses, and they shall prophecy a
thousand two hundred and threescore days, clothed in sackcloth.

4 These are the two olive trees, and the two candlesticks, standing before the
God of the earth.

The two witnesses, the two olive trees, and the two candlesticks, mean the
same two parts of the everlasting Gospel of Salvation, as they are wrote by St.
Matthew and St. John; which are the two apostles and proper witnesses of Christ.

This explanation alone, which has never been discovered to any before, is
sufficient to strike every man with conviction, that studies the Scripture, and
believes in the spirit of God, that, as this part is true, the others I have,
and shall constantly mention, are equally so; and that a knowledge of the whole
comes directly to me from the Divine Being.

As the eyes of the blind cannot be opened, nor the sick healed, but by the
immediate power of God; so neither can the prophecies be truly explained, but
by regular instruction from the same Almighty Being.

Read diligently what follows, and by the information contemplate on the mighty
goodness of God, for revealing a true knowledge of his prophecies in sufficient
time to implore for mercy, and save a city with multitudes of people, recorded
to be destroyed.

7 And when they shall have finished their testimony, the beast that ascends
out of the bottomless pit will make war against them, and will overcome them,
and kill them.

8 And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great city, which is
spiritually called Sodom in Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified.

This great city, mentioned here, means London: her streets are full of
prostitutes, and many of her houses are full of crimes. It is for such
exceeding great wickedness, that St. john spiritually calls London, in this
chapter, by the name of Sodom; and infers, from the toleration of so much evil,
that the two witnesses of Christ, that the two apostles, St. Matthew and St.
John, spiritually represented by the two parts of the Gospel, which they wrote,
that their two bodies lie dead -- thrown out in the street -- trampled under
the foot of vice.

11 And after three days and a half the spirit of life from God entered into
them, and they stood upon their feet, and great fear fell on all that saw them.

The three days and a half, mean three years and a half; and the present is the
time of the world alluded to by St. John: for until the present war, of time,
times, and the dividing of time, which is three years and a half, according to
Daniel, 7th chapter, also is expired, the two parts of the blessed Gospel will
lie dead in London, and over Europe likewise: after which, a prophet, (mysery)
will be revealed to the world, with signs and the mighty power of fire from
God; the two parts of the gospel of salvation will then be revived. (For my
designation is, and the commands of God to me are, that I shall walk through
the great thorough-fare-street of the city, to ^e-pronounce his judgments, and
declare them irrevocable. As a testimony from God that they have been suspended
for my sake, but are now commanded to be fulfilled, because his offers of mercy
have been d^spised, and his messenger treated as false. I am to take the rod,
which he ordered me to cut in 1792, and throw it on the ground, when it will be
changed into a serpent; to take it in my hand again, when it will be re-changed
to a rod. The people of London will then tremble, and all nations will be
greatly afraid, when they hear the dreadful consequences for neglecting them so
long.

12 And they heard a great voice from heaven (meaning thunder) saying to them,
Come up hither. And they ascended up to heaven in a cloud, and their enemies
beheld them.

13 And the same hour there was a great earthquake, and the tenth part of the
city fell; and in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand, and the
remainder were a frighted, and gave glory (meaning honor) to the God of heaven.

The recorded judgment of God, according to this last verse, is that London,
for indeed it is the city meant shall be visited by an earthquake, and a tenth
part of it destroyed; in that tenth part, about seven thousand persons will be
killed. When the people see this, they will be convinced that it proceeds from
the great anger of God, for despising his offered mercy, and creating his
messenger ill, then they will all be frightened, and will all believe: Then the
city will honor him by instant reformation, and all the people will implore
him for pity.

Lot was laughed at, and the danger despised by his sons-in law when he said to
them. "Up, get you out of this place, for the Lord will destroy this city."
Sodom was burnt and they perished.

The king of Nine^ah, although a professed idolater, and immersed in
wickedness, believed the judgment of God by his prophet when he heard it,
without the additional testimony of scriptural evidence; he immediately humbled
himself, reformed entreated for mercy; by doing so, the city was forgiven, and
all its people saved.

14 The second woe is past, and behold the third woe comes quickly.

CHAP. XVI. This part which follows belongs to the thirteenth chapter, and is a
continuation of the account begun there of the rise, progress, and perpetual
fall of the English government.
13 And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of the
dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false
prophet.

14 For they are the spirits of devils, working miracles, which go forth to the
kings of the earth, and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of
that great day of God Almighty.

The thirteenth verse means the proclamation issued out by the king and
council, to assemble for the last time the English parliament; they are to
meet, but are never to separate, that all things in this prophecy relative to
them may be fulfilled; and in the allotted time will, according to the judgment
of God, be destroyed by an earthquake.

Reader, consider attentively what I write, and remember that sin is always
committed by man through the temptation of Satan, (for there is no man on earth
that does not do wrong at times, neither is there my that is not a sinner; look
at the words of Solomon in his prayer when the Temple was dedicated.) This
proclamation then being blasphemous, is in the same manner directed by his
secret and powerful influence.

1^ And he (meaning the king) gathered them together into a place, called in
the Hebrew tongue Armageddon.

Them, means the Parliament; Armageddon, their house to assemble and die in.

Armageddon was a valley to bury the dead in and also a place of great mourning
near Jerusalem: -- The Parliament House in London being the recorded prophesied
burying place of its members, and multitudes besides, is, for its designed
similarity to the former, spiritually called in the Hebrew tongue by the same
name.

17 And the seventh angel poured out his vial in the air; and there came a
great voice (meaning loud thunder) out of the Temple of heaven, from the
Throne, saying -- "IT IS DONE."

This verse means, that when the allotted time is expired for the English
parliament to exist, the Lord God will pronounce from the Throne of Heaven, in
a voice of very loud thunder, the judgment of its utter destruction on a sudden.

18 And there were voices, and thunders, and lightnings; and there was a great
earthquake, such as was not since men were upon the earth, so mighty an
earthquake and so great.

The judgment of God being to destroy the English Parliament, this mighty
earthquake will swallow it up at the very time of its sitting, and likewise so
much of London, as to leave but three divisions of it standing.

19 And the great city was divided into three parts, and the cities of the
nations fell: and great Babylon, meaning Rome in this chapter) came in
remembrance before God, to give to her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of
his wrath.

20 And every island fled away, and the mountains were not found.

The city mentioned here, under the name of the great city, means London; this
designed recorded earthquake will be felt in all nations under heaven as well
as in England, and he dreadful effects by most cities in the world as well as
London. The earth will be shook so violently at this time as to make it sink in
many places, and let the sea flow in where the land was: mountains will sink to
a level with valleys, and many islands will disappear forever in the sea. This
earthquake will spread desolation throughout all countries, and destroy great
multitudes of people.

The United States of America will declare war against England; -- but before
they do, France will lose all her West India Islands; and after they do,
Jamaica will be the last in possession of the English.

On the 25th of June, 1792, I wrote to the French ambassador then in London, by
command of the Lord God, acquainting him with the future loss of the French
Islands, and likewise the fall of the English. But he treated it in the same
manner as all the writings of the prophets of God ever have been, when they
sent divine information, when they spoke the truth, when they did not flatter
with pleasing words to deceive.

There will great changes take place in all nations under heaven, to fulfill
this prophecy of Daniel by visions in the seventh chapter: Nation will not only
rise against nation, but they will be likewise torn by civil wars in
themselves; kingdom will rise against kingdom, and man against man; until they
fight and fall -- to rise no more. The sword will destroy very great multitudes
of people by this war, and occasion frightful desolations over the earth.

The promise of God by the prophet Haggai, to Zerubbabel, Governor of Judah,
although mentioned in the first book, I am commanded to repeat it here, means
the present time of the world, and the present wa^ with its destructive
consequences; and myself the man, in whom this great promise of wonderful
distinction and elevation is to be fulfilled. CHAP. II.
20 And again the word of the Lord came to Haggai in the four and twentieth day
of the month saying.

21 Speak to Zerubbabel, governor of Judah, and say, I will shake the heavens
and the earth.

22 And I will overthrow the thrones of kingdoms, and I will destroy the
strength of the kingdoms of the heathen; I will overthrow their chariots, and
those that ride in them, their horses and riders shall come down, every one by
the sword of the other.

The present time of the world, and this present wa^ in its spreading
consequences, is the time of trouble and destruction meant by the prophet: this
is also the Great War recorded by ^am^ and St. John, that no man has a
knowledge of its progress and how it will end revealed to him but myself, this
is the war which will fill up the measure of transgression, and carry the guilt
of shedding innocent blood into all nations: the sword is drawn in heaven, and
the cup of fury held out to the ^^th, according to the prophecies in the
scripture, and the visions of God shown to me, which are recorded by his sacred
command in the first book; therefore she must drink deep from the one, that she
may feel less the bitterness of death from the other until wasted of her
inhabitants.

23 In that day, says the Lord of ^osts, I will take thee, O Zerubbabel, my
servant, the son of Shealtiel and will make thee as a signet; for I have chosen
thee, says the Lord of Hosts

The promise of God to Zerubbabel, by the prophet ^aggai^ in this verse means
that when the time of the world is come and this prophecy fulfilling he will be
revived in his d^^^ndant, who will be not only like himself the visible prince
and governor of the ^ews but also receive the full performance of this great
promise which is to be regarded by all nations as their signet of peace and
safety.

The covenant to king David, and the renewal of it to ^olomon with this
recorded promise to ^erubbabel will be fulfilled in me: for which the Lord God,
through this writing, holds me out now as the promised signet in his hand to
all nations that believe in him, -- and commands me to say, That his recorded
judgments, in the Scripture, according to all that I have mentioned, according
to the prophecies of Daniel, Haggai, and St. John in the Revelation, for the
fall of cities, the fall of thrones, the fall of princes, the death of
millions, and the desolation of kingdoms, shall be suspended again, if the
nations at war will accept of life, and return to his government of peace.

But if they allow themselves to be led away by delusive temptations, if they
refuse to believe that I am commanded to offer these things, although supported
by undeniable proofs of Scripture, of revealed knowledge in this book, as well
as in the first, which are unknown to any other, and which were never made
known to any man before; if they will not accept of this gracious offer of
mercy for their length of life now, and the good of their children hereafter,
all I have mentioned, all the prophecies of Daniel, Haggai, and St. John in the
Revelation, which relate to the present time of the world and the present war,
will be fulfilled: -- the sword must go through, and earthquakes will soon
follow; thrones will be destroyed, cities levelled with the ground, millions of
people will be cut off, and kingdoms will be made desolate for ever.

The Lord God, the better to make all nations believe immediately, and the
people I live among regard me as his prophet, for their benefit in future, gave
me the true age of the world, by which he fulfils his recorded judgments, and
taught me, by direct instruction from himself, how to write it down; the time
of showing his mercy to the Jews, by their restoration; the true meaning of the
prophecies, and time of fulfilling them, with his commands to publish the
information to the world; that when I am openly revealed to the Hebrews and
people of London, ( to the former, to order their immediate departure from
England, under my own direction; to the latter, to convince them, the loud
thunder, in January, 1791, was to proclaim the judgment of God and fall of
London; but that the judgment was suspended, and the city pardoned, for my
entreaty,) and ordered to repronounce, with the power of fire, his irrevocable
judgments, no nation may be able to say, We were not informed of any offers of
mercy from God, or of those things which would lead us to believe the age of
the world was so great, and the prophecies of desolation were fulfilling; for
the king and principal members of the English government, with nearly all the
foreign ambassadors in London, -- for their respective countries, have been
informed; and will all, besides, receive this additional true, but last
information, in writing.

THE PROPHECY OF DANIEL, IN THE SEVENTH CHAPTER, CONTINUED.
9 I BEHELD till the thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of Days did sit;
whose garment was white as snow, and the hair of his head like pure wool; his
throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burning fire.

This verse a^^^e, unassisted by any information from me, is sufficient to
explain the most necessary parts of the chapter to know; every person that
reads it must confess that it alludes to the latter time of the world, and that
the general dissolution of human grandeur, which it mentions i^ but the
expected necessary preparation for the coming of Christ, to judge the world.

10 A fiery stream issued and came forth from before him; thousand thousands
ministered to him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him: the
judgment was set, and the books were opened.

The latter part of this verse corroborates the explanation that is given of
the preceding one.

11 I beheld then, because of the voice of the great words which the horn spoke
-- is the king of Prussia -- (here the prophet Daniel returns to the former
part of the vision, and gives a further account of what was shown him.) I
beheld, even till the beast was slain and his body destroyed, and given to the
burning flame.

The death of this beast, mean the death of the emperor of Germany, it is
certain; and all the armies of Europe cannot save him, nor prevent the
accomplishment of it by the hands of man* The judgment of God according to this
prophecy is also, that he shall suffer the punishment of everlasting ^ire.

12 As concerning the rest of the beasts they had their dominion taken away;
yet their lives were prolonged for a season and time.

13 I saw in the night visions, one like the Son of man; and behold, he came
with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of Days, and stood near
before him.

14 And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom; that all
people, nations, and languages, should serve him: his dominion is an
everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away; and his kingdom that which
shall not be destroyed.

15 I, Daniel, was grieved in my spirit in the midst of my body, and the
visions I saw troubled me.

16 I came near to one of them that stood by, (an angel,) and asked him the
meaning of all these things; so he told me, and made me understand the
interpretation of them.

The prophet Daniel, in his visions, as well as St. John the apostle in the
Revelation, had always an attending angel near, to explain the meaning of every
thing he saw that was necessary for him to be informed of.

17 These great beasts, which are four, are four kings, which shall arise out
of the earth.

18 But the saints of the Most High shall take the kingdom, and possess the
kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever.

The time is very nearly come for the judgments of God to be felt in all
nations, and this pare of the prophecy to be fulfilled in Europe: It is a
warning to all princes and states, to honor God, and fear his judgments; to
live in peace, and govern with mercy.

19 Then I asked him the meaning of the fourth beast, which was different from
all the others, and exceeding dreadful! whose teeth were of iron, and its nails
of brass; which devoured, broke in pieces, and stamped on the residue with its
feet.

20 And of the ten horns that were in its (...), and of the other which came
up, before whom three fell; even of that horn which had eyes, and a mouth that
spoke very great things, whose look was more stout than his fellows.

The beginning of this verse means the German Princes; the rest of it the King
of Prussia; he threatens and executes more, presuming on the unconquerable
power of his army, than any of his equals. His being represented in the visions
of God as a horn, with eyes, and a mouth speaking very great things is an
allusion to his military strength, quick discernment, and violent inclination
to quarrel, always disputing for territory, -- pushing at or fighting against
some nation or other.

21 I beheld and the same horn made war on the saints, and prevailed against
them.

For my entreaty, the Lord God has been pleased to suspend this part of the
prophecy, the latter part of the twenty-first verse that of allowing the king
of Prussia to prevail against the righteous, and govern them with great
oppression, under the power of his army, for three years and a half.

22 Until the Ancient of Days came, when judgment was given for the saints of
the Most High, and the time came that the saints should possess the kingdom.

2^ Thus he said; -- The fourth beast will be the fourth kingdom on earth. (The
Emperor will reduce, under his subjection, all Germany, (...) neighboring
states, and all Italy, to (...) this great kingdom,) which will be different
from all the other kingdoms; (meaning the other great kingdoms or monarchies,
shown in the vision; which are, England, Russia, and France.) It will try to
devour the whole earth, tread it down, and break it in pieces.

24 And the ten horns, out of his kingdom, (meaning the German electors, before
they are destroyed by the Emperor,) are ten kings which will arise; and another
will arise after them, meaning the king of Prussia, who is an elector: he will
be different from the first, and will subdue three kings.

When the king of Prussia opposes the Emperor, he will also at the same tim^
follow his example, which will soon now begin to manifest itself; indeed, the
interval of time between this and then is but short; for all things are
hastening fast, and concurring in their operations, extend the war, and give
the prophecy its full recorded course.

25 And he will speak great words against the Most High, and will wear out the
saint of the Most High; and will think to change times and laws: and they will
be given into his hand, for a time, and times, and the dividing of time.

The beginning of this verse means the king of Prussia, speaking in blasphemy
against God, threatening in great words, as if he possessed the whole power of
heaven, to conquer and destroy, with his army, all cities that do not open to
him and all men that oppose his designs. This was exactly fulfilled by the
Horn, when he entered France in 1792; the proclamations which he issued, at
that time, are full of blasphemy against God, presumption for his great army,
and violent threats to destroy cities, and out innocent men in pieces.

Change times and laws: the meaning of which is, that what God decrees is his
law, and this prophecy contains it; an opposition by the king of Prussia to
what God has decreed shall come to pass, is endeavoring by force of arms to
stop the course of the prophecy, and change the decreed time for it to be
fulfilled. The king of Prussia, by threatening, with the great strength of his
army, to build up, what God, to fulfill this prophecy, has thrown down; to
restore that monarchy in France, which God, to fulfill his recorded judgment in
this prophecy, has removed for ever; -- is the meaning of -- And he will think
to change times and laws.

And they will be given into his hand, for a time and times, and the dividing
of time. The meaning of which is, that the king of Prussia, although acting in
opposition to the will of God, (for every man that reads the Scripture, and
believes it to be the book of truth, possesses from that moment a knowledge of
good and evil, of right and wrong, of what is merciful, and what is cru^^, of
what is pleasing to God, and what is offensive,) is permitted to wage a war of
injustice against the righteous for three years and a half; during which time,
according to the prophecy, he would conquer and destroy great multitudes of
them. But my prayers prevailed with God, even against his own recorded judgment
by Daniel, for I beseeched him to oppose the unjust designs of the king of
Prussia, before he invaded France, after he had, to suspend the prophecy, and
for my sake to turn him back. The Lord God spoke to me in a vision, at night,
and said, "He shall go out of France with shame and confusion."

This promise was fulfilled in the year 1792; for, soon after the Prussian army
entered France, God led it into such difficult places as to endanger its
safety; he also sent the visitation of a wasting sickness that forced it to go
away, ashamed and highly disappointed. Although the other parts of the prophecy
must necessarily be fulfilled to accomplish the purposes of God, and the
destruction of the Prussian monarchy, the king cannot conquer as the judgment
intended but he is permitted to oppose, sometimes defeated with shame, and
sometimes encouraged by deceitful success; until his armies become weak, and
the Bear becomes strong; until the proper time arrives for him likewise to fall.

26 But the judgment shall sit, (it ought to be, But the judgment shall take
places) and they shall take away his dominion, to consume and to destroy it to
the end.

The king of Prussia will have his country destroyed by fire and sword: his
power will be taken away, and also his life: the government will be changed,
and the monarchy will be abolished for ever.

In the year 1792 I sent the commands of God, as they were given to me by
revelation at night, to the king of England, for the king of Prussia, before he
invaded France, desiring him to return home, and have nothing to do with the
people of that country; for the change of government taking place among them
was determined, that the unalterable judgment of God, in the Scripture of Truth
might be fulfilled: reminding him, at the same time, as a corro^^rating
testimony, that what I wrote was from God, of the monitor that entered his
breast, and so powerfully struggled with his inclination to keep him back from
war, that when he positively resolved on it, reproached him strongly with the
injustice.

That intelligent, internal monitor, was in truth no other than the
compassionate Spirit of the living God, striving, to the last moment, to save a
falling man from the dreadful effects of his own judgment: but the king of
Prussia despised the blessed intimation, and resolved on a war; which, if there
was no knowledge of God in the world, no part of human reason could find the
least colorable pretense to justify.

At the time of my writing to the king of England, relative to the king of
Prussia, I informed him, as I was commanded, of the certain failure of the
combined armies of Prussia and Austria.

27 And the kingdom, and dominion, and the greatness, (meaning the power of all
the kingdoms under the whole heaven,) will be given to the people and saints of
the Most High: his kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions mu^^
serve and obey him.

This is that real kingdom of heaven, of Christianity in practice, to believe
and obey God, which was commanded by Christ, to preserve the soul of man, and a
due knowledge of himself; preached by the apostles, and through them the
foundation of it laid in all nations; though determined from the first
transgression of Adam, and began more than seventeen hundred years ago, with
all the materials ready prepared, from the multiplied interruptions of war and
other causes, incident to human kingdoms, like the second temple at Jerusalem
-- long in building -- This mighty structure is not finished yet. This is that
stone, cut out without hands, mentioned by the prophet Daniel, in his second
chapter, 34th and 35th verses, which breaks the head and the feet, the gold and
the silver, the brass, the iron, and the clay, of the great image of human
power to pieces: and this is that kingdom, mentioned by the same prophet, in
the 44th verse following, which is to break in pieces and consume all other
kingdoms; but which is to remain itself forever. -- The name of this universal
kingdom is Peace; it has the blessed Gospel for its government, and the Lord
God for its king.

As I knew, in the beginning of 1792, that the king of England would enter into
this war, and by doing so, fall under the same judgment from God as the other
monarchs shown in the vision, unless I could, by a just explanation of the
prophecies, persuade him to remain at peace; he will, I trust, with the queen
and minister of state, do me the justice hereafter to acknowledge that the
danger was fully communicated: and that I did not cease in my endeavors to
prevent him from joining in the confederacy against France, not only for a long
time before he intended it, but also after he had, even till the designs of
government were ready to be executed by open preparations for hostility.

If this war was like any which has preceded it, a prince might, as usual, sit
down at his leisure, and calculate, from his successes, how long to carry it
on; or, by his defeats, how soon he must leave it off: but the death of Louis
XVI. and the revolution in France, having proceeded from the recorded judgment
of God, the two things which have occasioned it, and which have rendered it so
entirely different, that its consequences are already determined, will be the
lame to the monarchs engaged in it, as it happens to a man unexpectedly caught
in a large trap, on forbidden ground -- the pains of death convince him of
transgression, before his eyes could warn him of the danger.

I know the judgments of God; by them I am directed; by revelation and through
his Holy Spirit I write. To fulfill, then, the seventh chapter of Daniel, and
such parts of the Revelation as mean the present time and the same things, the
war now carrying on will involve all the nations engaged in it in great
distress, and nearly all the princes of Europe in death. As I knew all this a
considerable time before the war, I set my heart and my mind to intercede with
God, although it was against his recorded Judgments, to save the king, and
spare the country I live in: I succeeded with God, and obtained an offer of
mercy; but could not with man, to believe and accept it.

I wish well to the king and queen, and likewise their family, to know all that
I have related, and more than I am permitted to tell; to know the unavoidable
death of him, and afterward the certain destruction of an amiable woman and
her children, would, I thought, be a crime to reproach for ever the feelings of
my heart, if I did not implore, when I knew the great kindness that God had for
me, and endeavor, by all the means in my power, to prevent it.

But in doing this, I have subjected myself to the power of human laws, when,
indeed, I had the choice to make them subject to me; for if I had not become an
intercessor, by prayer and supplication for the people I live among, I should
have been sent away from London. Its fall would soon after take place; and then
my revelation, as the next great thing to warn the world, would immediately
succeed; but, preferring its safety to my own immediate advantage, although
informed at the time that the people would not believe; that I should be
despised, and made to suffer; I obtained its pardon at the risque of my own
life, and determined to remain in it until my time to be revealed was entirely
completed.

I find, yes, I feel by dreadful experience, that all men are insensible to the
consequences of those judgments, recorded in the Scripture, and are also
exceedingly hardened against believing their true interpretation and time to be
fulfilled. That I have suffered, by imprisonment and distress, more than is
proper now to publish, for entreating, when I was told that my entreaties were
contrary to the prophecies, to save the king and his family; London and its
inhabitants, from recorded destruction; God, who is more generous to give
mercy, than man is grateful to believe and accept it, is by all this revealed
knowledge of his prophecies my witness now, and will, in due time, in a short
time, be additionally so, by terrible signs and mighty wonders.

I have said, in the first book, that the fulfilling of the judgments of God,
however destructive they might prove to the nations or governments, which they
are directed against, would not affect my personal safety, nor operate in the
least to my prejudice: my elevation is recorded in the Scripture, and
established by promise to myself; besides, I am not mortal to human power. But
although I am to be great, far abo^^ any prince on earth, and cannot be
destroyed by man: although the fall of governments and ruin of nations, will
not be allowed to affect my personal safety, nor operate in the least to my
prejudice, I will not provoke any, but endeavor, by a peaceable conduct,
civility, and fair words, to make all men believe.

My earnest desire and prayer to God is, that as he has given me a pre-eminence
of favor to all men that were ever upon earth before, I may be able, although I
have been in prison, insulted and despised; although my zeal is broke, and my
inclination altered, to save in this country one person as well as another; the
king, as well as myself; the rich, as well as the poor; all without
distinction. For which I request all men to meditate on the present times, and
consult with themselves by their knowledge of the Scripture, by comparing the
leading features of what ruined other great nations unexpectedly, to what are
now as suddenly opening to human view, and what are as unexpectedly coming to
pass in the world; of the judgments and prophecies to be fulfilled, which every
man that has the spirit (...) conviction to believe, and an understanding to
discern, must plainly perceive that the convulsed state of Europe, as it now
presents itself, is one of their visible features; and that the sudden great
war which occasions it, Multiplying still as it lengthens against all forcible
endeavors, d^^^icing (...) expected, and ^u^^ing the prudent foresight of the
wise politician to his own ruin, -- is either the fore running sign of general
dissolution, or some other great and mighty thing.

Some of the prophecies which mean myself, and which I am commanded to insert.
THE PROPHET ISAIAH, CHAP. IV.
1 And in that day, seven women shall take hold of one man, saying, We will eat
our own bread, and wear our own apparel; only let us be called by thy name, to
take away our reproach.

The man alluded to by the prophet is myself, and the time of the world is just
now come. Remember that the seventh chapter of Daniel, and the sixth of the
Revelation, are now fulfilling; remember, likewise, the second chapter and 24th
verse of Haggai; by all of which, thrones are to fall, nation to be turned
against nation, army against army, and man against man, until the earth is
wasted of her people. -- By this great destruction of the human race, millions,
millions of women will go to the grave, widows, unmarried and barren.

The war is now, compared to what it will be in future -- as four or five
houses on fire, is to a large city set in flames by them; which all the arts
and invention of the world, which all the force of power and political
foresight cannot quench. It is from the great scarcity of mankind, which the
war will occasion, that the prophet represents so many women as taking hold of
one conspicuous and particular man.

2 In that day the branch of the Lord will be beautiful and glorious, and the
fruit of the earth will be excellent and comely for them which are escaped of
Israel.

3 And it shall come to pass, that he which is left in Zion, and he that
remains in Jerusalem, shall be called Holy: even every one that is written
among the living in Jerusalem.

4 When the Lord has washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion, and has
purged the blood of Jerusalem from the midst of it, by the spirit of judgment
and by the spirit of burning.

This verse alludes to the Jews after their restoration, and to Jerusalem in
the latter time of the world, when rebuilt and inhabited; the Jews will then
acknowledge Christ for their Messiah, and through the sanctification of his
blessed Spirit they will be cleaned from sin.

5 And the Lord will create upon every dewlling place of mount Zion, and upon
her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by
night; for upon all the glory (meaning the people) shall be a defense.

6 And there shall be a tabernacle for a shadow in the day time from the heat,
and for a covert from ^^^m and from rain.

This is a figurative representation of the peace and safety of the Jews under
the protection of God after their restoration to Jerusalem in 1798.

APOCRYPHA. -- II. ESDRAS, CHAP. XI.
36. Then I heard a voice which said to they Look before thee, and consider the
things that thou see.

37 And I beheld, and lo, as it were, a Roaring Lion chased out of the wood;
and I saw that he sent out a man's voice to the eagle, and said,

This roaring Lion, as it were, chased out, of the wood, means myself: who am
now forced out of concealment by divine command to rebuke the eagle; not her
only, but the other princes likewise, if they will not believe what I write,
and try to save themselves from the judgment of God, by sparing the effusion of
human blood. This must necessarily be done to fulfill the prophecy, (For it is a
true one) which is fully accomplished on my part by an explanation of the
seventh chapter of Daniel, and declared a loud to the world by the publication
of it in this book.

Peace being requested from God, and a suspension of his judgments offered
through me, I earnestly request all the princes of Europe to forsake war, that
they may enjoy the substantial blessings of long life, and everlasting
happiness.

38 Hear thou, I will talk with thee, and the highest shall say to thee;

39 Art thou not it that remainest of the four beasts whom I made to reign in
my world, that the end of their times might come through them? (Instead of the
word them, it should be, as it was in the original, Thee.)

40 And the Fourth came, and overcame all the beasts, that were past; and had
power over the world with great fearfulness, and over the whole compass of the
earth with much wicked oppression: and so long time dwelt he upon the earth
with deceit.

41 For the earth have thou not judged with truth.

42 For thou have afflicted the meek, thou have hurt the peaceable, thou have
loved liars, and destroyed the dwellings of them that brought forth fruit, and
have cast down the walls of such as did thee no harm.

43 Therefore thy wrongful dealing is come up to the Highest, and thy pride to
the Mighty.

44 The Highest also has looked upon the proud times, and behold, they are
ended, and their abominations are fulfilled.

45 And therefore appear no more, thou eagle: nor thy horrible wings, nor thy
wicked feathers, nor thy malicious heads, nor thy hurt^^l claws, nor all thy
vain body:

46 That all the earth may be refreshed, and may return, being delivered from
thy violence; and that she may hope for the judgment and mercy of him that made
her.

CHAP. XII.
10 And he said to me, This is the interpretation of the vision.

11 The eagle, whom thou saw come up from the sea, is the kingdom that was seen
in the vision of thy brother Daniel.

12 But it was expounded to him, therefore now I declare it to thee.

I have inserted these verses not only as a demonstration of their truth, but
likewise to show the intimacy between the visions of Esdras and them of Daniel.

Moreover, when God was communicating by revelation at night a knowledge of
this prophecy to me, he said, in plain words, as one man would speak to
another; for it is in that manner all knowledge of what I write is first
revealed to me.) "I passed by this part with Daniel." It was mentioned as a
confirmed certainty to me, that the prophecy of Esdras was given from a true
vision.

31 And the lion, whom thou saw rising up out of the wood, and roaring, and
speaking to the eagle, and rebuking her for her unrighteousness, with all the
words which thou have heard:

32 This is the Anointed (meaning myself, as prince of Israel) which the
Highest has kept for them and for their wickedness to the end: he shall reprove
them, and shall upbraid them with their cruelty.

33 For he shall set them befere him alive in Judgment, and shall rebuke them
and correct them.

34 For the rest of my people shall he deliver with mercy, those which have
been preserved upon my borders, and he shall make them joyful until the coming
of the day of judgment, of which I have spoken to thee from the beginning.

CHAP. XIII.
25 This is the meaning of the vision; whereas thou saw a man coming up from
the midst of the sea.

26 The same is he whom the Highest has kept a great season, which, by his own
self, (meaning in his own person,) shall deliver his people; (meaning his
people the ^ews) and he shall order them that are left behind.

I am the man alluded to in this chapter; coming from the sea, in the
twenty-fifth verse, is to signify that I should, as the p^^son means, live on
the ocean. I have; having been in the English navy; but am now rising from it,
to fulfill this prophecy, that of Isaiah, Haggai, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel,
Malachi, and part of the Revelation to St. John likewise. For I was necessarily
engaged with the sword, to fulfill the recorded judgment on the monarch I am to
represent; and professionally a seaman, to fulfill the visions from God in this
prophecy.

27 And whereas thou saw, that out of his mouth there came, as a blast of wind,
and fire, and storm:

28 And that he had neither sword, nor any instrument of war, but that the
rushing in of him destroyed the whole multitude that came to subdue him. This
is the interpretation.

29 Behold, the days come when the Most High will begin to deliver them that
are on the earth.

30 And he (this means Christ, but the next verse myself. For I am now his
prophet and messenger: the branch of his family alluded to, and the designed
signe^ of peace for all nations; the prince ordained to govern visibly for him
in his city, and on his throne; therefore, he being God, Lord, and King, shows
me to Esdras, as he did to St. John, spiritually representing, and spiritually
called under the name of his son, because universal dominion, as his empowered
visible representative, immediately under himself, next to himself, will be
given to me) shall come, to the astonishment of them that dwell on the earth.

31 And one shall undertake to fight against another, and one city against
another; one place against another, one people against another, and one realm
against another.

32 And the time shall be when these things shall come to pass, and the signs
shall happen which I showed thee before, and then shall my son be declared,
whom thou saw as a man ascending.

33 And when all the people hear his voice, every man shall, in his own land,
leave the battle they have one against another.

34 And an innumerable multitude shall be gathered together, as thou saw them,
willing to come, and to overcome him by fighting.

35 But he shall stand upon the top of mount Sion.

36 And Sion shall come, and shall be showed to all men, being prepared and
builded, like as thou saw the hill graven without hands.

37 And this my son, shall rebuke the wicked inventions of those nations,
which, for their wicked life, are fallen into the tempest;

38 And shall lay before them their evil thoughts, and the torments wherewith
they shall begin to be tormented, which are like to a flame: and he shall
destroy them without labor, by the law which is like to fire.

I recommend it to every person that read this book, to take the Bible, and
read from the beginning of the thirteenth chapter to the thirteenth verse, as
it means myself: and likewise of the sixteenth chapter, from the eighteenth
verse to the thirty-sixth, as it corroborates the prophecy of Isaiah. Daniel,
and Haggai, relative to the immediate, and just now approaching, time of the
world.

OF THE REVELATION, CHAP. V.
The book means the prophecies intended to be concealed until this time of the
world, which is the time they relate to: its seals, their spiritual look or
fastening.

Observe, the Revelation was given to St. John a long time after the death of
Christ, not to commemorate those things which were before, which were
fulfilled, which were known before the time of writing it; but to record those
things which are to be in future, and which are to be fulfilled: according to
the words of God, declared in the fourth chapter, and first verse, which are,
"Come up hither, and I will show thee the things which must be hereafter." They
were shown to him in heaven, under such wonderful, such incomprehensible
similitudes, in visions, as to seal their meaning a perfect secret, until the
time of the world alluded to came, when the designed spiritual person (for no
man can be a prophet of Christ, now under Christianity, and speaking through
the Holy Ghost, his spirit, without bearing some similarity to himself in
meekness and compassion* (witness the apostles) would be revealed, to open the
spiritual seals, and make known the secret prophecies under them in the book.

CHAP. VI.
The four first seals are opened, and the covering of secrecy is removed; the
judgments which are to punish the world for transgression, by rising nation
against nation, and man against man, are gone forth spiritually under the
similitudes expressed in this chapter, to the eighth verse, and are began to be
fulfilled; the concealed meaning of the prophecies, which have been carefully
preserved so for me until the present time, are now declared; the spiritual
seals are opened, the contents of the spiritual book, which they shut, is
known, and a revealed knowledge of it published in this visible book, for the
good of all mankind.

The Lord God commands me to acknowledge the kindness of a poor woman, that
brought me a three-penny loaf each week, every Monday morning, when I was in
prison: Her name is Isabella Wake. The prison is Newgate.

A man that died the day before, of a bad fever, and from neglect, for the want
of proper nourishment, as I was told, made a vacancy in a room, with fourteen
poor men, little air, and much crowded, for me to come into his place.

The small, very small pennyworth of bread, with water only, except one day in
the week, when there are a few ounces of beef, for twenty-four hours, is barely
sufficient to keep life and body together. The prison is very close; there is
not room enough to promote health, by the necessary exercise of walking: there
are no coals allowed for fire, nor candles for light. There is no bed to lie
on, nor blanket to cover one: The poor are entirely destitute here.

When the condition of prisons, and the treatment of prisoners, is required for
public information, it is from the poor man, whose health is injured by
confinement, who has to draw his little air through a small iron-barred window,
who has but a small pennyworth of bread allowed for the whole day to live on,
that a true account is to be received; but certainly not from the officers,
keepers, and contractors, who live in plenty; whose emoluments swell in
proportion as the prisons grow crowded.

Therefore be no longer astonished that London, in one part of the Revelation
is called under the name of the great city, for she is the greatest city in
Europe, and the richest in the world; in another part she is called Sodom; and
in a third, she is, as well as Rome, spiritually called Babylon the Great.

No man, who has any knowledge of God, can justly say, that London is without
guilt, and her people are without sin; when her streets are full of vice, and
her prisons are full of oppression.

ST. MATTHEW, CHAP. XXV.
37 Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord when saw we thee an
hungered, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink?

38 When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee?

39 Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came to thee.

40 And the King will answer, and say to them, Verily I say to you, in as much
as ye have done it to one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it to
me.

ISABELLA WAKE, this is the recorded testimony of your everlasting life, which
I am commanded to give in this book now, and ^o repeat it at my revelation.

Moreover, I will provide for you? and although I am now poor, without house or
servant, I shall soon have abundance, and be at the head of the greatest nation
on earth: In my palace you shall always have an apartment, and at my table you
shall always have a seat.

I am commanded to acknowledge likewise the acts of friendship I received from
Captain Hanchett, of Abingdon-street, which the Lord God considers as shown
directly to himself; therefore his blessing is on you; and by his promise in
the Gospel, your reward is great. -- Moreover, I am commanded to inform you, as
well for the benefit of your children hereafter, as yourself immediately, that
although your name is Hanchett, there is John Pit, Earl of Chatham, Sir
Gilbert Elliott, and Charles Gray: you, as well as them, the whole, as well as
myself, are of the Hebrews; branches of my own family, and are descended from
David king of Israel.

All this has been told me by revelation from the Lord God, in visions of the
night.

There are many of my family, which have heard of me, and with which the Spirit
of God has given me favor, that do not want either inclination or ability to
demonstrate their friendship: but they are deterred, from a fear of offending
Government, and from a fear of incurring the imputation of guilt, by being
generous.

The pre-ordained and designed signet of peace for all nations, cannot do any
thing that will ultimately tend to injure any prince government, or individual:
if they view his words in a contrary light, it is because they calculate the
future by the past; they know the things which were last month, but have no
knowledge of those things which are to be the next. For all he does by writing,
is to preserve the weak alive, and save the strong from falling down.

The weapons of his writing are not weak and carnal, but mighty and spiritual:
when he is ordered to re-pronounce the judgments of God, and withdraw his eye
from pity, the great power of his words will be felt to destroy, before their
effects are seen to admonish; -- then, fleets, armies, princes, governments,
and nations, must implore the God of heaven for mercy, and receive it likewise;
or they will, all that remain from the sword, be cut off by the sudden and
irresistible falling of fire.

THE PROPHET MALACHI, CHAP. IV.
5 Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great
and dreadful day of the Lord.

6 And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to their children, and the heart
of the children to their fathers, lest I come, and smite the earth with a curse.

The Elijah, mentioned in this chapter, and the messenger, mentioned in the
first verse of the third chapter, mean two distinct persons. The one was the
immediate messenger of Christ, when he came for the salvation of mankind; --
the other, his recorded prophet, to pronounce his judgments, and warn the
world, before he comes to destroy it.

This is that great prophet alluded to in the last chapter, under the name of
Elijah, and not St. John the Baptist: he will possess the Spirit of God equal
to Elijah, and have the power of his fire in the same manner. He will turn the
hearts of the fathers to the children, and the hearts of the children to the
fathers: that is, he will suppress war and violence, which sets the old against
the young, and the young against the old. He will command peace, and by the
great power given him from heaven, enforce an obedience wherever he comes.

The appointment of this prophet, being to invite first, and compel after, all
nations to come into the kingdom of peace, as a necessary prepuration to ^^e^
Christ, when he comes to visit and judge the world: Saint John the Baptist, for
being appointed to prepare for Christ -- preaching the same kingdom of peace,
and promising, by baptism, mercy to all that would believe, is the real and
very reason, that Christ, in the seventeenth chapter of St. Matthew, calls him
Elias.

At a former time, when I was entreating God to spare London, I mentioned no
man by his title: but when I was writing an account of it for public
information, he said to me, "unless you write their titles, they themselves
wont know who you mean." It will appear strange, because I am not acquainted
with any of the distinguished persons alluded to; but I knew everone by some
particular act that caught my approbation, and made me remember them then. It
secured as if God had done this on purpose, for he has often said to me since,
in visions and revelations at night, You must be a wall of defense and safety
to many a great man; -- yes, even to some that despise you now. At that time,
after mentioning the name of William Pit, I passed by that of his brother;
immediately after, the Lord God reminded me of it, and, in a voice of great
softness and good nature, said, There is John Pit, wont you mention him? You
don't know who he is I forgave.

In the year of 1790 the Spirit of God begun first, (although I always had a
presentiment of being sometime or other very great,) to enlighten my
understanding, and teach me to distinguish right from wrong. At that time I was
an officer in the navy, and considering that voluntary swearing, which I was
obliged to comply with every six months as a qualification to receive my pay,
was unnecessary, unjust, and wicked, I requested to be indulged with permission
to receive it without; stating at the same time, the concealed and unheeded
cruelty of the oath, with my own reasons for objecting to the form: when I was
told, in answer to my request, that there was an order of council to take the
oath, and that it was not in the power of the admiralty to dispense with it.

Soon after this I made another request, supporting my objections to voluntary
swearing, with observing. That if the order of council enforced an oath in any
manner or under any form whatever, and that the man it was directed to operate
on, swore that he was not forced, but that the oath he took was a voluntary act
-- the result of his own free will, -- would it not in the sight of God in
heaven, and every man of discernment under him on earth, amoun^ to a false oath?

These reasons with these objections, and the letter I received from the
admiralty, stating their insufficient power to dispense with the usual form of
swearing, I published at that time in the newspaper called the Public
Advertiser.

During the time of my writing officially to the Admiralty I had occasion to
write also to the president, whom I knew to be a member of the council; with
the business of Swearing, which led me to make an application, I remarked to
him, That as men, whether few in number or the increased multitude of a senate
were not infallible, they must consequently be subject to error. To corroborate
more forcibly this assertion, and likewise to impress a conviction of its
justice, I mentioned among other things, a decision of the privy council
relative to a native of Glasgow, who had his ship seized in the West Indies for
an undesigned infringement of the Navigation act.

After a legal investigation in that country, it was clearly proved, and openly
acknowledged, that although the apparent defect in the register might authorize
the seizure, it could not justify a condemnation; because the commander, like
an honest man, showed it at the Custom-house, and received the approbation of
the principal officer.

An appeal was lodged against this acquittal, by the seizing officer in the
West Indies, and brought before the Privy Council in England! -- the ship was
condemned.

To constitute a High Court of Equity, its members, to pronounce their judgment
agreeable to that very name their existence as a court is derived from, must be
governed more by the Intention than the presumptive proof. But to constitute a
Court of Law, its judges must be directed by the express letter of the act of
parliament under which they officiate.

For example, two men go into a forest; while the one is fetching a blow to cut
down a tree, the axe flies from the handle and kills the other: Here is a
presumptive proof of murder, and the law very justly brings the survivor to
trial. But equity, viewing this circumstance in a proper light, declares the
innocence, and acquits accordingly.

Another, and more revelant to the seizure. -- A man buys a stamp, to legalize
a bond for the better security of trading with his money, or in plainer
language, lending it on interest; to be certain that this stamp is warrantably
just, according to the prescribed forms of law, he shows it at the
Stamp-office, where it is acknowledged to be good and safe: after this, in
consequence of some defect, it is declared illegal, and the holder subjected to
a penalty.

I believe every man on earth, that has the common faculty of distinguishing
white from black, will agree with me in saying, that it would be repugnant to
equity to fine the holder for a defect that he had no knowledge of as such, and
for what was authorized by the very office of government that always issued the
stamps.

The law supposes criminality from the appearance; but equity measures it from
the design. The one is external and visible, provided many years before it may
be wanted: the other is internal and spiritual, always alive in the heart of
every judge that possesses prudence, learning, and penetration.

When I was writing of these things, to the Earl of Chatham, on my knees! made
a solemn vow to the Almighty God, declaring that if he would be pleased to
enable me, I would most surely procure an inde^nification for the poor man that
lost his ship. Since that time the Lord God has told me, by revelation at
night, That he would most truly enable me^ for if I liked, I should be
President of the Council, and Chancellor of the Exchequer: I should have any
thing that I required. Immediately after this, I heard another voice from
heaven, say, The Lord have mercy (...) them, if they had not you for their
friend and counselor; for England is the Spiritual Egypt mentioned in the 11th
chapter of the Revelation to St. John.

After making the numerous representations I have mentioned, the Earl of
Chatham, with great propriety, acknowledged their justice so far as to erase
the word Voluntary from the prescribed form of swearing: but I was then
reminded of the words of Christ in the 5th chapter, 34th verse of St. Matthew,
and strictly commanded to obey them. Soon after this, I requested from the
Admiralty, and often repeated it, a dispensing order that I might receive my
pay without an oath; but they would not grant it.

If the Earl of Chatham had shown me the small favor I asked for, and
certainly it would have been but a very small one to him, he should be held up
to the world, at my friend, to be admired and regarded; he should wear such a
durable coronet as would make him the envy of princes; it should be a coronet
that no human power would ever be able to remove.

As the Admiralty would not give me that reasonable indulgence I requested, as
they would not show me that kindness which as men living by the navy, they
might have done with ease, and without prejudice to their dignity; I wanted for
a bit of bread to eat: I was besides treated so ill, as to be dragged to a
workhouse without any legal authority, against every remonstrance I could
make, and against every threat I could make use of to call them to a strict
account for the injustice. The Admiralty knew all this; they might have
prevented it, by ordering what was due to me to be paid; but they would neither
prevent the evil, nor enable me to be liberated: they would not order the
payment of what was due, until open falsehood was made use of to say I was out
of my senses. It seemed as if they were under some private apprehension, though
pleased with my distress, of being charged one day or other in the eyes of
their country with unfeeling cruelty, and wanted some kind of colorable
evidence to justify the proceeding.

Hear (...) therefore, all nations, and be warned by i^, what the Lord God has
told me by revelation, and now commands me to write, that the injuries I
received, because de^^ for obeying his word, in the blessed gospel, the
remembrance of them should never be blessed out from the throne of heaven.
Moreover, he said likewise, That he would shake the English admiralty as a man
would violently bread in a basket, until he loosed the foundations of the
earth, and shook the place in pieces.

If I am out of my senses, in the opinion of the admiralty, for refusing first
to take an idle oath, secondly, a false one, and thirdly, to take any: Christ
the Savior of the world, and him that Isaiah the prophet calls Wonderful
Counselor, who prohibits by his Gospel in the strongest terms all kind of
swearing, must, by the same rule of knowledge for giving such a command, be out
of his.

As the Quakers never swear, and their objections to it are sanctioned by a
just indulgence of law; they, the king and parliament, for giving the
indulgence, must for the same reason as I am, be out of theirs.

Christ having been abused at Jerusalem, reproached with having a devil, being
mad, and out of his senses, makes it the less astonishing for me, that am his
servant, to be reviled in the same manner: For which the Lord God commands me
to remind all men, from the testimony of his blessed Gospel, that the sin is
blasphemy against his Holy Spirit, and that the punishment is everlasting fire.

It is from visions and revelations, and through the Holy Ghost, that I write
this book for the benefit of all men: therefore, to say it is false, that I am
mad, am an impostor, have a devil, or am out of my senses, constitutes the
dangerous sin of blasphemy.

ST. MATTHEW, CHAP. XII.
31 Wherefore I say to you, All manner of sin and blasphemy, shall be forgiven
to men; -- but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto
men.

32 And whosoever speak a word against the Son of Man, it shall be forgiven
him; but whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him,
neither in this world, neither in the world to come.

ST. MATTHEW, CHAP. V.
22 But I say to you, that whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause,
shall be in danger of the judgment: and whosoever shall say to his brother,
Raca; shall be in danger of the council: but whosoever shall say, Thou fool,
shall be in danger of hell fire.

To insult any person, whether high or low, rich, or poor, of whatever sect or
denomination, that preaches or writes through the Holy Ghost, which is indeed
the true Spirit of God, by saying that he is foolish, mad, or possessed with a
devil, constitutes the dangerous sin of blasphemy in men at this day, as well
as it did formerly in the Pharisees, when they reviled Christ.

As the good spirit may, by diligent attention, be easily known from the evil,
and the true prophet from the false, remember that no man, speaking or writing
under the direction of the Spirit of God, can revile another, encourage acts of
injustice, or disturb society, by promoting violence in any manner whatsoever.

From the Spirit of God flows all the good things which are necessary to
increase the life of man, and unite all nations under the gospel bond of
Christianity and friendship; they consist of love, peace, civility and
kindness; -- by a strict attention to observe the good spirit that encourages
these things, may be easily discerned from the evil one that opposes them.

ST. PAUL TO THE EPHESIANS, CHAP. IV.
29 Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is
good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace to the hearers.

30 And grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed to the day of
redemption.

31 Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking,
be put away from you, with all malice.

32 And be ye kind to one another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even
as God, for Christ's sake, has forgiven you.

The Lord Jesus Christ, the better to prevent the commission of sin, and the
fall of man, for there is no Savior but him, begins with strictly prohibiting
the lesser but poisonous names ^o flattery and falsehood, that they should not,
by a frequency of use, corrupt the mind, and increase to the more dangerous
ones of blasphemy and rebellion.

FIRST OF THESSALONIANS, CHAP. V.
19 Quench not the Spirit.

20 Despise not prophecyings.

21 Prove all things; hold fast that which is good.

22 Abstain from all appearance of evil.

23. And the very God of Peace sanctify you wholly: and I pray God that your
whole spirit, and soul, and body, may be preserved blameless to the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ.

CORINTHIANS, CHAP. II.
12 Now we have received, not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is
of God; -- that we might know the things which are freely given to us of God.

13 Which things also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom teaches,
but which the Holy Ghost teaches; comparing spiritual things with spiritual.

14 But the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they
are foolishness to him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned.

15 But he that is spiritual judges all things; yet he himself is judged of no
man.

COLOSSIANS, CHAP. II.
8 Beware, lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, after the
tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ.

No man ought to advance the writings or opinion of another to assist his own,
when what he says is proved to be in opposition to the words of Christ; neither
ought he to go back to the Law, which was for the Jews alone, in their own
country, to look for a precedent, to favor his delusive method of reasoning,
when the thing he wants to justify is quite contrary to the blessed Gospel of
peace and salvation.

The following are the words of ST. PAUL. (...) the fourteenth chapter to the
Corinthians, which I am commanded to insent, as justly applicable to many at
this time; when some, possessing all spiritual knowledge, as they thought,
exalted themselves against him, and doubted the spiritual truth of what he
said. VERSE XXXVII.
If any man thinks himself to be a prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge
that the things I write to you are the commands of the Lord.

38 But if any man be ignorant, let him be ignorant. That is, if any man is not
spiritual to discern the works of the Spirit of God, let him conceal his
ignorance; let him not speak against them, because he has not the spirit to
discern, faith to believe or knowledge to comprehend their truth.

GALATIANS, CHAP. I.
6 I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace
of Christ to another gospel.

7 Which is not another; but there is some that trouble you, and would pervert
the gospel of Christ.

8 But though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel to you than
that which we have preached to you, let him be ^coursed.

9 As we said before, so say I now again, If any man preach any other gospel to
you than that ye have received, let him be accursed.

SECOND OF THESSALONIANS, CHAP. I.
6 Seeing it is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them
that trouble you,

7 And to you, who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from heaven, with his mighty angels.

8 In flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey
not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

9 Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his power.

It is time to awaken all nations from their sleep of delusive security, by
informing them, that the time alluded to by St. Paul, in his Second Epistle to
the Thessalonians, is come; and that there is a great falling away from an
obedience to the blessed Gospel. And likewise to inform them that Satan has
been revealed; the age of the world is great, and the time is come for it; he
is now allowed more power, because sin is increased, to influence and deceive
man than at any time ever before. I am the prophet to whom the minister of sin
was revealed; he is a spirit, and no man can see him in the open daylight,
unless sanctified by the power of the Holy Ghost, and his eyesight
strengthened for the purpose.

It is for this reason that I am the appointed witness for God, and his last
recorded prophet to warn all nations, and desire them to obey the blessed
Gospel of salvation.

The following are some more of the VISIONS, which God showed me, and which I
am commanded to publish here.
IN the month called July, 1791, I was in a vision, and was carried away by the
spirit of God, to the sea coast, in the English channel -- a new ridge of
unknown land was brought in an instant plain to my eyes, while the finger of a
hand wrote, in large capital letters, with great quickness, and a voice
pronounced twice from heaven, at the same time, SWEDE, SWEDE!

After this I was in a vision in the month of January 1792, and was carried
away by the Spirit of God to Sweden, when I was made look through a window in a
room; I did, and saw a man walk from the side of a great chair, leaving it
empty. I could not see his face as he went away, and although I could not, nor
perceive that he had committed any crime, I thought with myself that he had
been doing wrong. Immediately the angel that stood by me said, The chair means
the chair of state; -- and that man you saw will make it empty. The king of
Sweden is delivered over for death, and that is the very man that will shoot
him.

The prince of Orange is closely pursued likewise, but he is not delivered over
yet.

After this I was in a vision, and saw the Prussian eagle perched on a chair of
state; soon after, on a sudden, I saw the chair, the house, and the whole city
where the chair stood, in flames. The angel that was near me, said, He is
likewise pursued now.

After this I was in a vision, and the Lord God talked with me, and said, I
give you the life of the Swede; but know this for certain, that if you prevent
his death, the man himself will not believe there was any danger of it. -- And
when you write hereafter of things in this country, you will be called an
impostor, a fool, and a liar: you will be imprisoned, and treated very ill.
When I see this, it will make me angry; I will then begin to kill the people,
and I will surely destroy this city.

For which I gave no public information to warn the king of Sweden, and prevent
his death. Had this man lived, he would have commanded the German army against
France; his private plan was to go through Normandy, close by the sea coast, to
be supplied the easier with provisions from England, and endeavor, by all
possible means, to take the harbor of ^rest.

He said to himself, in his own closer. This is the plan I will pursue; it will
be giving a mortal blow to the French navy, and getting a safe harbor for our
own ships.

All this was made known to me by revelation from the Lord God; and which I
communicated to the queen and minister of state in 1792, sometime before the
provinces of Brittany and Normandy showed any open appearance of hostility
against the present government of France.

In the month of April 1793, I was in a vision, and was carried away in the
spirit of God in Russia, where I saw a Bear stop and rest itself under a large
tree; soon after I beheld a man, that lay concealed among the branches, drop
down softly, and with a sharp piece of iron, which he held in his hand, stab
the ^ear; pronouncing, as he did so, I have watched a long time for you, but
now I have caught you at last.

I know by revelation from the Lord God, that this vision means the present
empress of Russia; for which, being permitted, I give her this warning.

Let the death of the kings of Sweden and France, which is but a little time
past; the death of the king of Spain and another, which will soon take place,
for they are pursued; convince the princes and the people of Europe, that the
seventh chapter of Daniel and the second of Haggai are now fulfilling.

At a former time, when the Lord God was instructing me in a knowledge of the
laws and other things, relative to the nation I am appointed to govern, he
said, in a vision of the night, When I bring princes and people from all
nations to bow down to you; when I begin to exalt you above the kings of the
earth -- Be sober, be modest, be reasonable. And immediately after he added,
You may inform the king of England that I call you my nephew.

On the 3d of March, 1794, I was in a vision and saw the sun in its full
strength, clear and high up in the firmament: soon after I saw another sun rise
on a sudden, equally large as the former, and stand close by it: both shone
with equal brightness, and the last, as well as the first, enlightened the
world.

After the first division of this copy was sent. to be printed, and even some
of it done, the printer was advised not to do it according to my form; for, if
he did, prosecution, imprisonment, and perhaps hanging, would be the
consequence to him. For which the Lord God commands me to keep back the
additional information that otherways would be given, and terminate the book.

I have said already that the sixth chapter of the Revelation was now
fulfilling: the four first seals are opened, and the covering, which kept the
meaning of the prophecies a profound secret until the present time, is removed:
the recorded decrees are held up, and God himself commands a knowledge, of
their contents to be published for the good of all nations. But if I cannot
have the commands of God, and a knowledge of his judgments, printed exactly as
I write, how is this extension of mercy to be known over Europe, and the people
of London informed of any danger that is past, or any danger that is to come?
All the prophecies in the Scripture were given through men: the Nine-inevites
were warned through one.

How is the king to save himself from that recorded, determined, and
unavoidable death, -- which all the powers of armies cannot prevent? How is
London and the parliament to be saved, when they are recorded in the Scripture
of truth to be destroyed? How is England, Europe, and most parts of the world
to be saved, when they are recorded to be filled with blood by war, and to be
made desolate for ever by earthquakes if the person I employ is deterred, by
the fears of prosecution and evil, from printing the full copy, exactly as I
give it*

The king of Egypt and his people were dedestroyed, because they would not
believe Moses; but the king of Nineveh and his people were saved, because they
did believe Jonah, and reform.

The king of England, the chancellor of the Exchequer, secretaries of state,
other members of administration, and as many members of both houses of
parliament, as my ability will allow; the bishops, judges and all the foreign
ambassadors in London; will have a book sent to each.

On account of my being insulted, because the Jews do not believe in the first
book, by a public acknowledgment of it, the Lord God commands me to remind all
men of what is wrote in that book, and to say, that as the Jews do not believe
in Christ, it cannot be expected that they will in me; neither are they, until
I am revealed in a similar manner to Moses in Egypt, but with the additional
power of sire as his sign, to make them.

The night before I had finished this book for the press, the Lord God showed
it to me in a vision, ready printed, holding it up at the same time by one
leaf, and shaking all the others open, while he pronounced, in strong clear
words, and commanded me to write them down exactly as he spoke, for universal
information:

There is nothing in this book that the English law can take hold of: -- So
says Him that Isaiah the prophet calls Wonderful Counselor.

I request every body, in all nations, to read this book with attention, and
receive it savourably, for although the information and warning it contains is
through me, yet it is not mine, but God's.

RICHARD BROTHERS.
LONDON, No. 57, Paddington Street, 11th of the month called APRIL, 1794.
SOME OF THE PROPHECIES Which mean myself, and which I am commanded to insert,
the appointed time being now fulfilled.
DEUTERONOMY, CHAP. XVIII.
15 The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a prophet, from the midst of thee,
of thy brethren, like unto me; unto him ye shall hearken.

16 According to all that thou desiredst of the Lord thy God in Horeb, in the
day of the assembly, saying, Let me not hear again the voice of the Lord my
God; neither let me see this great fire any more that I die not.

The time of the world, alluded to by Moses, though not expressly mentioned in
this chapter, when a prophet would be raised up, to order the restoration of
the children of Israel in the latter days, (for he was fully informed of all
the calamities that would befall them, afterward their deliverance and return,
to be dispersed no more, as the thirty-second chapter sufficiently testifies,
is the present; and myself the man -- the designed prophet, as leader of the
Jews, to fulfill a similar character, according to his own words, like unto me.

For Christ is the head of all prophecy; from him flows the Divine Spirit of
truth: he is Lord and God; he is all that Isaiah says of him -- the Wonderful
Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace.

Moses was but a man, and to a man like himself he alludes; as the Lord himself
likewise declares in the three following verses.

17 And the Lord said to me, They have well spoken that which they have spoken;

18 I will raise them up a prophet from among their brethren, like unto thee;
and I will put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak to them all that I
command him.

19 And it shall come to pass, that whosoever will not hearken to my words,
which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him.

The Testimony given by ST. MATTHEW the Apostle, of who CHRIST was. CHAP. I.
22 Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled, which was spoken of the
Lord, by the prophet saying.

23 Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they
shall call his name Emmanuel; which, being interpreted, is God with us.

The Testimony of ST. JOHN the Apostle. CHAP. I.
1 In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God and the word was
God.

2 The same was in the beginning with God.

3 All things were made by him; and without him was not any thing made that was
made.

4 In him was life; and the life was the light of men. And the light shone in
darkness; and the darkness comprehended it not. There was a man sent from God,
whose name was John.

7 The same came for a witness, to bear witness of the light, that all men
through him might believe. He was not that light, but was sent to bear witness
of that light. That was the true light, which lights every man that comes
into the world.

10 He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him
not.

11 He came to his own, and his own received him not; but as many as received
him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God. Which were born, not of
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.

14 And the word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, etc.

The Testimony given by ST. PAUL, I. Timothy. CHAP. III.
16 And without controversy, great is the mystery of godliness; God was
manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of angels, preached to the
Gentiles, believed on in the world, and received up into glory.

The meaning of this Chapter having been always misunderstood by expounders of
the Scripture, I am commanded to insert and explain it for the benefit of all
men. ACTS, -- CHAP. VII.
29 Then fled Moses at this saying, and was a stranger in the land of Midian,
where he begat two sons.

30 And when forty years were expired, there appeared to him, in the wilderness
of mount Sina, an angel of the Lord in a flame of fire in a bush.

31, 32 Saying I am the God of thy fathers, etc.

37 This is that Moses, which said to the children of Israel, a prophet shall
the Lord your God raise up unto you, of your brethren, like unto me.

This is he (meaning Moses still, and not the prophet alluded to in the
preceding verse; who was not Christ neither, as has always been erroneously
supposed) that was in the church, (meaning the tabernacle) in the wilderness
with the angel which spoke to him in mount Sinai.

39 To whom our fathers would not obey -- (meaning Moses) but thrust him from
them, (meaning Moses: often did he fast, and pray, that God might not destroy
the congregation,) and in their hearts turned back again into Egypt.

Who was the conspicuous person that the angel constantly accompanied,
manifested himself to, and talked with during forty years in the wilderness,
according to the 38th verse, but Moses? Who did the angel speak to in mount
Sinai from a flame of fire in a bush? St. Stephen meant no other here than
Moses.

40 Saying to Aaron, make us Gods to go before us; for, as for this Moses,
which brought us out of the land of Egypt, we know not what is become of him.

Expounders of the Scriptures have always supposed that St. Stephen, by
repeating in this chapter the verses I have inserted from Deuteronomy, meant
Christ to be the prophet alluded to by Moses, which is, like himself, to
collect and lead home the Jews; but he does not; he repeats it as in historical
account, to remind the council, before which he stood for judgment, that as
their fathers had before rejected Moses in the wilderness, so did they their
children reject Christ at Jerusalem. But in no one part does he, or St. Peter
in the 3d chapter, mean that Christ is the prophet alluded to by Moses in the
eighteenth chapter of Deuteronomy, -- as the fortieth verse even sufficiently
testifies.

REVELATION TO ST. JOHN, CHAP. XII.
St. John the Apostle in this chapter describes a woman as clothed with the
sun, the moon under her feet, (meaning darkness, or the Turkish empire in
Asia,) and a crown of twelve stars on her head. The sun alluded to is not the
sun in the firmament, neither is that sun the Lord Jesus Christ, as has been
always erroneously supposed. The woman is not the church, nor yet the Blessed
Virgin, the mother of Christ, as has always been likewise erroneously supposed;
but that sun, means an entire man composed of flesh and blood like any other^
and that woman, the princess of Israel. The prince is represented as a sun,
because that through him God will enlighten the world with more knowledge than
ever it had yet, and give a fresh manifestation of his mercy to prolong its
duration. The woman, as his consort, is represented as clothed with him, and
also as wearing a crown of twelve stars; because he, as her husband, is prince
of the twelve tribes.

The child, who will govern all nations immediately under and next to God,
being caught up to God and to his throne, means no more than the child going up
to Jerusalem, where the throne of God will be on earth. The woman's going into
the wilderness, means going up to Jerusalem also: the words into the wilderness
are mentioned because the city is situated far inland from the sea. The dragon
means a European prince now alive, who will pour out proclamations and
manifestoes after me, as a flood would issue from the mouth of a dragon: for
Satan will be in him.

At the time God was explaining this chapter to me, be said, when I give you
power to destroy that man from the face of the earth, you will melt into pity
and spare his life; for which all my people will universally blame you, because
he is their enemy and oppressor. Those strange names are given, and those
difficult allusions to be understood, are made by St. John on purpose to seal
the true meaning of the prophecies and revelation an entire secret, according
to the 5th chapter; until the full time is accomplished, and the appointed
person made known to publish them to the world.

The prophet Ezekiel in the visions of God to him, describes the great extent,
and grandeur of Jerusalem at a future time; and likewise of its being governed
by a human prince.

This is the very man, the appointed of God that is now abused, and publicly
reproached in London -- the capital of the spiritual Egypt, as is mentioned by
St. John in the 11th chapter, with being a hypocrite, and a fanatic impostor.

Remember those things, O my God; and as thy thunder on the 7th of this month
-- August -- was to show thy full determination to throw down cities, and dash
in pieces the council of evil men, if they committed any violence against me,
for otherways I should now be lying in the common prison -- So, O my God,
execute; for they have no faith to believe thy just judgments, nor charity to
be civil to thy messenger that declares thy great offers of mercy.

First published August the 10th, 1794.

THE reason why these parts of Scripture, and the other things which follow,
were not inserted when the first edition of this book was printed, is, the time
was not accomplished, and the Lord my God would not permit them to be published
until it was.

I am now commanded to make them publicly known for the information and benefit
of all men: In obedience to which, as his servant and prophet, I do.

SECOND OF SAMUEL, CHAP. XXII.
44 Thou also have delivered me from the strivings of my people, (meaning the
then children of Israel, over whom David was king.) Thou have kept me to be
head of the Heathen: a people which I know not shall serve me.

This promise to king David then, meant that it should be fulfilled to him in
his descendent at a future time; a man, a human being, like any other that is
composed of flesh and blood; but not the Lord Jesus Christ, who is God: who
always was, and always will be, the head of the Heathen, and all nations. The
promise was made from God to David, to be fully accomplished in that man's
descendant; which descendant, is myself; I shall, under God, rule all nations
under the government of the Gospel to fulfill that covenant to David, and the
promise of it by revelation to myself.

45 Strangers shall submit themselves to me: as soon as they hear, they shall
be obedient to me. -- (Meaning to be fulfilled in his descendent, as soon as
they hear of his revelation.)

46 Strangers shall fade away, and they s^all be afraid to come out of their
close places.

47 The Lord lives, and blessed be my rock: and exalted be the God -- the rock
of my salvation.

48 It is God that avengeth me, and that brings down the people under me; and
that brings me forth from my enemies.

49 Thou also be lifted me up on high, above them that rise up against me: thou
have delivered me from the violent man.

50. Therefore I will give thanks to thee, O Lord, among the Heathen, and I
will sing praises to thy name.

Here, David, who was not himself among the Heathen, was praising God for his
descendant that should have this promise fulfilled to him, and who should be
among the Heathen.

51 He (meaning the Lord) is a Tower of Salvation for his king: (meaning the
descendant of David as king, ruling over all nations under the covenant and
constant direction of God,) and shows mercy to his Anointed, under David, and
to his seed for evermore.

That Christ, the Savior of the world, should be born of a Virgin, and that he
should be called the Wonderful Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting
Father, and the Prince of Peace, Isaiah the prophet sufficiently testifies:
that Christ was so born, St. Matthew the Apostle witnesses in the first chapter
of that part of the Gospel wrote by him. And Christ himself says in the 22d
chapter, when speaking to the Pharisees, -- "What think ye of Christ? Whose son
is he? They say to him, The son of David. He says to them, How then does David
in Spirit call him Lord, saying, the Lord said to my Lord, sit thou on my right
hand, till I make thy enemies thy footstool? if David then call him Lord, how
is he his son? And no man was able to answer him a word; neither durst any man,
from that day forth, all him any more questions."

The words are, "Unto David and to his seed for ever more."

It means, to continue in succession from father to son, from the one as a man,
to the other as a man, while the world lasts.

The Blessed Virgin Mary, through whom Christ the Redeemer, who was God, came
into the world, was descended from king David: it is for this that Christ,
though he was the Everlasting Father and Creator of all things, is alluded to
as the son of David.

Mary was first cousin to that Joseph, who was promised to be her husband when
found with child by the Holy Ghost. St. Matthew, chapter 1st. Both Mary and
Joseph were descended from one grandfather, who was Matthan; she the daughter
of one brother, and Joseph the son of the other. Told me by revelation from the
Lord God.

ZACHARIAH, CHAP. VIII.
20 Thus says the Lord of Hosts. It shall yet come to pass, that there shall
come people, and the inhabitants of many cities: and the inhabitants of one
city shall go to another, saying, Let us go speedily to pray before the Lord,
and to seek the Lord of Hosts; I will go also.

22 Yea, many people and strong nations shall come to seek the Lord of Hosts in
Jerusalem, and to pray before the Lord.

23 Thus says the Lord of Hosts, In those days it shall come to pass, that ten
men shall take hold, out of all languages of the nations, even shall take hold
of the skirt of him that (...) Jew, saying, We will go with you; for we have
heard that God is with you.

The time of the world, meant by the prophet, when this would be fulfilled, is
at the restoration of the Jews, in the latter days; and myself the conspicuous
particular Jew, as leader of the Jews, alluded to. I shall be importuned by
many out of all nations, when revealed, comparatively taking hold of my skirt,
entreating to go with me to Jerusalem; because God, the mighty power of his
Spirit, and fire, will be with me.

More of the VISIONS, which God showed me, and which I am now commanded to
publish.
IN the month called June, 1791, at the hour of two in the afternoon, I saw a
hand, from the wrist downwards, like the hand of a man, with the fore finger
pointed out, appear on a sudden a little above the height of my head, near the
door, on the wall or partition of the room I was then in (...) After this I was
informed, by revelation, at ^ght, from the Lord God, that it meant the speedy
end of the present king of England and his ^^pire, like Belshazzar and Babylon,
both of which would soon be destroyed.

In the month called May, 1792, I was in a vision, and receiving instruction
from God of future things: he showed me the queen, greatly alarmed at his
judgments, by my revelation, with the power of f^e, and immediately she cried
out, The Lord have mercy on us! we shall all be destroyed, we shall all be
destroyed! (...) After this I was in a vision again, and the Lord God showed me
the present queen of England, coming toward me, slow, trembling, and afraid.
This was communicated, with other things, to William Pit, in the month called
June, 1792. And likewise, informing him, at the same time, that it would most
certainly be fulfilled: It will: it is established with God, and will be so.

In the beginning of the month of June, 1792, I was in a vision, and was
carried away, by the Spirit of God, to the palace called St. James's, where I
saw the present king of England; he rose from his seat on seeing me, and
immediately sent me his own magnificent star, at the same time breathing on it,
and kissing, as if kissing to take a last farewell; yet not with grief and
reluctance to give, but with evident satisfaction. Why the king of England
should take his own conspicuous ornament, and send it to me, was a thing that I
was greatly astonished at; I wished to know the meaning, but could not
discover; until a loud voice pronounced, down from heaven, The Lord God
delivers his life over into your hands, and he will give you any thing to
preserve it. This vision, with others, and other things, was communicated, by
Divine command, to the king, in 1792. The letter, which contained it, with
others to the king, the queen, and the chancellor of the Exchequer, were put
into the penny-post office, to be sent by that conveyance, according to the
directions I received on that head by revelation from God.

1794. This day, called Thursday, and the 12th of the month called June, I was
in a vision, at the hour of two in the afternoon, when the Lord God spoke to me
in a voice of great quickness, carrying me away to the Bank of England at the
same time, and saying, There is one of twenty. The whole place rung and
trembled with the clear, but sharp sound of his words, it is by his sacred and
particular command I mention this vision in writing.

The 13th, in the morning, the Lord God said to me, among other things, in a
vision, You see those people do not believe, neither will they for all your
endeavors; why then do you continue to entreat me for them?

The 14th, in the morning, the Lord God spoke to me, and said, The judgment is
now against this nation; the thunder, just past, was to proclaim it: Pharaoh is
appointed to die, and his government to be destroyed; the priests, and all the
abominable idolatries of Egypt, shall perish, never to be found any more.

In the same manner that the Lord God spoke to the prophet Samuel, and revealed
a knowledge of his designs, in the same manner also he speaks to me, and
reveals a knowledge of his will. FIRST OF SAMUEL, CHAP. III.
1 And the child Samuel ministered unto the Lord before Eli; and the word of
the Lord was precious in those days; there was no open vision.

2 And it came to pass at that time, when Eli was laid down in his place, and
his eyes began to wax dim, that he could not see, and ere the lamp of God went
out in the temple of the Lord, where the ark of God was, and Samuel was laid
down to sleep,

4 That the Lord called, Samuel; and he answered, Here am I. And he ran unto
Eli, and said, Here am I; for thou calledst me. And he said, I called not; lie
down again. And he went and lay down.

6 And the Lord called yet again, Samuel. And Samuel arose, and went to Eli,
and said, Here am I; for thou did call me. And he answered, I called not, my
son; lie down again.

7 Now Samuel did not yet know the Lord, neither was the word of the Lord yet
revealed to him.

8 And the Lord called Samuel again the third time. And he arose, and went to
Eli, and said, Here am I; for thou did call me. And Eli perceived that the
Lord had called the child.

9 Therefore Eli said to Samuel, Go, lie down; and it shall be, if he call
thee, that thou shall say, Speak, Lord; for thy servant hears. So Samuel went
and lay down in his place.

10 And the Lord came and stood, and called, as at other times, Samuel, Samuel.
Then Samuel answered, Speak, Lord; for thy servant hears. And the Lord said
to Samuel; Behold, I will do a thing in Israel, at which both the ears of every
one that hears it shall tingle.

12 In that day I will perform against Eli all things which I have spoken
concerning his house: when I begin, I will also ma^e an end.

1794. The 25th of the month called June, the Lord God said to me in a vision
of the night, on my bed, In seven days more the judgment will be on this nation.

After this I was in a vision, and the Lord God brought close to me, that I
might hear the report of a gun that was fired, and see a man privately shoot at
another, to kill him: it was so near, that I saw the flash, and smelt the
powder. Before the death of the king of Sweden I was shown, in a vision,
similar to this, that he would be delivered over from the protection of God, to
be shot.

I know, because the Lord God has explained it to me by revelation, that this
vision means, the man fired at to be the present king of England. He will be
shot, but not killed; he will be wounded, but not mortally.

He has not believed me at any time, although I fully informed him in 1792, and
since, that it would be so: neither will he, until the very evil is visited on
him: and visited on him, to increase his distress, at a time when he is
surrounded with danger, and loaded with trouble; it most certainly will. Then
the king of England will be convinced by woeful and feeling proofs, but it will
be very late; -- comparatively, when Death knocks at the door, that he despised
the offered mercy of God in 1792, and constantly since his best friend, among
mankind, as false.

In the month called March, 1794, I was in a vision, and the Lord God showed me
a large and very tall oak tree it stood alone; it was entirely withered, and
all its branches were cut off. While I was considering the tree, its lonely
condition and nakedness, I heard a very loud voice call out of heaven, ^ew down
that tree. Immediately, the tree was covered with a thick cloud of darkness,
and an angel descended from God, who struck the tree with so violent a blow
that it fell to the ground, and in its fall it made a great noise.

1794. First of the month called July, the Lord God said to me, among other
things, in (...) vision, early in the morning, for I had been earnestly praying
to him the evening before to hasten my revelation to the Jews, and inform me
how long it would be until it took place; because I was daily abused as an
impostor, for publishing his commands, by wicked men; every one of them led on
under the influence of an evil spirit -- You must be at Constantinople, in your
way to Jerusalem, by this time the next year.

The 2d of the same month, the Lord God said to me, in a vision on my bed,
early in the morning, in breaking bread you must not any longer say, to any
person, Peace and friendship, but salvation only to the spiritual.

I know, by revelation, that Christopher Love, a clergyman, who was unjustly
tried, condemned, and put to death in London, in the year of 1651, had the
divine Spirit of the living God, and prophesied from it. He testified of me at
that time under different names, though all of them meant one and the same
person; that of a Bright Star, as a Sound of Thunder in the Ears of the Wicked,
a Lantern to the Jews, and a Great Man.

The Lord God commands me to give this testimony, and also to say, that he will
soon send, in anger, the visitation of his judgment on London, and call her to
a strict account for shedding not only the blood of this righteous man, but
likewise all his other faithful witnesses.

I know likewise, by revelation from the Lord God, and am commanded to write it
down that John Maximilian Da^^ was sanctified by the divine Spirit of Truth,
and prophesied, under its sacred direction, in the year of 1709. He has also
testified of me under different names.

The Lord God commands me to inform you, John Wright, that you are of the
Hebrews, of the tribe of Levi, descended from Aaron the high priest, by
Phinchas, Zadok, and Ezra; for which the covenant to your forefather, Phinchas,
of an everlasting priesthood, is renewed, given to you, to be manifested in you.

NUMBERS, CHAP. XXV.
10 And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying.

11 Phinchas the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, has turned my
wrath away from the children of Israel, while he was zealous for my sake among
them, that I consumed not the children of Israel in my jealousy.

12 Wherefore say, Behold I give to him my covenant of peace:

13 And he shall have it, and his seed after him; even the covenant of an
everlasting priesthood; because he was zealous for his God, and made an
atonement for the children of Israel.

This is the recorded testimony which the Lord my God commands me to give; and
to say to you likewise, You are sanctified by the Holy Ghost, the divine Spirit
of Truth.

The Lord God commands me to say to all you, professing Christianity, whom I
have, by his sacred direction, acknowledged to be of the Hebrews, descended
from Israel; for you, and your children after you, are some of his chosen
people; not to take up, in obedience to any law or any human power whatever,
warlike arms, to shed blood, or commit violence, in consequence of the
approaching calamities which he will most surely bring on this Egyptian land.

Neither mind the people that blaspheme God, and revile you for believing in
his testimonies: the wicked have always rose against the righteous, and this
land, like Egypt of old, has many taskmasters to abuse and oppress in it.
Therefore comfort yourselves in the knowledge of the promises of God to his
servants: For I declare, by his sacred command, that the visible Jews are but
few in number, compared to the great multitude prosessing Christianity, but all
descended from the former Jews in the land of Israel, the forefathers of the
present visible ones; which were, at different times, led captives into all
nations: your lives are long, theirs but short; you are the holy seed, the
people and saints of the Most High; to whom, and your children for ever,
belongs the possession and government of his kingdom.

The Lord God, who was the Lord Jesus Christ, commands me now, and not until
now, to insert the following testimonies, as a warning to all blasphemers, and
as a reason to all men, that do not know, why he said to me, in the preceding
part of this book. You may inform the king of England that I call you my nephew.

THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW, CHAP. XII.
46 While he (meaning Christ) yet talked to the people, behold his mother and
his brethren stood without, desiring to speak with him.

CHAP. XIII.
36 Then Jesus sent the multitude away, and went into the house; and his
disciples came to him, saying, Declare to us the parable of the tares of the
field.

37 He answered, and said to them, He that sows the good seed is the son of
man.

38 The field is the world; the good seed are the children of the kingdom; but
the tares are the children of the wicked one; the enemy that sowed them is the
devil; the harvest is the end of the world; and the reapers are the angels.

40 As therefore the tares are gathered and burned in the fire, so shall it be
also in the end of this world.

41 The son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather out of
his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity, and shall cast
them into a furnace of fire; there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.

43 Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their
father. Who has ears to hear, let him hear.

47 Again, the kingdom of heaven is like to a net that was cast into the sea,
and gathered of every kind; which, when it was full, they drew to shore, and
sat down, and gathered the good into vessels, but cast the bad away.

49 So shall it be at the end of the world: the angels shall come forth, and
fever the wicked from among the just. And shall cast them down into the furnace
of fire; there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.

51 Jesus says to them, Have ye understood all these things? They say to him,
Yea Lord.

53 And it came to pass, that when Jesus had finished these parables, he
departed thence. -- And when he was come into his own country, he taught them
in their synagogue; insomuch that they were astonished, and said, Whence has
this man this wisdom, and these mighty works?

55 Is not this the carpenter's son? Is not his mother called Mary? And his
brethren (meaning his brothers) James, and Joses, and Simon, and Judas?

56 And his sisters, are they not all with us? Whence then has this man all
these things? -- And they were offended at him. But Jesus said to them, A
prophet is not without honor save in his own country, and in his own house.

After the Lord Jesus Christ was born of the blessed Virgin Mary, she was
married to Joseph; by whom she had sons and daughters; -- they were supposed,
as the unquestionable testimony of the Gospel demonstrates, to be his brothers
and sisters.

St. Paul, the apostle, and likewise St. Mark, has left on record similar
testimonies, which corroborate the preceding one.

Being, myself, descended from that James, the eldest son of Mary, by Joseph,
whom St. Paul calls the Lord^s brother, is the reason that the Lord God, who
was the Lord Jesus Christ, said to me, as an expression of fondness, and to
manifest his regard, You may inform the king of England that I all you my
nephew.

ST. PAUL, GALATIANS, CHAP. I.
19 But other of the apostles saw I none, save James, the Lord's brother.

ST. MARK, CHAP. VI.
2 And when the sabbath day was come, He (meaning Christ) began to teach in the
synagogue; and many hearing him were astonished, saying, From whence has this
man these things? and what wisdom is this which is given to him, that even such
mighty works are wrought by his hands?

3 Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary, the brother of James and Joses,
and of Juda and Simon? And are not his sisters here with us? And they were
offended at him.

The Lord God commands me to say, for the information and warning of all men,
That between this day the 25th of the present month called October, and the
beginning of the month called June, 1795, without mentioning to any person at
what particular time in that interval, my revelation to the Jews, with a sign
the same as Moses in Egypt -- and to the people of London, will take place: to
the former, to receive the commands of God through me, and to collect all their
property and depart in great haste from all nations to their own land: the
ships of England, France, Spain, and all Europe, will be obedient to the
commands of God to carry home their wealth, and all the people that choose to go
by sea: to the latter, to convince them the destruction of London in 1791,
according to the eighteenth chapter of the Revelation, would have been
fulfilled, but for my entreaty. To fulfill the 4th chapter and the 5th verse of
the prophet Malachi, which is, Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet
before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord. I, myself, am the
appointed prophet to fulfill that chapter and character. Therefore I warn all
people in all nations -- that the terrible day of the Lord alluded to, is nigh;
it is not the day of universal judgment, but the day which is to burn like an
oven, and which is to consume the wicked from the face of the earth -- like the
stubble of the field. -- Then, according to the prophet Daniel in the seventh
chapter, the kingdom, and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the
whole heaven, will be given for an everlasting possession to the people and
saints of the Most High. Being to be revealed the same as Moses, but in the
same Spirit and power as Elijah, when he destroyed the soldiers and priests of
Ahab, I am to re-pronounce his judgments, to execute them on all false Christ's
and false prophets; and afterward, to call down fire from heaven to consume
the enemies of God.

The Lord God commands me to say to you, William Bryan, that you are of the
Hebrews, and of the tribe of Judah; and that you, with John Wright, are
appointed, and will be commanded by him, to testify publicly to the world who I
now am, and what my future designation is.

The Lord God will influence and command numbers of his people, both men and
women, to give the same public testimony. He will also give them, to fulfill the
prophecy of Joel in the 2d chapter, in wonderful visions, dreams, and open
signs in the heaven, a knowledge of the approaching times.

28 And it shall come to pass afterward that I will pour out my Spirit upon all
flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy; your old men shall
dream dreams, and your young men shall see visions.

29 And also upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those days, I will
pour out my Spirit.

30 And I will show wonders in the heavens and in the earth; blood, and fire,
and pillars of smoke.

31 The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the
great and terrible day of the Lord come.

32 And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the name of the
Lord shall be delivered: for in mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall be
deliverance, as the Lord has said, And in the remnant whom the Lord shall call.

THE REVELATION TO ST. JOHN, CHAP. VI. Which relates to the present war -- its
progress -- and consequences; and its destruction by the woeful but just
judgment of an offended God.
And I saw when the Lamb opened one of the seals, and I heard as it were the
sound of thunder, one of the four beasts saying, Come and see. -- And I saw,
and behold a white horse; and he that sat on him had a bow: and a crown was
given to him; and he went forth conquering, and to conquer.

3 And when he had opened the second seal, I heard the second beast say, Come
and see. -- And there went out another horse that was red; and power was given
to him that sat thereon to take peace from the earth, and that they should kill
one another: and there was given to him a great sword.

5 And when he had opened the third seal, I heard the third beast say, Come and
see. And I beheld, and lo, a black horse; and he that sat on him had a pair of
balances in his hand. -- And I heard a voice in the midst of the four beasts
say, A measure of wheat for a penny, and three measures of barley for a penny,
and see thou hurt not the oil and the wine.

7 And when he had opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth
beast say, Come and see. And I looked, and behold a pale horse; and his name
that sat on him was Death, and hell followed with him: and power was given to
them over the fourth part of the earth, to kill with sword, and with hunger,
and with death, and with the beasts of the earth.

9 And when he had opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the souls of
them that were slain for the word of God, and for the testimony which they
held. And they cried with a loud voice, saying. How long, O Lord, holy and
true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth.
And white robes were given to every one of them; and it was said to them, That
they should rest yet for a little season, until their fellow servants also and
their brethren, that should be killed as they were, should be fulfilled.

The fifth seal is now opened, and the secret prophecy contained under it is
published for the information and benefit of all men.

The opening of the next seal, while it brings woe to the wicked, will manifest
to the Jews the great power and name of their prince with God, as recorded by
Daniel, for their deliverance and restoration.

THE PROPHET DANIEL, CHAP. XII.
And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great prince which stands for the
children of thy people; and there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was
since there was a nation, even to that same time: and at that time thy people
shall be delivered, every one that shall be found written in the book.

The time of the world alluded to, when the woeful calamities mentioned here
will take place, is just now come: Myself, who will be the revealed prince of
Israel, is the Michael and the great prince alluded to here by the angel
speaking to Daniel: but not the Lord Jesus Christ visibly, who is God, and king
over all; neither is it the angel that is mentioned under the name of Michael
in the 10th chapter and 13th verse.

2 And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake; some to
everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt.

3 And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; and
they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever.

4 But, thou, O Daniel, shut up the words, and seal the book, even to the time
of the end: many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased.

8 And I heard, but understood not: then said I, O my Lord, what shall be the
end of these things?

9 And he said, Go thy way, Daniel; for the words are closed up and sealed till
the time of the end.

10 Many shall be purified, and made white, and tried; but the wicked shall do
wickedly; and none of the wicked shall understand; but the wise shall
understand.

At this time, which is the time alluded to by the angel informing Daniel, the
earth will quake, and be rent in many places: the heaven will be convulsed,
opening and shutting, and showing many fearful signs; -- there will be storms
of wind, hail, and showers of rain, with violent thundering and lightning; --
the very beasts of the field, birds of the air, and fishes of the sea, will be
frightened: all the inhabitants of the earth will tremble for their lives,
dreading that it is the hour of their dissolution, and day of universal
judgment; so fierce and terrible will the great anger of God be manifested
against a wicked world, professing Christ with their lips, but teaching
rebellion against his blessed Gospel in their public laws and forms of prayer.

Swearing oaths; the Lord's supper, or taking the sacrament to remember him and
commemorate the awful moment when he gave it to his disciples, is made a
qualification, even to the most unthinking, abandoned, and wicked, to serve in
any public office or employment whatever.

Of the public prayers. Our Father, which art in heaven; hallowed be thy name;
thy kingdom come; which is the kingdom of peace; is very good: but the next
form of prayer is beseeching God to go forth with fleets and armies: this is
very bad, because it is in direct opposition to the former; it encourages
strife, hatred, war, and bloodshed; it is calling on God to keep back his
kingdom, and to overthrow his own gospel of peace. The worship of christians
ought to be pure, humble, and peaceable without any mixture of politics or
^tional constraints from human law.

The bishops are called Lords Spiritual. -- To ^rdain a clergyman, he must
kneel down before a bishop, while he says, "Receive the Holy Ghost for the
office and work of a priest in the church of God, now committed unto thee by
the imposition of our hands. Whose sins thou do forgive, they are forgiven;
and whose sins thou do retain, they are retained."

Likewise, at the consecration of a bishop, it is said, "Receive the Holy
Ghost, for the office and work of a bishop in the church of God, now committed
unto thee by the imposition of our hands; in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen. And remember that thou stir up the grace of
God, which is given thee by this imposition of our hands."

As there is in truth no Lord but God, no man ought to assume his sacred name.
No man is Spiritual that has not the Holy Ghost, the divine Spirit of Truth; it
is by Christ that it is given, and he will not give it to any that promotes the
evil of war and disobedience to his gospel. A prince may give to a man a title,
but it is God only that can make him Spiritual: he cannot give that mighty
Spirit which he has not the power to command, and which he never received the
gift of himself. To pursue then any longer such a false form of ordination and
consecration, is not only dishonorable to the king, parliament, and people of
England, but also a reproach to the bishops to attempt to give, and to the
clergy to kneel down to receive.

Turn from such deceitful unmanly ways, and endeavor to live long; for it is
the word of God through a man that points at the crime, and warns you to
forsake, what must, if you do not, lead to certain death: for believe me, the
day of destruction to punish disobedience to the gospel is so very nigh, that
it will take place before the commencement of eight months from this day.

Look at your wives, your children, and all that is dear to you on earth; then
consider how great the blessing to have them, to live with, and possess them;
but how terrible the evil to separate, to be burnt with fire -- to die, and
lose them for ever.

Remember, God created man in his own image and likeness, and created the earth
for his use; that man might believe in him, and obey his commands.

He brought the children of Israel out of Egypt to conduct them to the promised
land, -- but when they disobeyed him in the wilderness, he destroyed thousands
of them. He burnt Sodom and Gomorrah, because the people were wicked; but he
saved Nineveh, which was also denounced, because the people repented.

The Lord God is great, merciful, and compassionate to forgive all that do
entreat and obey his commands; but be assured, he is also great, mighty, and
powerful, jealous of his sacred name and honor when given to men: and he can do
now what he did of old, they are recorded for our example and warning, that is,
overthrow cities, -- and destroy multitudes in an instant.

Life, blessing, and peace, is the inheritance of the servants, the saints, and
people of the Most High.

REVELATION, CHAP. VI. CONTINUED.
12 And I beheld when he had opened the sixth seal, and lo, there was a great
earthquake; and the sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the moon became
as blood: and the stars of heaven fell to the earth, even as a fig tree casts
her untimely figs when she is shaken by a mighty wind: and the heaven departed
as a scroll when it is rolled together; and every mountain and island were
moved out of their places.

15 And the kings of the earth, and the great man, and the rich men, and the
chief captains, and the mighty men, and every bondsman, and every freeman, hid
themselves in the dens, and in the rocks of the mountains: and said to the
mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits on
the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb: for the great day of his wrath is
come; and who shall be able to stand?

SECOND BOOK OF ESDRAS, CHAP. II.
42 I. Esdras, saw upon the mount Zion a great multitude of people, whom I
could not number, and they all praised the Lord with songs.

43 And in the midst of them there was a young man of a high stature, taller
than all the rest, and upon every one of their heads he set crowns, and was
more exalted; which I marvelled at greatly.

44 So I asked the angel, and said, Sir, what are these? He answered and said
to me, These be they that have put off the mortal clothing, and put on the
immortal: (It means the Jews, who, when I am revealed, will acknowledge that
the Lord Christ is the Lord God: then they will put off the mortal clothing of
unbelief and error, and put on the immortal clothing of faith and
righteousness,) and have confessed the name of God: now are they crowned, and
receive palms.

46 Then said I to the angel, What young person is that which crowns them, and
gives them palms in their hands. So he answered and said to me, It is the Son
of God, whom they have confessed in the world. Then I began greatly to commend
them that stood so st^ly for the name of the Lord.

The Son of God, alluded to here, is not the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, as
has been always erroneously supposed; but a human being, of fresh and blood,
like any other. It is a man, and but a man; though recorded, and honored with
being called the Son of God. It is myself, who am the man that will be made
that prince, alluded to by Ezekiel, in the xliv. xlv. xlvi. and xlviii.
chapters of his Prophecy; and in the second chapter of Haggai, when kingdoms
are convulsed with violence and war, with the fall of thrones and the
destruction of armies, as a promised, a designed signet, manifested to the
world by the great power and extended goodness of God. It is that man, whom God
has designed to be the visible prince of Israel. As a believer in God, by, and
through Christ, the divine Spirit of Truth, and an obeyer of his commands, he
is a son, an adopted son: so is every man under heaven an acknowledged son,
whether rich or poor, that does the same; and so is every woman likewise, an
adopted and acknowledged daughter.

Remember the words of the Lord Jesus Christ in the Gospel, where he says,
After this manner therefore pray ye, Our father, which art in heaven, etc. As
God then is our father, we that acknowledge and pray to him as such, are surely
his sons and daughters.

All that believe in the testimony of God by me, which he now commands me to
make known, are his people, a part (because the visible Jews are the great
body) of that innumerable multitude, shown by the angel to Esdras, crowned, and
receiving palms.

The Lord God commands me to remind all people of the loud thunder that was on
the 7th of August last, and to say, It was a threat from him to destroy London,
sooner than suffer me to be hurt: take it for a warning, and beware of the
dreadful consequences that will most certainly ensue, if a similar injury is
intended against me: for if you, the English Government, are determined to
molest me, the Lord God is also determined to oppose you; and will visit with
death on his enemies, and with destruction on their capital. For the English
Government, both what is called civil and ecclesiastical, in its present form,
will, by the fierce anger and determined judgment of the Lord God, be removed,
annihilated, and utterly destroyed, before the expiration of ten months from
this day.

For those unhappy men, which compose it, as if the injustice of the present
war was not sufficient to provoke him, have imprudently gone on, adding evil to
evil, and now, more than before, publicly encourage blasphemy against him, and
abuse against his prophet. Why do they do so? said the Lord God to me. Why?
because you have not their mark, but my seal; you have not their authority, the
laying on the hands of their bishops, to give the Holy Ghost to prophecy by,
but my Spirit, yet these are the men that pretend to judge of spirits, to
discern the good from the evil: they suppose every man, that writes or speaks
under the power and influence of God, is a false prophet, an impostor under
delusion; because the words of truth, by him, go to contradict their mark,
their human ordinances, and political forms of prayer.

The Lord Jesus Christ says, in the fifteenth chapter of his Gospel by St.
Matthew, "But in vain they do worship me, teaching, for doctrines, the
commandments of men."

And because the annunciation of my kingdom of peace and preservation, brings
with it the sentence of death against their kingdom of war and human
destruction; therefore, hear what the Lord God says to me by revelation, and
commands me to write, That, as they have encouraged blasphemy against me, they
shall not prosper; for I will send a blast on them that will confound all their
counsels: and, as they have encouraged abuse against you, whom I sent, and who
entreated me for their good, I will deliver them over to the power of their
enemies; to be hated by every body, despised, and trod under foot like mire in
the streets.

The Lord God commands me to say, for the information of the English
government, the judges, and all men, that the prisoners, now in confinement,
and on trial for their lives, charged with the crime of High Treason against
the life of the king of England, are innocent: as such, he requires me to make
known to the king his sacred commands in writing, and to publish this for the
knowledge of all.

The Lord God commands me to inform, through this book, all that honor him --
his servants -- the peaceable and righteous in all nations, which have had
their property, whether in land or money, confiscated, for no other reason than
because the nation they belonged to declared war against the nation they lived
in, all such property, or its full value, with reasonable interest for the
time, shall most surely be restored.

And you, Peter Woulfe, one of the Avignon Society, whom the Lord my God
commands me to mention here by name, as a testimony of his great regard, your
property, confiscated in France, will all be restored with interest, and much
kindness shown to you by the members of its government: they will restore the
property of every other peaceable individual likewise: by the same divine rule
of justice, Spain, England, Prussia, Germany, Holland, and all the nations of
Europe, must restore theirs. For the time of the world is just now come, and
God is firmly determined to manifest his mighty power, for the preservation of
his people and saints, by fulfilling by me his words in the eleventh chapter of
Isaiah, a part of which are -- But with righteousness he will judge the poor,
and reprove, with equity, for the meek of the earth: and he shall smite the
earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips he shall slay
the wicked.

RICHARD BROTHERS.
LONDON, No. 57, Paddington Street, 26th of the month called October, 1794.
THE PROPHET ISAIAH, CHAP. XLI.
25 I HAVE raised up one from the north, (meaning the revealed Prince of the
Hebrews at this time,) and he shall come; (meaning to Jerusalem, from that
northern part of the world alluded to: England lies in the north, and it is
indeed the country meant:) from the rising of the sun he shall call upon my
name: and he shall come upon princes as upon mortar, and as the potter treads
clay.

Isaiah stood at Jerusalem when this prophecy was given, writing and recording
it by the direction of God, he looked to the northern p^t of the world, where
this distinguished person, which he so clearly mentions, is first to rise, and
then come to Jerusalem, calling on the name of the Lord, from the rising to the
setting of the sun; as zealous for an obedience to the Gospel, as David, his
father, was for the law: traveling in the mighty strength of the Spirit, and
armed with the divine power of fire, like Elijah, Malachi, iv. 1. and 5.
Isaiah, xi. 4. II. Esdras, xiii. 11.
he will subject nations, remove thrones, and burn all rebel princes.

26 Who has declared from the beginning, that we may know; and before the
time, (meaning before the prophecy is fulfilled; it being 2461 years from its
declaration then to its accomplishment, now this present year of 1795,) that we
may say, He is righteous! yea there is none that shows; yea, there is none
that declares; yea, there is none that hears your words.

The king of England, and the members of his government, the parliament,
bishops, judges, and all the ambassadors from foreign nations, in London, have
received the information of their fall and destruction; but they all refuse to
believe, and by so doing fulfill exactly what the prophet means, when he says,
Yea, there is none that hears your words.

27 The first shall say to Zion, Behold, behold them; (meaning the Jews
crouding home to Jerusalem in great multitudes,) and I will give to Jerusalem
one that brings good tidings. (It means the revealed prince, returning home
with the people to rebuild the desolate city, and make her rejoice.)

28 For I behold, and there was no man; -- even among them there was no
counselor that, when I asked of them, could answer a word.

Here the Holy Ghost, the spirit of God, spoke by Isaiah, as if speaking by
myself (...) for I have sent books of the judgments of God to the king of
England, and the members of his government, his parliament, his bishops, his
judges, and all the foreign ambassadors in London, for their respective
countries: but to accomplish what is so faithfully recorded by the prophet,
where he speaks spiritually as myself -- Even among them there was no
counselor that, when I sent to them, could answer a word.

29 Behold, they are all vanity: their works are nothing; their molten images
are wind and confusion.

Other Parts of the Revelation to St. John which are to be fulfilled, and which
the Lord God commands me now to publish. CHAP. XIII.
1 And I stood upon the sand of the sea, and saw a beast rise up out of the
sea, having seven heads and ten horns; and upon his horns ten crowns, and upon
his heads the name of Blasphemy.

This beast means the English Monarchy; and it is by ships and commerce that it
has rose from the sea to such astonishing grandeur and magnitude. The heads,
horns, and crowns, allude to the many departments of Government, and their
splendid distinctions. The Blasphemy means the titles given to, and assumed by
the King of England; such as, Our Most Gracious Sovereign Lord, Sacred Person,
Majesty, Defender of the Faith, and Supreme Head of the Church; all which names
belong to God, he only can be what they express, and when they are applied to
any other, the sin is Blasphemy in his sight.

2 And the beast which I saw was like unto a leopard, and his feet were as the
feet of a bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a lion: and the dragon gave him
his power and his seat, and great authority.

The English Monarchy, for being Supreme Head of the Church, and over the many
religious sects tolerated in the country, is the reason that it is, for their
great number, compared to a leopard full of spots.

As a bear is very strong on his feet, so is the English Monarchy: and as a
lion roars with his mouth the loudest of any beast, so does the English
Monarchy proclaim its greatness more than any other.

3 And I saw one of his heads as it were wounded to death; and his deadly wound
was healed: and all the world wondered after the beast.

The beginning of this verse means the death of Charles the First King of
England: and the deadly wound being healed, means the recovery of Monarchy by
the restoration of Charles the Second. During the interval of time between the
death and succession, all the world wondered if the English Monarchy would ever
be restored again.

9 If any man have an ear let him hear. He that leads into captivity, shall go
into captivity: be that kills with the sword must be killed with the sword.
Here is the patience and the faith of the saints.

The leading into captivity means imprisonment and slavery: and killing with
the sword, means violence and war. The patience of the saints is, to bear
quietly with those evils, and to resist the temptations of wealth to do them:
All that have faith in God will not do such things, from a belief that they are
offensive, because he commands them not.

11 And I beheld another beast coming up out of the earth; and he had two horns
like a lamb, and he spoke as a dragon.

This verse means the Elector of Hanover. -- Coming up out of the earth, is to
signify that his country or government is situated inland. The horns of a lamb,
and the voice of a dragon, mean, that although he is weak in power like a lamb,
yet by his voice he can threaten in great and mighty words like a dragon.

12 And he exercises all the power of the first beast before him, etc.

It means the Elector of Hanover's succession to the crown, place, and power of
the former King of England. To fulfill this part of the prophecy given by
Revelation to St. John, the utter expulsion of the Stuart family must against
all human opposition have taken place to admit the Elector of Hanover.

A great part of this chapter is taken up in describing the king and
parliament. I am commanded to inform both of the recorded judgments of God, --
the dangers which threaten them, and their certainty of taking place, unless
they implore him for mercy, and obtain it.

They have individually promised, by their godfathers and godmothers, in the
sacred covenant of baptism, and acknowledge a confirmation of it by receiving
the sacrament, (for both were instituted by the Lord Jesus Christ,) to believe
in him and obey his commands; yet, notwithstanding this heaviest of all
obligations which a human being can enter into, (for it is with his God,) and
on the performance of which his salvation depends, the laws they make, a part
of the Thirty-nine Articles, and some of the forms of prayer, used in public
worship, goes more to break the covenant of baptism, to dishonor God, and
oppose an obedience to his blessed Gospel, than was ever authorized in any
other nation.

Without submitting to the forms of law prescribed by act of parliament, which
are in direct opposition to the commands of Christ, and very sinful to do, no
man can hold any place of profit or trust, enjoy the privilege of freedom, and
comparatively to buy or sell.

17 And that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the mark, or the name
of the beast, or the number of his name.

18 Here is wisdom. Let him that has understanding count the number of the
beast; for it is the number of a man; and his number is six hundred threescore
and six.

This verse means the English parliament; -- and although it exceeds the number
mentioned here, yet, notwithstanding, it is the real and very assembly of men
alluded to in the Revelation, by the number of 666.

Because the Parliament acknowledge and address the king by the divine names
which belong only to God; such as, Our Most Gracious Sovereign Lord, Sire,
Majesty, and honor him with equal humility in supplication, when they require
any thing, as if he really was the Lord of heaven and earth; such as, Humbly
praying that your Majesty would be most graciously pleased, etc. Therefore God,
in his great anger, being jealous of his name and honor, calls the king a
beast, and the parliament his image and number.

CHAP. XIV.
1 And I looked, and lo, a lamb stood on the mount Sion, and with him a hundred
and forty-four thousand, having his father's name written in their foreheads.

The lamb, mentioned here, means myself, as Prince of the Hebrews; and mount
Sion, Jerusalem: The hundred and forty-four thousand with me, having the name
of my father wrote in their foreheads, mean not only the visible Jews of the
twelve tribes, but likewise the invisible: -- it comprehends all of Hebrew
extraction that will believe in the testimony of God by me.

6 And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting
Gospel, to preach to them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and
kindred, and tongue, and people; saying, with a loud voice, Fear God, and give
glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made
heaven and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters.

8 And there followed another angel, saving, Babylon is fallen, is fallen; that
great city! because she made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her
fornication.

9 And the third angel followed them, saying, with a loud voice, If any man
worship the beast, and his image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or in
his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured
out without mixture into the cup of his indignation; and he shall be tormented
with fire and brimstone, in the presence of the holy angels, and in the
presence of the lamb: and the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and
ever; and they have no rest day nor night, who worship the beast and his image,
and whosoever receives the mark of his name.

12 Here is the patience of the saints: here are they that keep the
commandments of God, and the says of Jesus.

CHAP. XVI.
1 And I heard a great voice out of the temple, saying to the seven angels, Go
your ways, and pour out the vials of the wrath of God upon the earth.

2 And the first went, and poured out his vial upon the earth; and there fell a
noisome and grievous sore on the men which had the mark of the beast, and on
them which worshipped his image. And the second angel poured out his vial upon
the sea, and it became as the blood of a dead man; and every living soul died
in the sea.

4 And the third angel poured out his vial upon the rivers and fountains of
waters; and they became blood. And I heard the angel of the waters say, Thou
art righteous, O Lord, which art, and was, and shall be; because thou have
judged thus. For they have shed the blood of saints and prophets, and thou have
given them blood to drink; for they are worthy.

10 And the fifth angel poured out his vial upon the seat of the beast, and his
kingdom was full of darkness, and they gnawed their tongues for pain; and
blasphemed the God of heaven, because of their pains and their sores, and
repented not of their deeds.

CHAP. XXI.
6 And he said to me. It is done, I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the
end: I will give to him that is a-thirst of the fountain of the water of life
freely. He that overcomes shall inherit all things; and I will be his God, and
he shall be my son.

8 But the fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable and murderers, and
whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have their
part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone; which is the second death.

The Lord God commands me to say to you, George the Third, king of England,
that immediately on my being revealed, in London, to the Hebrews as their
Prince, and to all nations as their Governor, your crown must be delivered up
to me, that all your power and authority may instantly cease. On my being
revealed, the invisible power of the angels of God, which guards me now, will
then become visible as a flame of fire; the very same that accompanied Moses
and the children of Israel out of Egypt. I must not acknowledge any superior
but the Lord Christ, who is the Lord God: and as a man raised up, like David,
by him to be a Prince, he commands me to allow no equal, but instantly to burn
out of his kingdom the rebellious and disobedient. Read the xli. chap. and
verse 25, of Isaiah.

Be advised by this, for evil is going to be let loose; when it is, the king of
England will no more believe the signs of God by me th^n the king of Egypt
would by Moses; therefore, desire your servants to deliver directly to you all
letters and messages from me; for, it is for your contempt to me that your
country is ordered to be invaded, and your power to be destroyed. The tall oak,
with all its branches cut off, mentioned in one of the visions of God, in the
preceding part of this book, means yourself and family.

The Lord God commands me to say to you, Nathaniel Brassey Halhed, that as you
are reviled and considered, by your former acquaintances, as ruined and lost,
for speaking the truth as he manifested it to you, for publishing your
testimony of me, his servant, you shall, by the expiration of three months,
from this day, have your choice of being either Governor General of India, or
President of the Board of Control in England; that all men may be convinced,
that he that rules in heaven is able to exalt or to abase; that he is still
able, even at this late hour of a wicked w^d, to reward the obedient to his
blessed Spirit, and give the most eminent places on earth to whomsoever he
pleases.

The Lord God commands me to inform all men, as a prevention, in future, to
their asking unnecessary questions, that all that is proper and allowable for
me to relate from him, is published in this book.

The Copy of a LETTER to WILLIAM PIT, Chancellor of the Exchequer, which the
Lord God commands me now to publish.
IN obedience to the sacred command of the Lord God, whose servant and prophet
I am, I inform the chancellor of the Exchequer, that the prisoners now in
confinement, and on trial, charged with the crime of High Treason against the
King's Life, are innocent.

I am likewise commanded to inform you, because God is very merciful and
compassionate, that the seventh chapter of the prophecy of Daniel, and last
part of the sixth chapter in the Revelation to St. John, will be fulfilled
before the expiration of seven months from this day. And also my revelation to
the Hebrews, as their Prince and Leader, according to the twelfth chapter of
the prophecy of Daniel; to the king and people of England, and the people of
all nations, as their Ruler -- for -- and immediately under God, according to
the twenty second chapter of the Second Book of Samuel; to all nations, as the
promised Signet of Peace, according to the second chapter of Haggai; and as
Elijah, to the wicked, the revilers, and blasphemers against God, according to
the fourth chapter of Malachi.

RICHARD BROTHERS.
No. 57, Paddington Street, 9th of the month called November.

The king, and duke of Portland, as secretary of state, were wrote to at the
same time.

REVELATION, CHP. XI.
15 And the seventh angel founded, and there were great voices in heaven,
saying, The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of
his Christ; and he shall reign for ever and ever.

RICHARD BROTHERS, The man that will be revealed to the Hebrews as their
Prince; to all nations as their Governor; according to the covenant to king
David, immediately under God.
LONDON, No. 57, Paddington Street, 20th of the month called February, 1795.
ANECDOTES OF RICHARD BROTHERS, THE PROPHET.
[From the Register of the Times, for March, 1795.]
THIS extraordinary character having, for some months past, been the theme of
the public in general, induces us to state some particulars respecting him,
that, we trust, will gratify the curiosity of our readers. To see a man rising
from the humble state of a workhouse, to that of a person attracting the
attention of all ranks and degrees, for his prophetic assertions, has justly
excited astonishment. Let him be a madman, enthusiast, or hypocrite, he must be
considered as the most extraordinary man this century has produced. To cause
the most distinguished divines to hesitate in their opinions, respecting the
truth or falsehood of his scriptural expositions, is, surely, in an untutored
man, a most wonderful trait of character. Allowing him to be a hypocrite, to
blind an appearance of truth so artfully, with the reality of falsehood, as to
confound the most learned in scripture, evinces a faculty that few men, however
powerful in the arts of delusion, in the course of ages, are found to possess.
As a madman, there is such an urbanity of manners, such a piety of principle,
such a forbearance of self-gratification, such a uniform perseverance in
attending to the welfare of human nature, -- that we think it impossible for
all the faculty, versed in the different kinds of Mania, to define the nature
of Mr. Brothers's madness, and to class it under its respective species.
Supposing him an enthusiast, he is equally extraordinary. Such persons are
generally impelled to the most strenuous and violent of bodily and mental
efforts. Their faculties are in a state of perpetual agitation. Their passions
seldom find a ^uiescent pause from continual excitement. -- their object,
whatever it may be, so powerfully interests all their thoughts, that they are
never becalmed, by rest or peace, until nature, exhausted, submits to their
soothing influence; but, contrary ^o this, Mr. Brothers has appeared to be
almost divested of the common passions of nature. Ever calm -- ever collected
-- ever affable and communicative of sentiments, dictated by a boundless
attachment to the peace of man, if an enthusiast, he is, of all enthusiasts, --
the most wonderful.

The above observations are stated merely as evidence of his singularity of
character. They are not meant to vindicate or disprove the veracity of his
predictions, or his being the chosen restorer of the Israelites to their
kingdom.

With regard to the particulars that have transpired respecting Richard
Brothers, -- we have to state the following:

In 1782, he was a lieutenant on board the Albion, of 64 guns. This ship being
paid off in 1783, he was reduced to his half-pay, on which he supported himself
until 1789, when some religious scruples arising in his mind against the taking
of oaths, he was prevented receiving his arrears until there were two years
due, in 1791. At this period he lodged with a Mrs. Green, in Dartmouth-street,
with whom he had then resided three years. During this time, he behaved with
honesty, affable temper, and morality of principle.

Although he suffered the greatest distress from not receiving his arrears of
pay, amounting to L. 1^9 by refusing to take the necessary oaths before the
Agent, yet he persisted in refusing to be guilty of the crime, which he calls
voluntarily swearing. -- The reason he stated for his refusal was, that he
considered swearing, every six months, as a qualification to receive pay, was
unnecessary, unjust, and wicked. Having stated what he considered the concealed
and un^^^ded cruelty of the oath, in addition to objections against the form,
he was told, there was an order of council to take the oath, and that it was
not in the power of the admiralty to dispense with it.

He soon after supported his former objections, and made another request, that
he might receive his pay without being obliged to take the oath. On this
occasion, he observed, that if the order of council enforced an oath, in any
manner or any form whatever, and that the man it was directed to operate upon,
swore that he was not forced, but that the oath he took was a voluntary act,
the result of his own free will -- would it not, in the sight of God in heaven,
and every man of discernment under him on earth, amount to a false oath? These
reasons and objections he published, at the time, in the Public Advertiser. He
also published the letter he received from the admiralty, stating their
insufficient power to dispense with the usual form of swearing. Knowing the
president of the admiralty was a member of the council, he wrote to him: In
this, he stated, that as men, whether few in number, or the increased multitude
of a senate, were not infallible, they must consequently be subject to error.
To enforce his assertion, he alluded to the decision of the privy council,
relative to a native of Glasgow, who had his ship seized in the West Indies,
for what, he considered, was an undesigned infringement of the Navigation Act.

Such was his aversion to taking the oath, that he endured the want of even a
bit of bread. Without considering him a Prophet, but merely as a man of purity
and piety of principle, he is to be admired for the fortitude with which he
endured his sufferings, rather than obtain relief by committing an act, which
appeared to him most offensive to God and man. This conduct may be admitted as
a proof of his being, at least, sincere in his religious professions, however
he may be the dupe of his own visionary delusions.

Mrs. Green being greatly distressed for the money due to her from Mr.
Brothers, applied to the work house board of the United Parishes of St.
Margaret's and St. John's the Evangelist, Westminster. The workhouse board
considering the distress she must suffer, as well as what appeared to them, the
lamentable situation of our Prophet himself, resolved to receive him as a
casual pauper. Agreeably to an order from the board, he was brought about a
week after to the work house. He entered the room with his hat on, and
requested they would excuse his taking it off, as that homage he considered
only due to the Almighty.

At first he appeared offended with his examination; but being desired to take
a chair, his good temper returned. He then took off his hat, and said, he knew
when he was treated with that respect his character demanded. In this instance,
he appears to have refused taking off his hat, more from ideas of personal
consequence, than any peculiar homage he meant to reserve for the Almighty. His
examination, containing sentiments which serve to display his temper, and the
state of his mind, we insert it as follows. Pray, sir, do you know the reason
of your being brought to this house? Indeed I do not. All that I know of the
matter is, that I was brought in a very rough manner; but as external objects
affect me but little, I acquiesce.

I think, sir, you are in his Majesty's service? You are mistaken, I resigned
two years since. I am in the service of a Prince, the greatest and most potent.
A Prince, in whose services my wages will be certain; but his kingdom is not of
this world. What, sir, was your reason for resigning your commission? Disgust;
I conceived the military life to be totally repugnant to the duties of
christianity, and that I could not conscientiously receive the wages of
plunder, bloodshed, and murder.

How did you imagine that you could live without your pay, and that pay, which,
from your character and appearance, we should suppose with honor to yourself
and advantage to your country? Therefore I rejected. I observed before, that it
was impossible for a military man, to take his pay with a safe conscience: I
trust the master I serve will not suffer me to want. I shall, in a few days,
receive a sum more than sufficient to pay this woman's debt, ten times over.

Pray, sir, have you ever been a housekeeper? I cannot absolutely say I have
not: I once agreed for a house and was two months in possession; but as a very
melancholy idea comes across my mind when I think of that period, I hope you
will not press me further upon the question.

Certainly we shall not; We understand, sir, that you were born in America? I
was, in the town of Placensia* in Newfoundland; I have not a friend or relation
in this part of the world.

Where did you lodge before you came to Westminster? In Bridewell precinct.

You will excuse us, sir, we mean it not as impertinent, but as a necessary
question; What did you pay weekly? I am above that false pride which shrinks
from enquiry, I will answer any question you please to put to me.

I have already endeavored to live within the bounds of my income -- narrow as
they were; but you may suppose, that out of nominally 3 s. but really 2 s. 10
d. per day, I could not afford any superb lodgings. In fact, I paid 2 s. 6 d.
per week for my room.

[The conclusion of the anecdotes of Mr. Brother: are promised in the
succeeding number of the Re^^ster of the Times, which has not yet been received
by the American editors.]

THE American editors have it in contemplation to select a small volume of the
following testimonies, for the gratification of the serious enquirers after
truth. -- This however will, in some measure, depend upon the reception of the
present publication.

The following enumeration of the works written to corroborate the authenticity
of Mr. BROTHERS'S predictions, will show the reader that this prophet is in no
mean repute; that he has also his witnesses.

(Viz.) I.
A Testimony of Richard Brothers, in an epistolary Address to the People of
England, on the impending Judgments of God; with original Letters lately sent
to the Queen, Duke of Gloucester, Earl Fitzwilliam, Mr. Pit, etc. etc.

By G. COGGAN, Merchant of Hull.

II.
A Testimony of the Spirit of Truth, concerning Richard Brothers, the Man
appointed of God to govern the Hebrews, -- the Elijah promised of the Lord, in
these last Days, to come and restore all Things; dignified with the Title of
his King, who will be exalted to the Throne of David, in Mount Zion, in
Jerusalem. -- In an Address to the People of Israel, etc. To the Gentiles
called Christians, and all other Gentiles. -- With some Account of the Manner
of the Lord's gracious Dealings with his Servant, W. Brian -- one of the
Brothers of the Avignon Society, and by Revelation from God declared to be a
Jew of the Tribe of Judah.

III.
A Revealed Knowledge of some Things that will speedily be fulfilled in the
World. -- Communicated to a Number of Christians, brought together at Avignon,
by the Power of the Spirit of God, from all Nations; now published by his
divine Command, for the Good of all Men.

By JOHN WRIGHT,

His Servant, and one of the Brethren.

IV.
Richard Brothers, neither a Madman nor an Impostor; with a few Observations on
the Possibility of his being the Prophet of God.

By H. F. OFFLEY, late of Oxford.

V.
Another Witness: -- Or further Testimony in Favor of Richard Brothers: With a
few modest Hints to modern Pharisees, and reverend Unbelievers; also some of
the scriptural Marks of the present Times, or prophetical Latter-Day.

By S. WHITCHURCH.

"In the latter days ye shall consider it perfectly." VI.
An Additional Testimony given to vindicate the Truth of the Prophesies of
Richard Brothers. To which is added, a Warning to the Inhabitants of
Great Britain, to forsake their evil Doings, before the full Appearance of the
approaching Day of the Lord, which will barn the Wicked of the Earth as an Oven.

Dictated by the Spirit of God;

And wrote by THOMAS TAILOR.

"Behold I come as a thief." VII.
(...) ^ment of the Millenium, and a short Reply to Dr. Horne's Pamphlet,
entitled, " Sound Argument dictated by Common Sense;" together with cursory
Observations on the "AGE OF CREDULITY."

BY N. B. HALHED, M. P.

To which is added, an original Letter from Mr. Brothers to P. Stephens, Esquire
with his Answer. A Paper is subjoined, pointing out those Parts of Mr. Brothers
Prophecies that have already been fulfilled.

"Eyes have ye and see not." VIII.
An Answer to Dr. Horne's second Pamphlet, entitled "Occasional Remarks," with
Observations on an Essay, inserted in the 33d No. of the Register of the Times,
written by the Author of "The Age of Credulity;" Together with a Letter
addressed to the Directors of the East India Company; and to each of the
Corporations of Leicester and Lymington.

BY N. B. HALHED, M. P.

To which is added, his Essay, delivered at the Door of the House of Commons,
on the 21st April; and his Remarks on the Departure of the Israelites.

IX.
Look before you Leap, or the Fate of the Jews, a Warning to the People of
other Nations, in the Case of Richard Brothers the Prophet.

X.
Prophetical Passages concerning the Present Times, in which the Person,
Character, Mission, etc. etc. of Richard Brothers, is clearly pointed at as the
Elijah of the present Day, the Bright Star to guide the Hebrews, etc. Selected
from the Writings of J. Bhemen, C. Poniatonia, Kotterus, Salizarus, B. Keach,
etc. Also the Remarkable Prophecy of Humphrey Tindal, Vicar of Wellinger. To
which is added, (by permission) some Letters which have been sent to R.
Brothers.

XI.
Daut's Prophecy now remarkably fulfilling in France, Germany, Poland, etc.

XII.
Fleming's Apocalyptical Key, foretelling the Events in France.

XIII.
A Way to try Prophets by the Scriptures.

XIV.
Doctor Smollet's Prophetical Letter, and the remarkable Dream of the late Sir
Edward Walpole, with his Opinion on the Signs of the Times; a Dissertation on
the Existence, Nature and Extent of the Prophetic Powers in the Mind of Man;
with unquestionable Examples of several eminent Prophecies, of what is now
acting, and soon to be fulfilled upon the great Theater of Europe.

XV.
The WORLD'S DOOM, or Cabinet of Fate Unlocked; containing all those Prophetic
Treatises entire, upon which the Public Mind of late has been so much, and so
justly engaged, with their ablest Commentators and Answerers; also, all
Prophecies, ancient and modern, relative to the present and nearly approaching
Times, 2 vol. 12 mo.

FINIS.

