A FRIENDLY ADDRESS TO THE JEWS. STATING The MOTIVES to serious Enquiry into
the Cause of their present Dispersion, and the REQUISITES to a right Enquiry
respecting the Christian Doctrine. The CHARACTERISTICS of the MESSIAH from the
Prophets. And the TESTIMONIES in Favor of JESUS as the CHRIST.

TO WHICH IS ADDED, A LETTER TO MR. D. LEVI; CONTAINING REMARKS ON HIS ANSWER
TO DR. PRIESTLEY's LETTERS TO THE JEWS; SHOWING, That however his Arguments may
affect the OPINIONS of Dr. PRIESTLEY, they form no OBJECTION against the
CHRISTIAN RELIGION.

BY J. BICHENO.

PRINTED AT PROVIDENCE (R. ISLAND) BY CARTER AND WILKINSON, AND SOLD AT THEIR
BOOK AND STATIONARY STORE, OPPOSITE THE MARKET. 1795.

ADVERTISEMENT.
AS the design of the author of the following pages, is to solicit attention to
the proofs in favor of Christianity, and not to recommend his own peculiar
ideas of it, he has endeavored, as far as the subject will admit, to guard
against thrusting forward his own private opinions. What this man believes, or
that, is nothing to an enquirer after religious truth. The fountain is open,
and whosoever will may come, and take of the water of life freely. He is a kind
neighbor who directs the stranger, and assists the weak; but he who would
intrude upon another the water of his pitcher, be it pure or polluted, seeks to
beguile him of his right, and honors himself more than he ought.

The plan of the following Address was struck out, and partly executed, before
the author saw the Letters which Dr. Priestley has lately addressed to the
Jews. He thought whether that publication might not render this unnecessary:
but on perusal, imagined that what was projected might still have its use; and
as some others have joined in the same opinion, this is an additional motive
(conscious as he is of his deficiencies) to offer it to the Public, hoping that
candor will pass over those defects, which greater experience may discover;
and praying that the blessing of God may make it the means of promoting Truth
and Righteousness.

CONTENTS.
Introduction, Page 1 Characteristics of the Messiah from the ancient
Predictions of the Prophets, Page 19 Testimonies that Jesus is the Christ, Page
59 A Letter to Mr. D. Levi, containing Remarks on his Answer to the Letters
which Dr. Priestley addressed to the Jews, Page 67
INTRODUCTION.
YE children of Abraham, and of the covenant which God made with your fathers,
permit a stranger affectionately to solicit your attention to matters of the
highest concern both to you and the Gentile nations.

Long has been the captivity, and sore the afflictions which your tribes ^^^ve
endured. Surely then it is time to awake to serious consideration, and to
enquire wherefore it is that the anger of God against you still endures.
Doubtless there is a cause which bears a just proportion to your sufferings;
for the Lord does not afflict willingly the children of men. Lam. iii. 23.


As Assyria of old was the rod in God's hand to chastise your fathers, till
they should acknowledge their transgressions, and turn to him; so the more
modern nations (though the sin of their conduct is not hereby extenuated) have
been the instruments of inflicting upon you the divine displeasure. The folly
and the wrath of man has been made to praise the righteous government of God.
Great indeed have been the evils which you have endured from the several
nations, Heathen, Mohammedan, and Christian: and though, in general, they have
now adopted maxims of government more humane, and your sufferings are in a
measure abated (which, it may be hoped, is the prelude of your deliverance, and
the token of God's returning mercy) yet your captivity continues, and Jerusalem
is trodden down of the Gentiles. But where is the humiliation and deep
repentance, which, according to the prophets, shall be the forerunners of your
deliverance, and which God shall reward with such manifestations of his favor
as no nation has ever experienced? Are not the most thinking among you
constrained to lament, that your repentance is not more manifest, and that you
apply yourselves with no more seriousness to enquire the cause of God's anger?
Was not the illumined eye of prophecy directed toward your tribes, to observe
your conduct in these last days, when the prophet said, The Lord has poured
upon him the f ury of his anger, and the strength of battle; and it has set
him on fire round about, yet he knew it not; and it burned him, yet he laid it
not to heart Is^. ^^lii. ^^.
?

What was the covenant which God made with your fathers? To Abraham he
promised, I will be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee: and I will
give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land wherein thou art a
stranger, all the land of Canaan for an everlasting possession; and I will be
their God Genesis xvii. 7.8.
By Moses he said, If thou shall hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to
observe and to do all his commandments which I command thee this day; the Lord
thy God will set thee on high above all nations of the earth. But it shall come
to pass if thou will not hearken, that all these curses shall come upon thee;
cursed shall thou be in the city, and cursed shall thou be in the field. And
the Lord shall scatter thee among all people, from one end of the earth even
unto the other. -- And it shall come to pass when all these things are come
upon thee, and thou shall call them to mind among all the nations whither the
Lord thy God has driven thee, and shall return unto the Lord thy God, and
shall obey his voice, then the Lord thy God will turn thy captivity, and have
compassion upon thee Deuteronomy. xxviii. 1, 15, 16, 64. Deuteronomy. xxx. 1, 2, 3.
. For your transgression the Lord has scattered you; and till you repent and
turn to him, you can entertain no well-grounded hope of his favor.

Considering the length of time which has elapsed since your c^^y and temple
were destroyed, and you banished from your country; considering the evils which
you have and do still, in a measure, endure; and the felicity which awaits you,
when you return unto the Lord, and obey his voice, it is surely worth while to
set yourselves earnestly to enquire, with seriousness and candor, into the
cause of God's displeasure, and wherefore it is that he ^ath not heard your
groanings, as he did those of your fathers in Egypt, and remembered his
covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob: for be assured he is
faithful to his promise, and no length of time can invalidate his covenant. He
is waiting that he may be gracious, and that he may have mercy upon you Isa.
xxx. 18.
.

Your present dispersion, and that hope which the promises of God give you of
temporal prosperity, when you shall repent and seek the Lord with your whole
heart, are motives to induce you to search and see what those sins are which
have brought upon you such unparalleled marks of the divine displeasure, and
which prevent the accomplishment of the promises; but that guilt which sin
unrepented of brings upon the soul, and those unspeakable evils to which it
exposes you in the world to come, present to you still stronger motives to
apply yourselves to this work. Those temporal sufferings which may be endured
in this life, are but the shadow of that displeasure which pursues the guilty
into the world of spirits. To say the least, it is highly probable that you
have not yet discovered the principal cause of God's anger, and consequently
have not acknowledged it before him: had you done so, we may be sure that the
merciful and faithful God would long ere this have turned your captivity, and
have had mercy upon you. Enquire therefore why your God so long contendeth with
you.

Whether the Christian religion (not as held forth in the creeds of erring men,
but as contained in our sacred scriptures) be from God or of man, is surely
worthy of attentive examination. What I would request of you is, not to condemn
what you have never examined, but to bestow upon the subject that serious and
unbiassed attention, which both its own nature and your peculiar circumstances
demand.

Seeing that your present captivity was foretold by him whom Christians
acknowledge as the Messiah Matt. xxi. 33 -- 44. xxiii. 34 -- 39. xxiv.
; seeing that it took place from the days he announced; examine whether it be
not for rejecting him, and continuing in opposition to his kingdom. At least,
it is worth the trouble of enquiry. And the more so, as our sacred scriptures
Romans xi.
, while they declare your temporary rejection to be for unbelief hold forth
promises of your restoration when you shall repent and believe. When this event
shall take place, the prophecies in our scriptures declare, that then shall be
accomplished the glorious things foretold in yours. Your rejection till such an
event being thus affirmed, when no human foresight could possibly discover it;
and all circumstances, even to the present distant day, instead of at all
discrediting the prophecy, uniting to establish its authenticity; should, to
say the least, induce you, as reasonable men, so far to lay aside your
prejudice, as to enquire seriously whether your fathers may not have fallen
into an error, and whether there may not be more evidence for the truth of
Christianity than you have hitherto been willing to think. Seeing that the
prediction respecting your rejection is verified, it is, at least, such a
presumption in favor of the inspiration of the promise of grace, when you
shall believe, as should incline you to a candid enquiry: and I shall endeavor
to show, by and by, that your own prophets have predicted the same thing.

And are there not many other reasons, which ought to induce you to examine
this matter with the greatest attention? Such as that general expectation of
the Messiah which prevailed about seventeen or eighteen hundred years ago, and
which has prevailed more or less ever since; from whence many pretenders have
set up for the expected deliverer; and who have been followed, till their
imposture has been made manifest. And what is recorded of your Rabbi Elias, who
lived about two hundred years before the appearance of Jesus, is an argument in
favor of that enquiry which I would urge upon you. He said (no matter from
whence he derived his intelligence) he said the world was to stand six thousand
years before the great sabbath, two thousand before the law, two thousand under
the law, and two thousand under the Messiah. The last two thousand are nearly
gone, and no Messiah has appeared, if Jesus be not he; if he be, then we see
(thus far) the accomplishment of this prediction; and the clearest light is
thrown upon many of the prophecies; such as the seventy weeks of Daniel, the
glory of the second temple, etc. If Jesus be the Christ, then these two
thousand years are employed for the enlightening of the Gentiles, and
fulfilling the other prophecies. And though Israel, for the sin of rejecting
him, has been in bondage these seventeen hundred years, yet this does not
discourage us from hoping in the promises, Ye shall be gathered, before the
consummation of all things, to the feet of the Messiah, and he shall be your
King to save you. Yes, we may hope that his favor, as the light, in breaking
upon you, and that the day is not very far off, when the voice of mercy shall
say, Awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust, for thy dew is as the dew of
herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead Isa. xxvi. 19.
. -- But however this may be, all these things put together form a powerful
argument to induce you to an attentive examination.

It must be owned, to the reproach of professing Christians, that through the
impiety of their lives, their corruptions of the Christian doctrine, their
intolerance toward each other, and their persecutions of your nation, they
have contributed not a little toward perpetuating your abhorrence of their
profession; yet, seeing these are not the test of the truth or falsehood of our
scriptures, any more than the idolatry and other bad practices of your
forefathers were of the truth or falsehood of the laws of Moses; you are not
hereby justified in continuing to reject Jesus as the Messiah, without
examining the proofs which lie before you. If you have no better reasons for
rejecting Christianity than those derived from the practices of professing
Christians, you might as well reject religion in every form, and deny that God
ever spoke to man -- to the law and to the testimony. Compare our scriptures
with yours; try the matter by the severest rules; see with your own eyes; judge
with your own understandings; and then say, after dispassionate enquiry,
whether the religion of Jesus bears those marks of imposture which you have
been used to think it does.

Free and unbiassed enquiry is the glory of human nature. To be a Heathen, a
Jew, or a Christian, because our fathers were so, is unbecoming any reasonable
creature, arrived at years of understanding. That man is of no religion whose
profession is not from conviction, and there can be no conviction but from
enquiry. He who grounds his faith on the authority of others, and then studies
only for confirmation, seeks not truth by the light of truth, and is therefore
ever liable to embrace falsehood; and should he be so very fortunate as to
embrace truth, in him it is no virtue. -- Rise, then, O man, who art created
after the image of thy God; seek truth, and thou shall find her; forsake her
not, and she shall preserve thee; love her, and she shall keep thee.

But, what is necessary to a fair enquiry after truth? What is indispensable to
your investigation of Christianity, that you may form the conclusion of
virtuous men, and know whether it be of God or no? Humility, candor, a
dispassionate temper, the love of truth, and the love of God. Do these guide
and warm your hearts? Come, then; Religion rises to meet you; her books are
open.

No man in this enquiry (if he bring with him a heart rightly disposed) need
despair of finding the good and right way; for surely that Religion which comes
from God, carries with it an evidence which is discernible by the most simple
and unlettered, whose minds are not corrupted by vice, or warped by prejudice.
But let all, while they attend to that evidence which is held forth in the
Jewish and Christian scriptures, seek to God, by earnest supplications, for his
spirit to teach them to profit, and to lead them by the way they should go Isa.
xlviii. 17.
: For that heart which is unseasoned with the salt of grace, and a stranger to
serious devotion, is utterly unfit for the enquiry before us.

The first requisite (next to a devout spirit) to a right enquiry after truth,
is humility. We must ever despair of that man's errors being rectified, who is
so confident that he is right, that he will give no ear to any thing which
opposes his opinions; nor allow any force in arguments, however cogent, which
may tend to shake the foundation on which his system is built. When any
pretender to religion has adopted certain articles of faith, and laid them down
as unquestionable truths, and will not allow of his liability to mistake; nor
attend to any reasonings, or proofs, which go to show him his error; his mind
is in a state the most unfit for the discovery of truth.

Would you examine the evidence for, and against, the Christian religion, with
that temper of mind which the case deserves, you must think of those articles
of your faith, which you have been used to lay down as unquestionable truths
(such, for instance, as relate to a suffering Messiah) with that humbleness of
mind, which becomes men liable to err. Where is the man who is so enlightened
as to be able to penetrate through all the darkness which hangs over many of
the prophecies, especially before their fulfillment? For we are to remember,
that prophecy, in general, is not meant as history, to give us clear and
specific ideas of the persons or things spoken of. Here, no more is revealed
than is necessary to encourage the hopes of God's servants, and identify the
persons and things when they appear; and thus bear witness to the truth of
God's word. The general contents of a prophecy may be very intelligible, yet
the application of it to time and persons may be very uncertain. There must be
obscurity in a prophecy, as well as shade in a picture; all its lines must not
stand in a full light; for if the prophecies were open and barefaced as to all
their parts and circumstances, they would obstruct the course of human affairs,
and hinder, if it were possible, their own accomplishment. Modesty and sobriety
are in all things commendable, but in nothing more than in the explication of
these sacred mysteries. Surely a man must read but little, and think less, who
does not feel himself constrained to acknowledge that many of the prophecies
are hard to be understood. No man of humility, while he stands on the brink of
this vast abyss, but must hide his face and cry, O the depth of the riches both
of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments, and his
ways past finding out! Who has known the mind of the Lord, or who has been
his counselor? -- It is not for any man to say, when God promises a Savior to
the world (for to the race of Adam he was promised before the call of Abraham,
or the promise that he should be of his seed; as well as after by the mouth of
the holy Prophets, who announced him as the light of the Gentiles, as well as
the Redeemer of Israel) it is not for any man to say, when God promises a
Savior to the world, under what character, or variety of characters, he is to
appear, till God himself makes it known. His appearance may be the reverse of
that which human wisdom suggests: for the wisdom of men is foolishness with
God. But by the prophecies, (hard as many of them are to be understood,
especially before their fulfillment throws light upon them) God has made known
to his church the characters which his Anointed is to sustain. But a teachable
humility is an indispensable requisite to a right understanding of them.

If any man say, "My sentiments of the Messiah's character are certainly right,
and must not for a moment be called in question;" then, in this case, whatever
the Prophets may teach, must bend to preconceived opinion, however great the
violence. This state of mind is the most opposite to fair enquiry; and he who
is in an error, must be in an error still. Nothing can save him. The preaching
of an archangel would not illuminate his mind.

But, do you feel those impressions of humility, which teach you to be
diffident where there is a possibility of erring? Is your heart disposed to bow
implicitly to the Revelation of God, without regard to preconceived opinion? Is
any man amongst you praying, O Lord, who can understand his errors? Cleanse
thou me from secret faults. As a sinful man, I am prone to err, and ever in
danger from the deceptions of prejudice. -- Thy counsels, O Lord, are a great
deep. As a child, I beseech thy Spirit to instruct me. That which I know not
teach thou me, and I will keep it unto the end. Furnished with these
dispositions of mind, truth is not far from you. Seek, and ye shall find.

And need I entreat the wise to lay aside that national pride and prejudice
which puts men upon justifying whatever their ancestors may have done? Need I
entreat you to do all you can toward divesting yourselves of that extravagant
opinion which all men are too apt to entertain of those who have appeared in
favor of their own sentiments, to the utter neglect and contempt of all such
as may have appeared on the opposite side; as if with these there could be
neither wisdom nor virtue? This prejudice must be sacrificed to the love of
truth, or you are never likely to find it.

Consider; was it an impossible, or even an improbable thing, that that
generation of men, among whom Jesus appeared, should be so blind and wicked as
to persecute and crucify the true Messiah, should God, in his inscrutable
providence, permit them so to do, as he did their fathers to persecute and slay
the holy Prophets? And where is the man amongst you who can say, I am so
enlightened into the counsels of God, I have such a certain understanding of
the prophecies, that I know it is not fit for God to permit such an event; I
know that the prophecies, covered with darkness as many of them are, allow of
nothing like it. Is such man to be found? Surely not. -- Who can by searching
find out God Job xi. 7.
? -- My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, says
the Lord Isa. lv. 8.


According to your own historian, Josephus, that generation was the most wicked
that ever existed amongst men. He represents the leaders of the people, and
even the chief priests, as profligate wretches, who had purchased their places
by bribes, or some other acts of iniquity; and who maintained their ill
acquired authority by the most flagitious and abominable crimes. These rulers
he represents as dissolute and abandoned to the last degree; while the
multitude, set on by these corrupt examples, ran headlong into every sort of
iniquity, and by their endless seditions, robberies and extortions, armed
against them both the justice of God and the vengeance of man.

And with all this desperate wickedness, which deformed their character, were
they fond of the most idle and superstitious fancies, and strongly possessed of
the ^^otion of the approach of a Messiah, who should appear with all the marks
of external pomp and magnificence; emancipate them from the Roman yoke;
establish a worldly kingdom; and bring all the Gentile princes to the feet of
the Jewish nation? If God, then, whose thoughts are not as man's thoughts, and
whose ways are past finding out, should send a Messiah amongst them, whose
first and outward appearance should be the reverse of their expectations; in
whose pretensions there is nothing flattering to the pride and ambition of man;
and who, instead of winking at the vices and errors of the times (which it was
the interest of an impostor to do) should attack, with faithfulness, the
wickedness, errors and prejudices of all ranks of men, without partiality -- if
this were the case, is it at all to be wondered at that such a generation of
men, without the fear of God, and blind to that excellence which only is
excellence in the sight of the Most Holy, should despise and reject such a
Messiah? Is it at all mavelous, that men governed only by worldly motives,
and whose hearts and lives were estranged from all good, should do every thing
in their power to get him out of their way, who was constantly exposing the
degeneracy of their principles, and pouring out the threatenings of God against
their vices? Surely the voice of reason and truth says, No; the wicked will do
wickedly.

Certain I am, that there is nothing in the conduct of such men toward such a
person, though the most blameless in his life, the most amiable in his manners,
and though he had performed a thousand times more wonders of power and goodness
than are recorded of Jesus, which may not be as satisfactorily accounted for on
the principles of degenerate nature, as the conduct of any of their forefathers
toward the prophets whom they persecuted and slew.

And if it be probable (and more than probable) that the men among whom Jesus
appeared were blind and wicked enough to murder the true Messiah, if God should
permit them so to do, is it not as probable that the next and succeeding
generations might be so under the power of prejudice as to exert all their
talents to justify the conduct of their fathers, not only by misrepresenting
the characters of Jesus and his followers, but also by giving such glosses to
the prophecies as might best agree with their prejudices, and which might tend
to turn away the force of those arguments which Christians deduced from the in
favor of their cause? Certainly it is. And hence your writers have explained
away the clearest predictions of the Messiah, till there remains scarce any
proof of the promise of such a person.

Considering then the probability of this misguiding prejudice, it highly
becomes you, as reasonable men, seeking after truth, and as you wish to know
the cause of God's displeasure, to be on your guard, and cautious of receiving
implicitly what your wisest men have taught, and especially in their comments
on the Prophecies; for as it is on these that the truth or imposture of
Christianity turns, and as, the plain and most obvious meaning of them being
admitted, numbers of them appear to meet and have their accomplishment in
Jesus, they are necessitated by their principles to seek after such
interpretations as may least favor Christianity. To find out truth, you must
see with your own eyes; you must read the prophecies, and judge for yourselves;
you must carefully look into our scriptures, and see what is there related and
taught respecting Jesus and his doctrine; and on these, jointly, you must
ground your conclusion, for or against. To these, in conjunction, we appeal as
the test of truth, and not to what erring men have wrote or said on this side
or that; for as your sacred writings, in every essential part, remain
uncorrupted in spite of all your backslidings, and amidst all the various
fortunes which have awaited you; so do ours in spite of the degeneracy of
Christians, their vices, and their errors.

To our sacred books, in conjunction with yours, let us therefore appeal. In
the course of my acquaintance with those of your nation, I have more than once
had occasion to observe, that their greatest stumbling block has been their
taking that for Christianity, which is no more than fallible explication, or
mere human opinion. But search the scriptures themselves; compare ours with
Moses and the Prophets, and see what these testify of Christ, and how they
agree. Examine whether the authenticity of the facts related, and the divinity
of the doctrines taught, in our scriptures, and those related and taught in
yours, do not stand upon the same ground. Examine, as men of wisdom and
candor, whether the external and internal evidence of their being from God, or
otherwise, do not stand or fall together.

Were there such men as Moses, David, Isaiah, etc. and did they do, teach and
write, what is ascribed to them? And were there not such persons as Jesus,
Matthew, Paul, etc. and did not they do, teach and write, what is ascribed to
them? -- The answer of prejudice or indolence is nothing. -- What is the answer
of reason, after dispassionate enquiry? In the former case, the truth rests on
the characters of the relaters, the ci^^umstances which attended them, the
credibility of history, etc. So in the latter. There is no greater proof that
the Lord appeared to Moses in the wilderness, and spoke to him out of the midst
of a burning bush Exodus iii.
; than that Peter, James and John, saw Jesus transfigured on the mount Matt.
xvii.
. There is no greater proof that Elijah was taken up into heaven 2 Kings ii.
, and that Elisha, with the mantle of his ascended Master, divided the waters
of Jordan, than that Jesus was carried up into heaven in the presence of his
disciples Luke xxiv.
, and that they afterward healed the most obstinate diseases in his name Acts
iii.
.

That what Moses and the Prophets taught was of divine authority, rests
eminently on the internal evidence which accompanies their doctrine. We
contemplate the characters of the men, the views which actuated them, the
circumstances which attended them, the moral excellence of their doctrine, etc.
and the more we examine, the more we are obliged to acknowledge whose servants
they were, and that they spoke as they were moved by the Spirit of God. Whether
Jesus were sent of God, and what he taught divine, or not, rests on the same
evidence. As to his doctrine; if what he taught tends to give us unworthy ideas
of the Creator, to alienate our hearts from the God of Abraham, and to slacken
the moral obligations of men, then he is not of God. But if his doctrine be
replete with every moral excellence; if its tendency be to correct the
wickedness of the world, to purify the heart, and elevate the mind to God, then
has it all the proofs of divinity which the writings of Moses and the Prophets
possess. Let us compare the doctrine.

Ex. xx. 3. Thou shall have no other Gods before me.

Deuteronomy. vi. 4. Hear, O Israel, The LORD our God is one LORD.

Micah vi. 8. What does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love
mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?

Luke xii. 5. I will forewarn you whom ye shall fear: Fear him, which, after he
has killed, has power to cast into hell.

1 Cor. viii. 4 -- 6. We know that an idol is nothing in the world, and that
there is none other God but one. To us there is but one God, the Father, of
whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all
things, and we by him.

Matt. xxii. 37 -- 40. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and
with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great
commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy neighbor as
thyself. On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets.

Now compare the facts, and see if there be any thing related in our scriptures
less worthy of God, or less credibly attested, than in yours.

Genesis xxii. 1 and 2. God said to Abraham, Take now thy son, thine only son
Isaac, whom thou love, and get thee into the land of Moriah; and offer him
there for a burnt offering.

Genesis xxvi. 4. The LORD appeared to Isaac, and said, In thy seed shall all the
nations of the earth be blessed.

Luke i. 26 -- 38. The angel Gabriel was sent from God unto a city of Galilee,
named Nazareth, to a virgin espoused to a man whose name was Joseph; and the
virgin's name was Mary. And the angel said unto her, Thou shall conceive and
bring forth a son, and shall call his name JESUS.

Luke ii. 8 -- 14. The angel of the Lord appeared to shepherds, keeping watch
over their flocks by night, and said unto them, Fear not: for behold, I bring
you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. For unto you is
born this day, in the city of David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord.

Genesis xviii. The LORD appeared unto Abraham in the plains of Mamre, veiled in a
human body, and ate and communed with him.

John i. 14. The Word was made slesh and dwelt among us, (and we beheld his
glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father) full of grace and truth.

I repeat it; Examine whether, upon dispassionate investigation, there is any
thing taught or related in our scriptures, less worthy of God, less compatible
with the eminence of the divine perfections, or less credibly attested, than in
yours. I speak as unto wise men; examine the ground on which you stand; examine
ours; and say, if you can discover, wherein ours is less firm than yours. If
you examine with that candor which the importance of the subject demands, you
will surely find that he who invalidates the evidence of the Christian
religion's being from God, sets aside the proofs of the divinity of yours. They
stand or fall together. The Christian is the Jewish brought to perfection. Here
we see the things signified by the law, and the fulfillment of the promises, and
predictions of the Prophets.

CHARACTERISTICS OF THE MESSIAH, FROM THE ANCIENT PREDICTIONS OF THE PROPHETS.
IT is to be expected that the great Anointed of God, the works which he is to
perform, and the salvation which he is to bring, will occupy the most
distinguished place in prophecy, and be the chief theme of inspiration. This
was the idea of the ancient Jews; hence when jealous Herod was informed of the
birth of the King of the Jews Matt. ii. 4.
, he gathered together the chief priests and scribes of the people, who might
be supposed best skilled in the mysteries of the sacred books, and demanded of
them where Christ should be born. And they said unto him, In Bethlehem of
Judea, for thus it is written by the prophet Micah v. 2.
etc. And that this was the idea of the ancient Jews appears from the Talmud,
which says that all the prophecies of the Prophets related to Christ. But, is
it not a truth much to be lamented, that since the days of Jesus, those who
have been prejudiced against him, exerting all their ingenuity to give to the
prophecies such explanations as might least agree with his character and
doctrine, have thus well nigh shut him out of the holy scriptures? So that
those prophecies which most obviously refer to him, are made to terminate in
the Prophet who speaks, or in Josiah, Zerubbabel, Joshua the high priest,
Cyrus, or any other person, the most unlikely; as Hircanus, whom Herod slew;
Agrippa the younger, etc. It much interests you, therefore, to examine the
sacred writings with your own understandings, and to consider well, whether
many of those prophecies which your writers make to refer to others, do not
point to the Messiah. And in many cases, where inferior characters and events
may be the groundwork of what the Prophets speak, it is worth while to
consider whether the Messiah be not the ultimate object in whom the principal
matters terminate. It agreeing not with the design of prophecy that its whole
meaning should lie unconcealed, we find that many of the prophecies are of a
mixed nature, and point to two objects at once, or speak of one as the type of
another. Thus predictions, relating to the return from Babylon, under the
edicts of Cyrus and his successors, are mixed with others which respect your
return and glory in the last days, and one is made the type of the other. Thus
David often speaks of himself as a type of the Savior who was to come; and in
like manner the Prophets often speak of others. The prophecies are a sort of
enigmas, which nothing but the accomplishment can explain; with this key, all
the mystery is laid open, and he who runs may read -- with these ideas
respecting the prophetic writings, let us heartily enquire what your sacred
scriptures predict of the Messiah, and see whether they meet with
accomplishment in Jesus or not.

I. They foretell of him that he is to be a person of supereminent character;
superior to all preceding prophets, priests or kings; superior to all men, and
even to angels. Hence such language as this, Thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten thee Ps. ii. 7.
-- "The LORD said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine
enemies thy footstool cx. 1.
." -- Unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the government shall
be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called, Wonderful, Counselor, the
mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace Isa. ix. 6.


Now, do such predictions as these appear to be fulfilled in Jesus? Is there
any thing related in the history of his character, works and offices, which
bears any likeness to the eminence of the person here pointed out? Take the
book and read. The angel said unto Mary, Thou shall bring forth a son, and
shall call his name JESUS. He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of
the Highest: and the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father
David; and he shall reign over the house of Jacob forever Luke i. 30 -- 33.
." -- "Jesus says unto Philip, He that has seen me has seen the Father.
Believe thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in me John xiv. 9
and 10.
?" -- "In Christ dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily Col. ii. 9.
." -- "God, who at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke in time past unto
the fathers by the prophets has in these last days spoken unto us by (...)
Son, whom he has appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds
Heb. i. 1, 2.
." -- "And he has on his vesture, and on his thigh, a name written, KING OF
KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS Rev. xix. 16.
.

Do you expect in the Messiah a supereminent character? Behold him who was
crucified, whom God has raised from the dead, and made both Lord and Christ.
-- And hear his language. Who before Jesus ever spoke in such language of
majesty? Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give
you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me Matt. xi. 28, 29.
. "I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believes in me, though he were
dead, yet shall he live. And whosoever lives and believes in me shall never
die John xi. 25, 26.
Well might it be said, The people were astonished at his doctrine, for he
taught them as one that had authority, and not as the Scribes Mark i. ^2.
! Well might the officers who were sent to take him be disarmed of their
purpose, and say, "Never man spoke like this man John vii. 46.
." All he says and all he does is worthy of the eminence of God's Anointed!

But do you object, Is not too much ascribed to him? What means Jesus when he
says, "He that has seen me has seen the Father?" And what Paul, when he
asserts, In Christ dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily? In return
(for Christians acknowledge their insufficiency) it might be asked, What meant
Moses when he said, The LORD (with two angels) appeared to Abraham in the
plains of Mamre, in the likeness of a man, and ate of the meat which he set
before them. And as soon as he had left communing with Abraham he went his way
Genesis xviii. 1, 8, 33.
? What is meant when it is said, God called unto Moses out of the bush, and
said, Moses, Moses, I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, the God
Isaac; and the God of Jacob; and Moses hid his face, for he was afraid to look
upon God Ex. iii. 6.
? And what means Hezekiah where he prays, O LORD, God of Israel, that dwell
between the Cherubims 2 Kings xix. 15.
? What, is the Eternal Spirit the object of human sight? No. Was he, whom
heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain, circumscribed within the
limits of a body, a burning bush, or the glory which rested over the
mercy-seat? Surely that man must have formed very unworthy ideas of the Divine
Nature, and of the eminence of Jehovah's perfections, who thus thinks. -- Job
xxxvi. 26. xxvi. 14.
Behold God is great, and we know him not! How little a portion is heard of him
Much praise is due to Dr. Priestley for the benevolence of the motives which
induced him to address the Jews. No doubt but it was from the charity of his
heart. Pity that his intemperate zeal for his own peculiar opinions should
fully that charity, by indiscriminately traducing those as idolators who hold
the divinity of Jesus Christ.
!

II. Examine the prophecies, and see whether the Messiah was not to be born of
a virgin. Is not this idea suggested in those words of God, which conveyed to
our fallen parents and their descendants the first promise of grace? The LORD
God said unto the serpent (the devil) I will put enmity between thee and the
woman, and between her seed and thy seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou
shall bruise his heel Genesis iii. 15.
. Consult also Isa. vii. 14. Behold a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and
shall call his name Immanuel. Jer. xxxi. 22. The Lord has created a new thing
in the earth, a woman shall compass a man. To say the least, these difficult
passages serve to confirm our faith in the truth of the event, when it comes to
pass. And seeing that nothing is too hard for God; seeing that such a
miraculous conception would be to the honor of the Messiah, and worthy of the
supereminence of his character; seeing that though conceived out of the
ordinary course of nature, he may still be of the feed of Abraham, and the son
of David (his mother being in that line) and as there is nothing in the
prophets which obliges us to reject this idea, it is more than probable that
these predictions refer to such an event. -- In Jesus they are all
accomplished, as you may see, if you will read Matt. i. and Luke i.

III. According to the Prophets, a notable messenger is to go before the
Messiah to prepare his way. The voice of one that cries in the wilderness,
Prepare ye the way of the LORD, make straight in the desert an high way for our
God Isa. xl. 3.
." -- "Behold I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me,
and the LORD whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his temple. Behold I will send
you Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the
LORD Mal. iii. 1. iv. 5.
.

All this makes it evident, that some eminent prophet is to precede the coming
of the Messiah Whether there may not be two such persons predicted of, one to
precede the Messiah's first appearance, and the other previous to his coming at
the end of the world, deserves consideration. Nor shall we add absurdity to the
obscurity of prophecy, if we suppose all these predictions to have a general
reference to these two persons, whilst that in Isaiah might more immediately
point out the Messiah's first messenger; and that in Mal. iv. 5, ^ay direct our
attention more especially to that prophet who shall come before the end of the
world, that great and dreadful day of the Lord, which shall burn as an oven.
. But we are not to suppose this messenger or prophet to be Elijah himself
coming from heaven, but one who shall come in the spirit of that prophet; as
the Messiah is often called David, because, as David was a holy man, after
God's own heart, and the savior of Israel, so the Messiah Ezekiel. xxxiv. 2^.
.

Let us now attend to the history of Jesus, and see whether there be any
prophet preceding his appearance, bearing any likeness to the prediction. An
Angel appeared to Zacharias while he executed the priest's office in the
temple, and said unto him, Thy wife shall bear thee a son, and thou shall call
his name John. He shall be great in the sight of the Lord; and many of the
children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God. And he shall go before
him in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the
children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just; to make ready a people
prepared of the Lord Luke i. 5.
." -- "Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, the word of
the Lord came unto John, the son of Zacharias, in the wilderness. And he came
into all the country about Jordan preaching the baptism of repentance for the
remission of sins. As it is written in the book of the words of Esaias the
prophet, saying, The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way
of the Lord, make his paths straight. And as the people were in expectation,
and all men mused in their hearts of John whether he were the Christ or not,
John answered saying unto them all, I indeed baptize you with water, but one
mightier than I comes, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to unloose
Luke iii.


Contemplate his history, work and doctrine. An angel announced him; a man of a
holy life; he baptized in water, as the emblem of regeneration, the emblem of
dying to sin, and rising to newness of life: he preached repentance, and gave
notice of the sudden appearance of him who had been the burden of prophecy.
All the people held John to be a prophet Matt. xxi. 26.
; and hence they supposed (according to Josephus Antiq. Lib. 18. c. 7.
who speaks highly of his character, as do other Jewish writers) that Herod's
army on a certain occasion miscarried in judgment upon him for putting John to
death. On account of his piety and doctrine he obtained the character of "One
of the wise men of Israel." It was from this high estimation in which he was
held, that a solemn deputation was sent to him to enquire who he was John 1.19
-- 28.
? He confessed that he was not the Christ, nor Elias (not literally, according
to the then prevailing idea of the Elias who was to come) not that prophet (of
whom Moses spoke) but the voice of one crying in the wilderness, Make straight
the way of the Lord, as said the prophet Esaias John 1.19 -- 28.
. Does not this messenger well agree with the predictions which pointed out
that prophet to the notice of Israel, who was to go before the face of the
Lord, and prepare the way for the appearance of his Anointed?

IV. As the Messiah was to be a Prophet of the highest rank (and more than a
Prophet) may it not be expected, that in proof of his mission he should perform
miracles, and prophecy of things to come? It is evident that the ancient Jews
expected that their Messiah would do many wonderful works; hence some said unto
Jesus, What sign show thou unto us, seeing that thou do these things John
ii. 18.
?" and others said, When Christ comes, will he do more miracles than these
Matt. xii. 38.
? Perhaps it was in reference to these prophetic gifts that it was said, Thy
people shall be willing in the day of thy Power Psalm. cx. 3.
And again, the Spirit of the LORD shall rest upon him, the Spirit of wisdom
and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and
of the fear of the LORD Isa. xi. 2.
etc. But whether the Prophets have directly spoken of this or not, it is
surely perfectly consistent with his character thus to be invested with power
from on high, (and in some sense necessary) to demonstrate that he is of God.
It may be justly expected that he who is represented as the most eminent
Prophet, the great burden of prophecy, of whom inspiration has spoken and
sung from the depths of antiquity, should be distinguished with gifts superior
to others Dr. Priestley speaks of the miracles of Jesus Christ as inferior, in
point of magnitude and splendor, to those of Moses, The justness of this
concession might be disputed. The miracles of Moses, in general, were as the
splendor of lightning; but those of Jesus Christ were as the sun, clear,
steady and benign.
.

An impostor might show juggling signs and wonders, which might deceive the
ignorant; or, perhaps, by the agency of evil spirits (who may be able to look
farther into causes and effects than men) he might be able to discover events
which lay hid from common eyes, and by those signs might lead the people after
strange gods, as Moses forewarned Deuteronomy. xiii. 1.
. God might permit these things as the trial of obedience. But, did ever any
impostor raise the dead, or give sight to one who was born blind? Such wonders
as these require the agency of the Creator, and which was never granted to a
deceiver. If miracles, which nothing but the power of God can perform, be any
proof of a true Prophet, here proof abounds. By a touch, by a word, by the
efficiency of his will, he healed all manner of diseases, cast out devils,
controled the elements, and raised the dead.

None pretend to deny that Jesus wrought many wonderful works, far transcending
human power. So irresistible is the proof of it, that your nation have been
obliged to allow it. Many who saw them, indeed, said He casts out devils,
through the prince of the devils Matt. ix. 34.
, and others, to get rid of the argument, which is drawn from hence in favor
of his being from God, have pretended that he did them by means of some
ineffable name of Jehovah. But surely, it is too irrational (not to say too
impious) to suppose, that the great Eternal would permit his name to be turned
into a talisman to favor the tricks of a juggling impostor; or that a few
letters, however arranged, or however pronounced, should have in them the power
of healing diseases, and raising the dead. This might do in the very darkest
ages of superstition; but have not all men, where revelation, reason and
philosophy, have carried their light, learnt more wisdom? Surely that poor man
who was born blind reasoned better than this, when they of the Sanhedrim said
unto him, We know that God spoke unto Moses; as for this fellow, we know not
whence he is John ix. 29, etc.
The man answered and said unto them, Why herein is a mavelous thing that ye
know not from whence he is, and yet he has opened mine eyes. Now we know that
God hears not sinners; but if any man be a worshipper of God, and does his
will, him he hears. Since the world began was it not heard that any man
opened the eyes of one that was born blind; if this man were not of God, he
could do nothing." q. d. "It is mavelous indeed that you, great and learned
men, should not know from whence this man is, who has wrought such a miracle;
when we unlettered and blind beggars know, that the holy and Almighty God is
not the accomplice of deceivers; we know that such power, as in this case is
manifested, is communicated only to them who are the true servants of God. Ah!
man, thou know not the power of prejudice, or thou would marvel at
nothing. Prejudice makes light darkness, and darkness light; good evil, and
evil good.

And is the gift of foretelling future events a criterion of a true Prophet,
and what may be expected to dwell in the Messiah in an eminent manner? In Jesus
we find the Spirit of the Lord, the spirit of wisdom and understanding. He
perceived the thoughts of men's hearts. He knew beforehand who would betray him.
His eye penetrated into the depths of futurity, and saw through the future
fortunes of the Jewish nation. What meant he to teach the Jews by his parable
of the husbandmen who first refused to render unto the householder the fruit of
his vineyard, and afterward murdered his only son Matt. xxi. 33.
? What meant he when he faid, There shall not be left here (in the temple) one
stone upon another that shall not be thrown down. -- Many shall come in my
name, saying, I am Christ; and shall deceive many. Then shall be great
tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of the world to this time
Matt. xxiv. 2, 5, 21.
? But

V. However great and numerous the proofs of the Messiah's mission, yet they
are not to be attended with that terror which prevailed at Sinai. Hear Moses.
The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet, from the midst of thee, of
thy brethren, like unto me; unto him shall ye hearken. According to all that
thou desiredst of the Lord thy God in Horeb in the day of the assembly, saying,
Let me not hear again the voice of the Lord my God, neither let me see this
great fire any more, that I die not Deuteronomy. xviii. 15, 16.
, etc. This is clearly a promise of the Messiah, and a prophetic description of
his character. And how perfectly does the ^^story of the doctrines, and works
of Jesus, agree with this prediction! Here are no thunders, nor lightnings, nor
the voice of trumpets, to make even a Moses fear and quake, and the people
exclaim, Let not God speak with us, lest we die. The lowest may approach to
learn of Jesus, for he is meek and lowly in heart; and what he has heard of
his Father, that he speaks in language which does not terrify, but invites
attention. His doctrine is at once full of grace, and full of truth. Though it
astonish, it does not affright; and if to confirm his mission he display the
power of God, yet it is in a way which accords with the promise. His wonders
are wonders of compassion and kindness; and even where there may be some
mixture of terror, mercy predominates. All they that had any sick with diverse
diseases, brought them unto him, and he laid his hands on every one of them,
and healed them. And devils also came out of many, crying out, saying, Thou art
Christ the Son of God Luke iv. 40, 41.
. -- He raised the dead; but he never called for sire to come down from heaven
to destroy men's lives. He stilled, but he never raised a tempest. He is in all
things according to the desire of Israel in Horeb. And whosoever will not
hearken unto my words, says the Lord, which he shall speak in my name, I will
require it of him Deuteronomy. xviii. 19.
. God foresaw that some would not hearken to this Prophet, whom he promises.
Search the scriptures, and see whether they do not testify of Jesus, and prove
him to be the promised Prophet.

VI. Both the life and doctrine of the Messiah are to be eminently holy; both
agreeing with that law which was written with the finger of God, and given to
Moses in Mount Sinai. He is to be like unto Moses, in that he is to speak the
pure word of God. All he teaches must be agreeable to his holy law, and in the
name of no other God. Of whom does the Psalmist speak, but of the promised
Savior, where, as Prophet, he says, Thou love righteousness, and hate
wickedness; therefore God, thy God, has anointed thee with the oil of gladness
above thy fellows. All thy garments smell of myrrh, and aloes, and cassia Ps.
xlv. 7, 22.
? -- Of whom speaks Isaiah? There shall come forth a rod out of the stem of
Jesse, righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the
girdle of his reins. The Lord is well pleased for his righteousness sake; he
will magnify the law, and make it honorable Isa. xi. 1, 5. xlii. 21.


View the life of Jesus. Who can convict him of sin? Though his enemies charged
him with blasphemy and sedition, where is the proof? He said, he was the Son of
God. And what says the scripture? Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten
thee Ps. ii. 7.
. He said he was a King. And of whom spoke David? Why do the heathen rage and
the people imagine a vain thing? The kings of the earth set themselves, and the
rulers take counsel together against the Lord, and against his Anointed. -- Yet
have I set my King upon my holy hill of Sion. -- Kiss the Son, lest he be angry
Ps. ii. 1, 2, 6, 12.
. Does not David here speak of some one superior to himself; but of whom he (as
a persecuted prince) was a type? Of one, who, like Jesus, was persecuted by
Herod, and Pontius Pilate, and the rulers of the Jews? But though agreeable to
the prophecy he said, "I am a King;" yet he said also, "My kingdom is not of
this world;" and when the populace would have taken him by force, and made him
King, he departed into a mountain himself alone; for he was God's, and not
man's Anointed. He was superior to receiving honors from men. -- They charged
him with violating the holiness of the sabbath. But why? Only because he did
good, healed the sick, and taught the difference between unnecessary works, and
those of necessity and mercy; between superstitions scrupulosity about triles,
and real sanctity.

Examine his doctrine. Did he not teach the fear and worship of the one true
God? Did he not enforce that moral law which God gave ^t Sinai? Yes, he
magnified the law, and made it honorable. Not so his enemies; they put outward
rites in the place of inward sanctity, and made void the law by their
traditions; they turned ^he holy religion of God into ostentation; and instead
of obeying his precepts from the heart, did all they did to be seen of men. But
what part does Jesus act? Does he, like the false prophets of former days,
shape himself and his doctrine according to the times; and hoist himself into
credit by arts of flattery, and words of peace? No. See the zeal which animates
his bosom, for the glory of God, the honor of his law, and the conversion of
men. -- See, he lays the axe to the root of the trees; denounces the woes of
God against hypocrisy; shows the fallacy of all religion, but that of the
heart; teacher men to worship him, who is a Spirit, in spirit and in truth; and
to cleanse themselves, not only with the outward washing of water, but their
hearts, and their lives, with the waters of repentance. Read his sermon on the
mount Matt. v. vi. vii.
. Read all he taught. He who believes not, must acknowledge, that the morality
of his doctrine is worthy of the character he assumes.

VII. The Messiah, according to the Prophets, is to be eminent for mercy,
gentleness and goodness; He shall feed his flock like a shepherd; he shall
gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently
lead those that are with young Isa. xl. 11.
. He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the street.
A bruised reed shall he not break; and the smoking flax shall be not quench
Isa. xlii. 3.4.
.

And did not all these kind affections shine bright, both in the doctrine and
actions of Jesus? He taught men to love one another, and do good, even against
evil. Ye have heard that it has been said, an eye for an eye, and a tooth for
a tooth. But I say unto you, That ye resist not evil. Love your enemies, bless
them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which
despitefully use you, and persecute you. That ye may be the children of your
Father which is in heaven Matt. v. 38, 39.44, 45.
. This is my commandment, that ye love one another John xv. 12.
.

And observe, he does not say and do not; he practices his own precept. The
history of his actions is the history of goodness, mercy and gentleness. When
his misguided disciples asked leave to call for fire, as Elias did, to come
down from heaven, to destroy those Samaritans, who, (because they were Jews)
denied them the rights of hospitality, he turned and rebuked them, and said, Ye
know not what manner of spirit ye are of. For the Son of Man is not come to
destroy men's lives, but to save them Luke ix. 54, etc.
. He went about doing good. Did the blind cry to him, Have mercy on us, O Lord,
thou Son of David? He had compassion on them, and touched their eyes, and
immediately their eyes received sight Matt. xx. 34.
. Did he behold an afflicted widow, following her only son to the grave? He had
compassion on her, and said unto her, weep not; and he touched the bier, and
said, Young man, I say unto thee arise. -- And he delivered him to his mother
Luke vii. 12, 13, 14, 15.
. And when he beheld the tears of repenting sinners, who wept for their
transgressions, and sought the mercy he came to display, with as much
compassion as majesty, he said, Thy sins are forgiven: Thy faith has saved
thee, go in peace Luke vii. 48, 50.
. When he contemplated the miseries which, like a destructive tempest, were
hastening to fall upon his people, He beheld the city and wept over it Luke
xix. 41.
. Even when his countrymen (with the Roman soldiers) at the instigation of
revengeful priests, and corrupt rulers, were shedding his blood; in the midst
of his pains, compassion overflowed his heart, and he prayed, Father, forgive
them, for they know not what they do Luke xxiii. 34.
. Yes, and his prayer shall be answered; for though the Lord has stricken his
people for their sins, yet he has not cast them off forever. When they shall
acknowledge their transgressions, he will forgive the iniquity of their sin. Is
not this the Christ?

VIII. The doctrine of the Messiah is to be full of grace. For thus spoke the
prophets, Thou art fairer than the children of men, grace is poured into thy
lips Ps. xlv. 2.
." "The spirit of the Lord God is upon me; because he has anointed me to
preach good tidings unto the meek: he has sent me to bind up the broken
hearted, etc. Isa. lxi. 1.
" "And he shall speak peace unto the heathen Zech. ix. 10.
.

Hear the doctrine of Jesus. -- God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life John iii. 16.
. -- There is joy in the presence of the angels of God over a sinner that
repents Luke xv. 10.
. -- And he said, A certain man had two sons, and the younger of them said to
his father, Father, give me the portion of goods that falls to me -- and he
took his journey into a far country, and there wasted his substance i^^otous
living. And when he had spent all, there arose a mighty famine in that land;
and he began to be in want. And when he came to himself he said, How many hired
servants of my father have bread enough and to spare, and I perish with hunger!
I will arise and go to my father, and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned
against heaven and before thee. -- And he arose and came to his father. But
when he was yet a great way off, his father saw him, and had compassion, and
ran and fell on his neck, and kissed him, etc. Luke xv. 11, etc.
Merciful Creator! As a father pities his repenting children, and forgives
their follies, do thou so pity and forgive repenting sinners, who turn to
thee? We adore thy mercy, which has given us such assurances of grace; we
receive him as thy Prophet, who thus makes known thy compassions; we repent
that our sins have grieved his Spirit! -- And ye who are weary with the
burdens of this present evil world, hear the consoling doctrine of Jesus which
is sent to you; Blessed are they that mourn; for they shall be comforted.
Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness' sake; for theirs is
the kingdom of heaven Matt. v. 4, 10.
. -- Let not your heart be troubled. In my Father's house are many mansions. I
go to prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will
come again, and receive you unto myself; that where I am, there ye may be also.
Ye now have sorrow; but I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and
your joy no man takes from you John
.

Well did Isaiah prophecy, The Lord God has anointed me to preach good tidings
to the meek; he has sent me to bind up the broken hearted. Well did Jesus say
to the men of Nazareth, when, in their synagogue, he read these words of the
prophet, This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears Luke i^. 21, 22.
. We with them bear witness, and wonder at the gracious words which proceed out
of his mouth. His doctrine droppeth as the rain, and his speech distilleth as
the dew; as the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon the
grass.

Who, unless his heart be corrupted by vice, or his mind darkened by prejudice,
can hear, or read, the doctrine of Jesus, which is at once so replete with
sublimity. and mercy, and not discover upon the face of it the stamp of heaven?
Is not this he who was to come, or, do we look for another?

IX. If we examine prophecy, we shall find the period marked out for the
Messiah's appearance. The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver
from between his feet, until Shiloh come, and unto him shall the gathering of
the people be Genesis xlix. 10.
. This is allowed to be a prophecy of the Messiah, and shows that before the
arrival of this period, when Judah, as well as Ephraim, should cease to be a
kingdom, he must appear. Again. Seventy weeks (490 years) are determined upon
thy people, and upon thy holy city, to finish transgressions, and to make an
end of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in
everlasting righteousness, and to seal up the vision and prophecy, and to
anoint the most holy. Know therefore and understand, that from the going forth
of the commandment to restore and build Jerusalem, unto the Messiah the Prince,
shall be seven weeks, and threescore and two weeks; the street shall be built
again, and the wall, even in troublous times. And after threescore and two
weeks shall Messiah be cut off, but not for himself, and the people of the
prince that shall come, etc. Dan. ix. 24, 25, 26.


And when the Lord would encourage Zerubbabel and his people, in building the
second temple, was it not by promising, that that house which they were then
building (and which Herod afterward repaired) should be blessed with the
presence of the Desire of all nations? Who is left among you, that saw this
house in her first glory? And how do you see it now? Is it not in your cyes in
comparison of it as nothing? Yet now be strong. -- I will shake all nations,
and the Desire of all nations shall come, and I will fill this house with
glory, says the Lord of hosts. -- The glory of this latter house shall be
greater than the former, says the Lord of hosts, and in this place will I give
peace, says the Lord of hosts Hag. ii. 3, 4, 7, 9.
.

You have doubtless been taught to give such explanations to these passages, as
may least favor the Christian cause. But for a moment, as lovers of truth, lay
aside as much of the prejudice of education as you can, and consider whether
the appearance of Jesus does not exactly answer to these predictions, and
afford the easiest solution. Judah has shared the same fate with Ephraim, and
the scepter is departed; but before their polity was utterly broken, and they
scattered over the face of the whole earth, Jesus appeared to gather together
in himself all people, Jews and Gentiles. And, exactly at the time foretold by
Daniel, he made his appearance, and was cut off, but not for himself.

To get rid of the argument which this passage offers, in favor of Jesus being
the Christ, your writers have explained it as not referring to the promised
BRANCH of David; though they are not agreed among themselves of whom the
Prophet speaks. Some by the Messiah, in the 25th verse, understand Zerubbabel,
others Joshua the high priest, and a third class interpret it of Cyrus. By
Messiah, in the 26th verse, who was to be out off, some understand Hircanus the
high priest, whom Herod ordered to be put to death; and others, king Agrippa,
who, they say, was out off by Vespasian. But is not this contrary to the plain
meaning of the text, and offering it the greatest violence? It is evident, to
every unbiassed reader, that one person is spoken of through the prophecy. The
number of weeks that were to pass, before the appearance of Messiah the Prince,
prove that neither Zerubbabel, Joshua nor Cyrus, could be the person referred
to. From the order to restore and build Jerusalem, unto the Messiah the Prince,
were to be seven weeks, and threescore and two weeks, i. e. sixtynine weeks:
but which is thus broken into two periods, to mark out the important event of
Jerusalem's restoration, and the time it should take to perfect that work, viz.
seven weeks (fortynine years.) But, even supposing the Prophet to say, It is
seven weeks to the Messiah the Prince; this does not agree with either of these
persons. Read. From the going forth of the commandment (either that recorded in
Ezra i. vi. or vii.) to restore and build Jerusalem, shall be seven weeks." It
is not "From the destruction of Jerusalem to the Messiah the Prince," but,
"From the going forth of the commandment to restore and build it, to the
Messiah etc. Who (under God) sent forth the commandment? Cyrus, Darius, or
Artaxerxes. And to whom was it given as the heads of the Jewish nation? Was it
not to Zerubbabel, Joshua, or Ezra? To make Cyrus, Zerubbabel, or Joshua,
therefore, the Messiah the Prince, will involve us in the greatest absurdities.
The plain meaning (without any breaks to mark out intervening events) is, From
the going forth of the commandment to restore and build Jerusalem, to the
Messiah the Prince, shall be sixty-nine weeks. Count them, and your finger will
rest upon JESUS OF NAZARETH THE KING OF THE JEWS. John xix. 19.


The Messiah, mentioned in the 26th verse, which some interpret of Hircanus,
and others of Agrippa, is surely no other than the person spoken of in the
preceding verse. Nothing can be plainer. But is not the person here pointed out
of more eminence than either of these? Was Hircanus the most holy? or did his
cutting off make reconciliation for iniquities, and bring in everlasting
righteousness? Did he confirm the covenant with many for one week? Criticism
and prejudice may make the text applicable to any body, or speak any thing
which may answer a purpose; but look on the face of it, and say whose likeness
it bears. As to Agrippa, he does not appear to be of eminence enough to be thus
spoken of; and of his cutting off there is not sufficient proof, and none at
all for the ends and consequences of it mentioned in the prophecy. When
expositors are reduced to such contradictions and glaring absurdities, is it
not a reason, at least, to examine heartily, whether Jesus, in whose history
and pretensions the prophecy meets with the easiest solution, be not the person
pointed out? The Messiah was to appear after sixty-nine weeks; then did Jesus
appear. -- He was to be cut off, but not for himself, so was it with Jesus. --
He was to finish transgression, to make an end of sin, to make reconciliation,
and to bring in everlasting righteousness; and this, the Christian doctrine
teaches us, Jesus did. -- He was to confirm the covenant with many for one
week; this Jesus did, by the ministry of his forerunner and of himself. -- And
then was the people of the prince to come and destroy the city and sanctuary,
as did the Romans in less than forty years after the cutting off of Jesus. If
this be not a prophecy of the Messiah, the BRANCH of David, the Prince of
princes, where shall we find a promise of him which may not be quibbled away?

And if Jesus be not the person, where shall we find in the records of history
that Desire of all nations, whose presence was to fill the second temple with
glory? This temple has been long since destroyed, and not one stone left upon
another to denominate it the same. And where do we find the fulfillment of the
promise of remarkable peace, if not in that doctrine of peace which was
preached by and through Jesus? that doctrine whose gentle stream blesses the
souls of the righteous with peace, amidst all the agitating tumults and
troubles of the world. Surely this is that Desire of all nations who was to
come and speak peace to them who are near, and to them who are afar off.

Having advanced thus far in your enquiries after the characteristics of the
Messiah, and the pretensions of Jesus, stop, and consider well the weight of
evidence for and against. And let it be remembered, that it is nothing to the
purpose, that in some instances you may suppose the prophecies misapplied; or,
at least, that they will bear a different interpretation; or that you may think
you discover some things in the history of Jesus which accord not with the
prophecies, or which lay the gospel open to objections. The matter to be
considered is, the great mass of evidence. And remember the truth of the
doctrine of Christianity does not depend for its proof, any more than the law
of Moses, upon the etymology of a word, or upon some detached circumstance. A
very little wit sharpened by prejudice may cut, and pare, and trim a word to
suit any purpose, and give to detached circumstances any appearance. But here
is a great body of prophecy and a vast body of facts, which are superior to the
arts of criticism. They form a long extended range of mountains, which no
assault of man can shake or separate, and which no length of time can impair.

Whilst the prophecies remain, and the history of Jesus is known, neither Jew
nor Gentile need be at any loss for grounds of enquiry into the truth or
imposture of the pretensions of the Son of Mary. If Christianity be an
imposture, surely it is the most extraordinary one that was ever heard of! Is
it not strange, that so many prophecies should unite their testimonies in its
favor? Is it not singular, that to get rid of the accumulated testimony to the
truth of the pretension of Jesus, we must put the most forced and unnatural
construction upon many of the sacred predictions? What ought a wise man, who
fears God, to do? Should he resist such evidence, because some things turn up
in the Messiah's character the reverse of what he has been used to think of it?
the reverse of what fallible men have taught him to believe? Should he resist
such evidence, because in some instances he discovers what he cannot explain,
or the propriety of which he cannot see? Surely not. Go, O man, if thou fear
God, and would lay hold on his covenant, go into thy closet, and shut thy
door upon thee; pray to him who sees in secret, and whose cars are open to the
prayers of the righteous; pray that he would pour his spirit upon thee, to
teach thee wherefore it is that he contendeth with your nation, what the sin of
Israel is, and where the way of truth; for he has not forgotten his covenant.
He waits that he may be gracious.

X. Enquire whether the prophets have not predicted, that the Jewish people are
to reject the Messiah, and for that reason be scattered over all nations, till
they repent? Moses supposes the possibility of some refusing to hear that
Prophet which God would raise up, as you may see Deuteronomy. xviii. 19. There are
many prophecies which clearly speak of this. I shall mention but two or three.
The former part of the 32d chap. of Isaiah is evidently a prophecy of the
Messiah: Behold a king shall reign in righteousness, etc. Here the Prophet
speaks of the excellence of the Messiah's government, ver. 4. The heart of the
rash shall understand knowledge, etc. But remark his different language, ver.
9th and on, Rise up ye careless women that are at ease, hear my voice ye
careless daughters; give ear unto my speech. Many days and years shall ye be
trouble. -- Upon the land of my people shall come up thorns and briars. -- The
palaces shall be forsaken, the multitude of the city shall be left, the forts
and towers shall be for dens forever, a joy of wild asses, a pasture of flocks.
And how long shall these days and years of trouble continue? ver. 15. Until the
spirit be poured upon us from on high, etc. How perfectly does this accord with
the Christian faith! What a clear delineation of facts subsequent to the
rejection of Jesus! Was he the promised King, the man who was to be a hiding
place from the wind? Did his doctrine tend to make the heart of the rash
understand knowledge? But the chief priests and elders, with the rulers of the
people, procured his death: and since this for many days and years has Israel
been in trouble; the land of God's people is thorns and briars; the palaces are
forsaken, and their days and years of trouble will not end till the Spirit be
poured upon them from on high, and they repent. Then this work of righteousness
shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness, quietness, and assurance
forever. ver. 17. -- See also Isa. xlii. After the Prophet has surveyed with
rapture the glory and grace of the Redeemer's character and government, he
turns his eyes toward a darker scene. ver. 22. But this is a people robbed and
spoiled; they are all of them snared in holes, and are hid in prison houses;
they are for a prey, and none delivers; for a spoil, and none says restore.
ver. 23. Who among you will give ear to this? Who will hearken and hear for the
time to come? ver. 24. Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers?
Did not I the Lord, against whom they have sinned? For they would not walk in
his ways, neither were they obedient unto his law. ver. 25. Therefore he has
poured upon them the fury of his anger, and the strength of battle, and it has
set him on fire round about, yet he knew it not; and it burned him, yet he laid
it not to heart.

Are you enquiring after truth? Attend then to this remarkable and affecting
description. If Jesus be the Christ, and your sufferings the consequence of
rejecting him, what elucidation does this prophecy receive? This Elect of God
has brought forth judgment to the Gentiles, he has brought the blind by a way
which they know not, he has taught them the knowledge of the one true God, and
the way to eternal life. Happy would it be if all who have seen this light
walked in it! And are God's people after all this robbed and spoiled? Has the
Lord given Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers, because they would not
walk in his ways, nor be obedient to his laws? Surely it is because they have
done as Jesus said, A certain householder planted a vineyard, and let it out to
husbandmen. And he had a son, one only son, and he sent him that he might
receive the fruit of his vineyard, saying, They will reverence my son. But they
caught him, and cast him out of the vineyard, and slew him Matt. xxiii. ^3, etc.
. Yes, for this he has poured upon him the fury of his anger, it has set him
on fire round about, but he knows it not, he lays it not to heart. -- Many more
prophecies might be produced in proof that Israel was to reject the Messiah, as
chapters xlix. l. liii. etc. But this may suffice.

XI. The Messiah is to endure sufferings and death. Proofs of this abound in
the Prophets; and though, as in the case of all the other prophecies, this
should not be without obscurity, till the event throw light upon the
prediction, yet its clearness is more than sufficient to induce a candid lover
of truth seriously to enquire whether that same Jesus who was crucified, and is
said to have risen again from the dead the third day, be not the Christ. What
is the meaning of those words of the Lord to the serpent in Genesis iii. 15. I
will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed;
it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel? Doubtless there is
much obscurity in the text, as there is in the whole relation which Moses gives
of the fall of man. But undoubtedly, it means something more than that mankind
and serpents were to be averse to each other. In this sentence was conveyed a
promise of grace and restoration to fallen man. The seed of the woman is to
destroy the works of the devil. Nor does this enigmatical manner of expression
at all operate against the text being a promise of life, a promise that some
one distinguished seed of the woman should remedy the mischief which the devil
brought on the human race. The promise of salvation, from the evils of the fa^^
is as the light which shines more and more unto the perfect day. It dawned on
Adam; it shone on Abraham; and grew brighter and brighter through the
successive stages of prophecy. The Messiah's appearance is perfect day, which
dissipates the shadow that obscured the prospect of the ancient church. Is this
then a promise of him, of whom the after Prophets foretold, that he should
assemble the outcasts of Israel, and stand for an ensign of the people, to whom
the Gentiles should seek Isa. xi. 10
? He is to be a suffering Savior. This perfectly agrees with innumerable other
predictions. What a picture of crucifixion does David draw in the 22d Psalm!
And of whom does Isaiah speak when he says, Many were astonished at thee, his
visage was so marred more than any man's, and his form more than the sons of
men Isa. lii. 14.
? Your ancient interpreters, before the days of Jesus, expounded the verse
preceding this, as a prophecy of the Messiah, and say, This is the King
Messiah, who is extolled above Abraham, above Moses, above angels Tanchuma,
vid. Pooli in loco.
. If the 13th verse belong to the Messiah, why not the 14th?

But let us compare the prophecies with the history of Jesus, and see how they
agree.

Genesis iii. 15. I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy
seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy bead, and thou shall bruise his heel.

Ps. ii. 2. The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel
against the Lord and his Anointed.

Ps. xxii. All they that see me laugh me to scorn, they shoot out the lip, etc.

Ps. xxii. 16. They pierced my hands and my feet.

18. They parted my garments among them, and cast lotsupon my vesture.

Isa. lii. 14. Many were astonished at the^, his visage was so marred more than
any man's, and his form more than the sons of men.

Isa. liii. 1. Who has believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed?

Isa. lii. 3. He is despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows, and
acquainted with griefs, and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was
despised, and we esteemed him not.

Isa. liii. 10. It pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has put him to grief.

Micah v. 1. They shall smite the Judge of Israel with a rod upon the cheek.

And when the Lord promises ^^od to Judah in the latter day, and above all, his
Spirit to awaken them to repentance, he says,

Zech. xii. 10. And they shall look upon me whom they pierced, and they shall
mourn for him as one mourns for his only son.

John xvi. 33. In the world ye shall have tribulation; but be of good cheer, I
have overcome the world.

1 John iii. 8. He that commits sin is of the devil, for the devil sins
from the beginning; for this purpose was the Son of God manifested, that he
might destroy the works of the devil.

Matt. ii. Herod sought the young child's life.

xxvi. 3, 4. Then assembled together the chief priests and the scribes, and the
elders of the people, and consulted that they might take Jesus by subtilty, and
kill him.

xxvii. 26. When Pilate had scourged Jesus, he delivered him to be crucified.

Matt. xxvii. 39 -- 43. They that passed by reviled him. -- Likewise also the
chief priests mocking him, etc.

Matt. xxvii. 35. They crucified him, and parted his garments, casting lots:
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet, etc.

Matt. xxvii. 29, 30. And when they had platted a crown of thorns, they put it
upon his head, and they bowed the knee before him, and mocked him, saying,
Hail, king of the Jews! and they spit upon him, and took the reed and smote him
on the head.

John xii. 37 and 38. But though he had done so many miracles before them, yet
they believe not on him, that the saying of Esaias the Prophet might be
fulfilled, etc.

Matt. xiii. 55. Is not this the carpenter's son?

John i. 11. He came unto his own, and his own received him not.

xii. 42. Many among the chief rulers believed on him, but because of the
Pharisees they did not confess him, for they loved the praise of men more than
the praise of God.

Luke xxii. 42 -- 44. Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me:
nevertheless, not my will, but thine be done. And there appeared an angel unto
him from heaven strengthening him, and being in an agony he prayed more
earnestly, and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to
the ground.

Matt. xxvii. 46. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

Matt. xxvi. 67. They spit in his face and buffeted him, and others smote him
with the palms of their hands.

xxvii. 30. They took a reed and smote him on the head.

John xix. 34. One of the soldiers with a spear pierced his side, and forthwith
came thereout blood and water -- that the scripture should be fulfilled, They
shall look on him whom they pierced God's sending the Messiah into the world,
and to his own degenerate people especially, for the purpose of reclaiming from
those wicked principles and practices which univerfully prevailed at that time
(to say nothing of the other ends of his coming) was the most forcible
expression of his abhorrence of sin. It was (so to speak) as if things were
brought to that issue, that the Creator determined on this alternative, -- "You
shall reform, or mine anointed shall fall a sacrifice." -- They would not
reform; and he fell a victim to the depravity of men. -- But adored be the God
of infinite wisdom and grace, who has made even this salutary to all them who
repent; and who by the doctrine of the cross will new-principle mankind!
.

XII. According to the prophets, the Messiah is to sustain the dignity of the
priesthood; and hence it is written, The LORD said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my
right hand until I make thine enemies thy footstool. The LORD has sworn and
will not repent, Thou art a priest forever after the order of Melchisedeck Ps.
ex. 1, 4.
. Whom can David call his Lord, to whom Jehovah spoke, but that righteous
Branch, who was to spring from him? He is to be a priest; but not after the
order of Aaron, but after the order of Melchifedeck, who united in his person
both the kingly and priestly dignities. Hear also Zechariah, Thus speaks the
LORD of hosts, saying, Behold the man whose name is the BRANCH, and he shall
grow up out of his place, and he shall build the temple of the LORD. Even he
shall build the temple of the LORD; and he shall bear the glory, and shall sit
and rule upon his throne, and he shall be a priest upon his throne Zech. vi.
12, 13.
. The branch here is undoubtedly the same with him of whom the angel spoke to
Joshua; (chap. iii. 8) God's anointed. Your Rabbis reckon among the names of
the Messiah that of The BRANCH. Who else can this be? It was no unusual
practice with the prophets to predict and show things to come, not only by
words, but by accompanying actions, that thus what they delivered might make
the deeper impression.

Hence this Prophet was commanded to put a crown upon the head of Joshua the
high priest, while he delivered this prophecy respecting the promised Branch,
as (...) significant emblem (agreeable to the manners of those days) of the
union of the priestly and kingly dignities in the person of the Messiah. And
was not his priesthood prefigured by the temple service? Was there not some
meaning and instruction hid under the character of the high priest, and the
service on which he waited? Certainly there was. The office itself, the
sacrifices which he offered upon God's altar, and the mediation which he made
for the people, were all full of spiritual meaning; they were the pictures of
things to come, that when those things appeared they might be known. Your
Rabbis Manachem on Lev. i. See Ainsworth.
have acknowledged their ignorance concerning these mysteries until the spirit
from above shall be poured out upon them; yet suppose that they signify the
sacrifices which Michael offers of the souls of the just. Christians are
taught, that this Michael is Christ, who has appeared to put away sin by the
sacrifice of himself. Heb. ix. 26.
.

As every high priest under your law was ordained to offer gifts and
sacrifices, it was necessary that this Priest, thus promised and typified,
should have somewhat to offer agreeable to his office, or he is not a priest.
-- He offered himself a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling favor; and thus
was fulfilled what Isaiah had predicted, When thou shall make his soul an
offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the
pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand Isa. liii. 10.
.

But this Priest, though slain, must rise from the dead, and ascend to heaven,
the most holy place made without hands, there to appear before God, and make
intercession for us. For David, who long ago saw corruption, and now dwells
among the dead, said, My flesh shall rest in hope, for thou will not leave my
soul in hell, (in the state of the dead) neither will thou suffer thine Holy
One to see corruption. Thou will show me the path of life Ps. xvi. 9 -- 11.
. And again, The chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of angels:
the Lord is among them as in Sinai, in the holy place. Thou have ascended on
high, thou have led captivity captive, thou have received gifts for men: yea,
for the rebellious also, that the Lord God might dwell among them Ps. lxviii.
17, 18.
.

In Jesus, by his rising from the dead, and ascending to heaven, we see the
full accomplishment of these predictions. And it is written in our sacred
scriptures, If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only,
but for the sins of the whole world 1 John, ii. 1, 2.
.

And thus is brought to pass what the Prophets looked forward to with the
rapture of inspiration. Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire. -- Then
said I, ^o, I come; in the volume of the book it is written of me: I delight to
do thy will, O my God: Yea, thy law is within my heart Ps xl. 6, 7, 8.
." -- "Surely shall one say, In the Lord have I righteousness and strength. In
the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be justified. and shall glory. Therefore
will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with
the strong: because he has poured out his soul unto death; and he was numbered
with transgressors, and he bare the sin of many, and m^de intercession for the
transgressors Isa. xlv. 24, 25. liii. ^. If any were to ask, How can the blood
of Christ make atonement for sin? How can his death and mediation redeem
sinners from the curse of the law, and reconcile them unto God? In return it
might be asked, How could the blood of beasts, presented in the most holy place
by the mediating priest, make reconciliation for the sins of Israel? What means
your law where it is said, It is the blood which makes an atonement for the
soul? Lev. xvii. 11. Must a Jew, in these cases, acknowledge his insufficiency
to account for the ways of God? At best can he do no more than resolve them
into his sovereign pleasure? What answer then can such a man expect from a
believer in the atonement and mediation of Jesus? With what propriety can he
object to the Christian religion, because of this inexplicable doctrine?
.

XIII. As the Messiah is to sit a Priest upon his throne, so also a King.
Behold a King shall reign in righteousness -- he shall be as rivers of water in
a dry place, as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land Isa. xxii. 1, 2.
." -- "He shall stand for an ensign of the people; to it shall the Gentiles
seek; and his rest shall be glorious -- he shall assemble the outcasts of
Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the
earth Isa. xi. 10, 12.
. Over Jew and Gentile shall he reign a glorious Prince. The prophecies abound
with testimonies respecting these gracious designs of God, in subjecting both
the Jewish and Gentile nations to his Anointed.

1. The Gentiles are to be the subjects of the Messiah's kingdom. To effect
this, he is to deliver them from the darkness of error, vice and idolatry. And
what can we conceive more worthy of the Maker of all, more worthy of the
Messenger of his covenant, or more glorious to his truth?

Of whom did David speak when he said, All the ends of the earth shall remember
and turn unto the LORD; and all the kindreds of the nations shall worship
before thee: for the kingdom is the LORD's, and he is governor among the
nations Ps. xxii. 27, 28.
? And to what glorious even did the prophet Isaiah point the hopes of Israel,
when he said of God's Elect, He shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles. He
shall not fail, nor be discouraged, till he have set judgment in the earth: and
the isles shall wait for his law Isa. xlii. a, 4.
? Doubtless the hopes of God's people were directed, by these predictions, to
the conversion of the idolatrous nations. And though that day is not arrived,
when the knowledge of the Lord shall cover the earth as the waters do the sea
Isa. xi. 9.
, for the doctrine of the kingdom of God is as a grain of mustard seed, yet has
not the light of God spread far, and done much, toward the destruction of
idolatry Isa. xiii. 8 -- 18.
, the reign of that wicked one who seduced our first parents! And is there not
a firm foundation laid for the kingdom of peace and righteousness? Our
scriptures have foretold a declension of the Christian church; and warned us of
Antichrist, whose sorceries should prevail one thousand two hundred and sixty
years, to the hindrance of the peaceful and righteous kingdom of God. When this
period terminates, then we hope to see fulfilled, the glorious things which are
spoken of the city of God. -- We hope it is at hand. Then shall he sprinkle
many nations, and sanctify them for his own inheritance, as he did Israel of
old in Horeb, when Moses with the blood of the covenant sprinkled the people;
and then, as at Sinai, to the ends of the earth shall it be heard, All that the
LORD has said will we do, and be obedient. Our eyes are fixed on your nation,
praying for your conversion, that by this the Gentiles may be awakened to a
more attentive consideration of the doctrine which they profess; and, from your
rising, receive that increase of light, which shall chase away this darkness
which now obscures us. Awake, awake then by repentance, and put on thy
strength, O Zion. How beautiful upon the mountains shall the feet of him be,
who brings good tidings, who publishes peace! Thy watchmen shall lift up the
voice, with the voice together shall they sing. The Lord will make bare his arm
in the eyes of all the nations, and all the ends of the earth shall see the
salvation of our God Isa. lii. 2.7, 8.1.
.

For, 2dly, with the Gentiles, he is to gather together the dispersed of Israel
and Judah: to bring them back to God, from whom they have departed; and to
restore them to their own land. Of this speak the Prophets. And it shall come
to pass in that day that the Lord shall set his hand again the second time to
recover the remnant of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from
the four corners of the earth Isa. xi. 11, 12.
." -- "Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I will raise unto David a
righteous BRANCH. -- In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell
safely, and this is the name whereby he shall be called, THE LORD OUR
RIGHTEOUSNESS Jer. xxiii. 5, 6.
." -- "He shall sit as a refiner; then shall the offering of Judah and
Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord as in the days of old and as in former
years Mal. iii. 3, 4.
.

Thus the salvation of Israel, their conversion from sin, and restoration to
their own land, are clearly the works of the Messiah Whether the Jews will be
converted to Christianity before their restoration to Canaan, or afterward;
whether it will be effected by the visible appearance of Jesus Christ, as some
conclude from Zech. xiv. and suck like predictions, or in a more ordinary way,
according to others, is not the present enquiry. However this deeply humble
themselves for expect God's favor till they deeply humble themselves for their
sins, and which cannot be, unless they set themselves seriously and
dispassionately to search their ways. Let them do this, and no doubt can be
entertained but mercy will break upon them, let the order or method of the
fulfillment of the prophecies ^e as it may.
; nor can it reasonably be doubted, but that these prophecies refer our hopes
to a period not yet arrived. They were not accomplished by the restoration
under Cyrus and his successors; for since that you have been awfully See Jer.
iii. 12.
defiled with your transgressions, and are so now; you have been a prey to your
enemies, and the beasts of the land have devoured you; from which evils the
prophets promise deliverance Ezekiel. xxxiv. 23, 25.
when the Messiah shall rise to save you. But length of time does not make void
the promise; nor do your present circumstances at all tend to weaken the proof
of Jesus being that Savior whom God promised; on the contrary, considered in
connection with the other prophecies, your present dispersion serves much to
confirm it. We have shown, from your prophets, that Israel was to reject the
Messiah, and for it to experience days and years of trouble, till they should
repent. Our scriptures teach, that God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him
to bless you, by turning you from your inquities; -- that had you obeyed his
voice, he would have gathered you together, as a hen gathers her chickens
under her wings; he would have saved you, but ye would not; therefore your
house was left unto you desolate; -- that for unbelief ye were broken off,
though not cast away; but that when ye shall believe, ye shall be grafted in
again, and all Israel shall be saved; as it is written, There shall come out on
Sion a Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob.

Allowing, for a moment (prejudice aside) that Jesus is the promised Savior,
your nation treating him as they did, was it not just in God (for surely it
must be a crime the most aggravated) to chastise them for it, til^ they repent?
And though his chastisements extend through more than seventeen hundred years
(they continuing still in unbelief) does this at all render void the promise,
if on their repentance his Savior rise up for their deliverance, and perform
for them all the good which the prophets have promised?

But in the Messiah you expect a temporal Savior only, and are prejudiced
against Jesus, because he is held forth principally as spiritual one, and that
for all people. But surely the account which the Christian Scriptures give us
of the character of Christ, and of the nature of his work and kingdom, is by no
means contradictory to the ancient prophecies; or at all derogatory either to
the perfections of God, or the glory of his Anointed. If you search the
prophecies, ur biassed by prejudice and a worldly heart, you may soon learn,
that the Savior who is promised, is to be not only a temporal one to you, but
also a spiritual one to all people. Hence that feast of fat things and victory
over death, of which Isaiah speaks Isa. xxv. ^^^^9.
. Hence he styles him "The light of the Gentiles Ib. xiii. 6.
." And Malachi says, He shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold
and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness Mal.
iii. 3.
. Surely the prophets speak of something more than temporal blessings! It is a
feast suited to the wants of the soul; it is light which informs the mind, and
purification from moral pollution. And is not this a more glorious work, thus
to save all people, than merely to bring back the scattered tribes of Israel to
the land of Canaan, whilst the rest of mankind, to whom their numbers bear no
proportion, are lest, without receiving any benefit from him, in darkness,
idolatry, and death? Yes, he is the Savior of all people, the King of all
nations! He brings spiritual as well as temporal salvation. His feast is for
all people; and he will destroy the face of the covering, and the veil, that is
spread over all nations.

TESTIMONIES IN FAVOR OF THE CHARACTER, WORKS, AND DOCTRINE OF JESUS.
LET us now consider the testimonies which are borne in favor of Jesus being
the CHRIST. There are testimonies which might be collected from profane
authors; but let us confine ourselves to what the historians of Jesus and the
writers of the Acts of the Apostles have written. As relators of plain facts,
what they affirm is as credible as what any other historian may have affirmed;
especially as they could have no interest in deceiving, but the contrary; and
as, if what they related were not true, they might easily have been detected,
and thus they would have destroyed the cause they meant to establish; for these
things were not done or spoken in a corner. It is certain then, that multitudes
of all conditions did entertain a high opinion of the character, works, and
doctrine of Jesus; and even his enemies have given testimony in his favor.

All men took John for a prophet; even they who have not believed in Jesus have
testified that he was of God. It is a criterion of your own, that A prophet
unto whom another prophet bears witness, he is a prophet out of doubt, and
needs no farther trial Maim. Ains. on Deuteronomy. xviii.
Did not John bear witness and testify, I saw the Spirit descending from heaven
like a dove, and it abode on him? And I saw and bare record that this is the
Son of God John i. 32, 34.
. And what said the multitude when they saw and heard him? All things which
John spoke of this man were true. And many believed on him x. 41, 42.
. Some said of his miracles, It was never so seen in Israel Matt. ix. 33.
." "He has done all things well (without trick or collusion.) He makes both
the deaf to hear and the dumb to speak Mark vii. 37.
. And of his doctrine the officers who were sent to take him testified, "Never
man spoke like this man John vii. 46.
." And what was the argument which the chief priests and Pharisees opposed to
the excellence of his doctrine? An argument worthy of that generation! Are ye
also deceived? Have any of the rulers, or of the Pharisees, believed on him
vii. 47.48.
? Even Judas the traitor was constrained by the terrors of his conscience to
hear witness to his innocence, I have finned in that I have betrayed innocent
blood Matt. xxvii. 4.
. His judge, time-server as he was, said to his accusers, I find no fault in
this man touching those things whereof ye accuse him. No, nor Herod; for I sent
you to him. I will therefore chastise him and release him. And they cried out
all at once, saying, Away with this man, and release unto us Barabbas. Pilate
willing to release Jesus, spoke again to them, but they cried, Crucify him,
crucify him. And he said unto them the third time. "Why, what evil has he done
Luke xxiii. 4, 14.15, 16, 18, 20.21, 22.
? -- But, he gave sentence as they required! What a mock of justice is the
whole of his trial! A way with this man, crucify him, crucify him, is here both
law and testimony! But, does such a prophet perish in Jerusalem without a tear?
Is innocence led to crucifixion unlamented? No. There followed him a great
company of people, and of women, which bewailed and lamented him. And all the
people that came together to that sight, beholding the things which were done,
(the injustice of his condemnation, the kindness of his heart in the midst of
his sufferings, the darkness and earthquake which proclaimed his character)
they smote their breasts, and returned xxiii. 27.48.
." "And when the centurion, and they that were with him, watching Jesus, saw
the earthquake, and those things that were done, they feared greatly, saying,
Truly, this was the Son of God Matt. xxvii. 54.
.

He is crucified. And will no friend own him, and give him a burial worthy of
so divine a Messenger? Behold there was a man named Joseph, a counselor, and
he was a good man, and a just, and had not consented to the counsel and deed of
them (of the Sanhedrim). This man went unto Pilate, and craved the body of
Jesus. And he took it down Luke xxiii. 50, 51, 52, 53.
." And there came also Nicodemus (a ruler of the Jews) and brought a mixture of
myrrh and aloes. Then took they the body of Jesus, and wound it in linen
clothes, with the spices, as the manner of the Jews is to bury; and laid it in
a sepulcher hewn in stone John xix. 39, 40.
-- Thus was Messiah cut off, but not for himself; and rich and poor bore
testimony that he had done no violence, neither was ^^y deceit in his mouth
Isa. liii. 9.
. -- But shall he remain among the dead to see corruption^ No. He cannot be
held a prisoner, who h^^^ ^ower to lay down his life, and power to take it
^gain; and who only descended into the regions of the dead, that he might
destroy him who had the power of death, and obtain eternal redemption for us.
On the third day he rose from the dead, in the presence of them who watched his
grave, and was seen of above five hundred brethren at once Matt. xxviii. Cor.
xv. 6.
. And after forty days he led his disciples out as far Bethany; and he lifted
up his hand, and blessed them: and it came to pass while he blessed them, he
was parted from them, and carried up into heaven Luke xxiv. 50, 51.
.

After his ascension, when his disciples (inspired with the gift of tongues)
announced, That their Lord was risen from the dead, and exalted to sit on the
right hand of God, to be both Lord and Christ, the multitude, when they heard
this, were pricked in their hearts, and said, Men and brethren, what shall we
do? and the same day there were added unto the disciples about three thousand
souls Acts ii.
. What, in the eye of reason, but the power of truth, and the energy of God's
spirit, could bring over such a multitude at once, to own one for the Christ,
who had been crucified but a few days before; when such an acknowledgement
would expose them to the insult of the rabble, and the persecuting power of the
great?

Furnished with wisdom and power from above, the unlettered apostles went forth
preaching Jesus, and proving that he was the Christ; confirming the truth of
their doctrine by healing diverse diseases, insomuch that the rulers who
persecuted them, though they had gone so far as to put Jesus to death, knew not
how to proceed; and they conferred among themselves, saying "What shall we do
to these men? for that, indeed, a notable miracle has been done by them, is
manifest to all them that dwell in Jerusalem, and we cannot deny it. But that
it spread no further among the people, let us straightly threaten them, that they
speak henceforth to no man in this name Acts vi. 15, 16, 17.
. And a Pharisee, named Gamaliel, a doctor in great reputation, advised his
fellow magistrates, on a like occasion, to let these men alone. Ye men of
Israel, take heed to yourselves, what ye intend to do as touching these men. --
Let them alone; for if this counsel or this work be of men, it will come to
naught; but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it, lest, happily, ye be found
to fight against God. And to him they agreed Acts v. 34.
.

It is not brought to naught. God was with his servants, and unarmed and
unskilled as they were in the wisdom of the world, not only did multitudes of
the Jews receive the doctrine of the cross, but nations and people, embracing
the gospel, have turned from idols to serve the living and true God; and to
wait for his Son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead, even Jesus, who
delivered us from the wrath to come. Before the power of his doctrine, their
oracles are struck dumb, their images are beaten to pieces, and their idols
laid desolate. It has been spreading and growing for more than one thousand
seven hundred years; and though, as was foretold, antichrist has for ages
deceived the nations, and retarded the progress of the kingdom of God, yet
truth is breaking forth as the light, and it shall shine to the ends of the
earth: it shall make the wilderness and the solitary place glad: the desert
shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose Isa. xxxv. 1.
. The doctrine of the kingdom of God (purified from the corruptions of man)
shall fill the earth with the knowledge of the Lord Isa. xi. 9.
. And he shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many people: and they
shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks:
nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any
more. O house of Jacob, come ye, and walk in the light of the Lord Isa. ii. 4,
5.
." -- "No lion shall be there, nor any ravenous beast shall go up thereon Isa.
xxxv. 9, 10.
. No, princes shall then be nursing fathers, and no more beasts of prey: and
for persecuting priests, the Lord will set up shepherds over his flock, who
shall feed them; and they shall fear no more; And the ransomed of the Lord
shall return and come to Zion with songs, and everlasting joy upon their heads;
they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.

Has the gracious God held forth such hopes to the children of men? Do both
your and our scriptures unite in assurances of grace, and peace, in the latter
day? Surely then, no exertions of diligence, no sacrifices of prejudice, can be
thought too much; if, by any means, you may be enlightened into the cause, as
far as you are concerned, of that displeasure which withholds the
accomplishment of these promises of mercy. Behold your nation, when the light
of God's countenance shone upon his people. He gave you a land of milk and
honey. Jerusalem was a quiet dwelling place. God was known in her palaces for a
refuge. Thither the tribes went up, the tribes of the Lord, unto the testimony
of Israel, to give thanks unto the name of the Lord; for there were set the
thrones of judgment, the thrones of the house of David.

But how are ye fallen from your former felicity! Without a country, without a
temple, without any certain dwelling place, ye are cast out and left desolate!
How has the Lord covered the daughter of Zion with a cloud, and cast down from
heaven unto earth the beauty of Israel! Yes, it is the hand of God which is
stretched out to scatter you, and make your plagues wonderful, till ye are
become an astonishment, a proverb, and a byword, among all the nations whither
the Lord has led you. And wherefore does he thus afflict the children of
Abraham, to whom he promised to be a God forever? Does his promise fail? No.
Jerusalem has grievously sinned, therefore she is removed Lam, i, 8. -- iii,
40.
. Search, then, and try your ways, that ye may turn again to the Lord; who
takes not pleasure in the death of a sinner, but that he would return from his
way and live Ezekiel. xviii. 22.
. Search the scriptures, and see what they testify of the promised Messiah.
Seeing that the scepter is ^eparted from Judah -- that the seventy weeks of
Daniel have been so long ago expired -- that that temple has been so long
since destroyed, in which the Desire of all nations was to appear, and your
expectations so repeatedly disappointed -- seeing that the law and the prophets
are so clearly illustrated in the pretensions of Jesus -- examine whether he be
not the Christ.

Yes, Adam, who received the first promise of salvation -- Abraham, with whom
God established his covenant -- Moses and Aaron, and all the prophets, lift up
their voice, and testify that this is the seed of the woman, that prophet who
was to come and enlighten all nations with his doctrine; him in whom all the
seed of Israel shall be justified and glory: the righteous branch, who shall
sit and rule upon his throne, and be a priest upon his throne, after the order
of Melchizedeck. They all cry, O that ye had hearkened to God's commandments!
then had your peace been as a river, and your righteousness as the waves of the
sea. -- Be wise now, therefore, serve the Lord with fear -- Kiss the Son, lest
he be angry, and ye perish from the way: blessed are all they that put their
trust in him Isa. xlviii. 18. Ps. ii. 10 -- 12.


A LETTER TO MR. D. LEVI; CONTAINING Remarks on his Answer to the Letters which
Dr. PRIESTLEY addressed to the JEWS.
Newbury, June 11, 1787. SIR,
I THIS day received the answer to Dr. Priestley, which you informed me you was
about to publish when I saw you in London; and I take the liberty of addressing
a few lines to you, on the subject of discussion between you. I hope you will
excuse the freedom, and be assured, though I may controvert your positions,
that good will and the love of truth are the governing principles of my heart;
and which, I trust, will guard me against saying any thing which might be
offensive to an ingenuous mind, or unworthy the subject in dispute.

I assume not the style of an answerer; that falls to the share of those who
are better qualified: and though, from what I have advanced in my Friendly
Address to the Jews, there may be some propriety in my taking notice of what
you have brought forward against the divinity of the Christian religion, yet
the limits which I have prescribed myself, will allow me to do no more than
make a few cursory Remarks upon your principal arguments, and briefly show,
that, however they may affect the opinions of Dr. Priestley, they contain no
solid objection against the divinity of the Christian religion, as held forth
in our sacred scriptures.

Surely, Sir, a man is not criminal for endeavoring to convince his neighbor
of what he supposes to be error; or for offering his hand, though it should be
a weak one, ^o assist him in his researches after truth. His principle will
plead for him, should he need an excuse, so long as he employs no other means
than what reason and religion approve; for though you may not think the law of
Moses (the law of rites) obligatory on all mankind; yet you must allow, that
the Christian religion, if it be true, is certainly obligatory on a Jew in the
highest degree. A Christian then who seeks to make converts, in the spirit of
love, is by no means the object of blame, as you insinuate in your introductory
letter.

Your sufferings from Christians, you say (p. 18) is one great argument with
you against Christianity's being the peaceable kingdom of the Messiah, as
foretold by the Prophets; but you confess (p. 19) that the doctrines of
Christianity do not teach, or authorize, to shed the blood of Jews (and you
might have added of any people) and that you carefully distinguish between the
doctrine and its professors. Is the doctrine of Jesus Christ in itself
peaceful, so that if all men were to live under its influence, would the
prophecies in this particular meet with accomplishment? And who can say, in
that case, they would not? Here then is a strong presumptive evidence in its
favor. Have the prophets any where said that the doctrine of the Messiah's
kingdom would instantaneously produce its great effects, in enlightening the
Gentiles, in taming the ferocity, and subduing the wickedness of men; so that
they should no longer hurt nor destroy Isa. xi.
? No. The stone which was cut out of the mountain without hands, and which
smote the image Dan. ii.
, that figured the monarchies of the earth, and brake it in pieces, and
afterward became a great mountain, so that it filled the earth, at first was
small; time brought it to perfection. The doctrine of Jesus has not yet
produced all the effects which the Prophets predicted, and which in its nature
it is calculated to produce. Antichrist has retarded its progress; but it shall
prevail. It is prevailing. The reformation, for which you thank God (p. 6) is
one event in his unsearchable government, which forwards the kingdom of peace;
and he must shut his eyes who does not see that increasing light, which tends
to the perfection of that kingdom, which God in his inscrutable providence, for
the trial of the nations, and for the purposes of his own glory, has so long
permitted the wickedness of man to counteract. It is no argument then against
Christianity, because all the good foretold by the Prophets is not at once
produced, if in its own nature it be calculated to produce it; and especially
if the same authority which demands our cordial reception of it informs us,
that this kingdom of God is as a grain of mustard seed, and that before the
glorious days of righteousness and peace it promises, iniquity shall prevail,
and the man of sin deceive the nations.

As to what you have said (p. 20, etc.) respecting Jesus Christ as the second
person in the Trinity, or as a simple Prophet, according to some, it deserves
re-examination. Your idea of personality in the Trinity is not, I think, the
idea of well-informed Trinitarians. There may be people (though I know of none,
objectionable as the language of some may be) who conceive of three persons in
the Godhead as they do of the persons of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. But however
such persons may think in this case, look into our scriptures (these are the
only test by which to try Christianity;) they certainly teach the unity of God
as much as your scriptures do. Do yours say, Hear, O Israel, Jehovah our God is
one Jehovah Deuteronomy. vi. 4.
? Ours speak the same language, There is none other God but one. -- To us there
is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him: and one Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him 1 Cor. viii. 4 -- 6.
." -- "Now a Mediator is not a Mediator of one: but God is one Gal. iii. 20.
. It is readily allowed, that that is said of Jesus Christ which it would be
blasphemy to say of any mere creature, as, The Word was with God, and the Word
was God John i. 1.
." -- "In him dwells all fullness of the Godhead bodily Col. ii. 9.
." -- "God was manifest in the flesh 1 Timothy iii. 16.
. But this does not destroy the unity of the Godhead any more than the doctrine
of Jehovah's appearing to Abraham veiled in a human body Genesis xviii.
, or of his dwelling in the Shechina 2 Kings xix. 15.
; when we know that Jehovah is uncircumscribed by the heaven of heavens. There
is but one Infinite Intelligence, uncircumscribed, and undivided in his nature;
and when you can tell us how he dwelt in the man who appeared to Abraham, or
between the cherubim; a Christian will then be able to inform you how the
fullness of the Godhead dwelt in Jesus Christ bodily. How he who was with God,
was God.

With this eminence of character which is ascribed to Jesus, who can dispute
his right to abrogate the Mosaic dispensation, or to alter the law of marriage,
of which you speak? -- Yea, even supposing him a mere man, according to Dr.
Priestley, if he came with sufficient credentials, the Jews were obliged to
receive him, though he announced himself commissioned to abrogate the
ceremonial law. Moral laws are of eternal obligation; but positive institutions
depend on the will of the legislator. God may add to, or take from them, as he
pleases. For though the command given by Moses to the tribes of Israel, Deuteronomy.
iv. 2, binds them from altering God's institutions according to their caprice,
yet it by no means conveyed the idea that the Legislator himself was bound from
adding or diminishing at his pleasure, and as circumstances should require. It
would have been as sinful in an Antediluvian to alter the then positive
institutions of God, as for a Jew in after days; and yet, it could not ^nter
into the heart of any Israelite, when God at Sinai enlarged this law of rites,
to suppose that this formed an argument against the divine mission of Moses. It
is now, as it always was, sinful for any man, at his pleasure, to alter the
positive laws of God; but God himself is not bound in like manner. And of this
abrogation of the Mosaic institutions the prophets appear to have predicted.
See Jer. iii. where the prophecies evidently speaking of the return of Israel
from the present dispersion. On their repentance, the promise is, ver. 14, 15,
16, I will bring you to Zion: And I will give you pastors according to mine
heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and understanding. And it shall come
to pass, when ye be multiplied and increased in the land, in those days, says
the Lord, they shall say no more, The ark of the covenant of the Lord; neither
shall it come to mind; neither shall they remember it; neither shall they visit
it; neither shall that be done any more. The credentials of Jesus, then, and
these only, constitute the matter of enquiry; if they be valid, though he alter
or abrogate the law of Moses, he is yet a divine messenger. Chastity is a moral
law; but whether a man shall be allowed a plurality of wives, or only one, as
in the beginning; whether he shall be permitted to divorce his wife for every
cause, or for adultery only Some among the Jews understood the law of Moses in
Deuteronomy. xxiv. 1, as tolerating divorces only in cases where a man found his wife
guilty of some action which was really infamous, and contrary to the rules of
virtue; others taught that the least reasons were sufficient, as, if she did
not dress his meat well, or he saw a woman whom he liked better. The Pharisees
who applied to Jesus (Matt xix. 3) seem to have been of this latter opinion. No
man of virtue will hesitate which doctrine to approve, that embraced by these
Pharisees, or that taught by Jesus Christ. Surely this is most agreeable both
to the law of nature and the law of Moses.
; or what sort of punishment shall be inflicted on the incontinent, whether it
shall be left to the decision of human laws, or whether God himself shall
prescribe a law to enforce punishment in this world, or reserve the punishment
in his own hand for a future state, as in a thousand other cases, depends on
his sovereign pleasure. If Jesus Christ has set loose from moral obligations,
or at all encouraged us to treat the righteous precepts of God slightly; if his
credentials are no more than the signs and wonders of a juggling impostor, and
he say, "Let us go after other gods;" then is there a good argument against his
pretensions, but not otherwise.

As to your objection against receiving Jesus as a Prophet, because his
discourses are not called prophecies, it is void of all force; words are
nothing. And as to the objection which you make to him, because, as you say, he
taught not in the name of God, it is founded in mistake; turn to John v. 42 and
43: I know you that ye have not the love of God in you. I am come in my
Father's name, and ye receive me not. -- vii. 15, 18. The Jews marvelled,
saying, How knows this man letters, having never learned? Jesus answered them
and said, My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. If any man will do his
will, he shall know of the doctrine whether it be of God, or whether I speak of
myself, etc. -- And what though the Apostles went forth preaching Christ, how
does this operate against the divinity of the Christian religion? What did they
preach? that some god was to be worshipped beside the God of Abraham? No; they
preached that God had raised Jesus from the dead, and exalted him with his
right hand to be a prince and a Savior Acts v. 30, 31.
. With the Jews they reasoned out of the scriptures, opening, and alleging
that Christ must needs have suffered, and risen again from the dead; and that
Jesus was the Christ Acts xvii. 2, 3.
. -- The Gentiles, they taught to worship the one true God; and that, by Jesus,
whom he had raised from the dead, he would judge the world in righteousness.
Acts xxii. 31.
-- To all they preached that God was, in Christ Jesus, reconciling the world
unto himself. They went forth into the world, proclaiming the fulfillment of
that promise, I will also give thee for a light of the Gentiles, that thou
may be my salvation unto the end of the earth Isa. xlix. 6, 7.
; and that now was accomplishing, by the exaltation of Jesus Christ, that
ancient prediction, Thus says the LORD, the Redeemer of Israel, and his Holy
One, to him whom man despises, to him whom the nation abhors, to a servant
of rulers, kings shall see and arise, princes also shall worship, because of
the LORD that is faithful, and the Holy One of Israel, and he shall choose
thee. Thus they preached, that the God of Israel only was God, and that he who
was crucified was his Christ.

If Jesus holds not a higher rank than any of the prophets, even than Moses
himself, I, with you, cannot see the propriety of his preaching in the language
he often did. But, allowing him to be superior not only to all prophets, but to
angels themselves, the true Messiah, him of whom Isaiah spoke, when he said,
Unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given, and the government shall be
upon his shoulder, and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the
Mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace Isa. ix. 6.
; with this supereminence of character, he may preach himself, The light of the
world. It is true, this is an instance not to be paralleled in scripture; but,
do not you Jews say of the Messiah, He is extolled above Abraham, above Moses,
above angels? What wonder, then, as in his character he has no parallel, he
should deliver his doctrine in a manner peculiar to himself? The prophets
foretold that he should be given for a light of the Gentiles; he declares he is
so. The majesty of his doctrine is one proof, viewed in connection with others,
that he is the person of whom the prophet spoke, Behold, my servant shall deal
prudently, he shall be exalted, and extolled, and be very high Isa. lii. 13.
.

You say (p. 29 and 72) that before Christians attempt to convert the Jews to
Christianity, they should settle among themselves what honors are due to
Jesus, and in what the work of salvation consists; otherwise the Jews, among
the variety of opinions which prevail, might be deterred therefrom, by reason
of the difficulty attending the making a proper choice of that which is right.
But, to the law, and to the testimony. It is not the creed of Athanasius, or
Arius, or Calvin, or Socinus, or Dr. Priestley, or of any body, which you are
called to examine, much less to subscribe. Our facred writings are open to you;
what do they teach? and how do the doctrines there taught agree with the law
and the prophets? Christians differ in their explications of these writings, as
do the Jews about theirs: examine them without regard to the opinions of
others. What Mr. Lindsey or Mr. Roman may have said about Christianity, or of
what constitutes a Christian, is of no more weight with the thinking, than any
thing which may have been said by the most obscure. The sacred writings are
every thing in the question before you.

You say (p. 73) Although the reformed churches, with the whole body of
diffenters, are more charitable than the Catholies, yet, unless a person firmly
believe the doctrine, and the merit of the blood and sufferings of Christ, as
the Messiah and Savior of the world, there is no salvation for him. This wants
a little softening, but suppose it did not, it is nothing to the purpose. Your
business is with the gospel of Jesus Christ, and not with the gospel of the
church of Rome, of Geneva; of England, or of any other church; so that (p. 76)
you are not called to forsake a religion given by God himself, for manifest
contradictory opinions; but to accede to that same true religion, brought to
perfection by the appearance of the Messiah.

As I dare say the goodness of your heart will have no objection, I will blot
out the 30th page, and pass on to what you advance respecting your present
captivity.

You endeavor to prove (p. 33 and on) that your present captivity is a
continuation of the Babylonish; and that you now suffer for the sins of your
ancestors previous to that period, which, you argue, they at their return never
repented of, but in a partial way; that their chief matter of repentance was
about the strange women, and not for persecuting the prophets. This is making
the whole nation, for the sake of a favorite opinion, a body of hypocrites,
and holding them forth as deficient in the most essential principle of true
repentance -- sorrow for all sin. This is making God to show his approbation of
a people who were wanting in the essential requisite to true goodness, and who
slattered him with hypocritical words. We cannot admit this idea for a moment,
which is so reproachful to Israel, and so unworthy of God. In Nehemiah ix. 26,
they confess the sin of their fathers in slaying the prophets, who testified
against them; and the great provocation which they wrought, for which they were
delivered into the hands of their enemies. See also their confessions in the
34th and 35th verses. And what did they do in testimony of their abhorrence of
the deeds of their fathers? They made a covenant, and sealed it; and every one
having knowledge and understanding, entered into a curse, and into an oath, to
walk in God's law, which was given by Moses, the servant of God, and to observe
and do all the commandments of the Lord Neh. ix. 38 -- x. 28, 29.
. If this be not proof of sincere and universal repentance, then no words are
sufficient to tell us what such repentance is. There is no ground then, in the
sacred writings, for what you assert respecting your present captivity, as the
same with the Babylonish, because the sins previous to that were not repented
of; for as to your explication of Daniel's prophecy of the seventy weeks, in
support of your position, it appears to me to be forced to the last degree. My
limits will not permit me to stay long on this article: I shall only observe,
there is not that close connection between the prophecy contained in the 8th
chapter and this in the 9th, as you would persuade us; nor does any thing
appear in this chapter which might lead us to think that Daniel was now
involved in any perplexity about the two thousand three hundred days. It is
Jeremiah's seventy years which gives occasion to his prayer. The prophecy of
the two thousand three hundred days, was in the third year of Belshazzar; this
was in the first of Darius, a period of twelve or fourteen years distance.

To see what false principles you go upon, in your application of the events
and persons here spoken of, you need only review your 58th page. Know,
therefore, and understand (that) from the going forth of the commandment to
restore and build Jerusalem, unto the anointed Prince (shall be) seven weeks. I
have already, etc. You make this an assurance to Daniel, that so far would God
be from prolonging the seventy years spoken of by Jeremiah, that he would
shorten them to forty-nine, the distance of time from the destruction of the
first temple to Cyrus, who was the anointed prince. Read the text again; it is
not from the going forth of the commandment to destroy the first temple, unto
the anointed Prince, shall be seven weeks:" but, "know, therefore, and
understand, that from the going forth of the commandment to restore and build
Jerusalem, unto the Messiah the Prince (or the Anointed Prince) shall be seven
weeks and threescore and two weeks. This needs no comment.

Instead of thus perplexing the prophecy, as your system obliges you to do, is
it not more natural, and much more agreeable to the tenor of the prophecy, to
suppose that the commandment here refers to that of Cyrus, recorded in Ez. i.
or of Artaxerxes, chap. vii. when they had leave to erect themselves into a
body politic; and the seven weeks (forty-nine years) as marking out the time
which it would take for perfecting their city and establishment; sixty-two
weeks, (434 years) after which Messiah the Prince (whoever he be) was to
appear, and be cut off? This is certainly the most natural way of understanding
the prophecy; for it must appear clear to every unbiassed reader, that the
Messiah in the 25th ver. and the Messiah in the 26th, who is to be cut off, is
the same person. And surely if this prophecy be considered dispassionately, in
connection with others which speak of the Savior who was to come, it must
evidently appear a clear prediction, both of the time of his appearance, and of
his passion.

In your second letter (p. 67, and on) you proceed to compare the divine
mission of Christ with that of Moses. After hinting that the miracles which
Jesus wrought were such as might be performed without the immediate assistance
of God, you proceed to prove, that Moses was not believed by the Jewish nation
merely for the miracles which he wrought, and that there was not only no such
great necessity for those of Jesus as for those of Moses, but that they were
scarcely just or rational, and that miracles only are not a sufficient proof of
a divine mission.

Did Jesus by a touch, by a word, by the mere efficiency of his will, heal all
manner of diseases, cast out devils, and raise the dead? And do not such works
as these transcend all human power? It certainly lies upon you to prove, that
he did not perform what is ascribed to him, or to inform us how a human being
can do such things without the immediate assistance of God.

You say (p. 83) The miracles of Moses were not the especial proofs of his
mission. What passed at Sinai, it is true, was a more forcible conviction than
any of the other miracles, that he was divinely commissioned, and calculated to
make deeper impressions on the minds of the people; such impressions as their
rude state required: but it does not hence follow, that the other miracles,
which may be said to be wrought more immediately by Moses, if they were such as
no man could do unless God were with him, were not sufficient to prove his
divine mission. If he had done no more than what he did in Egypt, and at the
red sea, the people were bound to receive him as from God; the Lord thus judged
when he gave him his mission, and endued him with those powers Ez. iv. 1 -- 9.
: the people thus judged, and followed him. That God gave them more brilliant
proofs afterward was from sovereign pleasure, and to answer his wise purposes:
but it is never said or intimated, that those other miracles did not prove his
mission. And we may observe, if those miracles were not sufficient to stamp
upon their minds such indelible proofs of his mission as to make them obedient
to his laws, so no more was the appearance at Mount Sinai sufficient to produce
the effects you speak of; for they did afterward call in question his divine
mission; they again and again rebelled against him, and even before forty days
were expired lost the impression of the one living God, and made a calf, and
danced, and sung, These are thy gods. O Israel.

As to there not being that necessity for the miracles of Jesus as for those of
Moses, whether it be so or not, it proves nothing. But suppose there were not
that natural necessity here as in the case of dividing the sea, yet was there
not a moral necessity? It is a strange sort of reasoning for a man to say in
the case of Jesus, or of any messenger from God, This and that is not so
necessary as the miracles of Moses, and hence cannot be offered as proofs of
their mission in comparison of Moses, and therefore I will reject them. The
question is not whether the miracles of Jesus were as dazzling to the senses as
those of Moses, but whether they surpassed all power but that of God. True, to
feed five thousand men, besides women and children, with five loaves and two
fishes; to open the eyes of one born blind, or to raise a man to life who had
been dead three days, is not so tremendous as some of the miracles in Egypt;
they do not make such impressions of terror as the thunder and lightning, and
voice of trumpets, at Sinai; but do they afford less proof of divine mission?
No unprejudiced man can say they do. Your business is to prove, that the
miracles ascribed to Jesus were not true and genuine, or all you say about
necessity, or comparison with Moses, amounts to nothing. As is the case with
your observations on Deuteronomy. xiii. 1. For before that text can operate against
the mission of Jesus, you must prove, that what are called his miracles were
only the signs and wonders of a juggling impostor, and that he says, "Let us go
after other gods."

You particularly justify yourself in rejecting Jesus as the Messiah (p. 67,
and on) because the credentials which he offers in proof of his mission bear no
comparison with the especial proof of Moses' mission, i. e. with the testimony
which was given at Sinai. It is true, here is no thunder and lightning, and God
speaking from a fiery mountain (though nature bore awful testimony to the
character of Christ when he died upon the cross, and proof abounds that he rose
from the dead, and ascended to heaven) but as you argue about necessity, permit
a believer in Jesus to do so likewise. There was not that necessity for such
appearances as those at Sinai for the confirmation of the divine mission of
Jesus, as there was for that of Moses. There (if I may so speak) was laid the
foundation of that stupendous superstructure which God meant to raise, the
redemption of man, the salvation of the world. Thus his wisdom chose to
ascertain the beginnings of his work. This foundation laid, and sanctified by
the most solemn sanctions of heaven, Moses' mission is confirmed; all he wrote
or taught is ratified; and that Revelation which is from God is identified. In
this Revelation a Savior is made known, and his work prefigured; God's
Anointed is promised; and through the successive stages of prophecy predictions
shine brighter and brighter, which give assurance of his future appearance, and
paint in the most glowing colors the glory of his person, the dignity of his
character, the offices he is to sustain, and the work he is to perform. Yea,
they tell us from what family he is to spring, in what town to be born, with a
thousand other circumstances intended to identify his person when he came. A
messenger, whom all the Jewish nation took for a prophet, announced his
approach. He appears, makes known who he is, and to the sublimity of his
doctrine he adds miracles in proof of the divinity of his mission. He heals
diseases, he casts out devils, he controls the elements, he rises the dead, he
bids them search the scriptures which testify of him, he claims their faith,
and declares, He that believes in me shall never die. -- If ye believe not
that I am be, ye shall die in your sins. Though crucified, he rises from the
dead; and in proof of his resurrection, and ascension to heaven, his disciples
perform miracles in his name, the truth of which the bitterest enemies of Jesus
could not deny, even though the vice and prejudice of their hearts stirred up
their passions to resist conviction. What necessity for the terrors of Mount
Sinai to be repeated here? Moses and the prophets (the truth of whose words the
thunders and lightnings of Sinai have ratified) bore testimony to Jesus as the
Christ. And the works which the Father gave him to finish, he did; which works
bear witness of him that the Father has sent him John. v. 36.
. All is agreeable to the request of Israel in Horch, Let me not hear again the
voice of the LORD my God, neither let me see this great fire any more, that I
die not Deuteronomy. xviii. 15 -- 19.
.

These remarks might be extended, by taking notice of some of the lesses
objections which you state against the Christian religion. Nor would it be
difficult to demonstrate the folly of that man who rejects Christianity,
because he supposes he spies out some little matters, which lay i^. open to
objection; but which bear no proportion to the great weight of evidence that
preponderates in its favor. It might be shown, that all which you can object
to the two miracles which you have picked out of the gospel history (p. 78)
makes no more against the divinity of our sciptures, than what an infidel
(without considering the manners of the times, without allowing for probable
attending circumstances, and by the help of his distorting imagination) might
allege against the divinity of yours, from some detached facts culled out of
them. Such an one might suppose it unjust in the Israelites to spoil the
Egyptians Exodus xii. 35, 36.
; he might fancy it "irrational" that -- but let him fancy -- The just shall
live by his faith Hab. ii. 4.
.

It might be shown that your objection (p. 88) to the words Jesus recorded,
John v. 37, originates in a wrong understanding, not only of this passage, but
of that also in Exodus xxxiii. 11. Enquiry might be made after the proof, that
the Jews in the days of Jesus so understood the seventy weeks of Daniel, as to
know that their city and temple were to be destroyed, when they were, and which
you produce (p. 86) for the purpose of setting aside the evidence of Jesus
being endued with the gift of prophecy. But this, and much more which might be
said, may be unnecessary for me to enter upon, as my design in writing this
letter was only to drop a few Remarks, and to thank you for favoring the
public with a statement of your objections. If you will forgive my thus
addressing you, and attribute it to the true motives which influence me, you
will confer an obligation on a lover of all good men;

And your affectionate servant, J. BICHENO.

The following BOOKS (lately published) are for Sale at the Providence
Book-Store, opposite the Market.
MEDICAL STETCHES: By John Moore, M. D. Author of Travels through France,
Italy, etc. Price 1 Dollar, 25 Cents.

The LOOKING-GLASS for the MIND; or intellectual Mirror; being an elegant
Collection of the most delightful Stories and interesting Tale^, for the Use of
Children. Price 75 Cents.

AN APOLOGY FOR CHRISTIANITY. In a Series of Letters, addressed to Edward
Gibbon, Esquire Author of the History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire.
By R. Watson, D. D. F. R. S. Bishop of Landaff. Price 75 Cents.

PRACTICAL DISCOURSES ON REGENERATION: In Ten Sermons, preached at Northampton,
by the eminently learned and pious Philip Doddridge, D. D. Price 75 Cents.

The SIGNS of the TIMES; or the Overthrow of the Papal Tyranny in France, the
Prelude of Destruction to Popery and Despotism; but of Peace to Mankind. By J.
Bicheno. Price 37 Cents.

Now in the Press, and speedily will be published, The ELEMENTS of MORALITY;
for the Use of Children. This Work, to be admired, needs only to be read.

At the same Place are constantly kept for Sale, Bibles of all Sizes,
Testaments, Prayer-Books, Psalm-Books, Latin, Greek and English Classical and
School Books; with a general Assortment of Books in the various Branches of
Science.


