ART OF COURTING, DISPLAYED IN EIGHT DIFFERENT SCENES; THE PRINCIPAL OF WHICH
ARE TAKEN FROM ACTUAL LIFE, AND PUBLISHED FOR THE AMUSEMENT OF THE AMERICAN
YOUTH.

Quid quisque vitet, numquam homini satis,
Cautum est in horas --
Hor. Od. xiii. l. 2, v. 13. What each should fly, is seldom known;
We unprovided, are undone.
CREECH. Published according to Act of CONGRESS.

NEWBURYPORT: PRINTED BY WILLIAM BARRETT. WEST CORNER OF MARKET-SQUARE.

1795.

DEDICATION. To the American Youth.
THE Rose of Sharon, and the Lilly of the valley, never so irresistibly charmed
the eye of the beholder, as that part of the rising generation^ whose minds are
expanded with knowledge -- whose hearts are glowing with love, and whose lives
are regulated by the rules of politeness, prudence and virtue. To persons of
sensibility, the natural creation can afford no sight more delightful and
enchanting. -- Of course it must be a circumstance very important and
interesting to all the friends of the rising generation, as well as to the
youth themselves -- to contribute all that lies in one's power, to promote
their rising glory.

Dear Youth,

THIS little book is dedicated to you, not because the author thought it more
re^lete with instruction than many others, with which you are acquainted -- but
because it is upon a subject not frequently handled by writers of any age. Be
so kind as to read it with candor, and it may contribute to advance your
charms, pleasures and usefulness in life.

That you may far exceed all the generations which have gone before you, in
beauty, wisdom, felicity and glory, is the humble prayer, not only of the
benevolent in general -- but in particular of

Your friend and humble servant, THE AUTHOR.

The PREFACE.
NOTWITHSTANDING the subject of the following pages is of acknowledged
importance to rising generations -- I do not remember to have seen it in any
publication, ancient or modern, cultivated with that force, perspic^ity and
familiarity which it demands.

The short Discourse, with which this little volume begins, aims at nothing
more, than to impress the minds of young people with a lively sense of the love
and favor of heaven in granting to the human race, the Institution of
Marriage, which is so admirably calculated to promote their improvement,
pleasure and happiness.

The principal scenes of courtship, here displayed, are taken from actual life;
and ^onsequently must be more interesting to the reader, than if they were
merely fictitious Several of the parties are now alive, and the original
letters in the hands of the writer.

The language is not so polished, as on a subject of this kind, it might have
been, had there been no regard paid to actual facts. Notwithstanding, it is
presumed our youth may read these several scenes of Courtship with a degree of
pleasure and profit.

The novelty of such a publication as this, and the important hints
interspersed through the whole, may prove both amusing and profitable.

Nothing of a temporal nature, can be more desirable to parents, than to see
their offspring forming judicious connections in life; and no connection can be
estimated of more importance than that of marriage.

That the following sheets may be serviceable to the youth of America, is
devoutly wished by

Their Friend and most humble servant, THE AUTHOR.

CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. OF the Institution and Nature of Marriage, together with sundry
prudential maxims, not unworthy to be treasured up in the minds of Youth. Page.
13. CHAP. II. OF the Courtship of Strephon and Eliza; together with Lady G --
's amor with Strephon -- displayed in twenty-nine letters. Page. 22. CHAP.
III. OF the Courtship of Emilius and Oliva; displayed in twenty-seven letters:
to which is added an account of Oliva's death; in several letters between
Emilius and Calybs, Oliva's father. Page. 74. CHAP. IV. OF the Courtship of
Bragadotius and Numshuldia; displayed in nine letters -- not for example, but
for warning. Page. 129. CHAP. V. OF the Courtship of Paramond and Matilda --
the former an old bachelor, and the latter an old maid; displayed in eight
letters. Page. 143. CHAP. VI. OF the Courtship of Polymond and Sylvia -- the
former a widower, and the latter a widow; displayed in seven letters. Page.
154. CHAP. VII. OF the Courtship of Fairshute and Shute^air -- the former a
gentleman of seventy-five, and the latter a young lady of twenty-five;
displayed in seven letters. Page. 168. CHAP. VIII. OF the Courtship of Damon
and Harriot. Page. 177.
THE ART OF COURTING.
CHAP. I. Of the Institution and nature of Marriage; together with sundry
prudential Maxims, not unworthy to be treasured up in the mind of Youth.
HEBREWS xiii.4. MARRIAGE IS HONORABLE IN ALL, AND THE BED UNDEFILED: BUT
WHOREMONGERS AND ADULTERERS GOD WILL JUDGE.


THE natural propensity of the human species to multiply and replenish the
earth, has always been too great to go unregulated by some wise and wholesome
institution from heaven. Therefore, for the great end of rendering mankind more
happy, than they otherwise could have been, the God of love has favored us
with the institution of Marriage.

In discoursing upon the words of the text thus introduced, we will

I. Illustrate the ^^^a, that marriage is honorable in all.

II. Take notice, that the propagation of our species without marriage, must be
whoredom and adultery, which will be condemned by a righteous God, the Judge of
all the earth -- and then,

III. Draw a few inferences from the whole.

1. Notwithstanding the example set us by the Clergy of the Church of Rome* and
many others of the deistical tribe among civilians -- notwithstanding the
sentiments of Lord Bolingbroke, that poligamy is a dictate of nature --
notwithstanding the sentiments and examples of these and many others, who have
foolishly ridiculed revealed institutions -- we say, that our God has told us,
that Marriage is honorable in all; this will appear* if we consider that
marriage is an institution of heaven, and among the children of men, is a civil
contract, by which, for life, one man and one woman are joined together as
husband and wife. The Savior of the world has told us -- That he who made us
at the beginning, made us male and female, and says, for this cause, a man
shall leave father and mother, and shall cle^ve to his wife, and they ^wain
shall be one flesh. Hence one great end in the formation of man, was that they
might multiply and replenish the earth.

The union of one man and one woman as husband and wife, therefore, must be
honorable in the sight of heaven, consequently, must be honorable in the
sight of all those who have any respect to those institutions which God has
made for the good of mankind.

2. Marriage must be honorable, because this is the only way of propagating
our species, which is truly virtuous. Nothing which is virtuous can be
dishonorable in the sight of God, or even in the sight of men whose judgments
are regulated by a love of propriety and truth.

3. Marriage must be honorable, because it is profitable. Man and woman are
mutually profited by a judicious connection of this kind; in this way their
wants may be supplied by each other with more ease than in any other: this is a
truth applicable to mankind in general.

4. Marriage must be honorable, because it renders virtuous men and women more
happy than they can be without it. In the married state, there are ten thousand
joys and innocent pleasures, which men and women in a single state can never
experience and be virtuous. The happy, virtuous and m^^^ied pair, viewing
themselves as having one common interest, and feeling themsel^^^ animated by
one soul, will readily partic^ (...) each others labors and sorrows, and w^
(...) communicate to each plea^ (...) joys; and while they trea^ the rougher
(...) of life, hand in hand, they will beguile the ^^^esome walk with mutual
and enchanting smile^ -- with pleasures, which have never yet found names to
express them.

II. We were to take notice, that the propagation of our species, without
marriage, must be whoredom and adultery, which will be condemned by a righteous
God, the judge of all the earth.

1. Here let it be remembered, that God will censure and condemn every thing
which in its nature, is contrary to his holy law, dishonorable to himself, and
injurious to his creatures* but whoredom and adultery are unlawful,
dishonorable to God, and injurious to mankind, therefore, the perpetrators of
these shameful crimes must expect to meet their angry Judge, who will not fail
to treat them as the rude violators of his holy laws, and abusers of his
creatures.

That this vicious course of conduct is a violation of the law of God, must be
evident to every one who reads his Bible; that it is injurious to mankind, will
appear from the following considerations:

1. It never fails of introducing confusion and distress into families and
societies where it taken place. How many of the fair and unguarded sex, by
means of this disgraceful conduct, have been obliged to pine and die, in
circumstances the most wretched and ^orlor^^^ How many children have been
exposed to want, and even death in consequence thereof, who (...) might have
been well ^ided (...) ^s of infamy do all (...) ^ho su^, (...) them to the
grave!

2. Though it be a fact, that several men of fortune and influence have taken
care to provide for, and educate their illegitimate and spurious offspring, yet
it is more than probable, that ten to one of those unfortunate mortals have
suffered beyond all expression by means of the unhappy circumstances which
attended their being brought into existence. The history of a Savage, one of
the British Poets, would be enough to convince any one of this. And if the
great and the opulent neglect their natural children, and suffer them to endure
innumerable evils, for want of their assistance, what may we expect to find
among the ignorant and indigent parts of society, who, without control, give
themselves up to the unlawful gratification of their passions?

The many instances of parents being executed for the murder of their
illegitimate children, are more than ten thousand arguments against this absurd
and vicious mode of propagating our species in the world.

They who indulge themselves in whoredom or adultery, mutually abuse and defile
one another: they disgrace their families, injure society, and dishonor their
Maker; and therefore, without repentance, cannot escape the wrath of God.

IMPROVEMENT.
1. Has God, for the happiness of mankind, given as the institution of
marriage, and is marriage and the bed undefiled honorable in all? Then we
ought to feel the obligations we are under, to observe this regulation of our
passions in life. Have we not reason to fear, there are many who live under the
light of the Gospel, without any realising sense of the goodness of God, in
this happy institution -- that feel themselves under no obligation to observe
the will of heaven respecting this matter? This is, and ought to be for a
lamentation among christian people.

2. From what has been said, we may learn, what an odious figure those make in
the sight of God, and in the sight of all the virtuous part of mankind, who
indulge themselves in propagating their species by acts of whoredom and
adultery: such characters will not bear an examination; the pleasures which
they take in these vicious ways are attended with stings of conscience, with
disgrace and infamy to themselves and their wretched posterity in this life,
and with punishment in the life which is to come, if unrepented of.

3. How thankful ought we to be for the institution of marriage, which is so
wonderfully calculated to promote the happiness of mankind. By entering into
the married state, the natural propensities of male and female toward each
other, may be indulged in perfect consistency, with the most elevated and pious
feelings of an holy and humble heart: for there is nothing more criminal in
that natural inclination which the sex have for the enjoyment of each other,
than there is in hunger or thirst, with which the God of nature has universally
endowed the human species. As we are rational creatures, we are then criminal
when we indulge these propensities, or natural appetites in an unlawful way and
manner, which constitutes whoredom, adultery, gluttony and drunkenness.

4. Is marriage of so much importance as to promote the honor and happiness of
mankind? then we may learn the propriety of laying down rules or directions for
the choice of suitable companions in life, that we may virtuously propagate our
species in the world.

Therefore, we shall now lay down several gen^^^^ rules or prudential Maxims,
worthy to be treasured up in the memories of those young people, who would
obtain suitable companions in life; after which we shall give several instan^es
of Courtships, not unworthy of the imitation of the American Youth.

MAXIM 1. -- Never undertake to woo a companion previous to your arriving to an
age fit for marriage: for not observing this precaution, many a sprightly youth
has been so entangled with premature connections, as have been very grievous
through life.

MAXIM 2. -- No person ought to engage in the delightful business of courting,
while his circumstances in life afford no rational prospect of supporting a
small family, and of his pretty soon entering into a state of wedlock: for not
observing these precautions, many evils have attended the married state, and
injured the parties all their days.

MAXIM 3. -- Youth who are under age, ought to form no connection for the
purpose of keeping company, without the approbation of their parents or
guardians.

The not observing this maxim, has plunged many a promising youth into great
difficulties. However, in all cases in which this is impracticable, by means of
the want of parents and guardians, youth are justified in proceeding without it.

MAXIM 4. -- Let none propose marriage, long before any real prospect of
entering into that nearest and dearest of all connections. The doing of this,
has proved a s^are to the undoing of many a lovely youth: the pro^^se of
marriage has untied the bands of virtue, and thrown many innocent creatures off
their guard, to the^^ entire ruin.

MAXIM 5 -- It is not desirable for persons o^ an unsuitable age to m^^^n with
^n other* However, a few years more in the age of the male than the age of the
female, has been found by experience not inconvenient, owing probably, to
women's failing in their natural strength and vigor sooner than men. But when
the age of the parties are so disproportionate, as to find the one party in the
bloom and vigor of life, and the other undergoing all the infirmities of old
age, much of the happiness of the married state is interrupted, if not wholly
prevented.

MAXIM 6. -- The parties who would wish to match with each other, ought to be
as nearly of a level, as to reputation, and family, as possible; otherwise,
scenes of contention may arise, which in time may ma^r the delicious sweets of
matrimony, and render the conjugal life burdensome.

MAXIM 7. -- It is undesirable, if not unlawful, for persons of piety, to match
with open and avowed infidels. It is likewise frequently inconvenient for
persons of one denomination, to match with persons of another, especially
those, who are of such denominations as admit of no communion with each other.
The evil effects of such heterogeneous connections, are too many here to be
enumerated.

MAXIM 8. -- It is preposterous for any to marry only for the sake of money;
for riches may take unto themselves wings and fly away: and when this comes to
pass, it will be ten to one if all the sweets of matrimony do not follow, and
innumerable evils rise in their room. Instances of this kind have not been
unfrequent in every part of the world.

MAXIM 9. -- Other things being equal, sentiment intermingled with unfeigned
affection, ought to be the great basis on which a connection so honorable and
pleasant as that of matrimony should be founded. They who suffer their fancy to
take the lead of their judgment in the choice of companions, will be in great
danger of being deceived, and finally rendered unhappy in the conjugal state.

MAXIM 10. -- In the choice of companions, the parties should as thorougly as
possible, investigate each others natural tempers. Some are of a temper so
rough and boisterous, or so sullen and unforgiving, that a person of a tender
heart, calm disposition, and delicate constitution, could no more be happy with
them in the bands of matrimony, than a lamb in the company of a tiger, or a
dove in the presence of a hawk. Many a poor wretch having never seen the
intended companion, but in hours of the greatest pleasantry, has been decoyed
into a match as unsuitable as can well be expressed. It is acknowledged, that
in many instances, the natural tempers of young people lie much out of sight,
and consequently cannot be known without much attention: this ought not to
discourage, but engage all to obtain this knowledge.

CHAP. II. Of the Courtship of STREPHON and ELIZA; together with Lady G -- 's
Amor with Strephon.
WE shall now give you an history of a courtship not unworthy of your
imitation. It is that which took place between Strephon and Eliza, American
you^h.

Strephon was a young gentleman of about twenty-five years of age; a person of
gente^l deportment; his shapes, lim^^^ and features were well proportioned;
comely, though not very handsome; of good parentage, but of a moderate
interest; of a most amiable moral character, and devoutly religious.

Eliza was a young lady of about eighteen years of age, whose person was in
almost every respect captivating: she was rather above the middle size for
height, strait and well proportioned throughout, her features regular and
charming, her skin admirably fair, her eyes black and expressive, her hair dark
and flowing; she was of a modest, amiable and religious character, and of a
family truly excellent.

Strephon and Eliza were of the same religion, and had natural tempers and
turns of mind, in many respects, much alike. Strephon had been much more
acquainted with the world than Eliza, for he had seen much company, for a man
of his age. Eliza, by means of her tender parents, had been led in a course of
life more retired, till the age of seventeen; of consequence, her ideas and
sentiments respecting matrimony, were such as she had gained from books, and
from the wise and chaste conversation of her dear parents, and a few select
friends of great modesty and worth.

Kind providence so ordered events, that Strephon and Eliza became acquainted
with each other, and indeed long before they had kept one another company;
they were both in love, and both ignorant of their being beloved by each other.
Their mutual feelings and conduct may be learned from the following
correspondence, together with those historic sketches which are interspersed
through the whole scene of their Courtship, which was completed in less than
two years.

LETTER I. STREPHON TO ELIZA.
Dear Eliza,
I HAVE given Miss B -- I. -- liberty to call on you for those volumes of Mr.
Addisons works which I left with you some time since. If you have read them as
much as you have an inclination, you can spare them, if not, keep them still.
In the mean time, you shall be welcome to the other volumes of this great and
elegant writer, if you will be at the trouble of calling upon my friend, and
your neighbor, the Rev. Mr. C -- r, in whose care I left them not long since.
Permit me to tell you, my dear friend, that if you treasure up an hundredth
part of the excellent sentiments and beauties of expression contained in those
masterly productions, you will have a rich reward for perusing them with the
greatest care and diligence. To spend ones precious time and youthful thoughts
principally on decorating the body and amusing the fancy, to the neglect of
that far nobler part, the mind, is a blunder too common among the fair sex.
Dear Eliza, it is with a pleasure not easily described, I behold you shuning
this fashionable vice, and seeking those things which will inevitably render
you more charming in the eyes of every man of sense, than the finest features
and best turned shapes that nature ever gave to a female, embellished with the
gayest apparel the Indies afford. Persevere in your researches after knowledge,
and you will soon get your head and heart filled --

With kinder things than can be told,
With dearer things than tried gold,
With fairer things than beauty bright,
With nobler things than lover^ write.
And every man of sense will say --

To such an one of noble mind,
I will of choice for once be joined:
For with the neat, the wise, and good,
I may expect to serve the Lord.
I am, dear Eliza, Your real friend, STREPHON.

LETTER II. ELIZA TO STREPHON.
Sir,
I SHOULD wound the tenderest and most grateful feelings of my heart, were I to
pass unanswered your friendly letter; and yet it is with a trembling hand I
undertake to write. For you cannot be insensible, Strephon, that in my doing
this, I assume a station most critical and delicate. However, such is the
opinion I have formed of your honor and generosity, that I have presumed you
will improve nothing which comes from me to my disadvantage. Perhaps I have
ventured with unjustifiable confidence, too far upon the principles of
friendship which have so long subsisted between you and your family* let this
be as it may, I must tell you with all the sincerity I am mistress of, that I
thank you for the books with which you were pleased to favor me, and likewise
for the agreeable things you have said concerning the right understanding of
them. I wish I may be so happy as to get my head and heart filled with those
excellent things which surpass the glory of all those enjoyments the heedless
world are panting for. I can assure you. Strephon, there is nothing I more
earnestly desire, than to cultivate my mind, and regulate my affections -- for,

Should youthful splendour lighten in my eyes,
Clear as the s^iling glory of the skies;
Sprinkled with radiant gold, a purple hue,
My wings display, my robe celestial blue*
More black than jet my curling tresses flow,
My dimpled cheeks with rosy beauty glow, --
Yet, without an improved mind and pious heart, I am a wretch undone.

I am, Sir, your unfeigned friend and most humble servant* ELIZA.
N. B. An answer would be agreeable.



LETTER III. STREPHON TO ELIZA.
Dear Eliza,
I AM exceedingly pleased with your modest and delicate answer to my last, and
will now assure you that the confidence which you have placed in my friendship
shall never be abused. I know you stand in a delicate situation; however, let
neither hand nor heart tremble when you write to Strephon, for his friendship
is unfeigned, and his honor is pledged for your security. I am charmed with
that ardour which glows in your heart for the improvem^nt of your mind, and the
regulation of your affections. Your kind parents will indulge you with every
suitable mean to obtain these great objects of your earnest pursuit. Wishing
you all that success your heart can desire, I beg leave to subscribe myself

Your real friend and most humble servant, STREPHON

LETTER IV. STREPHON TO ELIZA.
Dear Eliza,
IF I mistake not, I have heard you observe, that you were peculiarly fond of
history. It has just come into my head to give you a sketch of my life from
Friday last to the present time. I am sorry my subject is of so melancholy a
nature, however, I will comfort myself that perhaps the next time I write to
you, I may have a subject more lively and entertaining. We should not know how
to prize the innumerable favors of this life, were we to experience no evils
while in the world.

Between ten and eleven o'clock on Friday last, in a very weak and languid
situation of body (for you must know I have been sick since you went from home)
I took my leave of your honored parents and dear family with an heart
penetrated with undissembled gratitude, for the many favors they bestowed on
me while at H -- r. It would have been a consideration more pleasing than I am
able to express, to have received a parting smile and charming look from my
dearest friend, my lovely Eliza, but these were impracticable: The kindest
hearts and dearest friends are sometimes necessitated to bleed alone. You were
from home and knew nothing of my sickness or emotions of heart.

Upon the road from your fathers to the Rev. Mr. H -- ^ my thoughts were
principally employed on the various affections and mercies, pains and
pleasures, enjoyments and disappointments of which I had been the subject
during my Hanoverian visit. I could not help thinking that this visit was a
picture of human life in miniature, nor forbear adoring the great Jehovah for
the many useful lessons I had been taught during it. O Eliza, mankind may say
what they please, but I am persuaded, that it is as impossible for us to be
truly happy without real virtue, as it is for us to be rich without the
possession of any thing whatever. When I arrived at my old friend's, Mr. H --
s, I found his son, the scholar, from Philadelphia, and daughter from New York,
were both at home; the whole family were apparently pleased to see me so far
recovered from that dreadful state of illness under which I had been laboring.
When people appear happy in our company, we are naturally led to think they are
our real friends: but this is not unfrequently ^ delusion. In such cases we
sometimes find ourselves greatly deceived by the enchanting airs of love and
friendship. O Eliza! Hypocrisy is one of the greatest blots that ever stained
the dignity of man: may kind heaven ever keep you and I at the greatest remove
from it.

I think Mrs. T -- just as she was before she was married, only older -- that
Miss H -- pants for the joys of matrimony -- and that Miss P -- will enter into
the connubial state within ten days. At two in the afternoon I took my leave of
the old gentleman and his lady, together with my merry friends, the young
gentlemen and ladies, and proceeded on my way homeward a^ far as your brother B
-- l's, where I spent my time with more pleasure than is common on su^^ visits.
It seems to me that your sister B^ is ^ woman of uncommon accomplishments; she
is very agreeable in her conversation, and well worthy of the man who has
chosen her for his companion in life: I wish all her Papa's daughters may make
women as excellent as she is.

My next stage was at Mr. P -- 's, where I always call with peculiar pleasure.
After some agreeable chat, I enquired for your intimate friend Miss --, who was
from home. I told my friends I had been lately informed by one who pre^ends to
know almost every thing, that I was married to her, which raised an agreeable
smile on every countenance in the room. Miss P --, however, not being at home,
I was necessarily deprived of a sight of my bosom companion.

My next stage was at the Rev. Mr. L -- s, where I was received just at dusk,
with all that friendship which gladdens the heart of a weary traveller. Having
supped, I walked out several rods from the house, where, in a sudden and
surprising manner, I was seized with a fit of languor so great, that for some
time* I despaired of ever reaching the house again; however, by some means or
other, I know not by what, I got into the house, where my good friends used
every mean in their power to keep life in me, for several hours on the stretch.
Miss B. your great intimate and admirer, with her brother, watched with me
through the night; her kindness brought my friend Eliza into full view, whose
tenderness to (...) when formerly sick at her father's, can never be erased
from my mind, while sensibility and r^^^^ction are undestroyed. Saturday, in a
melancholy and dejected frame of mind, I got home, where I remained in this
unhappy situation, till two in the afternoon of the next day, when I gained in
some good degree, my natural flow of spirits, and experienced that pleasure and
freedom of thought in contemplating the goodness and mercy of God our Savior,
which no words can fully express. O Eliza, it is in him we live, move, and have
our being; and nothing ought to divert our attention from the great duty of
ascribing to him glory and honor for ever and ever.

Thus I have given you an imperfect sketch of the most remarkable events which
have happened to me since I left your Papa's: and though they may appear
trifling to an indifferent person, they may administer some satisfaction to a
friend. I conclude this long letter with requesting an history of your life
since we had the happiness to see each other.

I am, dear Eliza, Your real friend, STREPHON.

LETTER V. ELIZA TO STREPHON.
Sir,
THAT assurance you were pleased to give me in your last, that the confidence I
have placed in your friendship shall never be abused, is to me as balm poured
into a wounded (...). Believe me, the apprehension and groundless fears I have
endured since I wrote you that letter, have caused me much uneasiness. I have
asked myself a thousand times, what propriety there could be in my writing to a
gentleman of your character and situation in life: my only apology has been,
that you were too much of a gentleman as well as friend to our family, to
expose a young creature, who from friendship, had as it were, thrown herself
within your power. And I am happy beyond expression to find that my judgment
was not erroneous. Your last has put all my uneasy feelings to rest; I feel my
character safe in your generous hands. Be assured, my much esteemed friend (for
in this style you will now permit me to address you) I most sincerely thank you
for those historical anecdotes concerning yourself, with which you have
favored me. I do unfeignedly sympathize with you under all your sorrows, as
well as rejoice with you in the participation of all those good things the God
of love has bestowed on you. The recovery of your health, and that flow of
natural spirits so common to you, together with that calmness and tranquillity
of mind in devotional exercises, are circumstances of too much value, to pass
unnoticed by a friend. I would now comply with your request, by giving you
several sketches of my life since we saw each other, could I think them of such
a nature as to administer any real pleasure or amusement to you: but as this is
probably not the case, you will pardon my silence, and believe me

Your real friend and humble servant, ELI^^.

A FEW weeks after Strephon and Eliza had exchanged the foregoing letters, in
the full bloom of youth, health, vigor and innocence, they had the pleasure of
an interview at Eliza^s Father's, where undissembled friendship, piety and joy,
generally triumph in every heart, and glow in every countenance.

At the first interview this couple ever had with each other, which was several
years before this time, they were mutually struck with each other; but such
were their circumstances that neither of them entertained the least thought of
ever forming any other connection, but that of friendship -- However, love,
innocent love, glowed in their hearts, pure as the breath of heaven.

On a summer's eve, being seated under a green arbor, the thought for the
first time sprang into Strephon's mind, Why will not Eliza, the young, the
charming Eliza, make thee happy, O Strephon, in the sweet bondage of honorable
wedlock? As soon as the idea had gained a^mit^ance in Strephon's growing
breast, he requested Eliza to spend a few hours with him that evening, in a
manner they heretofore had not d^ne. A mixture of feelings now riotted in the
heart of Eliza; and Strephon read in her lovely countenance the interest he had
in her affections. Eliza could not deny the request of Strephon The evening
therefore was spent ^n a manner too tender for description.

Before this happy c^^ple pa^^ed, Strephon proposed a sec^nd visit of this
innocent and affectionate kind: but Eliza, with a dignity that became an angel,
ref^sed to comply with his request on any con^ short of his g^ang the
approbation of her h^ (...) and dear Parents. The heart of Strephon was (...)
too much under the power of Eliza's charms, long to hesitate on a matter of
such importance to his happiness. And though the father of Eliza was a grave
and reverend gentleman, whose presence never failed to awe the spirits of the
young and sprightly, yet love gained the ascendency over the natural modesty of
Strephon, who embraced the first opportunity to open the important and delicate
subject to Eliza's parent^s; and had the good fortune to obtain their full
approbation to pay his attention to their daughter as a courtier. He likewise
received from the old gentleman several excellent remarks on the nature of
young people's keeping company with each other.

After which, Strephon made h^s returns to Eliza, with pleasure too great for
language to express. And now the Courtship of Strephon and Eliza began to take
place in form; their interviews were regularly once a week, for several months;
after which the business of Strephon obliged this happy pair to part for some
time. During their absence the following letters passed between them.

LETTER VI. STREPHON TO ELIZA.
Dear Eliza,
I HAVE snatched a few moments from the public labors of my delightful and
important profession, to write to you.

Permit me to tell you (what I have never disclosed to any mortal) that from
the first moment I saw you, I have been charmed with your person. And
notwithstanding all this, to you only it must be confessed, that my feelings
toward you are quite different from what they were previous to that solemn
interview I had with your dear parents. Unfeigned esteem and friendship are
things truly agreeable: but love, chaste love, far exceeds them. By some means
or other, I now begin to love my dear Eliza, whom heretofore I admired and
treated as a friend only. I am confident that virtuous affections never yet
injured humanity, and therefore recommend them to you as worthy of your
attention.

Yours, etc. STREPHON.

LETTER VII. ELIZA TO STREPHON.
Sir,
THE obligation I laid myself under when we parted, to answer your letters, has
caused me much anxiety, and not a little mortification; for I did not duly
consider my inability to answer, with propriety, a gentleman's letters filled
with such delicate and tender things as are contained in your last: However, I
am bound, and therefore shall attempt to fulfill my engagement, with this
proviso only, that you will indulge me with time sufficient to go through with
the business.

Having confidence in your friendship, I will now frankly acknowledge, that it
is my opinion, that my sex are always pleased with the idea of appearing to
advantage in the view of yours: that this is my case with respect to you, is
news to me, and what I am half afraid, will finally turn out to be nothing but
flattery. It is true, that to be loved is one step above being admired, and
what never fails to excite tender emotions in a generous soul. I cheerfully
thank you for that esteem and friendship you have professed for my person. And
when I am properly convinced that I am the object of your affections, it will
be time enough for me to acknowledge it.

Are not the following lines beautiful?

"What may for strength with steel compare?
O love has fetters stronger far:
By bolts of steel are limbs confined;
But cruel love enchains the mind."
I am, Sir, Your real friend, and humble servant, ELIZA.

LETTER VIII. STREPHON TO ELIZA.
Dear Eliza,
IT is with peculiar pleasure I acknowldge ^he receipt of your modest and
judicious letter upon the most delicate subject -- for what can be a subject
more delicate for the pen of a female, than love? Believe me -- nothing in this
life ever gave me more pleasure, than that agreeable and lovely attitude in
which you have presented yourself in this short epistle. You say, it is in
compliance with the obligation under which you laid yourself at our parting
with each other, that you have undertaken to answer my letters -- and ask for
time to complete the business: This is perfectly rational, and shall readily be
granted. Such a temper must be delightful to one who wishes to see the object
of his affections adorned with every amiable and lovely qualification. I am not
at all surprised at your m^dest and guarded feelings, respecting an engagement
of this kind. I thank you for acknowledging your approbation of my esteem and
friendship; and can easily pass over your fears least my professed love should
turn out to be nothing but flattery, seeing th^^ is the fate of many
professions of this kind; and will wait for your acknowledgment of my love,
till I shall be able to convince you that it is a reality. Be assured, the
modesty and good sense you have displayed in your last, has charmed me more
than all your beauty, though this is great in my view.

"Why will ELIZA, when I gaze,
My ravished eyes reprove,
And hide from them the only face,
They can behold with love?
To shun her eye, and ease my care,
I seek a nymph more kind;
And while I love from fair to fair,
Still gentle usage ^^nd.
But Oh! how faint is every joy,
Where Nature has no part;
New beauties may my eyes employ,
But you engage my heart.
So restless exiles doomed to roam,
Meet pity every where;
Yet languish for their native home,
Though death attends them there."
With sentiments of esteem and unfeigned love, I am, dear Eliza, forever thine,
STREPHON.

LETTER IX. STREPHON TO ELIZA.
My lovely Eliza,
IT is now some time since I have been detained here, by reason of those heavy
rains which the Author of Nature has been pleased to send us; and indeed I have
no expectation of getting out of town till Monday next -- when, if the weather
and my health (which is but poor) will permit, I shall set out on my journey
for the delightful seat of your honored and dear Papa. Mr. Eliot, the
candidate, is here, recovering fast from a tedious fit of sickness; he is as
droll and as crazy as ever, and at times seems so fretish there is no living
with him. Oh* Eliza, this world is full of sin and sorrow -- Our pains are
numerous, and pleasures few, comparatively speaking -- Why then should we be so
fond of it? Sure I am, aside from religion, there are but few things worth
living for; among these we may rank an agreeable bosom companion -- the
sweetest enjoyment in time. -- In hopes of such a favor, I endure the
hardships of life, and promise myself what, perhaps, I never shall realize -- I
mean great happiness in the married state: I hope I shall not be disappointed:
However, it becomes us to be upon our watch against earthly objects taking up
our affections in such a manner, as to leave no room in our minds for things
spiritual and divine. My sentiments of the volums your kinswoman desired me to
send you, shall be given you in another letter, by the post on Thursday next,
provided existing circumstances will admit.

I am, dear Eliza, Your unfeigned friend and true lover, STREPHON.

LETTER X. STREPHON TO ELIZA.
My ever dear and lovely Eliza,
IT is with more pleasure than I can express, that I now enjoy an opportunity
of complying with your request respecting those elegant authors your fair
kinswoman mentioned to me sometime since. Ro^^sseau, Fordyce, and D^ Gregory,
have all written on subjects they have deemed of great importance to the fair
sex* And it must be acknowledged, that they have said many things worthy to be
treasured up in a female mind: When at the same time, there are many other
things said by these ingenious and elegant writers, which I am afraid will do
young ladies more harm than good: The general strain, in which these gentlemen
write, favors too much of female flattery; which cannot fail of giving disgust
to a lady of sensibility, and at the same time of ensnaring those of less
penetration. To excite thoughts in the minds of young girls, that nothing ought
to be more regarded by them than to render themselves the desirable subjects of
men's pleasures during a leisure hour, is to abuse the dignity of the female
mind: Will not this lead to a shameful neglect of the mind and religion, to
make way for the purpose of decorating the body? If it be true, that the
highest ambition a woman ought to have, is to please man (which seems to be the
great theme of these writers) is it not true, they ought to be excused from
knowledge and religion? -- which is absurd, and what every lady of sense and
piety must despise from the bottom of her heart. However, I am satisfied with
your reading them, and think an ingenious mind man be greatly entertained with
many things contained in them, especially those of the lower class of things
worthy of a lady's attention. Therefore I send you the writings on which I have
been remarking, wishing you may make that use of them which reason dictates.

I am, dear Eliza, your friend and lover, STREPHON.

LETTER XI. STREPHON TO ELIZA.
My very dear Eliza,
AGREEABLE to your desire and my promise, I embrace this opportunity of writing
to you, by your friend Mr. D --, who was so obliging as to spend several hours
with me the day past. Forgive my not writing by the post last week; it was
entirely owing to unavoidable and unforeseen events, and not to any want of
respect in me -- for I do assure you, that love which glows in my heart for
your person, forbids my neglecting any suitable opportunity of fulfiling my
engagements to you. This world is all hurry, bustle, noise and nonsense, and
they who are in it must be exposed to them: There are a few things, however,
among the many disagreeable ones, which are truly desirable; a humble heart and
a bosom companion, are things truly excellent -- these I am in great need of,
but I consider them as peculiar gifts of heaven, and to heaven I must look for
them. Perhaps you may be in the same condition with myself; if so, let us lay
our accounts together, and see if we cannot so regulate matters as to obtain
them. It is my intention to be at your papa's soon. Please to make my
compliments to your worthy and dear sister, and to all those facetious cousins
who live at the next door. I should be happy to receive a line from you, before
circumstances will admit of my accomplishing that long and tedious journey
which I am so eagerly contemplating. Writing will not injure, but improve your
mind and perhaps your heart. -- It frequently serves to give vent to the
tenderest emotions of the soul, and of course to soothe the anxious and
melancholy heart. I would not be without this mean of happiness for both of the
Indies. Wishing you every blessing the God of love can bestow upon a creature,
I beg leave to subscribe myself

Your real friend, and unfeigned lover, STREPHON.

LETTER XII. ELIZA TO STREPHON.
Sir,
I HAVE, unexpectedly, an opportunity of conveying a line to you. I acknowledge
the receipt of four letters, which I have not answered: They are all calculated
to administer great pleasure to your unworthy friend, and as such demand my
warmest gratitude, as well as speedy answer. I thank you for Rousseau, Fordyce
and Gregory; they are authors I have heard much of, but never saw before. My
papa's remarks on them correspond with yours. My mama thinks them compositions
in which nature is too much neglected, and art idolized. My kinswomen, (whom
you know are merry creatures) think them just right; for, according to the
sentiments of these gentlemen, we girls, say they, should be troubled with
little else than dress. visits, courtisies and dances; with them it is a matter
of no consequence whether women have sense or not, provided they are immersed
in a round of amusements and trifling pleasures. It gives me unspeakable
pleasure to hear that you are once more in possession of a considerable degree
of health; and more still, to hear that it is probable I may see you soon --
for, without flattery, I must confess your welfare lies near my heart. With
respect to the two things you mention as desirable and yet wanting, I think
they must be of great importance in the view of every considerate person, and
wish you may be speedily blessed with them: With respect to myself, my
^^tuation is not unlike yours, as you very well know; and whether it will ever
be otherwise is uncertain. I wish you would be so kind as to inform me what
qualifications you are looking for in the person with whom you would wish to
match. The whole circle of my female intimates say, Eliza, tell Strephon we
want his company here.

Adieu, ELIZA.

LETTER XIII. STREPHON TO ELIZA.
My charming Eliza,
(...) which I wish to find in the person with whom I may hereafter match.

I wish her to be the favorite child of respectable parents, educated in the
Christian religion. With respect to her person, I should wish she might be
above the common size of women, well-proportioned in body and limbs; her skin
white and ruddy; her eyes black and sparkling; her hair brown and flowing, and
her features well proportioned one with the other: But what I should prize
above all the rest, is a dignified mind, full of activity, generosity and
meekness -- unless it be some peculiar qualifications of heart, such as
benevolence and patience, with a soul turned for love: For if ever I match with
any one in this life, I mean to love her till death. Such then is the lovely
creature I wish for my bosom companion; and permit me say, such, in my opinion,
is my dearest Eliza.

Yours affectionately, STREPHON.

LETTER XIV. ELIZA TO STREPHON.
Sir,
I AM much obliged to you for the striking portrait you have given of the lady
with whom you wish to spend your life as a bosom companion; but expect you will
die an old bachelor* if you wait till you find one who answers your description
in every particular. I cannot, however, forbear mentioning my surprise, that a
gentleman of your taste and judgment should apply this description to me; the
reason is, because I have no such ideas of myself: Notwithstanding, could I
think you sincere, I should be exceedingly happy, though you were actually
deluded. What I most fervently wish is, that you may meet with one every way to
your mind.

Your real friend, ELIZA.

LETTER XV. STREPHON TO ELIZA.
Dearest of Girls,
I THANK you for your sensible and modest answer to my last. I would by no
means flatter you by the portrait of the charming creature I wish for my
companion in life. It is not impossible but I may be mistaken in some things
respecting you; however, I flatter myself it is not very probable that this is
really the case; for such has been my acquaintance with you several years
before I presumed to treat you as a lover, that I have been under peculiar
advantage in forming an accurate judgment of your mental and moral
qualifications. That you should perceive the power of your own charm^ as
sensibly as I do, is neither probable nor desirable; for this would cast a
shade on that amiable character which you now exhibit before the eyes of the
penetrating and judicious -- it might betray you into some imprudent conduct,
which to you is now a stranger. I wish to express my own views and feelings in
a manner that cannot wound yours. For the present I will be content with the
following lines as descriptive of your general character.

"Favors to none -- to all she smiles extends:
"Often she rejects; but never once offends."
Dearest Eliza adieu, STREPHON.

AFTER Strephon and Eliza had exchanged the foregoing letters, they were
favored, for several months together, with frequent and endearing interviews
with each other: And upon every interview, their affections for one another
increased with the greatest rapidity: However, such were the circumstances of
Strephon, that he was obliged to take leave of the idol of his heart, his dear
Eliza, for several months. This was truly mortifying, not only to Strephon, but
to Eliza, who now began to feel her happiness connected with the company of her
Strephon. At their parting, they mutually agreed to bear each other upon their
hearts, before the throne of grace, morning and evening, till kind providence
should bring them together again. The sight of a couple's parting, who were so
happy in each other's company, must have been truly affecting. We will leave
them to their own reflections for a few weeks, and then attend to the
epistolary correspondence which followed.

LETTER XVI. STREPHON TO ELIZA.
Kind and affectionate Eliza,
TWO days since I arrived at this place. -- There was nothing on my journey
worthy of your attention. The politeness and generosity of this great and
populous town to me, demand my warmest gratitude: I could not wish to be among
a people more kind, hospitable and devout. My situation here is such, that I am
frequently visited by the wise and pious, whom you know are the most desirable
company. I had like to have said, I want nothing more to make me happy (I mean
of this world) than the company of my dear Eliza. Please to make my compliments
to your dear parents; and forget not to mention me to your sister, and your
merry cousins, whom you know feel interested in my welfare. May the blessings
of heaven rest upon thee, thou dearest friend and lover.

STREPHON.

LETTER XVII. STREPHON TO ELIZA.
My dearest friend,
IT is with grateful emotions of heart, that I realize such a degree of health
as will admit of my writing a few lines to one whom I love more than words can
express. You would have heard from me before now, had I enjoyed health
sufficient for the purpose of writing. Three times successively have I been
taken down within these two months, with the intermitting fever; and am now
just recovering from the last and most severe turn of all. When I shall be able
to return to year papa's, where, in days past, I have received so much
instruction, pleasure and satisfaction, is quite uncertain: However, if
circumstances do not forbid, I mean to see the old mansion house seven or eight
weeks from the present time. Did I enjoy the company of my dear Eliza here, I
should be less anxious for a sight of that ancient dome. During my sickness, I
have been favored with all that attention one could wish. The soothing accents
of friendship, in times of distress, are like cordials to a fainting man, and
demand our sincerest gratitude. I begin to learn (for sickness has taught me)
to set my heart on nothing under the sun, my Eliza excepted -- whom I am afraid
has too large a share of my affections: But we will drop this, and attend to
the happy situation of the good man -- which may be represented in the
following lines.

Though troubles dire, on every hand*
In sad confusion rise,
The soul sincere, can humbly hope
For peace beyond the skies.
Resigned, the good man waits his fate,
Or meets his savage foe;
And death, if death must be his doom,
Composed he will undergo.
The God within solves every doubt,
And gives his soul to see
That he who strikes the fatal blow
But sets the captive free.
Wishing you health, and every other blessing you are capable of enjoying, I
beg leave to subscribe myself

Your friend and true lover till death, STREPHON.

LETTER XVIII. STREPHON TO ELIZA.
Lovely Eliza,
THE good people belonging to the family, except a man servant, are all gone to
church; and though it is sabbath day, I have undertaken to write a few lines to
my dearest friend. Yesterday morning I proposed to set out for H -- on the
morrow; but to my great mortification, before eleven o'clock on that day, I was
confined with my old disorder: This is the fourth severe turn of the fever I
have experienced since we parted: When a kind providence will indulge me with
health to pursue my delightful employment, God only knows: Within these six
weeks past I have been bereaved of an affectionate mother, and five brethren
and sisters; they all died suddenly, and in close succession to each other. Oh,
Eliza, all earthly enjoyments are passing away; they are on the wing of time,
and will soon get beyond our reach. Your welfare has laid near my heart in the
midst of all my pains and sorrows. The silent watches of the night will witness
the fulfillment of my solemn engagement to bear you on my heart at the throne of
grace. May the God of love inspire our hearts with love unfeigned to himself,
who is the fountain of blessedness. -- Without this, no enjoyment of any kind
can save us from complete wretchedness and everlasting despair. Should you say
I write like a preacher instead of a lover -- I answer, I mean to do nothing on
God's holy day inconsistent with seriousness and solemnity of spirit, for the
blessing of heaven is pronounced on those who keep the sabbath holy unto the
Lord. May grace, peace and mercy be multiplied unto you.

I am yours affectionately, STREPHON.

LETTER XIX. STREPHON TO ELIZA.
Dear Eliza,
IT is with peculiar pleasure I embrace this favorable opportunity of
informing you of my recovery from sickness: O the difference between a state of
health and vigor, and a state of sickness and languor! If I thought you would
be pleased to see me, I should soon be on the wing for it; but I am afraid you
have almost forgotten your friend and true lover, presuming that otherwise you
would have written to me before now. Alas! --

Our friends, like troubles, out of sight,
Are often forgotten, day and night.
But shall I ever of thee conclude
Thy tender heart is grown so rude?
No -- Eliza, above the rest.
Has love ^nkindled in her br^ast:
A virtuous flame, half divine,
Cannot be quenched by length of time.
Notwithstanding all I have said, provided circumstances will admit, you may
expect to see me within six weeks from this time: Then, perhaps, we may be so
pleased with each other, as to desire a more intimate connection within six
months: Don't say I have told you no news -- I confess I can hardly believe it
myself.

Yours affectionately, STREPHON.

LETTER XX. ELIZA TO STREPHON.
Sir,
IT is with pleasure I acknowledge the receipt of four letters from you since
we parted. The several anecdotes respecting your person, and circumstances
contained in them, are truly interesting. My heart has repeatedly trembled at
the relation you have given of your bodily indisposition, least I should never
see you again. I sympathize with you in the loss of your kind parent and
affectionate brothers and sisters. The voice of providence is loud -- Let us be
ready for our last change. O the distinguishing goodness of God -- your
relatives are no more, and we are yet alive! I most heartily congratulate you
on your recovery from that state of weakness in which you have languished so
long. O, my friend, be thankful, and let the spared life be devoted to him from
whom all our favors constantly flow. I must, I will frankly acknowledge the
several declarations of your friendship. The following lines were penned on the
evening of that day in which I received your letter containing an account of
your late sickness. They were written for my own amusement, and are now (...)
to you for yours.

In what soft language shall my thoughts get ^r^
My dearest Strephon, when I write of thee?
Ye muses, graces, all ye gentle train
Of weeping lovers, assist my friendly strain.
But why should I implore your moving art?
It Is but to write the dictates of my heart;
For all who know the charming youth, will join
Their pious sighs and friendly tears to mi^e
For all who know his sorrows must confess
In grief for him there can be no excess.
His soul is formed to act each glorious part
Of life, unstained with vanity or art.
No thought within his generous mind has birth
Too rude for one to own to heaven or earth.
May heaven his life in usefulness prolong --
These are my ^^ghs, my prayer and my song.
My papa has great anxiety respecting your ^ealth, and frequently (though not
in the presence (...)) says, Eliza, have you heard from Strephon within these
four or five weeks past? I am obliged to say yes, or to say nothing; either of
which is trying to my feelings. Be so kind, Sir, as to write him a line or two;
it will be agreeable to him, and free me from answering questions, which are
truly trying to my nerves. Your merry friends, my cousins, rally me on the
arrival of every post, and with shrewed countenances ask, What news from the
island? And sometimes Nancy says, What news from Strephon? we had a rumor the
other day, that he was sick. A letter from you Sir, to my Papa, will in a
measure free me from these perplexing questions, and greatly oblige your
anxious friend.

I am, Sir, Your real friend, and most humble servant, ELIZA.

LETTER XXI. STREPHON TO ELIZA.
JANUARY 27, 1776. My ever charming Eliza,
YOUR favor of the 15th inst. demands, and absolutely has, my most unfeigned
gratitude: a jewel plucked from the richest diadem could not have pleased me a
thousandth part so much. By some means or other my heart from day to day grows
more and more charmed with my lo^^ Eliza. That I speak the sentiments of truth,
a^ not of flattery, you will not deny, when you have perused the enclosed
letters.

Lady G -- was the widow of my Lord G -- of about twenty four years of age, and
the only daughter and favorite child of my friend, the Rev. Dr. B --, who,
when a young man, was peculiarly intimate with your honored and dear father.

The letters are thus:

LADY G -- TO STREPHON.
January 4, 1776. Sir,
I BELIEVE you will be much surprised when you read the contents of this paper.

That I should write on a subject of this kind, is what I could not have
believed, though an angel should have declared it unto me. My throbbing heart
and trembling hand, forbids me to proceed: or rather female delicacy and
prudence seem to be in close combat with my affections -- my love triumphs -- I
must, I will tell you, that I unfeignedly love you! -- What can you think! What
can my friends think of me! Yea, what can I think of myself, that I should
write in such a strain to one, with whom I have never had any very particular
acquaintance -- to one, whose sentiments of friendship, and circumstances
respecting the fair sex, are unknown, is wonderful to myself! That I should
hazard my rep^tation, by a course of conduct, which* I have the (...)
con^iction, has not unfrequently appeared (...), if not a^tended with
disaffection, i^ a^.

Believe me, much respected Sir, since the departure of my Lord G --, I have
many a time drawn up, as I then thought, a firm resolution never to marry
again; for I had concluded that it was impossible for me ever to esteem and
love another man with that fervency of affection I have had for him: My present
feelings toward you have detected the delusion, and proved all such opinions
of the human species to be groundless: However, by some means or other, I have
been led to imagine that our dispositions are so much alike, that we should be
more happy in a m^rried than we can be in a single state. A private interview,
perhaps, may settle this matter to our mutual satisfaction. After all, I must
tell you, Sir, that did I not apprehend you to be a real friend to true virtue,
I should by no means wish to form any intimate connection with you. For what
purpose these throbbings of heart and glowings of soul toward you, are formed
in my ^reast, I cannot tell. Perhaps they are ^o try and prove my virtue: One
thing, however, is certain, they have increased from the first moment I eve^
saw you. -- They have grown strong, and triumphed over the most faithful
remonstrances and arguments I have been able to bring against them* For, when I
have seriously reflected on the disagreeable circumstances which frequently
attend second marriages, both with respect to parents and children -- when I
have meditated upon matching with one whose employment will probably call for
my removal from a situation near an aged and affectionate parent; a situation,
surrounded with numerous relatives, tried friends and entertaining
acquaintance: When I have reflected on these things, together with the
possibility of my being less happy in the married than in the single state, my
affections for you have not been at all abated. These facts lead me to observe,
that in my view, I am a kind of miracle, for I cannot understand my own heart.
I have no doubt but I could marry in a manner equal to my situation in life,
were I disposed to accept any of the offers made to me of late; but this is not
agreeable to my present feelings. It is not, therefore, barely for a companion,
but for the man whom I love, that I would change my situation. And now,
perhaps, I shall be obliged to taste the bitter cup, which I have turned out to
others -- I mean a denial of your affections. But, O Sir, think not of me as I
have foolishly thought of others in like circumstances, that it is a slight of
fancy, and not love, which so powerfully moves and agitates my soul. Sure I am,
I never had that love for any man, while in a single state, which now glows in
my wounded heart for you. But what am I doing? In days past my indignation has
been fired against those ladies, who, single, had openly expressed their
affections for any particular man; and indeed, my reason now condemns this
practice as imprudent: But love, all powerful love, triumphs over reason,
judgment and education. My heart is engaged, and I must go through with the
business. Dear Sir, be so kind as to inform me, whether you are under any
particular engagement to any of my sex? If you are, I am undone* If you are
not, I shall still hope for happiness in this life. I shall be in the greatest
anxiety till I know what reception you will please to give these lines. For
whether I succeed or not, my troubled heart will give me no rest till I know my
fate. There are sundry reasons I could mention, which have led me to indulge
the flattering idea, that a near connection with me would not be disagreeable
to you -- but I must suppress them. And now I begin to tremble, least my
freedom in writing should lessen your affections, and excite in your heart
hatred for my person. When I recollect myself, I am ready to conclude my pride
must be asleep -- to say nothing of those delicate feelings of the female of
which I once flattered myself I was amply possessed -- otherwise I could not
have ventured so far, on imprudent ground, as I have done: However, I flatter
myself, that you are (...) gentleman of too much goodness and generosity, not
to fe^^ for a person in my situation -- not to cast a mantle of love over my
weakness, folly and indiscretion. I cannot conclude this long letter, without
asking a thousand pardons for every thing you may find amiss in it, and
requesting you never to communicate this epistle to the nearest friend in life.
Please to commit this to the flames, when you have learned its contents. I have
too much respect for your character to indulge the most distant idea of your
ever injuring mine. -- Thus being irres^stibly impelled by love unfeign^^^,
with a bleeding, trembling heart, I have thrown myself within your power. O
Sir, use me as a gentleman of unbounded generosity, and lay me under
everlasting obligations of gratitude.

I am your admirer friend and lover, G --
P. S. Sir, Please to excuse the badnes^ of my writing, the inelegancy of my
composition, and every thing else in the above letter offensive to you. --
Eleven o'clock, Friday evening. Dear Sir, I know not what to do. I am in a
great dilemma whether to send you the above letter or not. If I should send it,
and it should not meet with your approbation, I shall be mortified to death. If
I should not send it, and of consequence, should not obtain your affections, I
should forever reproach myself with omitting the only probable, though
dangerous mean of obtaining the man whom I love as I do my life. Love triumphs
once more -- the letter goes. -- I trembling wait to know my fate.




STREPHON TO LADY G --.
January 10, 1776. Madam,
YOUR affectionate letter should have been answered before now, had not a
variety of circumstances rendered it impracticable. The day in which I received
it, I could get no time to read, much more to answer it. The next day was the
Sabbath. Monday and Tuesday we^e ^holly taken up with pre-engaged business --
^o that the present moment is the first which has put it into my power to
relieve your tender heart from that anxiety which I know your peculiar
circumstances must produce.

Believe me, dear Madam, I feel myself unable to express the grateful emotions
of my heart, for that favorable opinion you have been pleased to f^rm of my
person, sentiments and character. You have graced the preface to your address
with a note of admiration. That a person of your birth, education, character
and circumstances in life, should write to one in my situation on so tender and
delicate a subject as love, is indeed not unworthy of several notes of
admiration. That foolish modesty, fear and bashfulness, which prevents your sex
from disclosing the tender emotions of their hearts to gentlemen of character,
has ever appeared to me an imperfection. I confess, the tyrannical laws of
custom, however, in many cases, have put it out of their power to do this with
so much safety and honor as the rights of women demand. Aside from this, I can
see no more impropriety in a lady's communicating her thoughts on love to a
gentleman of character, than there is in a gentleman's communicating his
thoughts on the same subject to a lady of character: Therefore I beg you would
give yourself no uneasiness on the account of the innocent freedom you have
taken in writing to me on the most tender and delicate subject that ever
employed the pen of either men or women. It is evident to my mind,
notwithstanding all your notes of admiration and modest apologies, that had not
the secret sentiments of your heart been similar to mine, on this subject your
address would have never seen the light. Inclination, honor and piety
constrain me to deal generously with you, Madam: I must, therefore, let you
know, that my circumstances in life are such as forbid my marrying so soon as
perhaps would be agreeable to you. To match with a lady surrounded with so many
reputable friends and acquaintance -- a lady who all her life has lived in the
greatest affluence -- without the means of supporting her in this way of life
-- is a thought so grating to my feelings, and mortifying to my spirits, that
it cannot be harbored in my breas^ a single moment: And yet I will no^ ^elie
my own feelings. The fact is, I have no objection ^o a married life, simply
considered; but believe it the happiest situation, all things being equal, that
men or women can be in, while in this imperfect state. A^ soon, therefore, as
circumstances shall unite to render it proper, I am determined to be bound by
the sweet and delicate chains of matrimony. You will bear it in mind, that
nothing which I have said, is designed to give you the most distant intimation
of the least aversion from your person and connections; on the contrary, I feel
myself greatly honored by your unsought, your unexpected esteem and love.
Notwithstanding it is very probable you would choose to alter your situation
much sooner than it would be consistent for me to do: Moreover, I am
constrained to tell you (for I must and will be generous with you) that I have
my eye on a young lady, whose person, temper, character and circumstances are
such as invite my attention, and create in my breast a hope, that in some
future period, we may be in the enjoyment of each other: this I own is little
more than conjecture; however, as her name is concealed, what I have written
can (...) of no injury to her reputation, should it be made ever so public. As
to a private interview with you, Madam, I can assure you, it would have been
very agreeable had circumstances concurred with my inclination; but this
pleasure I must postpone to some future period. Next Monday, by the leave of
Providence, I must journey to the westward; when I shall return to this place
is uncertain. Permit me to conclude this epistle, dear Madam, with unfeignedly
wishing you every blessing you are capable of enjoying, in time and in eternity.

I am your obliged friend, and most humble servant, STREPHON.


LADY G -- TO STREPHON.
January 13, 1776. Dear Sir,
THIS day your endearing favor came fa^^ to hand, and met with the ^indest
^e^eption. Before I was informed of the occurrences which delayed your answer
to my first, I was naturally led to fear, that the person, for whom I had
expressed so much esteem and affection, was ungrateful. Your letter, Sir, has
banished all such apprehensions from my troubled breast, and ca^^ed the tumults
of my bleeding heart. My affection for you, Sir, is truly great; and had I not
been conscious of violating the tyrannical laws of custom, my address would not
have been in^^^lard^d with so many notes of admiration. Notwithstanding this
concession, I must do myself the justice to affirm, that I am not wholly
unacquainted with those delicate feelings which are always put on the rack,
when a modest lady declares her affections for any particular gentleman -- I
mean in an unmarried state. What mortifies me most of all is, that upon so
slight an acquaintance, I should suffer my heart so quick to to be carried away
with your charms -- and my pen so soon to disclose the melancholy tale. Be
assured, Sir, nothing alloys my anxiety on this subject so much as the
testimony of my own conscience, that I have acted in sincerity. Your strictures
on the tyrannical laws of custom are, in my opinion, just; and indeed are such
as have not unfrequently occurred to my own mind when reflecting on this
subject. Were women allowed the same liberty to communicate their affections to
men, as men are to communicate theirs to the women -- I believe unhappy matches
would be less numerous. One thing is certain, I shall now have no reason to
reproach myself with the ne^glect of any mean I thought justifiable to obtain a
gentleman for my companion, for whom I had the highest esteem and the most
unbounded affection. Your condescension in stating your objections against
altering your situation soon, gives me both pleasure and pain; pleasure to find
you so obliging and sincere; and pain lest some one or more of these objections
may prove an insurmountable obstacle to my happiness: Politeness and sincerity
are not unfrequent inducements to love; and in this instance I feel their
influence most sensibly: However, I cannot forbear smiling at one of your
ingenious objections against soon entering the conjugal state. No wonder you
imagine me disposed to marry soo^er than you are inclined to do -- My letter
has given you sufficient reason to draw this conclusion: But, dear Sir, I am
unfeignedly sincere in the declaration of my affection for you -- and will now
tell you, that I will wait for you any period of time you may think proper to
propose; provided you can assure me, you are under no engagement to any of my
sex, and will attend to my request, which to me is a subject of the last
importance. In the mean time I must let you know, Sir, that I never shall
consent to match with any person living -- no, not even with yourself, whom I
love almost to distraction, without ample evidence of being loved by the same.
Where affections are not reciprocal, there can be nothing of the delicate
nature of social and refined happiness. Various circumstances have led me to
conclude you have some esteem of and love for my person: This conclusion
emboldened me to address you in the manner I have done, and yet I am afraid my
unguarded expressions will lessen your affections for me. I must be indulged in
hoping you will never improve my freedom to the injury of my character, whether
you finally comply with my proposals or not. It gives me much satisfaction to
hear that a private interview is not disagreeable. I shall wait with great
anxiety till that happy moment arrives -- when we shall have opportunity,
without the mediums of pen and ink, to know one another heart. It is the
fervent and unceasing prayer of my soul, that the great disposer of all things
may direct you, Sir, in the line of duty respecting this delicate and
momentuous affair. Though I feel that I should be happy in forming with you the
nearest connection in life, yet I cannot desire you to act contrary to your
duty or your inclination.

Before I conclude this letter, I must observe, that your generosity will
prompt you to pas^over my imperfections, and acknowledge my sincerity, as well
as to plead with your God that I may be truly resigned to the will of that
providence which regulates all things in the wisest and best manner. The
continuation of a correspondence with you, is what I sincerely wish, provided
it meets with your cordial approbation. With the greatest sincerity, I beg
leave to subscribe myself

Your unfeigned lover* G --.
To Strephon.
P. S. Excuse the following lines.

O God, how swift my moments fly!
How great's the thought that I must die!
How short's a day, a month, a year!
How fast my moments disappear!
O God of love, Almighty power,
May I imp^ove the present hour.
Devote myself to thee in time,
And ripen fast for joys sublime.
Ye dying things, and earthly joys,
Ye anxious cares and trifling toys,
Tempt me no more, be banished hence;
And thou my God, be my defense.
When Jesus is my only guide,
Then let my moments swiftly glide*
^d O, when time shall be no more,
Sa^e land me on the heavenly shore.
Eternities unbounded space,
Shall know the riches of thy grace;
I Will jo^^ with all the heavenly throng,
Free grace! free grace! shall be my song.



STREPHON TO LADY G --.
January 19, 1776. Madam,
YOUR favor of the 13th instant, came safe to hand on the last Sabbath. I
should have answered it before now had it been in my power. Last Saturday, as
you have doubtless heard, I was taken down with my old disorder, the
intermitting fever. -- This turn of the fever has proved more severe than any I
have experienced heretofore. I am, however through the kind hand of providence,
so far relieved from pain, as to be able to set up and write a few lines to my
much respected friend.

Dear Madam, The careful perusal of your second letter, has raised a doubt in
my mind, whether you properly understood my first letter to you: Whether I was
so explicit as the case required, I will not undertake to affirm. You will
please to recollect, however, that among the several reasons I offered for not
choosing to marry very speedily, I mentioned a young lady on whom I had fixed my
eye, and for whom I had some regard; in the enjoyment of whom, I might, in some
future period, be exceedingly happy. This, it is true, was mentioned as
something entirely conjectured: However, from these representa^tions, I
imagined you would natu^^lly draw^ conclusion not far from the truth, viz. that
I had n^ particular inclination to pay my addresses to yo^ as suitor; but as a
friend; for w^om I had a^ unfeigned esteem, and to whom ^ felt myself under
peculiar obligations for that regard you have expressed for my person. Upon
these principles I was ready to comply with your requests, both as to a private
interview and familiar correspondence. Whether you understood me in this
manner, you will please to let me know in your next, Notwithstanding all this,
I most seriously declare, that I know not, but on a farther acquaintance, you
may appear infinitely more lovely in my view than ever I have appeared in
yours, or than any of your sex have ever appeared in mine. I am certainly much
pleased with that innocent and undisguised freedom -- with those glows of
modesty -- with that happy talent of communicating your sprightly thoughts on
the tender and delicate subject of love -- as well as with your turn for poetry
and religion; which you have exhibited in the scene you have been acting.
Cultivate, my dear friend, by every possible mean, these excellent talents, and
they will not fail of commanding the attention of every man off sense, with
whom you form an acquaintance. That the refreshing dews of grace divine may
attend you through this vale of tears, is the prayer, dear Madam, of

Your sincere friend, and most obliged humble servant, STREPHON.


LADY G -- TO STREPHON.
January 22, 1776. Sir,
I HAVE this moment received your letter of the 19th instant -- for which I
give you many thanks. The restoration of your health demands my gratitude and
joy, and they shall not be suppressed. Now, Sir, I will inform you, that I
believe there is no misunderstanding between us. When I read your first letter,
I was willing ^o hope you were possessed of that tender and generous passion
which heretofore has, and still does, so powerfully agitate my soul; for you
cannot be insensible that we naturally hope for those things we most fervently
desire. It is an old adage, that love has no eyes; and this reminds me of my
stupidity, in not taking your ideas from your first letter, however, you will
forgive me, if I say you were not so explicit as my sincerity* frankness and
love required. Be assured, dea^ Sir, my tender and affectionate feelings for
you have by no means left me on my disappointment Virtuous love yet glows in my
bleeding hea^^ with an irresistible sway. The velocity, sens^^bility and
keenness of my passions are well know^ by all my acquaintance; yea, they are
such (...) cannot pass unnoticed by your eagle eye. Be^lieve me, dear Sir, had
I not entertained a hope that you were truly generous and unfeigned^^ pious, I
should not have taken the measur^ which I have adopted, to obtain you as my
nea^^est friend and dearest companion. I know chr^^^tian love and affection are
things quite different from the natural glows of heart which graceless persons
experience toward each other: but you are sensible, Sir, that when two persons
experience natural affections judiciously mingled with spiritual ones, they
rise to the highest pitch of happiness they are capable of in time: This I have
hoped might be our case -- for I know my love to you, Sir, has been and still
is sincere and vehement, as well as virtuous; and although I may have been
unguarded in my expressions, and perhaps imprudent in my conduct (which are
circumstances truly mortifying) yet I cannot reproach myself of doing that,
which, at the time, I was conscious was very criminal. Had you not been ^igh in
the esteem of my greatest friends, as well (...) myself, prudence might have
triumphed over ^e clamors of my bleeding heart, and saved me ^^om that dilemma
into which I have plunged, ^d out of which I know not how to extricate myself
with honor. But what am I saying? It ^s not the esteem of friends, nor yet the
esteem which I had for your person, that urged me on (...) snatch you from the
embraces of all my sex -- ^ut love, irresistible love, that agitated my ^eart,
and contrary to all arguments, swayed my ^^ul into that course of conduct
which, in this af^^ir. I have taken. I needed correction -- for in ^^ys past, I
have been guilty of insincerity and ^ngratitude to broken hearted lovers; and
now I (...) the pungent pain, which many a time I have ^en to a worthy youth
with too little sensibility (...) soul. I am really reproved and mortifyed at
^he ^ight of my own folly.

And now, dear Sir, permit me earnestly to request you, as a gentleman, to
commit this and my former letters to the flames -- or send them, by the bearer,
enclosed to me, with your sacred promise never to publish their contents to the
disadvantage of my character. Surely you cannot be so ungrateful to one who has
loved you so sincerely, as to deny her this small request: Remember your
compliance will greatly ease my troubled heart, and raise you, if possible,
higher in my esteem than ever you have yet been. This is the first, and I
believe it will be the last time I shall ever expose myself in this way. What
has taken place I hope will not unfit me for future usefulness in the world. I
should be greatly grieved were it to render me odious in the view of my friends
and acquaintance: But, Oh! had you been possessed of that generous passion
which even now burns in my wounded heart, I have not the least doubt, but our
mutual affections would have me* with the cordial approbation o^ my honored
friends and relatives. Love is a free, a voluntary passion -- the gold of both
the Indies cannot purchase it, nor the powers of all the earth destroy it. But
since my love cannot be returned, I will try to keep it in subjection to
reason, prudence and religion. Hush my hea^^ and be still. I hope you will
still indulge me with your christian affection: May thi^ be mutual between us,
till we gain that heavenly state, where they neither marry nor are given in
marriage, but are as the angels of God, triumphing in (...) love of the all
glorious Jehovah: O that the sacred flame might now inspire our souls with
glows of seraphic ardor, which shall run parallel with the unceasing
revolutions of a vast eternity. ^o devoutly prays

Your unfeigned friend, and most humble servant, G --.
To Strephon.
P. S. Farewell! farewell my beloved friend; ^lways remembering that it is less
painful to a ^^^erous soul, to forgive a crime, than to an of^^nder to request
it. May the guardian angels ^^end you through this vale of tears, and (...)
those lovely eyes from ever wounding anoth^^ heart, as they have incurably
wounded mine. ^dieu, dearest Strephon, a final adieu!

G --.




Dear Eliza,

THE five foregoing letters contain a very in^^esting correspondence, upon a
subject truly ^^dicate and impor^^nt. Mrs. G -- is really a ^y of great merit:
She is young, s^nsible, beau^^^^^, rich and pious -- with a soul formed for
love, (...) surrounded with friends and connections of (...) the greatest
reputation in this land. This cor^^^pondence is presented to you, for the sole
pur^^^e of impressing your mind with the idea, that ^re can be no object so
dear to me as yourself. (...) ^ust entreat you by all the ties of friendship
(...) generosity, not to disclose it to a single person (...) earth. Nothing
but a desire of giving you (...) greatest evidence in my power that I love
(...) above all others, could have prevailed on (...) to lay this
correspondence before you.

I am, lovely Eliza, your unfeigned friend, and true lover, till death,
STREPHON.

LETTER XXII. ELIZA TO STREPHON.
JANUARY 30, 1776. Sir,
I HAD the pleasure to receive your acceptable letter of the 27th of January,
last evening. Believe me, I can never be thankful enough for that confidence
you have reposed in my prudence and generosity, in disclosing that long and
interesting correspondence you have had with lady G --. My honored father,
with whom Dr. B. her father, formerly had the greatest intimacy, has, within my
hearing, frequently descanted on the charms of this young, beautiful and pious
widow. I am surp^ised you we^e not taken in with her rare accomplishmen^s, for
they are just such as I should have thought would have catched your affections,
and commanded your heart, above those of any other lady living: She was a
person of birth and education, beautiful and devout, with a large estate to
render you happy; and what I should have thought would have charmed you more
than all the rest, she had (...) soul turned for love. What aile^ you,
Strephon* Did sickness blunt the keenness of your sensibility, or where you not
yourself, when you spurne^ the affections of a lady every way so accomplished?
However, I must say, that I think her amourous freedom was carried too far for
the del^^cate tone of a female nerve: But I check myself, for I am no judge of
the power of love. (...) ^eems, for a while, you were half disposed to give her
your heart. O the struggles, the throws of ^er bleeding heart! I cannot help
pitying the ^fflicted and distressed creature; and at the same ^ime I am
provoked to smile at her imprudence -- perhaps it would become me more to drop
a ^ear over it. You have helped her out as well as you could -- in the
performance of which, I ^hink you have acted the generous part. The ^ixture of
feelings, which glow throughout her several epistles, are a sight truly
entertaining; ^er devotion appears sincere, but she too fre^uently loses sight
of it, and turns to the melan^holy tale of her wounded heart. I am sure her ^se
must have given your generous soul great ^n. All my feelings, excited by
reading this ^orrespondence, shall not now be disclosed to (...); perhaps I may
hereafter have an opportu^^^y of doing it with much more proprie^^ ^han (...)
present is practicable. One thing you may ^^pend upon as fact, your conduct in
this singu^^^ affair, has greatly endeared your person to

Your friend and humble servant, ELIZA.

FROM the 16th of February to the 4th of April, ^^76, Strephon and Eliza were
favored with more ^^quent interviews with each other, than they ever ^cyed
before; and upon each inter^iew their mutu^^ affections increased with the
greatest rapidity, till (...) arise to such an height, that it became agreeable
^n to submit to the sweet chains of matrimony: which they did on the evening of
the 4th of April, ^^76. Since which, they have lived in all the joys and
innocent pleasures the conjugal state affords* constantly increasing in esteem
and love for one another. As a testimony of this, we will copy two letters
which passed between this happy couple, more than nineteen years after their
marriage.

Business of importance called Strephon to be absent from his enchanting Eliza,
for several weeks together, during which time, the following letters passed
between him and his other self.

STREPHON TO ELIZA.
My ever ^ear, ever loving, and ever lovely Eliza,
YOU will not judge me acting out of character as your husband, if I disclose
some of the tender feelings which have been excited in my breast, during my
absence from you* whom I have loved with the greatest ferve^^^y from the first
moment the kind heavens ever presented you before my eyes. I am afraid that the
noise, the prattl^, and jo^ial tricks of the children, will be too much for
your tender constitution -- mama* and not papa, must now be the sole arbiter of
all their childish and innocent dissentions. Be patient, my dearest creature,
and remember you yourself were once a gay and sp^ightly child. With me time
seems to move heavily on; every day appears longer than common, and every night
intolerably tedious. My affections will not leave their proper object, to feast
on and riot in the enchanting scenes of pleasure, with which I am continually
surrounded. Within the peri^^ of three days, I promise myself the inexpressible
pleasure of embracing my dearest Eliza. Tell the prattling things, who
constantly surround you, their papa says they must be good and obedient to
their mama, and he will bring them something pretty when he returns home.
Loveliest of creatures, be not impatient, I will not fail of seeing you at the
time which I have prefixed.

I am your real friend and loving husband, till death. STREPHON.

ELIZA TO STREPHON.
BELIEVE me, dearest Strephon, I never received a line from you, which
administered a thousandth part of the consolation to my anxious heart, as that
which came safe to hand the last evening. I am tired with this state of
widowhood, and pant for another nuptial evening with my lovely Strephon. Our
children are as good as can be expected -- but they are children and need the
authority of a father exercised over them from day to day. Say nothing, dearest
of men, of time's dull pace, nor of the length of particular days and nights,
for I have become so great an adapt in the knowledge of this subject, that I
fancy you can instruct me in nothing about it. I long for the arrival of that
happy moment, when I shall again see my dearest Strephon, whom I love more than
every other object this side heaven. May the guardian angels protect you from
every evil.

I am your everloving ELIZA.

CHAP. III. Of the Courtship of EMILIUS and OLIVA, American Youth; together
with an account of OLIVA's death.
EMILIUS was a gentleman of taste and information. Oliva was a young lady of
good family; possessed of those charms, which at the same time, awe and
enrapture the beholder. Her features, shapes and turn of mind, as well as her
prospects in life, were exactly such as Emilius wished to find in the lady with
whom he chose to match. And though Emilius was several years older than Oliva,
he had not completed the knowledge of that profession upon which he had fixed
for life. Oliva's youth on the one hand, afforded Emilius time to accomplish
this important business -- and on the other, herself time to gain those
personal embellishments, which Emili^s wished to find in the object of his
love. The circumstances of these youth ^^^ing thus situated, Emilius proposed
his addresses to Oliva, who, by the approbation of her parents, gave her
consent to treat him as a suitor. After enjoying intimate and frequent
interviews with Oliva, for several months on the stretch, Emilius was obliged
to reside several hundred miles from the object of his affections. The
following letters and historic sketches will display their mutual feelings
toward each other.

LETTER I. EMILIUS TO OLIVA.
June 12, 1771 Charming Oliva,
IT is with pleasure that I inform you, that I am in health, and that I hope
you enjoy the same blessing. I am disappointed in journeying to the southward
so soon as I expect^d when we parted. However, should no unforeseen accident
prevent, I shall set out on the morrow. I need not ^^ll you how much I esteem
and love you, and how anxious I am you should obtain all those improvements of
your mind, and embellishments of your person, for which you so vehemently
thirst. Intellectual accomplishments, joined with beauty, politeness and
virtue, in the fair sex, never fa^l of commanding the attention of m^n of
sense; and notwithstanding your present situation is not the most favorable
for improvements of this nature, I flatter myself you will not fall behind many
who are in pursuit after them.

I am not insensible that many young ladies in this country, who wish to be
thought the m^st a^^complished creatures, have laid aside the sacred oracles,
and the numerous authors on virtue and religion, as unfashionable things; and
for the improvement of the^^ minds, read little else than novels and plays:
This will do for those who mean to form themselves companions agreeable to
gentlemen who are determined to live a vicious and irreligious life. Nothing
would give me more pain, than to find you patterning after these giddy and
heedless creatures; you will therefore excuse me while I urge upon you the
frequent and careful perusal of those writings which are infallible. Even now,
at this late period of the age of the world, there are no volumes so full of
important ideas -- ideas so entertaining and sublime, as the scriptures of
divine truth. Do you wish to obtain just ideas of the great creator and
governor of the universe -- here you may find them to perfection. Does your
anxious heart enquire what course of life is most agreeable to the best of
beings -- here you have it fairly delineated. Do you wish to know the only
method of salvation -- here you have it displayed in all its charms and
beauties; yea, in these sacred writings, we have life and immortality brought
to light. Peruse them, then, my dearest Oliva, with all that care and attention
which is due to the most important writings in the universe: For,

"God's kindest thoughts are here expressed,
Able to make us wise and blessed:
The doctrines are divinely true,
Fit for reproof and comfort too.
This is the field, where hidden lies
The pearl of price unknown;
That merchan^is divinely wi^e
Who makes the pearl his own
Here consecrated water flows
To quench our thirst of sin;
Here the fair tree of knowledge grows,
Nor danger dwells within"
You may depend on my seeing you at the time prefixed for that purpose,
provided no unforeseen accident should prevent.

I am, dear Oliva, yours affectionately, EMILIUS.

LETTER II. EMILIUS TO OLIVA.
OCTOBER 22, 1771. Much esteemed Oliva,
IT is with peculiar pleasure I devote this late hour of the night to your
service. My thoughts and affections are fixed on you, as the most agreeable
object in the whole circle of creation. Had I wings, I would soon fly to your
distant apartment, and embrace my dearest Oliva, in all the modest forms which
love and virtue dictate. In former times my heart never so panted for an
interview with my dearest creature, as it has done within these six weeks past.
You will excuse me if I tell you that it ha^ pleased the God of all grace, to
impress my mind with a greater sense of divine things, than I have ever
heretofore exp^rienced. My heart is fixed: I am no^ determined to shape my
course for the w^ of glory. What I most earnestly desire of you, is, that you
would accompany me to the paradise above -- where immortal youth blooms -- love
triumphs -- and every tear is wiped away: Though the road which leads thither,
is strait and narrow, yet it deprives us of no pleasures, but such as are
beneath the dignity of man -- such as are low, vicious and diabolical. I am
unwilling to leave you walking after the course of this vain world; for I most
sincerely love you, and as sincerely pant for your everlasting welfare. Your
temptations to vanity and irreligion, I confess are great and powerful: Youth,
beauty and worldly prospects of happiness here, which you possess above many of
your sex, all conspire to work out your ruin: And what renders your situation
more dangerous than all the rest, is that circle of constant admirers, and
subtle flatterers, with which you are perpetually surrounded.

Pause then, a moment, my dearest creature, and set the excellencies of real
religion before your eyes; perhaps they may sway your mind to a life of
humility and undissembled piety, which is of more value than all this wide
world affords. Rude and trifling company is more frequently attended with
greater evil^ than young people in general imagine. Be therefore on your guard
against the enchanting influence of the bad examples of the young, the
beautiful, the gay and fashionable part of the world; otherwise you may be
caught in the snare, and led captive at the will of the great enemy of all
virtue. Think not, however, that I suppose you can, at all times, with decency,
shun such unprofitable company; it is not at all probable: The part, then,
which you have to act, is to guard against its ^ernicious effects.

When we parted, I expected to have seen you again this fall; but events
respecting me, in a course of providence, have so turned up, that I now despair
of doing myself this pleasure. Whether ever we shall see one another again is
entirely uncertain. Wishing you all that happiness you are capable of enjoying,
I beg leave to subscribe myself

Your true friend, and unfeigned lover, EMILIUS.

LETTER III. OLIVIA TO EMILIUS.
NOV. 22, 1771. Sir,
HAD I not given you my word, that after receiving two letters from you I would
write you one, I should not have troubled you with this insignificant scrawl.
To tell you the truth, Emilius, your affectionate, polite and instructive
epistle, have been received with more pleasure than I choose to express with pen
and ink. I certainly feel myself greatly indebted to you for that esteem you
have expressed for my person, and that anxiety you have shown both for the
improvement of my mind and the salvation of my (...). I imagine no one can be
more ^^^sible of a deficiency in mental improvements, and religious endowments,
than I am. Your advice, therefore, (...) read the scriptures with care and
attention, and shun the fashionable vices of the present age, perfectly accord
with the dictates of my own reason and conscience. Be assured, Sir, I am not
wholly insensible of the danger arising from a circle of flatterers: It has
been my study what use to make of them; and, upon the whole, I must say, they
have been the dangerous means of leading me to prize an open and candid friend
more highly than ever I should have done without them. I am mortified at the
news of your being necessarily detained so long from the company of your best
friends. May you be blessed and succeeded in all your enterprises. Write me as
often as inclination and opportunity will permit.

I am your real friend, OLIVA.

LETTER IV. EMILIUS TO OLIVA.
DEC. 1, 1771. My lovely Oliva,
I THANK you for the fulfillment of your promise. Yours of the 22d of Nov. came
safe to hand yesterday, and has afforded me more pleasure than I can express. I
will take it for granted that this is a specimen of what you will always be;
that is to say, true to all your engagements. Your assurance that my advice is
agreeable to the dictates of your reason and conscience, gives me no small
pleasure; for therein I have endeavored to act the part of a real friend to
one for whom I have the highest esteem: While we follow the dictates of reason,
we shall keep our consciences void of offense toward our maker and our fellow
men. Your mortification at my being necessarily detained from the company of my
best friends, cannot be greater than mine. As soon, therefore, as my important
affairs shall permit, I am determined to mingle with that lovely circle of
friends who reside in your neighborhood, and feast my eyes on the charming
creature, whom I am afraid has already too much room in my heart. Please to
write as you have opportunity.

I am, dear Oliva, your unfeigned friend and admirer, EMILIUS.

LETTER V. EMILIUS TO OLIVA.
APRIL 8, 1772. Ever lovely Oliva,
I AM never more happy, in any earthly employment, than when I am writing to
you; and esp^^ially on so important a subject as the one I am now about to
communicate. It has pleased the God (...) ^r out his spirit on the inhabitants
of this town, and to revive his work in the midst of these yea^^ in a most
wonderful manner: Young gen^lemen and ladies, who, but a few weeks since,
seemed to be given up to every species of error and delusion, are now
apparently sincere followers of the Lamb of God: Their vain amusements, and
sensual gratifications, are laid aside as things quite beneath the dignity of
man; and the subline doctrines and duties taught in the gospel are attended to
as things of the very last importance. How lovely is the change -- how charming
is the sight to all the friends of Zion! O Oliva, let the one thing needful
have the uppermost room in thy tender heart. What are all earthly enjoyments --
what are all the glories of this transitory world, compared to the sublime and
satisfactory pleasures of real religion? Will not true religion improve your
mind -- grace your person, and add ten thousand beauties to those which you now
possess? Will she not give you that peace of conscience and joy of heart which
are inexpressible and full of glory? Real religion will fit you for this and
for the coming world; she will prepare you to meet with fortitude all the
afflictions, and improve all the mercies of this life; and what is more, she
will sit you for a state of everlasting glory. O that I were with you, then I
could speak of these great things in a manner I cannot write. My heart has been
remarkably affected of late. -- If religion be a delusion, it is surely a
pleasant delusion: Therefore you will forgive me, though my letter should
appear more lik^ a sermon than ^^ke a ^^re epistle of a common lover -- for I
have learned not to be ashamed of the gospel of my Lord and Savior Ch^ Should
my friends judge this to be vile. I hope ^ shall be more and more vile, till I
have done with the transitory world.

My dearest creature, you may depend on my fulfiling all my declarations of
love and friendship, as far as it shall be in my power. The happy moment when I
shall see you, I hope is not far off: However, should your affections be weaned
from me, and fixed upon another, I hope you will be so generous as not to
conceal it from him, who begs leave to subscribe himself

Your real friend and true lover, EMILIUS

LETTER VI. OLIVA TO EMILIUS.
MAY 14, 1772 Sir,
YOUR favor of the 8th of April is just come to hand -- which, with no small
pleasure, I now set down to answer. The recollection of your friendship, and
the heppy moments spent in your agreeable company, never fails of ex^^ting
emotions in my heart too tender and delicate to be trusted on pape^. You
mention a period, which you suppose not far distant from the time. (in which
you w^ite, and call it a happy m^men^^) when you expe^^ we may meet each other.
Be assured, Sir, you cannot contemplate an event of this kind with more
pleasure than I do. I most sincerely thank you for the good news you have been
pleased to communicate in your last; and heartily wish this great and good work
may extend to the ends of the earth. Your anxiety for my best interest, affects
my heart, and demands my admiration and gratitude, which shall never be
suppressed: O that I too might feel that sacred passion which so sensibly
agitates your generous soul! You say* that if any one esteems you vile for
embracing, and recommending religion to your fellow creatures, you hope you
shall be still more and more vile, till you have done with this transitory
world. My settled sentiment is, that whoever despises any one for an attachment
to real religion, ought to meet with the contempt of all rational beings.

Sir, Should my affections ever be weaned from you, and six upon any other man,
you may rest assured I will not conceal the fact; for I have not forgotten the
sacred promises we made to each other when we last parted, that we would not
deceive one another. Please to neglect no opportunity of writing to

Your much obliged and real friend, OLIVA.

LETTER VII. EMILIUS TO OLIVA.
January 15, 1772. Dear Oliva,
YOURS of May the 14th I have received with sensible pleasure: You could have
said nothing more captivating concerning me, than that you reflect on the past
moments spent in my company with satisfaction, unless it be what you have
hinted respecting a future interview. I thank you for that cheerfulness with
which you receive and answer my imperfect epistles* and am sorry to hear from
another quarter, of your bodily indisposition. ^y dearest creature, did you
withhold this melancholy idea from me because you would not grieve your friend
and lover? It is true, I shall be exceedingly anxious till I am favored with
further information respecting your health; therefore embrace every opportunity
of writing till you shall regain it -- which I pray may soon be the case.

Yours, EMILIUS.

LETTER VIII. EMILIUS TO OLIVA.
JULY 14, 1772. Dearest of Girls,
THIS is the third time I have written to you, since I received your obliging
letter, dated May the 14th; and had I not been favored with a line from your
honored papa, which assured me of the restoration of your health, I should
have feared, that your disorder had proved fatal; or that I am less dear to
you, than you are to me: But now I am freed from these perplexing conjectures;
especially from the first -- and with respect to the (...), I must ^^y, such
has been the confidence I have reposed in your generosity, that it is
impossible for me to conclude, that you would willingly deceive me in a matter
which lies so near my heart -- and which you know is of so much importance to
my happiness. You will think me a plain dealer -- I am so -- and would have you
be so likewise: Plain d^^ling and honest hearts generally go togethe^ ^d have
the greatest tendency to promote those mutual affections which the conjugal
state requires: Of all relations in life, this is the most important to the
parties concerned, to posterity, and to society in general. Therefore, before
we enter into the sweet and sacred bonds of wedlock, we ought to be convinced
of each others sincerity. With reciprocal and unfeigned love, the matrimonial
relation must be a blessing; without it, such a connection will prove a
vexation too great for the parties to endure. The happy pair, who are united
together by mutual esteem, and undissembled love, yield to the sweet bands of
matrimony with pleasure: They will have one common interest; and in a sense
feel themselves animated by on^ soul. They will readily participate in each
others foils and sorrows, and cheerfully communicate their pleasures and joys
to one another* Thus they will march through this vale of ^^ars, adoring their
maker for the enjoyment of each other. But I forget I am writing, and not
talking, to a young lady, of the happy situation of the married state -- whom I
know not, but is this moment solacing herself in connubial pleasures with some
favored youth, unknown to me. I will however, write no longer in this strain,
for I have no sufficient reason to justify it. A letter written with that
lovely hand I used to call mine, will doubtless banish all such imaginations
from my anxious mind. But to drop these pleasant topics, and dwell upon those
of more importance: Let me ask you, my dearest Oliva, Is it your study and
delight to prove yourself devout and sincerely religious? (...) the laws of
your maker, and precepts of your Redeemer, suit your taste, an^mate your
affections, and comfort your spirit? With respect to your maker, can you say
whom have I in heaven but thee, and there is none on earth that I desire in
comparison to thee. With respect to the Savior of sinners, can you say, he is
the chiefest of ten thousand, he is altogether lovely? O set me a seal on thine
arm, as a seal on thine heart, for love is stronger than death! Is the daily
language of your heart for God -- the living God? If these be the views of your
mind, and exercises of your heart, you must be happy beyond expression: On the
contrary, if nothing of this nature be sound in you* your state must be awfully
dangerous! Permit me to close this long letter with the following lines:

"Virtue, soft balm of every woe,
Of every grief the cure;
It Is thou alone that can bestow,
Pleasures unmixed and pure.
The shady wood, the verdant mead
Are virtue's flowery road;
Nor painful are the steps which lead
To her divine abode.
It Is not in palaces or halls,
She, or her train appears;
Far off she flies from pompous walls,
Virtue and peace dwell (...)."
I am, dear Oliva, yours, etc. EMILIUS.

LETTER IX. OLIVA TO EMILIUS.
August 1, 1772. Sir,
YOUR long and entertaining letter of the 14th of the last month, I have
received with peculiar pleasure; and now embrace the first moment which
presents, to make out some kind of answer to it. I heartily wish I could
compose with that freedom and elegancy you do* then would I give you a long
answer; but I must be content to communicate my ideas in a clumsy and inelegant
style. Pardon my imperfections, and you will secure my heart. I am heartily
rejoiced my honored papa has been so good as to inform you of my welfare. I
have written and thrown away several letters since my sickness; the reason of
this conduct has been altogether owing to my want of opportunity to convey them
to you; and it is entirely uncertain whether this ever reaches you; therefore
you will accept of a short and imperfect answer. Be assured, that it is with no
small pleasure, that I find myself able to inform you that my health is
perfectly restored. Oh how thankful ought I to be to the great disposer of all
events, for this display of his goodness and mercy to an unworthy wretch. Many,
many of my fellow mortals have been cut down as cumbers of the earth, and
lodged in the silent grave, since I was first seized with my late bodily
indisposition. O Emilius! help me to praise the great preserver of man, for his
distinguishing goodness to an unworthy and helpless creature. With respect to
the ^^lemn and pointed questions you have asked (...) concerning my love to
religion -- all I have to say is, my reason and conscience tell me I ought
(...) be able to answer them in the affirmative -- But alas, my wretched heart
stands in the way. One thing, however, you may depend upon as fact; and that
is, I have never had more serious thoughts on the great and important things of
real religion, than I have had during my late sickness: And to tell you the
truth, your pious letter has largely contributed to increase these solemn
impressions on my naturally vain and trifling mind; but I am afraid they will
soon wear away, and leave me worse than they found me. Oh the wretched
influence of this vain and unsatisfactory world! How powerfully it allure^ our
imaginations, and commands our affections. O Emilius, on these accounts I
should be more happy to see you, than ever I have been h^retofore. In the midst
of your rapturous description of the happiness of the married pair, you check
yourself for thus writing to one, whom you knew not but was then solacing
herself in the embraces of some favored and unknown youth: Give yourself no
concern, Sir, about any such imaginations; and believe me incapable of acting a
part so base, so contrary to my most solemn engagements to you. The following
lines appear to me very beautiful:

"Be wise, cut off long cares
From thy contracted span.
Even whilst we speak, envious time
Does make swift haste away;
Then seize the present, use thy prime,
Nor trust another day."
My parents enjoy their usual health; Anna and Charlotte are well, and as w^
ever: Your friends in general, in this town, are all in prosperous
circumstances. Wishing you every blessing you are capable of enjoying in this
and the coming world, I beg leave to say

I am your friend and most humble servant, OLIVA.

UPON the reception of the above letter, Emilius concluded to drop his
important and delightful studies, and spend a few weeks with his enchanting
Oliva, from whom he had endured an absence so long and painful. At their
meeting, their mutual joys were expressed, not by the cold and lifeless
language, which mere words compose -- but by sparkling eyes, glowing
countenances, and actions the most polite and endearing. The pious and
dignified conduct of Emilius, on this occasion, was too perspicuous to pass
unnoticed by the honored parents of Oliva, who now began to feel themselves
happy in their daughter^s connection with a gentleman of so much worth: Every
thing, of course, conspired to render them as happy in each others company as
they could reasonably wish. Their circumstances, persons, amusements and
devotions, were such as mutually and constantly charmed each other, as well as
entertained and delighted a numerous circle of friends and relatives: Every one
who beheld their chaste, polite and dignified conduct, admired -- and some even
envied their happiness. In circumstances so delightful, the time alloted by
Emilius for this visit rolled away imperceptibly, and the melancholy moment
too soon arrived when he was ^ed to take his leave of the idol of his heart,
and repair to his books, to complete his knowledge of the profession which he
had chosen for life. -- This was a scene too tender for description: We shall
therefore give the reader liberty to indulge his imagination, and pursue the
correspondence which afterward took place between these happy lovers.

LETTER X. EMILIUS TO OLIVA.
SEPT. 29, 1772. Much respected and dear Oliva,
I AM always happy when your friendship is the subject of my contemplation. If
I am not mistaking the idea, mutual friendship consists in a strong and
habitual inclination, in two or more persons, to promote each othe^^ welfare,
here an^ hereafter; consequently persons, united by the sacred bonds of
friendship* in a measure rejoice in each others welfare, a^ they do in their
own. When I reflect upon myself as standing in this ^^lation to you* I am both
ple^sed and charmed with my situation -- when I go ^ step further, and consider
myself as your approved suitor, I wa^^ language to express the emotions of my
heart. One hour spent in your company, gives me more pleasure than years spent
in the company of others.

Please to make my respectful compliments to your honored and dear parents --
and tell them that Emilius arrived safe at the ^ce of his residence last Friday.

Dear Oliva, Let not youthful amusements so take up your time and affections,
as to leave no room for the all important things of real religion. I mean to
write by every opportunity, and hope you will do the same.

The following lines were composed in an hour devoted to your service:

The olive branch, the blooming maid,
Has charmed my heart, and filled my head
Be thou, my dear, forever true,
And constant love shall be thy due.
As pearly drops, as virgin snow,
From lofty clouds in season flow,
So let thy path, in virtuous ways,
In truth shine forth, with pearless rays.
O, let every grace in their turn,
In thy dear soul awake and burn;
Against the snares of Satan bold,
Thy virtue guard, thy vows uphold;
Adorn thy heart, adorn thy mind,
With knowledge of the purest kind:
Be this thy carry (...) work of life.
And you may prove a joyful wife.
I am, dear Oliva, your unfeigned friend and true lover, EMILIUS.

LETTER XI. EMILIUS TO OLIVA.
OCT. 21, 1772. My worthy dear Oliva,
AS I make it a point of no small importance to let no suitable opportunity
pass without writing to you, so I would thank you to conduct toward me. This
attention to each other, i^ what we have laid ourselves under mutual
obligations to perform. Every letter received from you is esteemed by me as a
fresh evidence of your friendship; and I would have you esteem every letter you
receive from me, not only as a token of friendship, but of real love. Of your
friendship, I have looked for more frequent testimonies of this kind than I
have received; and sometimes have been almost r^ady to conclude, that my
sweetest creature is not so a^^entive to her engagements as she ought to be:
the^ I check myself and fondly attribute her neglect to the want of suitable
conveyance, rather than to any want of inclination to gratify her friend and
lover. Be so kind as to free me from these perplexing thoughts, by a long
letter filled with your sentiments upon the most important subject -- I mean
religion. Say not that religion is an unfashionable subject for the pens of
youth and lovers -- for it certainly lies near my heart, and I hope is not far
from yours. I have not forgotten the happy moments we spent, when last
together, on the excellenc^es of this dignified and sublime theme -- and hope
your memory retains the same things we then caused to pass before our minds. I
know that young people, especially lovers, must be indulged in dwelling on the
charming subjects of beauty, frien^ship and love; but this is no reason they
should not embrace religion, and frequently write to each other upon its divine
and superlative beauties: for without this one thing needful all other
possessions are nothing, less than nothing, and vanity. Young minds are too apt
to imbibe unfavourable ideas of this glorious subject: they are too apt to
conclude that religion will mar^ all their pleasures, and render themselves
undesirable objects of the love and esteem of the most valuable youth in the
land: but remember this is not only far from the truth, but an insinuation of
the great enemy of all righteousness, who always strives to paint those ways
which are ways of peace, and those paths which are paths of pleasantness, as
too rugged and thorny for the tender feet of the young and beautiful*
Reflecting upon our first mother's decep^ion by this great enemy of all
righteousnes^ --

Fly from the false deceivers tongue*
My dear Oliva fly;
Our parents found the snare to strong,
Nor should the children try.
But to drop this, and pass to a subject more cheerful. -- In the midst of that
large acquaintance which I have had with mankind, I have found it expedient
that my peculiar friends should be but few, and well chosen. I have sought to
associate with those only who were polite, decent, sensible and virtuous. By
this mean I have been often screened from that imprudent and vicious course of
conduct, which otherwise I should probably have adopted; and perhaps brought
upon myself disgrace, if not ruin.

It is my serio^^ opinion, that young people in general, in no way expose
themselves so much, as by keeping company with beautiful young, heedless and
vicious youth. This proves beyond all contradiction, that our intimate and
peculiar friends ought to be few and well chosen. There are several kinds of
amusement peculiar to youth, which, though they are not always criminal, are
notwithstanding very inconvenient: These I have frequently pointed out to you
in days past: I will now content myself with mentioning one folly, too frequent
among youth, which I have not heretofore laid before you: It is this -- For a
lady to suffer several gentlemen to share her peculiar attention in close
succession one after another: Or a gentleman to divide his affections and
attentions among several of the fair sex. This shameful and disingenious
practice has a tendency to ruin one's heart, and prevent it for ever fixing on
a single object in that manner which is convenient for the consugal relation.
It is no less an argument of wisdom to di^tinguish between proper and improper
conduct, than an argument of virtue to reject the former and adopt the latter.
The study of prudence is worthy of every young mind; and always pays double
wages to those who exercise themselves in this way. I have ten thousand things
to tell you, when kind Providence shall indulge us with another six weeks
visit; for believe me, when I say,

As well might solid mountains move,
As distance quench the fire of love.
Thoughts instant dart from pole to pole,
And agitate the tender soul.
How often I clasp my dear in arms!
How often I Am wrapped in female charms!
Then kindest thou^ has possess my soul,
And my Oliva I condole.
"What may for strength with steel compare?
O love has fetters stronger far.
By bolts of steel are limbs confined;
But cruel love enchains the mind."
A thousand times in one sad day
My thoughts to Bethlem wing their way;
For what -- I leave for you to say.
I am, dear Oliva, your lover, EMILIUS.

LETTER XII. EMILIUS TO OLIVA.
November 17, 1772. Dearest of Girls,
THE perplexing thoughts and foreboding fears which constantly occupy my breast
concerning you, are too great and numerous to be expressed in a single letter.
I have from no quarter received the least hint of your welfare since we parted.
Sometimes I paint to my disordered imagination, that numerous circle of
friends, admirers, flatterers and lovers in which you stand; and say, the glare
of these have hidden Emilius from the lovely eyes of Oliva: Surely Oliva has
forgotten her real friend, her unfeigned lover. -- At other times, I am ready
to conclude she is married; and of course bidden an eternal farewell to Emilius.
But no conjecture touches my heart more forcibly than that which whispers in my
ear, surely Oliva is no more, or you would have heard from her before now. My
only relief from these anxious and perplexing thoughts, is the recollection of
your modest^ in writing, and the difficulty of conveying with safety what you
have written to me. Be so kind, if in the land of the living, to free me from
this distress, by the first opportunity, though your letter should contain only
ten lines.

I am, dear Oliva, your constant and fervent lover, EMILIUS.
P. S. The following lines were presented to my troubled imagination, last
evening, when half asleep.

YE guardian Angels, hover round
That lovely spot of sacred ground;
Where my Oliva, panting lies,
And bear her spirit to the skies.
You will forgive the impropriety of these lines: They are communicated for no
other reason, than to impress it on your mind, how much I am troubled
concerning you.

Dearest creature, adieu.


LETTER XIII. OLIVA TO EMILIUS.
DEC. 22, 1772. Much respected Sir,
I JOYFULLY acknowledge the receipt of three letters from you -- two of them
are long, and one is but short -- for which I give you many ^ks. Your
sentiments of friendship meet with my most cordial approbation; and your
professed esteem for my person merits my notice and gratitude.

It has been with some degree of confusion, I have made your compliments to my
parents. I wish for the future, you would excuse me from a task so trying to my
nerves. Your advice, to be so much on my guard against the pernicious influence
of youthful amusements, as to leave room in my heart for pious and devotional
exercises, demands my unfeigned gratitude. The lines of poetry, with which you
conclude this letter, are really charming; and indeed the whole letter is high
in my estimation, except it be the last line -- "And you may prove a joyful
wife." Wife is more than a mouthful; it is with some difficulty I write it --
and you may be sure it will be with more that I shall ever learn to speak it. I
thank you for the charming things which you have written on friendship,
fidelity, love and religion, which glow throughout your letter of October 21,
and heartily wish them all ingrafted on that little stock of knowledge I have
already obtained; I think they would enlarge my mind, and swell my too
contracted soul. Be assured, Sir, of my endeavors to make daily improvements
in these most excellent and desirable things. The poetry, with which you
conclude this letter, has charmed me more than any thing of the kind I ever
received from you --

"A thousand times* in one sad day,
My thoughts to Bethlem wing their way;
For what -- I leave for you to say."
I am glad you did not say write, for I (...) rather say ten things than write
one.

Your last letter really frights me. -- I (...) that much learning is about to
make you (...); and seriously wish you would drop your studies, and spend
another six weeks at the old mansion house: This might settle your head -- ^r
^te your thoughts, and prepare you for a clo^ ^pplication to your books, than
you now seem to be capable of: However, whether you are sober, or beside
yourself, I am pleased with your solicitude for my welfare, and set it down as
an incontestible evidence of your sincere love for my person; therefore forgive
my innocent, though perhaps too bold remarks on your anxiety for your friend. I
wish any thing could tempt you to leave your books, and converse a while with
your friends. My parents, within my hearing, frequently say, What is become of
Emilius? Oliva, have you heard of late any thing of him? For my part, I
generally say nothing; but Anna, looking yare, and smiling, answers yes, she
receives letters from him every fortnight: That Is more than you know, my dear,
I generally reply, and so the conversation ends.

I think the following lines worthy of notice -- perhaps you have never met
with them.

"FRIENDSHIP -- peculiar boon of heaven,
The noble mind's delight and pride;
To men and angels only given:
To all the lower world denied.
While love, unknown among the beasts,
Parent of thousand wield desires,
The savage and the human breast,
Torments alike with raging fires:
With bright, but often destructive gleam,
Alike over all, his lightning fly,
Thy lambent glories only beam
Around the favorites of the sky.
Thy gentle glows of guiltless joys
On fools and villains never descend;
In vain for thee, the tyrant sighs,
And hugs a flatt'rer for a friend.
Directress of the brave and just,
O guide us through life's darksome way;
And let the tortures of mistrust
On selfish bosoms only prey.
Nor shall thine ardours cease to glow,
When souls to blissful climes remove;
What raised our virtue here below,
Shall aid our happiness above."
Dear Sir, with every sentiment of unfeigned friendship, I am yours, OLIVA.

LETTER XIV. EMILIUS TO OLIVA.
JAN. 1, 1773. Dearest Oliva,
I WISH you a happy new year. It has been with a pleasure too great for words
to express, that I have received your endearing favor of the 22d of December:
Believe me, kindest of creatures, this epistle has reduced my troubled
imagination to order, and my anxious heart to calmness and tranquillity, and
without flattery, merits my thanks ten thousand times over. I am greatly
pleased that my sentiments on friendship, love and religion, have found so
cor^^^l a reception with you; and do not find i^ (...) to resent your
satyrising my last letter, (...) it was a just representation of existing
^nations, circumstances and feelings, yet it bear^ the marks of the hypo, which
you know is not a^ uncommon disorder with gentlemen of a s^dentary life. I had
heard nothing from you (...), that my anxious heart had got full of ten
^^ousand distressing conjectures; but thanks to kind providence, I am now at
ease. Your declaration, that my letters are received with pleasure, gives me no
small satisfaction, for I know not a single creature within the whole circle of
creation, that I should more wish to please than my ever lovely Oliva. Please
still to give my letters a favorable reception, till the period shall arrive,
when we shall meet and embrace each other, not barely as friends, but as
unfeigned lovers. You kindly intimate* that another six week's visit, at your
papa's, would meet with the approbation of a numerous circle of friends, and
prove advantageous to myself. -- I am much of your way of thinking, and will as
soon as existing circumstances shall admit, do myself the pleasure to comply
with your proposal; for, depend upon it, you share a too large proportion of my
thoughts and affections, not to command my utmost attention. However, I must
check my fond expectations -- knowing there are ten thousand accidents and
misfortunes which may prevent our ever meeting again. -- Death, that enemy to
all our earthly enjoyments, may, before we are aware, snatch you from me, or me
from you. Let us then prepare for every event which awaits us in (...) and
disappointments will prove less dreadful ^en they overtake us. I thank you for
making my compliments to your parents; but as this sho^ks your tender nerves* I
will not again request such a favor of you, till I have some evidence of their
being strengthened. Give my love to M^ Anna -- this will not disturb your
tender feelings. Oliva, I am charmed with that rapid improvement you have made
within the last six months, in your hand writing, and in composition. -- An
improvement in these particulars is an advantage which attends friends and
lovers residing at a distance from each other. -- You will not think it strange
if I urge you on in this commendable course; for you know, from your first
acqu^^ntance with me, that it has been a matter which has lain near my heart
Should you ask why I interest myself so much in your making progress in these
improvements, my answer is, because I love you. A few months spent at a
boarding school in the metropolis of your State, might be attended with happy
effects. -- In such a case* you would be under advantage, not only to make
literary improvements, but to see the mode^ and fashions of those who, by
education, are raised above the common classes of men. Your English grammar,
geography, poets and historians, should always be within your reach -- and your
Bible esteemed above all other books.

ON BEAUTY.
"Victorious beauty* by what potent charm,
Do thou the soul of all its force disarm?
We bless our chains, abhor our liberty,
And yield the uncontested prize to thee.
Whether we rash or calm designs pursue,
Thine is the glorious motive still in view:
For thee we search the wide creation round;
But thou art no where in perfection found:
Some blemish still remains on mortal pride,
And crowding years its airy boasts deride.
Triumphant beauty fits Oliva's eyes
On fire -- I gaze, the trembling luster dies.
Thou lovely, fleeting, transitory thing,
From what immense perfection do thou spring?"
I am, dear Oliva, your most obedient and humble servant, EMILIUS.

LETTER XV. EMILIUS TO OLIVA.
March 18, 1773. My love,
THAT you may not think my attention to you is abated, I have enclosed several
letters to you which were written some time since, but not sent for want of
suitable conveyance; be so kind as to give them all an answer in your next. I
have ten thousand things in my head, which I could better tell you than write,
were I in your agreeable company. Perhaps you may think my affections for you
are greatly cooled -- or I should have otherwise visited you before now. --
Believe me, dearest of creatures, could I do myself this honor without making
a sacrifice greater than you would wish me to do, I would be upon the wing
immediately for B -- m: however, I have fixed on the month of July next for
this purpose. In the mean time, I shall let no opportunity of writing pass
unimproved, in furnishing you with all that information respecting my person
and circumstances, which you can desire -- and beg you not only to adopt, but
to persevere in the same line of conduct toward me.

I enjoy my health to a very great degree, and in many respects am exceedingly
happy; there being nothing which troubles me much, except it be the want of my
dearest Oliva's company. In my ^a^^ you were entertained with several remarks
on the improvement of your already improved mind. I would now observe, that it
is a matter of importance, that those who are both able and inclined to make a
shining figure in life, should be under all the advantages of improvement --
while it is of no consequence to those who are of a different make and turn of
mind: for let their advantages for improvement be what they may, they will
never mak^ any considerable progress in knowledge. ^ young lady of beauty,
genius and fortune, should be careful to lay hold ^f every mean to improve her
mind, polish her manners, and set off her person with dignity and grace;
otherwise she will do herself great dishonor in the view of persons of sense
and r^finement -- for she had it in her power to make a shining figure among
the upper classes of the human species, but through negligence falls far below
what nature intended for her. A person of a beautiful form, destitute of an
improved mind -- of a gr^^t fortune, destitute of a polite, virtuous and
dignified carriage, is an object which never fails of exciting compassion,
mingled with c^ntempt. Think not, my dearest Oliva, that I am pointing at you;
I know the charms of your beautiful person, and I can also add, I have (...)
the charms of your more beautiful mind. What I am aiming (...)* is to urge you
to add be^^^^ to beauty, and one improvement to another, till y^^r charms shall
be acknowledged irresistible by (...) wh^ cast their eyes upon you.

I am, lovely Oliva you^ true f^iend and unfeigned lover, till death, EMILIUS.

LETTER XVI. OLIVA TO EMILIUS.
April 9, 1773. Sir, my friend,
IT is with more pleasing emotions of heart, than I will undertake to express,
that I now inform you of the welcome reception of two endearing and instructive
letters -- the one dated January 1, 1773; in which you are so kind as to wish
me an happy new year -- and the other dated March 18.

I can never be thankful enough for that unwearied and generous pains you have
so long taken to render my person, mind and carriage, agreeable to men of
taste, virtue and refinement; as well as for that concern you have exhibited
for my happiness beyond this transitory state: these things I shall set down as
real tokens of friendship. Be assured, my worthy Emilius, you are not dealing
with an ungrateful girl. I have for more than eighteen months, carefully
attended to those improvements, which you have so earnestly recommended; and I
hope I have not been altogether unmindful of the one thing, which above all
others, is needful.

I sincerely thank you for those lines on beauty; and think the sentiments are
just, and the diction elegant; and should have been perfectly pleased with the
whole, had one word only been omitted -- but I will say no more, for I am
determined never to quarrel with you. I rejoice you have fixed on a time to be
at B -- m.

Your real friend and most humble servant, OLIVA.

LETTER XVII. EMILIUS TO OLIVA.
April 21, 1773. Ever lovely Oliva,
I ESTEEM every letter, with which you are pleased to favor me, as a fresh
proof of your love and fidelity; your last, however, has charmed me more than
all the rest; -- it breathes such a spirit of innocence, gratitude, dignity and
love, that I am overcome with its influence. Mr. S -- g, by whom I received it,
tells me, I must make a visit to B -- m soon, or grieve some of my best
friends: Please to tell them I have not forgotten them, and will fulfill my
engagements at the time prefixed. I have nothing new to tell you respecting
myself, or yourself.

THE LIBERTINE REPULSED.
HENCE Belmour, perfidious! this instant retire,
No further entreaties employ,
Nor meanly pretend any more to admire,
What barely you wish to destroy.
Say, youth, must I madly rush on upon shame,
I^ a traitor but artfully sighs!
And eternally part with my honor and fame
For a compliment p^^d to my eyes?
If a flame all dishonest be vilely professed,
Through tenderness must I incline,
And seek to indulge the repose of a breast,
That would plant endless tortures in mine!
No, villain -- a passion I cannot but despise,
Shall never find way to my ears;
Nor the man meet a glance of regard from these eyes,
That would drench them forever in tears.
Can the lover who thinks; nay, who wishes me base,
Expect that I ever should be kind?
Or atone with a paltry address to my face,
For the injury done to my mind?
Hence, Belmour, this instant, and cease every dream,
Which your hope saw so foolishly born;
Nor vainly imagine to gain my esteem
By deserving my hate and my scorn.
O Oliva, how dignified and charming is the spirit which glows through the
above lines? Other things being equal, such a lady, above all others, would
captivate my heart, and command my reverence and admiration. May the libertines
of our day, in all their attempts upon the fair and virtuous, meet with
repulses of this kind, till their hardened souls, tormented with remorse, shall
be brought to unfeigned repentance.

I am, dearest Oliva, your friend and lover till death, EMILIUS.

LETTER XVIII. OLIVA TO EMILIUS.
JULY 12, 1773. Sir,
YOURS of the 21st of April came to hand yesterday; and my heart bids me to
answer it as soon as possible. I will not be disobedient to the sacred impulse.
I cannot think how Mr. S -- g came to interest himself in a subject so near my
heart. I am sure he must be a man of sensibility and discernment, or he never
would have talked in the manner you have represented; for I have never
exchanged a word with him on our affairs. He surely is in the right now,
whatever he may be at other times. I thank you for the kind things you have
been pleased to say of my last letter; and likewise for the piece you style, "
The Libertine Repulsed." The spirit which breathes through this excellent
composition cannot charm you more than it does me. Your friends are now looking
for you every hour in the day.

May the kind angels hover round
That chosen spot of sacred ground*
Where you are fond of dwelling,
And fill your soul with tender feeling
For, dear Sir, your friend and most humble OLIVA.

A LITTLE after the date of the foregoing letter, the happy Emilius and lovely
Oliva, enjoyed the pleasure of several weeks interview with each other. Their
joys on this occasion were b^tter expressed, by the glows of their
countenances, the sparkling of their eyes, and their polite and endearing
behavior to each other, than pen and ink could do were they in the hand of an
angel. They had been loving each other at several hundred miles distance, for
more than ten months, without the sight of one another faces; during which
period, their persons and minds had received many embellishments which served
to heighten their mutual esteem; and now they had an opportunity of feasting
their eyes and hearts on each others personal beauties and mental
accomplishments, which they did with transports too great to escape the notice
of a numerous circle of friends and relatives.

The fond hearts of Oliva^s parents were now expanded with generosity and
benevolence; they were likewise relieved of ten thousand anxious thoughts
respecting their daughter, who for several months before, seemed to take no
pleasure in any company of any kind. The old mansion house became the resort of
the most polite and improving company in the town. The happy lovers felt
themselves standing at the next door to the summit of all earthly joys. The
modes of entertainments, diversions and improvements adopted on this occasion,
were such only as wisdom and virtue dictated. Thus Emilius and Oliva enjoyed
each others company for more than six weeks together; during which time, they
gained all that satisfaction with respect to the affections of each other they
could wish; and consequently entered into a most solemn engagement to mar^y as
soon as the circumstances of Emilius would permit. In circumstances so
agreeable the time alloted for the performance of this v^ passed away
insensibly, both to Emilius and Oliva. However, when the period fixed on for
their separation was come, these happy lovers, with glowing hearts, clasping
hands and flowing tears, commended each other to the care of a kind and tender
providence, and parted. We shall now leave them to their own reflections, and
pursue their literary correspondence, which closed their coartship.

LETTER XIX. EMILIUS TO OLIVA.
August 29, 1773. Ever charming and ever lovely Oliva,
IT is with a pleasure which none but your Emilius can enjoy, that I reflect
upon the happy moments, hours, days and weeks, lately spent with you and your
friends: And notwithstanding true lovers are extremely apt to behave themselves
so fond of each other as to render themselves ridiculous in the eyes of wise
and good judges, I have the consolation to think we have steered clear of any
just censure of this kind. However, true love will, and must have its natural
course; and one may as well hide the glowings of the natural sun, as to hide it
from the penetrating eyes which surround us on certain occasions. I am
unhappily detained here by reason of my horse's lameness. All my brothers and
sisters are well. I have unexpectedly met with one sister here, the two first
letters of whose name are exactly what I expect yours will be ere long. -- She
is a pretty girl: I wish you and she might have an interview with each other.
Your uncle G -- y and family are in health. I know not what to say more, unless
I should enter upon those enchanting themes we had over so often when at your
papa's.

I am your lover, EMILIUS.

LETTER XX. EMILIUS TO OLIVA.
SEPT. 11, 1773. Dear Oliva,
LAST evening, about nine o'clock, I arrived at the seat of the muses; where I
spend my time with more pleasure than I can do in any other part of this lower
world, unless it be at B -- m, in the company of my dearest Oliva. I am,
however, not so well as common: riding a whole day in the rain, has occasioned
a great cold, which by some means or other, I find it difficult to throw off.
Believe me, my dearest creature, I can put you in mind of nothing of more
importance, than your obligations to devote yourself to the great God. If you
have not real religion, when you are called hence, you must be a wretch undone.
O think of it seriously. I expect you will soon send me a long and entertaining
letter, to make up for the time you have neglected writing to your Emilius. We
must not -- we cannot forget each other; for

LOVE studies how to please -- improves our parts
With polished manners -- it adorns with arts.
Love's an heroic passion, which can find
No room in a base degenerate mind.
It kindles all the soul with lambent fire,
And fills the heart with strong, with true desire.
Love, various minds with various things inspire;
It stirs in gentle natures gentle fire --
Like that of incense on the altar laid,
While raging flames tempestuous souls invade.
The fire which every passion blows
Mounts up with pride, and raging glows.
May our love prove to be of that virtuous, gentle and lasting kind, which is
described in the first nine lines of the above piece.

I am, dear Oliva, your sincere lover till death, EMILIUS.

LETTER XXI. OLIVA TO EMILIUS.
Sept. 18, 1773. Sir,
IT is with more joy than I can express, that I acknowledge the receipt of two
excellent letters from you since we parted; and with open arms embrace the
first opportunity (which is by Mr. Davenport) to answer them.

O Emilius, what can be the reason I am harrassed night and day, awake or
asleep, with the most distressing imagination, that I shall never see you
again? I am grieved almost to death; and what renders my situation most
shocking, is, I have not a friend on earth, beside yourself, to whom I dare
unbosom my heart. O pity me, and pray for me, my dearest friend. Were it not
for fear of frightening you with the idea that I am actually distracted, I
should most earnestly desire you immediately to return to B -- m. I am grieved
to hear that you are unwell, on several accounts; one is because it has
increased my heartfelt distress for you. Whether you or I shall fal^ a victim
to sudden death, I know not; and were it in my power, I know not which I should
choose -- for either would ruin me forever: However, one of the two, I am
persuaded, will soon take place. Think not that I have the spleen: I am as well
as common; and should be cheerful were it not for these distressing
apprehensions concerning you. I am really in earnest, and shall have no peace
till I hear from you. My parents, with all your friends in this town, are in
health. I have nothing more to say* unless it be to assure you, that I am with
all that sincerity I am capable of,

Your distressed and unfeigned friend, OLIVA.
N. B. The lines on love, in your last letter, are very descriptive of that
noble passion; and you will forgive me, Emilius, if I add, let all our actions
toward each other forever hereafter be expressions of this divine flame: Then
our mutual engagements will be fulfilled, our honor supported, and our
consciences kept unviolated.



LETTER XXII. EMILIUS TO OLIVA.
Dec. 4, 1773. Dear Oliva,
I HAVE had the pleasure of seeing Mr. P -- m, who lately came from B -- m; and
who, in his blunt way of talking, tells me that my sweetheart is unwell. I
asked him what he meant -- He answered, Miss Oliva is pining, and* I believe,
unwell; and this was all I could get out of the philosopher on this subject,
except that you looked unwell. I then told him, if you in fact were unwell, I
should have supposed you would have written me on the subject, which you had
not done. He answered, delicate ladies are not apt to communicate all their
feelings to their suitors. Upon the whole, he talked with me till I heartily
wished myself at B -- m -- where I might judge of the health of my dearest
friend. Believe me, my love to you is sincere, and I have not a doubt but yours
to me is the same; therefore, depend on my fidelity, in every thing which I
have said to you. I am this moment, agreeably interrupted, by the reception of
your letter, dated Sept. 28; and am truly surprised at its contents. What the
meaning of your uneasiness is I cannot tell. You say you enjoy a good state of
health; and I am sure I never enjoyed a better in all my life. Be not
discouraged my dearest creature: I hope your fears will prove to be the effects
of mere imagination, and not the forebodings of so great a calamity as the
death of either of us. Let us commit ourselves to the great disposer of all
things, who constantly regulates all events in the most desirable and best
manner. Your wish, that all our future actions toward each other may be the
expressions of genuine and mutual love, meets with my highest approbation: For
I know this is the only way to fulfill our most solemn vows -- maintain our
honor, and preserve our consciences pure before the searcher of all hearts.

Dear Oliva, I am your unfeigned and faithful lover till death, EMILIUS.

LETTER XXIII. OLIVA TO EMILIUS.
JAN. 1, 1774. Sir,
AFTER wishing you a happy New Year, you will permit me to assure you, that it
was with a pleasure too great for words to express I received your letter of
the 4th of December, which informed me of your reception of mine of the 28th of
September. When I reflect on the contents of these letters, I feel for myself
-- I also feel for you. What in the course of Providence is about to take place
I know not. One thing is certain, I have not endured so much anxiety in all my
life, as I have felt since we parted. But since you tell me you are well, and I
know I am, I will try to lay aside these imaginations, and act the part of the
philosopher. Though it be not long to the time you have prefixed to see me, I
must beg you to write as frequently as possible, that I may be wholly freed
from those distressing apprehensions which have almost destroyed my natural
cheerfulness.

Believe me, Emilius, I am forever thine, OLIVA.

LETTER XXIV. EMILIUS TO OLIVA.
March 2, 1774. Dearest of Girls,
I HAVE received your agreeable letter, dated January 1, 1774, with all that
pleasure, which its peculiar circumstances could not fail of producing. I most
heartily thank you for wishing me a happy new year; and hope it will be crowned
with those nuptial joys I have so long contemplated. This depends, however, on
your inclination. Your anxiety concerning my welfare most sensibly affects my
heart. I am glad to hear your resolution to act the part of the philosopher. I
will now inform you of an important event; of which you have probably not
heard: About four weeks since, I took the smallpox by inoculation: and have
got through with it very easily: I was confined to my bed only three days. Of
this event I should have informed you before now, had it not been for fear of
giving you unnecessary pain. I wish you had been with me, and had got as well
over this disorder as I have done: Don't fear of taking it from this letter,
for I can assure you there is not the least danger of it.

I expect you have not received several of my letters, written within these two
months past, because you make no mention of their contents. I wrote you a long
serious letter, in which I have, as far as words can do, expressed my whole
soul. If you have received it already, or do hereafter receive it, be so kind
as to give it a particular answer, and you will lay your friend and humble
admirer under fresh obligations of gratitude.

EMILIUS.

LETTER XXV. OLIVA TO EMILIUS.
MAY 15, 1774. Sir,
YOURS of March, 1774, I have this moment received; and heartily return you
many thanks for its contents. Your remarks on the important event which you
wish may crown the present year, perfectly accord with my feelings. But this is
almost too much to say to a gentleman; however it is said and shall not be
recalled: my solemn vow to you, Sir, shall be my apology. I have not received
your long letter in which you say you have told me all your heart; and
therefore must beg you to write another for this purpose, and I will give it a
particular answer* Your friend and my near relative, Mr. Elijah G -- y, lost
one of his legs, last March; it was occasioned by a wound, which mortified, and
of course called for amputation, as the only mean of preserving his life. I
have one piece of news more to tell you -- my grand mama has been lately
married to the Rev. Mr. C -- s. What such aged people mean by marrying, is
beyond my knowledge.

I am heartily rejoiced to hear you got through the smallpox safely; and am
much obliged to you for your tenderness to me, in concealing this affair till
you had quite recovered your health; for my mind has been so agitated with
fearful apprehensions concerning your welfare, when I knew not but you were
well, that I know not what would have been the consequence, had I been told you
were sick with this dreadful disorder. My distress has in a great degree
subsided, and my mind is now calm, and my natural cheerfulness greatly revived.

Be so kind as to accept the following lines of poetry, as an evidence of my
sincerity, in this declaration.

The beauties of the blooming spring,
Fresh to my mind Emilius bring;
The flowers which give a fragrant smell,
Do emulate his virtues well.
The warbling songsters of the grove,
Chaunt forth melodious notes of love;
All nature smiles with prospects gay,
And joys refined salute each day.
But the soft pleasures of the spring,
Trouble, as well as rapture bring;
When greater joys are wanting still,
Then discontent the mind must fill.
Not all the good that earth bestows,
Can satisfy the mind that glows
With generous love; while absence frowns,
Our hearts must bleed with deadly woun^s.
I am Emilius, yours affectionately, OLIVA.

LETTER XXVI. EMILIUS TO OLIVA.
MAY 30, 1774. Ever dear and charming Oliva,
YOURS of May the 15th is this moment come to hand. I thank you for the several
pieces of news you have been pleased to give me; and heartily sympathize with
my friend in the loss of his leg. Old people who have been once married, can
better tell what they mean by second marriages, than young one's -- I will
therefore let them alone. Your poetical flight would not have met with my
approbation, had it not been accompanied with that most solemn declaration in
the beginning of your letter, that my wishes concerning the crowning of the
year, perfectly accord with your feelings. I am glad you have recovered that
natural cheerfulness, which is so peculiar to yourself; and wish you may never
lose it again; for it must be a continual feast -- this I can say by
experience. I know what it is to be cheerful, and within these three weeks past
I have felt what it is to be melancholy. Sometime since you were in this
situation; now I am taking my turn. I could not before sympathize with you as I
can now; what the reason is, I can give no account: but one thing is certain, I
have no comfort of my life. My mind is so agitated with anxious thoughts, and
perplexing fears, by night and by day, concerning you, that I get no rest. I am
afraid we are never to see one another again; and that one or both of us, must
soo^ launch into a boundless eternity! How solemn is the thought! The period on
which we have fixed to consummate our joys, is only six weeks from the present
moment. A thousand times since I saw you, I have looked forward to tha^ ^ra,
with raptures too great for description -- bu^ ^as! my feelings now tell me, we
shall never behold one another again. Even while I write, my heart bleeds, my
tears flow, my very soul trembles! How vain is this transitory world; how
uncertain are all earthly enjoyments! Our affections have been mutual and
sincere -- by many circumstances almost peculiar to ourselves, they have been
tried and proved genuine. I thank you for all that unseigned friendship and
generous love you have exercised toward me for several years past. Thus,
agreeable to your request, and my solemn promise, I have disclosed to you the
feelings of my distressed soul.

Adieu then, my dearest creature, adieu -- a long, an eternal adieu. I give
myself -- I give you afresh to the great disposer of all events. May heaven's
best blessings descend and rest upon you forever. Once more I bid you an
everlasting adieu.

I am your faithful friend and true lover, EMILIUS.

NOT long after the date of the above letter, Emilius having completed the
business which had occasioned him so long to reside at such a distance from ^is
Oliva, began, notwithstanding the solemn leave he had taken of the idol of his
hea^^^ to contemplate a journey for the purpose of seeing her: And what is ^^^y
remarkable, on the very hour which he had ap^^^^^ed to begin his journey, he
received the follow^^^ ^r from Mr. Calybs, Oliva's father:

LETTER XXVII. MR. CALYBS TO EMILIUS.
Dear and much respected Emilius,
I HAVE heavy tidings for you -- My daughter, your Oliva, is no more. The last
Sabbath she was so well as to attend the funeral of her youngest sister
Charlotte, and the Tuesday following was a corpse. Our babe died with the
canker -- Oliva caught the dreadful malady; and being exceeding restless, her
physician judged it expedient to give her a portion of opium; after receiving
of which, she appeared for a while, to be in a sweet sleep, and our hopes of
her restoration were greatly revived: But to our astonishment, before the time
we expected she would awake, she ceased to breathe. Thus she is gone! forever
gone! and we must submit to the Divine pleasure without a murmuring thought.
Please to excuse my freedom, and come and see us as soon as convenient. Though
our daughter is no more, you may depend on finding a father in her father. I
unfeignedly thank you for all that friendship and love you have exercised
toward her. Mrs. Calybs and Anna send their love to you: Be so kind as to pray
for us, that our afflictions may be sanctified, and we made better by them. May
God support you, as he has supported us, under this great and trying
dispensation of his holy providence.

I am your afflicted friend and most humble servant, D. CALYBS.

AFTER the funeral obsequies of Oliva were performed, her afflicted mother
opened Oliva's scrut^ire, and found the foregoing letters, which Emilius had
written to his beloved Oliva; together with the following letter, sealed and
directed to Emilius, dated three days only before her departure.

LETTER XXVIII. OLIVA TO EMILIUS.
Dear Sir,
IT is with pleasure intermingled with pain too great for pen and ink to
express, that I acknowledge the receipt of your letter, dated May 30, 1774.
Your troubled imagination, and anxious heart, are exact pictures of my own; for
although, when I wrote to you last, my mind was much more calm than it had been
some time before, yet, before I received your last, my distress returned upon
me with double force. I have been preparing every thing for that happy moment,
when you and I should participate of those virtuous and refined joys, of which
none but true lovers are capable. -- But, alas! all my labor, as well as my
love for you, is in vain. -- You feel that we are never again to see each
other, and so do I. You have taken an everlasting farewell of me, and so I must
treat you. -- Which of us is soon to die -- or whether both of us must speedily
leave this world, are things unknown to me; all I can say is, I have it
impressed on my mind, that we shall behold one another faces, in this world,
no more. I thank you a thousand times over for all that attention, friendship
and love, you have shown for me, since the first moment of our acquaintance.
Should I be called away before you are, love my dear parents, for they have
ever esteemed and loved you. But what am I saying! I know not but we are both
under a delusion, and may yet realize all our expected joys. However, my heart
tells me something great is about to take place. May the angels of God surround
thee, Emilius, wherever though art; and heaven's best blessings rest upon you
through time and eternity. Adieu, my dear Emilius, a long, an everlasting adieu.

I am your afflicted and unfeigned friend, OLIVA.

LETTER XXIX. EMILIUS TO MR. CALYBS.
Honored and much respected Sir,
YOU will excuse me if I call you father. Your letter has brought me tidings,
the most melancholy that ever wounded a tender and bleeding heart. Is it indeed
true, that Oliva -- the young, the beautiful, the virtuous, the charming, the
all accomplished Oliva is no more! -- Then break thou my heart, and burst ye
mine eyes with sorrow -- and be thou my soul dead to this world; for what is
all creation to thee, when thy Oliva is no more. O mourn, mourn thou for thy
Oliva, the idol of thine heart -- for she is snatched from thine eager embrace.
She has winged her way to the world of spirits --

But hark -- the voice of reason cries
God lives -- while thy Oliva dies.
It Is joyful truth -- let grief be stayed,
For Nature's debts must all be paid.
Alas! what have I done, that I should be marked out for such peculiar
afflictions? O Lord, did I love that dearest of creatures too much, that thou
have taken her away in the bloom of life? Was she not formed to charm my soul?
and have thou not cut her down to show me the emptiness and uncertainty of all
earthly enjoyments? Have I not sought her welfare, as well as my own, in all my
intercourse with her? And have I not also sought thy glory in the connection
which now is no more? O Lord, I appeal to thee, for thou know the heart* --
but I must not forget that I am a poor imperfect creature; and though Oliva,
above all others, was formed to charm my heart; and though I may have been upon
my guard against loving her more than I ought to love any creature, yet God
must be justified in his conduct, and I must submit to his holy pleasure.

Dear Sir, forgive me, if I have lost sight of you for a moment. My feelings
are such as none can conceive, who have not drank of the bitter cup I am now
drinking. O my dearest, lovliest, sweetest creature, must my ears never more be
charmed with the music of thy tongue, and my eyes never more be blessed with
the beauties of thy form! My grief is too great for expression; I cannot
suppress its overflowings: however, I will try to be calm and resigned -- God
has done nothing unrighteous -- hush then my heart, be still, and know that God
is the Lord.

Dear Sir, did the physician who administered the fatal dose, understand his
business? Was he friendly to your family -- was he himself? O that I had been
present, and snatched it from those enchanting lips that received it, and saved
the lovely creature from the deadly draught. But no more. I mean, dear Sir, to
see you soon, when I shall enquire into all circumstances, and satisfy my
wounded soul. But, alas -- this will be the exact time when your daughter and I
once expected to be triumphing in all the innocent joys of the conjugal state.
O ye heavens, what a reverse is here! My dear parents, (for so you will permit
me to address you) may he who gave you the most beautiful, virtuous and amiable
child that ever lived, and has taken her away in the bloom of life, also give
you grace to say, The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away, and blessed
be the name of the Lord.

The oldest and the youngest of your dear children are now no more; you have
one who now lives: O that, like Anna of old, she may prove a favorite of
heaven.

With every sentiment of friendship, and all the feelings of a disconsolate
child, I beg leave to subscribe myself

Your unworthy friend, and most humble servant, EMILIUS.

NOT long after the preceding letter was written, Emilius visited the
disconsolate parents of his departed Oliva. The scene was truly affecting to
all who beheld it. The good Mr. Calybs and his lady received Emilius with all
the demonstrations of love that tender parents could receive a son who had been
long absent. They mingled sorrows with joys; their hearts bled; their tears
flowed, till weeping could be endured no longer. At this solemn and tender
interview, Mr. Calybs delivered Emilius the foregoing letters, which he had
written to Oliva; together with that which Oliva had written and directed to
Emilius but a few days before her exit. The emotions of Emilius' heart, on
reading this letter, exceeded all description.

The next day the whole family of Mr. Calybs went, in company with Emilius, to
mourn over the grave of his Oliva. No language can express the sorrows of
Emilius heart on this solemn and tremendous occasion. Mr. Calybs presented
Emilius with a suit of mourning, together with some of the favorite rings and
jewels of his departed daughter, before they parted.

Thus we have given you a history of the courtship of Emilius and Oliva; to
which we have added a brief account of Oliva's exit.

N. B. Emilius is still alive, and happy in the enjoyment of one of the most
excellent women in the land.

CHAP. IV. Of the Courtship of BRAGADOTIUS and NUMSKULDIA. -- Not for example
-- but warning.
THE following anecdotes of the actual Courtship of Bragadotius and Numskuldia,
are recorded, not for the example, but for the amusement of the American youth.

As to parentage, education, turns of mind, and courses of conduct, Bragadotius
and Numskuldia, were much on a level. At an early period in life they formed an
acquaintance, which finally issued in what they esteemed love -- and marriage
was its consequence.

While Bragadotius viewed himself the most accomplished young gentleman within
the circle of his acquaintance -- Numskuldia considered herself a lady
inferior to none, within the circle of her knowledge. Bragadotius, without
counsel, felt himself equal to the important trust of providing a companion
every way suited to his taste and views in life: and Numskuldia became the
object of his highest ambition. For notwithstanding many fair creatures fell
under the notice of his eye, none appeared to him so charming, none proved so
captivating, as his incomparable Numskuldia. Contrary to the wholesome counsels
and solemn commands of his parents, Bragadotius was frequently out whole nights
on what he called his own business. Sometimes he was obliged to break open his
father's house; at others he was necessitated to take up his lodgings with the
cattle in the barn, or some out house, till the day broke and the family were
up.

The amorous Numskuldia was under less restraints, than her beloved
Bragadotius; which frequently chagrined, and pained him to the very heart.
Bragadotius and Numskuldia were equal as to religion; for neither they nor
their parents had the least appearance of any such thing.

The following is an Epistolary correspondence which passed between them during
their courtship.

LETTER I. BRAGADOTIUS TO NUMSKULDIA.
Dear Numskuldia,
YOUR appearance last Sabbath was more like an angel, than any thing I ever
saw. -- That new hat, little cap and red gown you lately got at Boston, has
perfectly charmed me. I always thought I had chosen the best girl in our town,
and now I know it to be true. For I am sure there was not one who cut so grand
a figure as you did. Notwithstanding the last night I ever saw you, was
extremely boisterous, yet after we parted, I met with your brother and several
others of equal spirit, who assisted me in pulling down several signs, and
filling up sundry wells, together with a number of other heroic exploits, which
become gentlemen of spirit. When I came home I found all bolted and barred
against me, and therefore was oblig^d to take the barn. I wish you had been
with me, for I assure you, I was very lonesome, and could not help thinking how
I had tired myself. My father says I shall ruin myself, and disgrace my family.
Perhaps you will hear something of these matters; if you should, be not
concerned, for I shall weather the storm, and gain the harbor with flying
colors.

I am your most humble servant, BRAGADOTIUS.

LETTER II. NUMSKULDIA TO BRAGADOTIUS.
Sir,
I HAVE received (...) ^etter with pleasure; and though I c^ (...) my^el^,
(...) you very well know, I am, by the assistance of your cousin, determined to
give it a full answer.

Though I love a little fun once in a while as well as any body, yet it seems
to me, I would never have given myself the trouble, if I had been in your
place, to have played the pranks which you, Jack and others did, in so stormy a
night -- but let this all go. I am pleased that you are charmed with my new
dress; I think it becomes me very much; your cousin says it is the neatest in
town. I hope you will not displease your father; for I am afraid he will
disinherit you. Our Jack told me all your tricks; and did they not injure your
character, and expose you to the displeasure of your father, I should care
nothing about them. I know old folks are full of notions; for they sometimes
act as if they had forgotten that they were once young: this may be our case if
we live long enough. Our Dolly says you are the prettiest fellow in the world,
and I am a fool if I don't have you. I told her nothing of our engagements to
one another -- say nothing Bragadotius.

I am your friend, NUMSKULDIA.

LETTER III. BRAGADOTIUS TO NUMSKULDIA.
Dear Numskuldia,
I AM much obliged to you for your letter; and heartily thank you for that
concern you show for my welfare* With respect to the old man, it must be
confessed he talks high; but I hope it will be nothing more than talk; and that
he will prove better than one could expect from his threatenings. If I should
mind him, I should see no company once a week: To a man of my spirit, this
would be truly mortifying. In matters of business I mean to observe his advice
-- but in matters of love and gallantry, I think I have a right to consult my
own taste; if I did not, I am sure I should never see you again.

I am your true friend, BRAGADOTIUS.

LETTER IV. NUMSKULDIA TO BRAGADOTIUS.
Sir,
IN your last, you intimate, that if you did not consult your own taste, you
should never see me again. This would have been well enough, had it not been
connected with the idea of your father's disapprobation -- which is not a
little alarming. I should be exceedingly grieved to have you displease your
father; depend upon it, Bragadotius, if you do, your sisters will run away with
all the old gentleman's interest, and you will be put to the hard necessity of
getting your livelihood by the sweat of your brow. I wish in your next you
would explain yourself more fully. I have nothing new to tell you, unless the
marriage of Mr. G. to Miss P. be such; which was celebrated last Thursday
evening; they seem to be very happy, and I hope it will last.

I am, Sir, your real friend, NUMSKULDIA.

LETTER V. BRAGADOTIUS TO NUMSKULDIA.
Dear Numskuldia,
YOUR concern for my welfare has added ten thousand charms to all you have
heretofore possessed. I believe in my soul you think a thousand times as much
of what is necessary for our subsistenee in this world, as I do. However give
yourself no uneasiness about my sisters running away with the old gentleman's
estate. They are as deep in the mire as I am in the mud. -- They have, contrary
to my father's express command, kept company with two young fellows, who indeed
I esteem, but he despises. This may prove a lucky hit for me. After all I wish
the girls no harm: Perhaps the old gentleman's displeasure may convince them
that my conduct, or, in other words, a few funny tricks, should not set the
world in an uproar, and hurl confusion through the earth.

To tell you the plain truth, my father is against my keeping the company of
any body; and especially against my keeping your company. He says I am too
young to be out in the night; and wonders what I can see in Capt. Mumpy's
girls, that sets me so bewitched; and often tells me that I shall rue the day I
ever formed any acquaintance with them, and a thousand other things of the same
tenor. Sometimes he puts on a pleasant countenance, and says, Bragadotius, if
you will be a good boy, and behave yourself well, till you are sixteen, you
shall see suitable company with my approbation; but if you cannot be restrained
now, while you are so young, you may depend upon being ruined. These are the
things, my dear Numskuldia, which made me intimate in my last, that if I did
not consult my own taste, I should never see you again. After all, I am
determined so to conduct my affairs, that if it should be my good fortune to
marry you, I may be able to support you in a manner that becomes your family.

I am your friend and humble servant, BRAGADOTIUS.

LETTER VI. NUMSKULDIA TO BRAGADOTIUS.
Sir,
I HAVE received your kind letter, and think you have sufficiently explained
yourself. I cannot help laughing at the girls conduct, because they have said so
much against keeping, the company of those whom our friends dislike. It seems
as if your father wished you never to keep company with the girls till you are
grown old enough to be married. But what mortifies me more than all the rest,
is what he throws out against the Mumpys. I am glad, however, that your heart
seems to be steeled against reflections of this kind; and believe I must hold
my tongue, for the future, about your displeasing the old gentleman.

I am your friend, NUMSKULDIA.

SOON after Numskuldia had received the above letter, the difference between
Bragadotius and his father arose to such an height, as rendered it inconvenient
for Bragadotius to remain under the old gentleman's roof any longer. He
therefore took up his constant residence at Capt. Mumpy's, where, for several
months on the stretch, without the least control, our lovers riotted in all
the joys of what they called love and gallantry. After which, Capt. Mumpy
growing weary of so much expense and dissipation, as Bragadotius and his
company occasioned in his family, advised him to return to his father's house,
and if possible gain his pardon and good will; for, as circumstances then were,
he could no longer tarry with him. Chagrined and confounded at this unexpected
repulse, Bragadotius, having too much pride to comply with the wholesome advice
of the captain, resolved to leave his country; which he did, without
communicating his design even to Numskuldia.

The SOLILOQUY of BRAGADOTIUS.
I SHALL now see how old Sturdum Bragadotius's father.
and Mumpy will feel; they certainly will reflect, that their severity has
ruined one of the most promising young gentlemen in the land. When they come to
hear nothing of me, they will conclude I have put an end to my own existence,
and charge the murder upon themselves. I will be hanged if I don't sweat them.
Sturdum has no son but myself to heir his estate, and his daughters have
greatly displeased him; and Mumpy will never find so good a market for his only
daughter, as he might have found with me; they will all be upon the wing to
find me -- But O my heart aches for Numskuldia; she is a kind and loving
creature -- her taste and temper is much like my own: I am afraid she will cry
her eyes out. I don't care -- they shall all know I am a man of too much spirit
to be nosed about like a boy of a dozen years old. I am now in my sixteenth
year, and ought and will have my own way. But where to go I know not! I will
try my fortune among strangers, seeing my acquaintance are so unkind.

With these and such like sentiments of resentment, Bragadotius, in cog,
traveled from town to town, till he had got more than an hundred miles from
home; where he met with several persons of his own taste, who made much of him
while the little money he had lasted; but after his money was gone, he found
his new friends all forsook him.

Ruminating, one day, upon his circumstances, by the road side, Bragadotius
espied a young gentleman, whistling and galloping along, whom he thought he had
seen before, and making up to him, found he was one of his former companions,
whom Numskuldia had employed to search for him -- and, if possible, to find and
persuade him to return home. Bragadotius was greatly mortified, when he found
his father and Capt. Mumpy had made no stir about his departure; but appeared
rather pleased than displeased that he had left them; therefore he would not
consent to return, according to the request of Numskuldia; but let her know, by
his friend, where she might direct her letters to him.

LETTER VII. BRAGADOTIUS to NUMSKULDIA.
Dear Numskuldia,
THE bad treatment I received from my father and yours, was the only cause I
left B -- l, without communicating my design to you. My heart has asked for you
a thousand times since I left home; and I will be bound yours would have bled
for me had you known the difficulties I have encountered since we parted. I
find strangers of my taste are friendly no longer than my money holds out --
which for some time has been gone. I should comply with your request by Mr.
Hunter, and return immediately to B -- l, were it not that our parents appear
to have no inclination ever to see me again. I begin to think I am undone; and
shall never return to B -- l till my father has left this world; after that I
may inherit his estate; for I understand he is of the opinion, that I am no
more: which opinion I hope he will keep till the day of his death.

I thank you for that love and concern you have showed for me; and hope in some
future time I shall be able to fulfill all my engagements to you. Please to
write me by the first opportunity; and let no one know where I am, and you will
oblige

Your humble servant, BRAGADOTIUS.

LETTER VIII. NUMSKULDIA to BRAGADOTIUS.
Sir,
MR. Hunter has this moment returned from the country with the joyful news that
you are yet alive. All your relatives and mine, have done all in their power to
persuade me that you had put an end to your life* They had heard a rumor from
P -- l, a town about fifty miles distant, that a dead person was found in a
swamp, whom they concluded must be you. None can conceive the distress I have
undergone since you left us. My own circumstances are truly alarming; and the
thought of your death have been distressing beyond all description. I must
entreat you by all the ties of friendship, and by all those solemn promises you
have so frequently repeated to me, to give me an opportunity soon to see you --
for I am already undone -- and shall be wretched beyond all conception, if you
refuse my request.

I am your distressed NUMSKULDIA.

LETTER IX. BRAGADOTIUS to NUMSKULDIA.
My dear girl,
I RECEIVED your affectionate letter yesterday, and thank you for rejoicing
that I am alive. I believe there are but few people in B -- l of your temper.
But what do you mean by your circumstances being so alarming? I hope you are in
jest. You may depend upon my giving you an opportunity to see me in a private
manner, before long: for I would by no means have our relations know I am
alive. I shall be at D -- y, which is only ten miles distant from you, in about
eight days, when I hope to know your situation more particularly. I now begin
to call to mind some things which my father, in an angry fit, once told me,
that I should bring upon myself. However, be of good courage, I hope all will
turn out well yet.

I am your friend and admirer, BRAGADOTIUS.

AFTER the exchange of the foregoing letters, Bragadotius had a strange turn of
mind, which was followed by conduct as strange and foolish: (...) instead of
flying to his Numskuldia, and mar^ (...) her according to his promise, he did
not so (...) as give her an opportunity of seeing him in private; but idled
away his time in the neighboring towns and villages, skulking from house to
house, in a habit which so disfigured him, that his former acquaintance would
scarcely have known him. This conduct filled Numskuldia with more distress than
any thing she had ever seen in her beloved Bragadotius; for her parents had now
began to suspect her circumstances were truly deplorable. They had likewise
heard that Bragadotius was alive skulking about the town. All this was known to
Numskuldia -- and what to do the foolish girl knew not. She was ashamed to
appear in public -- at home, the eyes of her parents met her with severe
rebukes: She was disappointed in every attempt to see Bragadotius; she knew not
what to do -- she languished -- she wished for death to put an end to her
shameful existence. Capt. Mumpy, being overcome with the distress of his only
daughter, finally so managed matters, as to send an officer for Bragadotius,
and proposed that he should marry his daughter, upon condition of his humbling
himself to his father and to him; and if not, he should suffer the penalty of
the law in such cases. At first Bragadotius utterly refused to comply with the
captain's proposal; but finding he could get no bail and must go to jail
immediately, listened to the tears of Numskuldia, and humbled himself before
his father and the captain -- who forgave him upon condition of his promising
to forsake his former vicious company, and attend to busi^^^^ which he did, and
was married.

Thus ends the Courtship of Bragadotius and (...) which in every respect was
contrary to the prudenti^^ ^ims of Courting.

CHAP. IV. Of the Courtship of PARAMOND and MATILDA -- the former an old
Bachelor, and the latter an old Maid.
PARAMOND was a bachelor of about fifty; who, notwithstanding his large
interest, had all his life feared to marry, lest he should not be able to
support his family in that splendour he wished. He was a man of as good
character as one could expect for a bachelor. His person was not ungraceful,
though not very beautiful; his manners acceptable, allowing for the oddities
peculiar to bachelors: And notwithstanding all these things, he firmly adopted
a resolution to change his situation.

What puzzled him more than every thing else, was whether he should woo a young
girl, an old maid* of widow. After several years reflection -- for bachelors'
thoughts run not very rapidly -- he came to the conclusion to marry an old
maid; and in the whole circle of his acquaintance (which was by no means
contracted) he could not find a fairer candidate for his affections than
Matilda. Matilda was a lady of good family, and of a most excellent character;
she was in reality exceedingly clever -- but not handsome. Her good father left
her possessed of a fortune of about four thousand pounds; which rendered her
more beautiful in the eyes of Paramond than any personal qualification whatever
could have done.

At a certain wedding, Paramond and Matilda were rallied by some of the company
then present, and put in mind of the propriety of their matching with each
other. This so emboldened Paramond in the secret conclusions of his heart, that
he soon paid Matilda a visit in the character of a lover; which was received
with that coldness and indifferency which are peculiar to old maids: However
Paramond was not discouraged, as the following correspondence will show.

LETTER I. PARAMOND to MATILDA.
SATURDAY. Dear Matilda,
FOR more than thirty years since, I have had a secret flame enkindled in my
breast for your person. You may remember the silver snuff box I had the
pleasure to present to you when we were children. The sparkling of your eyes,
on that occasion, wounded my heart, and it has never been healed from that day
to this. Should you ask the reason why I did not declare my passion before, I
would answer because it was very great. My circumstances in life were then by
no means affluent; and my love for you was too great to bring you (had it been
in my power) into a situation in which you must have lived in a style less
elegant than that in which you have been brought up. For more than thirty years
it has been my constant study, as well as labor, to lay up money for the sole
purpose of your spending it in my company. The great disposer of all events has
so far succeeded my worldly enterprises, that I am now worth about six thousand
pounds clear of all encumbrances: This, added to the generous portion which
your honored father has left to you, may, with mutual affections for each
other, render us happy for that little space of time we have to spend in this
world. I say that little space, for you must know we cannot live long in this
world.

Thus, my dear Matilda, I have sincerely opened my heart to you, and shall wait
with great anxiety, till you declare your sentiments upon this important and
interesting matter. One thing more: It has always given me pleasure to know
that you have uniformly rejected the most advantageous proposals of matrimony.

I am, dear Matilda, your unfeigned friend and lover, PARAMOND.
To Matilda.



LETTER II. MATILDA TO PARAMOND.
MONDAY. Sir,
THIS is the first time I have ever undertaken to write to a gentleman on the
subject of your letter, with which I was honored last evening; and it is not
impossible but it may be the last. Let this be as it may, I must confess that
your letter has convinced me, that old bachelors are not such cold, frozen and
stupid creatures as they are generally represented. The hearts of men are
hidden from the common eye, and may contain many things -- yea, and agreeable
things too* which do not fall under the notice of superficial observers. Who
could have thought Paramond had been a lover for more than thirty years on the
stretch! I confess I am surprised; and were it not for your known character, as
a man of veracity, I would not now believe you. Your letter has likewise mended
my opinion of old maids; perhaps they are not such cold and despicable
creatures as they have been generally represented.

Paramond, you have filled my head, to say nothing of my heart, with a thousand
thoughts, which belong to youth, and not to old age. What shall I say? I will
write no more, lest I expose myself.

A line from you will not be disagreeable.

Remember, Paramond, our first mother, according to Milton, had worth "That
would be wooed, and not unsought be won."

I am your friend, MATILDA.
To Paramond.



LETTER III. PARAMOND to MATILDA.
THURSDAY. Very dear Matilda,
IT was with peculiar pleasure I received your obliging favor, written last
Monday, and should now do myself both the honor and pleasure, to wait on you,
were it not for the agreeable news of the ship Nancy's arrival from the
East Indies, which I am informed has made a very great voyage, and demands my
immediate attention. I hope she contains the richest silk that ever was woven,
to deck my dear Matilda on a bridal day.

I am sincerely glad to hear that your letter to me was the first that ever you
have written on the subject of mine. However, it damps my spirits to hear you
say, that perhaps it may be the last. I hope this is nothing more than the
effect of your native modesty, and that you will answer this with cheerfulness.
I am really charmed with your judicious observations on old bachelors and
maids; and I suppose the great reason is, because they perfectly accord with my
own feelings and sentiments. I hope your head is not so filled with youthful
thoughts as to disturb your repose. It is truly an excellent character you have
given of our first mother, out of Milton. I am perfectly willing that you
should wear this excellent character; but I must beg leave to be the wooer. --
Better late than never, is an old and good maxim.

What studies please -- what most delight,
We dream them over through all the night.
The whole of the last night my thoughts were ten times as much on you as on my
rich ship from the Indies.

I am, Matilda, your real friend and lover, PARAMOND.
To Matilda.



LETTER IV. MATILDA TO PARAMOND.
MONDAY. Sir,
I HAVE received your second letter with a degree of pleasure I never expected
a letter from any gentleman could have given me. I rejoice at the arrival of
the Nancy from the East Indies, and hope it contains the richest purple that
ever graced a man in that happy moment, when he gave his hand to the lady of
his choice. You are wise in attending to your ship, and kind in not forgetting
your Matilda.

I thank you for your generosity in allowing me as (...) I am able, to wear the
character of our first ^other* and in return will bid you welcome to become a
second Adam.

Your thoughts on me are flattering; but it is probable, that before now they
are fixed upon the rich ship.

I am, Paramond, your friend and most humble servant, MATILDA.
To Paramond.



LETTER V. PARAMOND TO MATILDA.
12 o'Clock Saturday night. Dearest Matilda,
BEING almost wearied out with the labors of the day, and just ready to go to
rest, a gentleman knocked at the door, and delivered me your endearing letter.
I freely confess that it has given me new spirits, and banished sleep from my
before dull eyes. What (my heart whispers) Does Matilda -- does Matilda rejoice
at my prosperity; and will she allow me to act the part of a second Adam! Then
what do I mean, by spending a single moment in attention to my ship? All the
gold of both the Indies is trifling, when once compared with so rich a jewel as
my Matilda. But I am afraid I shall appear to you like a child; however,
remember, my Matilda, the passion which now agitates my soul, is of long
standing, and of late has gained much strength -- it burns with great
vehemence. I feel surprised at myself, that I am no more charmed with the
richest cargo that ever a vessel brought into America! By some means or other
my soul is swayed to love, and I cannot withstand the sacred passion.

My thoughts on you, you say, are flattering: but it is probable that they are
all over before this time.

MATILDA, see from yonder flowers,
The Be flies loaded to its cell:
Can you perceive what it devours?
Are they impaired in show or smell?
So, though I robbed you of a kiss,
Sweeter than their ambrosial dew --
Why art thou angry at my bliss?
Has it at all impoverished you?
It Is by this cunning I contrive,
In spite of your unkind reserve,
To keep my famished love alive,
Which you so wantonly would starve.
Your lover, PARAMOND.
To Matilda.



LETTER VI. MATILDA TO PARAMOND.
FRIDAY. Sir,
YOU have written to me so many of your conjuration stories, that I begin to
feel like a girl of eighteen. I wish you would lay them as^de for a while, and
put on a more manly appearance; at present say no more of your cunning in
stealing kisses and such soft things; but talk to me of things more becoming
our age: Tell me what the profits of your rich ship are -- when I shall have
the pleasure of seeing you in this city, and a thousand other things which
become a man of business, and not a child of sixteen.

I am, Sir, your friend and most humble servant, MATILDA.
To Paramond.



LETTER VII. PARAMOND TO MATILDA.
Tuesday Evening. Dearest Matilda,
YOURS of last Friday came safe to hand a few moments since; and
notwithstanding you seem to be somewhat out of humor at what you call my
conjuration stories, I must tell you that I am pleased to my very heart that
you feel like a girl of eighteen. Let these stories then drop -- and I will
talk to you about the profits of the rich ship Nancy.

The profits of the ship Nancy
It seems will please your fancy.
-- Know ye, then, that this ship, by this single voyage, has cleared me more
than ten thousand dollars; besides furnishing me with the finest purple, and
the finest silks for our nuptial evening.

I am your real lover, till death, PARAMOND.
To Matilda.



LETTER VIII. MATILDA to PARAMOND.
MONDAY Sir,
I HEARTILY rejoice at your prosperity at sea, and wish you may succeed as well
by land. You are a little merry upon me for asking you to let me know the
profits of your ship Nancy: but I think I will forgive you, since you have been
so good as to forgive my feeling like a girl of eighteen.

I hope you will keep the rich purple, and the fine silk you talk so much
about, till you are blessed with the woman, whom of all the world you esteem
the most. Think not, Paramond, that I am more concerned about the profits of
your ship, than any thing else -- it was but a joke, and I beg your pardon:
when you are pleased to pay us a visit, I will tell you what I love the most in
all the world.

I am your friend and most humble servant, MATILDA.
To Paramond.



AFTER exchanging the above letters, Paramond and Matilda had frequent
interviews with each other, for more than six months, when the tide of their
affections arose to such an height, that they cheerfully yielded themselves to
one another, in the honorable and sweet bands of matrimony. The rich purple,
and unparalleled silk which, in their correspondence has been so frequently
mentioned, made their appearance on this happy couple, at church, as well as on
almost every public occasion. Thus Paramond and Matilda have wiped away the
reproach of Old Bacheldor and Maid; and have become the parents of ^ fine boy,
who is heir to more than twenty thousand pounds.

O that all the old bachelors and old maids in America, would follow the
example of this happy couple.

CHAP. VI. Of the Courtship of POLYMOND and SYLVIA; the former a Widower, and
the latter a Widow.
POLYMOND was a gentleman of about thirty eight years of age -- a man of a fair
mind, agreeable person, ana unexceptionable character, and a good estate. He
had two children, whose genius and persons promised fair to make a shining
figure in life.

Sylvia was a widow of thirty years of age -- had four children, (two sons and
two daughters) -- she had no estate; but what was of more value in the view of
Polymond -- she was a lady of the greatest beauty, taste and piety.

Notwithstanding Polymond and Sylvia had been born and brought up within twenty
miles of each other, and were both persons of considerable notoriety, yet they
had formed little or no acquaintance with one another.

About ten months after Polymond had buried his dear companion, he came to a
firm resolution, to marry again, as soon as he could suit himself: But where to
find a lady that would answer his ideas of a second match, he was wholly
ignorant. Upon a certain public occasion, he accidentally cast his eye upon
Sylvia, whose graceful appearance shaded the glory of all around her; she was
dressed in half mourning, and appeared with innocence and dignity, which never
fails to command the attention of men of sense, judgment and taste. Polymond
soon made himself acquainted with the circumstances of the charming Sylvia, and
found them to be such, as emboldened him to make her overtures of esteem,
friendship and love; and accordingly spent several afternoons in her company.
The following letters will give the reader an idea of their views, sentiments
and feelings, during their Ccurtship, which terminated in about six months,
after their first interview.

LETTER I. POLYMOND TO SYLVIA.
Dear Madam,
PERMIT me to lay before you some of the feelings of my heart. I have
heretofore been blessed with one of the most amiable and lovely women that ever
lived -- but she is now no more. I have mourned for her most sincerely; but
this you know has no tendency to make up the loss of her; to me, she is as if
she had never been -- and therefore the language of divine Providence seems to
be thus: O Polymond, the world is before thee, choose for thyself: Hence I am
determined to marry as soon as I can suit my inclination, fancy and feelings.
You, dear Madam, are the first I have seen, with whom I think I could be happy
in the married state. And though I am not unacquainted with many of the pretty
and enchanting feelings of the young and amorous, I will not trouble you with
them on this occasion.

I have two lovely children, for whom I must provide; I have likewise an estate
equal to my most affluent neighbors. Thus you see, dear Sylvia, my situation
and feelings. What I most earnestly wish, is, that you would take them under
your most serious consideration^; and as soon as may be convenient, write me
your whole heart.

I am, dear Madam, your friend and most humble servant, POLYMOND.

LETTER II. SYLVIA TO POLYMOND.
Sir,
FROM the death of my beloved companion, to the moment I was honored with your
kind and endearing favor, I have never had a single thought of marrying a
second time. My circumstances are such, that I am pretty sure, no person
calculated to suit my taste, would ever think of matching with me. My departed
husband was a man of unbounded generosity; and though he always lived in a
state of splendour, yet he died in a state of poverty; and consequently left me
and four lovely children without any considerable means of support. I love my
children and must cleave to them, let it reduce me to poverty and hardships
ever so great. When a kind providence shall so order matters, as to provide for
them, and furnish me with a person agreeable to my taste, I may marry -- but
not till then. I most sincerely thank you for that esteem you profess for my
person, and for that generous proposal you have made -- of keeping my company.
I cannot say how I may feel upon becoming more particularly acquainted with
your person and circumstances. One thing you may depend upon, and that is, your
letters and visits shall be attended to with all that respect matters of this
kind demand from one in my situation.

It has been said, that a man can never love a second person with that
affection, which is necessary to render the conjugal state desirable; -- please
to give me your sentiments on this subject, if you should write to me again.

I am, Sir, your friend and humble servant, SYLVIA.

LETTER III. POLYMOND to SYLVIA.
Dearest of Women,
YOUR answer to my last has met with my approbation and esteem. I was not
wholly unapprized of your circumstances, and therefore am not shocked to hear
them painted in the blackest colors. I knew you had four children, on whose
welfare your heart has been justly fixed.

That you have never thought of marrying since the departure of your worthy
companion, is not strange; and is no reason I should not put such a thought
into your mind.

I will assure you, that it is far from my mind to entertain the least thought
of marrying you, without making handsome provision for your children; and
likewise recommending myself to your taste.

With respect to a man's loving a second woman well enough to render the
married state desirable, I must say, I have never had the least doubt of such a
thing. The best proof, however, of this is drawn from men of virtue and
integrity, who have had experience. As to myself, I have been once married, and
loved my wife as well as I wish ever to love any body; and I know that I loved
several young ladies before her, with the same kind of affection, and to the
same degree, before ever I saw her.

Doctor B --, a gentleman of known integrity and unblemished piety, told me a
few days since, that he had buried four companions, which were so equal in his
affections, that were they all now alive, and presented before him, as they
were the moment he gave them his hand; and he to loose his life, if he did not
say which he preferred -- he should not be able to do it*

The idle fancy, therefore, of men and women not being capable of esteeming and
loving several persons in succession well enough for marriage, is what no
person of sense will build upon. It is not improbable to me, that many a one
has been led to fear a second match on this account, which I think is wholly
founded on imagination, and not on the reason and nature of things.

I am, Madam, your sincere friend and true lover, POLYMOND.

LETTER IV. SYLVIA TO POLYMOND.
Sir,
BY some means or other, I am more pleased with your letters than I ever
expected to be with the letters of any person living. Your generous thoughts
respecting my children, not only please but charm me. I must confess you have
recommended yourself to my particular taste in a manner very agreeably indeed.
Your observations on the possibility of esteeming and loving several persons in
succession, meet with my approbation: For although I have as yet never
experienced any thing of this nature, I can see no reason why I may not.

I have one request more to make, which lies with no inconsiderable weight on
my mind; and that is -- that you would give me an idea of your religious
sentiments; for I know not that I could be cast into a more disagreeable
situation, than to be thrown into the arms of an infidel: For what fellowship
can light have with darkness -- the servants of the Most High with the servants
of the adversary of all righteousness?

I love religion more than I can love any thing else in this world; and
therefore be not surprised if I assure you, that I would rather endure ten
thousand inconveniences in this life, than to match with an infidel, or even
with an irreligious person: In this respect, I feel not only for myself, but
for my children, who must look up to my companion as their father, and be
instructed by him in matters most important and interesting. Excuse, and
believe me

Your real friend, SYLVIA.

LETTER V. POLYMOND TO SYLVIA.
Lovliest of Women,
I AM charmed with your piety -- with that tender regard you have for your
children, and that sacred respect you pay to religion; and therefore there was
no need of your asking pardon for dwelling upon these great and interesting
subjects. It is with real pleasure, I comply with your pious and rational
request, in giving you a summary of my religious sentiments.

My parents were christians, who lived in the strict observance of all the
duties* and doctrines taught by Calvin, that eminent minister of Jesus Christ,
and reformer of the christian church. -- The religious sentiments which I, for
myself, have adopted, comprehend the leading ideas of Calvinism -- and differ
from him in nothing except several inconsistences, which he either had not time
or wisdom to rectify.

True religion, in my opinion, consists in a conformity of mind, heart, and
life, to the law of God and gospel of Jesus Christ. -- In the midst of that
almost infinite variety of sentiments, this, my dearest Sylvia, is all that I
call religion; every thing else, in my opinion, being idolatry, superstition,
enthusiasm and will worship.

All the schemes of religion, ever yet published to the world of mankind, may
be denominated selfish, or benevolent. -- Under the head of selfish religion,
may be comprehended every false scheme of religion which has ever taken place
in the world. -- Under that of benevolence, we may say of true religion, that
it is a religion which is derived from and supported by the scriptures of the
old and new testament. This is the religion which I profess to believe and
practice, and upon which I mean to venture my soul into the world of spirits --
for it bears the image of its original, the great author of the universe.

But the Apostle says, Sanctify the Lord God in your hearts; and be ready
always to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of your hope
that is in you, with meekness and fear.

That boasting and proud mode of giving a relation of what is called religious
experiences, too frequently practiced among the warm and devout, is in my
opinion, an abomination to the great God, and all good men.

With meekness and fear, therefore, I would now give you the following reason
of my hope that I am an heir of the grace of God.

I now perfectly remember that when I was about seven years of age, after
hearing one of my parents commend me, together with my brethren and sisters, to
the grace of God, that I was exceedingly affected with a sense of my own
vileness. I really felt myself an exceedingly vile and unworthy creature in the
sight of God -- before whom I had been usually called to bow myself morning and
evening. This idea grew upon me for more than ten years -- I found myself a
wretch undone; for notwithstanding I had been taught, and knew my duty, such
was the pride of my unhumbled and unsanctified heart, that I loved not the
things which my reason and conscience told me were most excellent. Sometimes I
was gay and airy; but never without some reflection.

When I was about twenty years of age, it pleased the great disposer of all
things (as I humbly hope) to change the temper of my heart. I remember
perfectly well (which is not probably the case with every one) the place and
time when I first discovered a change in my disposition and feelings of soul.
-- I felt deeply impressed with a sense of the righteousness of the great
Governor of the universe; and with the exceeding vileness of my own conduct in
life -- though I have been so happy as to escape those blots and blurs, which
blast the characters of many of my fellow-citizens -- I found enough in my
character and heart to fill me with blushing and confusion.

About this time, I felt an uncommon disposition to take blame and shame to
myself, for all my former conduct toward my creator; and was most sincerely
disposed to censure and condemn myself as a sinner before heaven. Now my
conduct appeared infinitely more vile than ever it had done before; and I felt
myself every way undone -- and began to feel in such despair as words cannot
describe. In the midst of this distress and horror of soul, I was, in infinite
mercy, favored with a fresh idea of the glorious gospel of Jesus Christ. --
The glorious Redeemer appeared just such a savior as I needed; and I thought I
could with the greatest pleasure, yield my all up into his hands, without any
reserve, for time and eternity. Since that time, the worship of God -- his
friends -- his ordinances, and precepts, have been my delight.

In about twelve months after I observed this alteration in my heart and life,
I joined myself to a congregational church of Christ, with which I have lived
in the greatest harmony for a number of years past. With great pleasure I have
put my children under the watch and care of the church, with whom I am in
covenant.

Thus, my dearest Sylvia, I have given you a summary of my religious
sentiments; and, I hope, with meekness and fear, added a relation of my
religious experiences. If I know my own heart, I must say, there is nothing in
the whole circle of creation, which appears of more value, than real religion*
it is in very deed the one thing needful. And to tell you the truth, all
personal charms are of little value, where religion is despised. My former
companion was a person of universally acknowledged wit and beauty: but her
piety added ten thousand charms to all her other excellencies -- her last words
to me were, "Polymond, if you ever should marry again, see to it, that you
match with a lady of virtue and piety -- and may the great disposer of all
things direct you in the pathway of life."

I am, dear madam, your unfeigned friend and most humble servant, POLYMOND.

LETTER VI. SYLVIA to POLYMOND.
Sir,
AS Felix said unto Paul -- thou almost persuadest me to be a christian -- so
must I say unto thee, Polymond -- thou almost persuadest me to be thy
companion. For notwithstanding I had drawn up a conclusion never to marry
again, I begin to feel, that such a conclusion was rash, and unfounded on
principles of wisdom; and that in the great store of my heavenly father, I may
possibly find a companion, every way as agreeable to me, as my former one was.

I am without dissimulation, perfectly charmed with your sentiments in
religion; and hope that relation you have given of your attachment to the great
and interesting truths of the gospel, is genuine.

Remember, Polymond, our heavenly Father knows what is best for all his
children; some must be afflicted, and some most triumph in all the joys of
prosperity: if I am a child, I am an afflicted one; but I would not despair of
the goodness and mercy of God. Bear me upon your heart as often as you go
before the throne of grace; and believe me

Your sincere friend and most humble servant, SYLVIA.

LETTER VII. POLYMOND to SYLVIA.
Dear Madam,
I AM exceedingly happy to find, that my sentiments on religion, so sweetly
accord with yours. Depend upon it, it was your religious character that first
led me seriously to reflect up on making proposals of matrimony to you. I am
likewise happy to find that you are almost persuaded to comply with my request;
and hope you will soon be altogether so.

It is an old maxim, and perhaps a true one, that widowers and widows ought not
to spend so much time in courting, as it would seem necessary for those to do,
who had never been married. Perhaps there is nothing within the bounds of
decency, and limits of custom, to forbid our entering into the joyful bands of
matrimony, within a few months from the present moment. You will say, I am
plain and explicit -- I mean to be so -- and hope you will ever treat me in the
same undissembled way.

I have found by happy experience, in days past, something irresistibly
captivating, in the company of a fine woman: for though her tongue should be
silent, her eyes teach wisdom; and the mind struck with the external graces,
vibrates into respondant harmony.

And while I Am fired, at Sylia blessed,
Amidst profusion still I pine;
For though she give me up her breast,
Its painting tenant is not mine.
Believe me, dear madam, I am determined to see you soon, when I hope we shall
understand one another so well, as to free ourselves from the necessity of
conversing at a distance.

I am, lovely Sylvia, yours till death, POLYMOND.

NOT long after writing the foregoing letter, Polymond spent several weeks in
the company of his beloved Sylvia. And within six months from his first
interview with this charming woman, was blessed with her hand. They have now
lived several years as husband and wife, in the greatest harmony. Kind
providence has indulged them with an happy pledge of their mutual affection.

There is no difference made between the children of the mother and the
children of the father; all seem equally to share the affections of both. The
too commonly odious idea of father in-law and mother in law, is sca^cely known
by the children of this family.

Polymond feels himself more happy than he ever was before; and Sylvia finds no
reason to complain. Their children are trained up in all the graceful and
useful arts. And what is of more importance, than every thing else, both father
and mother are ambitious to excel one another, in instilling into the minds of
their children, just views of true religion. Wisdom, virtue, religion and
harmony reign triumphant through the family.

This is an example of a second marriage, worthy of the imitation of the
Widower and Widow.

CHAP. VII. Of the Courtship of FAIRSHUTE and SHUTEFAIR.
FAIRSHUTE was a gentleman of about seventy five years of age, who had been
favored with two wives: by the first he had several children; by the second he
had none. However, his second wife brought him a considerable fortune, which
was a consolation to him as great, as if she had born him sons and daughters.

Shutefair was a young lady of about twenty-five; in indigent circumstances;
her eyes were black and sparkling, her skin dark, and her person not
disagreeable.

Fairshute had cast his eye on Shutefair, and was determined to make one
vigorous push to gain the young and fair creature, as a companion in his old
age. But how to accomplish the matter, he could not for a while satisfy himself.

Shutefair lived with Mr. Peter Meansomething. A gentleman of a singular
character, and in circumstances somewhat needy. Fairshute concluded that it
would be a matter of the last importance to gain the good graces of Mr.
Meansomething, if he expected ever to win the young and amiable Shutefair.
These he soon obtained, by a few presents of no great value; and Mr.
Meansomething devoted himself to the service of Fairshute, who employed him in
carrying his letters to Shutefair, and receiving hers. In this office Mr.
Meansomething did wonders.

The following is a correspondence between this remarkable couple, which lasted
for more than six weeks; and finally issued in that happy connection, of which
Mr. Peter Meansomething was the principal occasion.

LETTER I. FAIRSHUTE TO SHUTEFAIR.
Dearest Shutefair,
I HAVE been wishing for more than ten days since the funeral, or an
opportunity to speak to you, but could get none. Mr. Peter Meansomething, with
whom you live, tells me that he will deliver this letter to you, and convey a
line from you to me, provided you are disposed to write one -- which I shall
consider as a great favor indeed.

Be not surprised, my dearest Shutefair, that I should write to you so soon
after the decease of my dear wife. My only apology is, that I know I have but a
little while to live in this world, and therefore must improve my time in the
best manner I can. You know your own circumstances, and you know mine. What I
wish is to marry you as soon as possible.

I am, dear Shutefair, your friend and admirer, FAIRSHUTE.

LETTER II. SHUTEFAIR TO FAIRSHUTE.
Venerable Sir,
I HAVE received, by the hand of Mr. Peter Meansomething, your letter, which
has not a little surprised me. I wonder at your imprudence, Grandfather! your
wife has not been in her grave a fortnight yet! What do you mean by such
childish things as those which you have written to me? I am afraid you think me
a fool -- or that you are crazy -- or turning a child in your old age; either
of which are melancholy considerations. Be so wise as to lay a^^de these
childish things, and act with that dignity which becomes a gentleman of your
age and circumstancees You say you know you have not long to live in this
world: I wish you would realize this important truth, and act consistently for
the future.

I am your friend, SHUTEFAIR.

LETTER III. FAIRSHUTE TO SHUTEFAIR.
Lovely Shutefair,
I AM not at all surprised at your astonishment at my conduct in writing to you
upon such a subject, so soon after the departure of my beloved wife. However, I
can never be thankful enough, that Mr. Peter Meansomething has undertaken to
communicate my letters to you, and your^ ^o me.

You seem to be surprised at my conduct; and, to tell you the truth, I am
surprised at it myself. But we must remember there is a reason for every thing:
My wife is gone, and to me, is as if she had never been; my life will soon go
too: You have, therefore, an opportunity to gain a good estate, and not be
troubled with an old husband very long. Please to consider this matter
carefully, and write me soon, for the business calls for haste.

I am your real admirer, FAIRSHUTE.

LETTER IV. SHUTEFAIR TO FAIRSHUTE.
Sir,
I HAVE received your answer to my first letter, with a degree of pleasure I
never expected to experience on such an occasion. Your proposals are generous.
My circumstances are necessitous; but the disproportion in our ages is more
than fifty years -- a circumstance, you must allow, rather unhappy.

When you first proposed a connection between us, I was really surprised; but
the more I think of it, the less I am shocked. We read in the good book, that
when King David was old, and could get no heat, that the young and beautiful
Bishag was presented to him for the purpose of administering to, and lodging
with him. -- We are moreover told, that the King knew her not. How your
proposal will finally set on my mind, is what I will not undertake fully to
determine, without more time, and further consideration. -- However, you may
rest satisfied, that I will treat the subject with that attention which is due
to matters of the last importance, till I shall have made up my mind upon it.
In the mean time, I shall be glad to hear from you by the instrumentality of
Mr. Meansomething.

I am, Sir, your friend and most humble servant, SHUTEFAIR.

LETTER V. FAIRSHUTE TO SHUTEFAIR.
Charming creature,
YOUR letter has given me more pleasure than you can cleverly conceive. It is
not uncommon for young ladies to feel shocked at the first proposals of
matrimony, especially when they come from an unexpected quarter. Mr. Peter
Meansomething says you look serious and very thoughtful, and thinks my
proposals are the principal cause of this uncommon appearance. Remember, my
dear Shutefair, the moment you consent to write your name Fairshute instead of
Shutefair, you become the mistress of my house, and heir of my whole estate. I
would moreover inform you, that I am by no means so debilitated as King David
was, when Bishag the Shunamite was placed in his bosom; for my eyesight has
not so failed me, that I cannot discern a great difference between you and any
other lady in town. I wish to hear from you soon, for I feel impatient to know
my fate.

I am, dear Madam, your admirer, FAIRSHUTE.

LETTER VI. SHUTEFAIR TO FAIRSHUTE.
Sir,
I HAVE deliberately taken under my most serious consideration, your generous
proposals of matrimony; and am now prepared to give you an answer in full.
Notwithstanding all the obstacles which have presented themselves in my way, I
have come to a full determination to comply with your request: I am therefore
yours. And now, Sir, I depend upon your generosity and kindness to me. -- If I
should fail of these, I shall become the most miserable of women.

My friends and relatives are surprised at my conduct; the eyes of the world
are upon us -- and there are more than fifty old maids and widows, who wish we
may quarrel in one week; but depend upon it, if we do, it shall not be owing to
any fault in me.

May the best of heaven's blessings rest upon you, Sir.

I am for ever yours, SHUTEFAIR.

LETTER VII. FAIRSHUTE TO SHUTEFAIR.
Dear Shutefair,
I AM quite charmed with your last letter, and would loose not a moment in
giving it an answer. I thank you a thousand times over for complying with my
request. I know the old maids and widows will make a fuss about us, and tell as
many lies a-piece concerning our match, as they are years old: The cause is
easily perceived; -- but I will say no more. I am determined, as far as in me
lies, to make you happy, and have not the least doubt but this is your
resolution respecting me. Monday evening I will pay you a visit at Mr. Peter
Meansomethings, when we will endeavor to adjust all matters respecting our
intended connection.

I am yours forever, FAIRSHUTE.

MONDAY evening, according to appointment, the old gentleman put on his best
bib and band, and with difficulty, hobbled away to Mr. Peter Meansomethings' to
see his beloved Shutefair; and soon dispatched the important business of his
COURTSHIP, much to his own and his beloved^s satisfaction. This remarkable
couple were married within six weeks from the first proposal of matrimony.

The whole town seemed in an uproar for several weeks. Every mouth almost was
opened against them both -- some blamed one, and some blamed the other -- so
that it was difficult for an impartial spectator to tell which was the greatest
fool.

"The neighbors, one and all, cried heaven forbid
That seventy-five should have so young a rib;
But love, we know, is called a flame -- then why,
Will Not fuel make the best that is old and dry?"
However, Fairshute and his lady, have proved as good as their word, to one
another; and appear perfectly pleased with their matrimonial situation: The old
gentleman is fond of his young wife -- and the lady is pleased that she has a
good home, and becom^ heir to a good estate. They bid fair to end the^^ days
more happily than either of them could have done in an unmarried situation. And
thus ends the Coutrship of Fairshute and Shutefair.

CHAP. VIII. The Courtship of DAMON and HARRIOT.
DAMON -- an American youth -- was twenty-one years of ^ge, when he became the
humble servant of Harriot. He was the oldest son of a reputable Clergymen;
educated in the christian religion. However, during his residence at the
University, from under the eye of his pious father, ^e contracted sentiments
and habits quite inconsistent with the christian religion, and returned home a
finished Deist; which almost broke the hearts of his exemplary and pious
parents. Notwithstanding all this, Damon was possessed of such a degree of
beauty, sense, modesty and politeness, as never failed to gain him the esteem
of those who beheld him -- especially the esteem of the fair sex. Harriot, upon
her first acquaintance with Damon, was turned of eighteen. She was the only
child of a rich and reputable merchant, and of course heir to a very handsome
fortune; her education was liberal for a female, and very particular in matters
of christianity. Though Harriot was no beauty* yet, in her presence, it was not
uncommon for beauties to become dissatisfied with themselves. Harriot was one
of those rare persons, the second sight of whom, always charms more than the
first. She dresses with singular grace, always intermingling simplicity with
elegance. Her ambition is to know what most becomes the fair sex, in every
station of life; and her ruling passion the love of virtue. She is possessed of
a tender, modest, delicate and benevolent heart. The peculiar turn of her mind
is cheerfulness, unallied to vanity. She always appears pleased, at the stated
returns of her seasons of devotion.

Damon and Harriot formed their first acquaintance with each other, at a public
entertainment. Damon, having entered the parlour, indulged his eye
indifferently to wander over a numerous circle of beautiful and well dressed
ladies; in the midst of whom his attention was irrisistably fixed on the
incomparable Harriot -- whose pene^ra^^ing eye soon perceived herself the
object of Damon's admiration. Both brushed, and in vein strove to hide from the
company the impressions a sight of each other had made upon their tender and
yielding hearts. The very next day, Damon found means to introduce himself to
Harriot as a courtier, and met with her modest approbation. The following
correspondence will display before the reader, their sentiments, their love,
and the obstacles which lay in their way* for a long time, of matching with
each other.

Damon having chosen the study of law, as the high road to political
preferment, was obliged to reside at some considerable distance from his
beloved Harriot, and therefore commenced the subsequent correspondence.

LETTER I. DAMON to HARRIOT.
Dear Harriot,
THE first impressions your lovely person made on my heart, have proved too
powerful for opposition -- too deep for eradication. They have answered one
good end at least: They have convinced me that I was a stranger to myself --
that cool philosophy is insufficient to silence the clamors of a warm, a loving
heart. Since I parted with you, ten thousand kind and tender ideas have
streamed through my unguarded, though alarmed mind; and as many new and
uncommon feelings have rioted in my heart.

To give play to these new visitors of my soul, I have undertaken to write to
you in a manner I have never done to any before; yea, in a manner I have
heretofore thought no gentleman of integrity could do to any lady whatever. I
mean (...) one who is unfeignedly and entirely (...) your command. It is a
fact, which I cannot hide from you, Harriot, that you have so far gained the
ascendency over my heart, that I am never happy, but when thinking or writing
about you. This is a situation into which, once, I could not thought it
possible for me to be thrown by the charms of the most charming creature that
ever existed. But facts are stubborn things. My consolation is, that it is
honorable for the vanquished to acknowledge the power of the conqueror. Thus,
dearest of creatures, I have unbosomed my heart to you, and most earestly beg
that you would not use the power you have gained over me, to my destruction.
Please to give me an answer which is generous; and depend upon my treating you
and your writings with the greatest respect and generosity.

I am, dear Harriot, truly your admirer, and most humble servant, DAMON.

LETTER II. HARRIOT to DAMON.
Sir,
CONTRARY to that line of conduct, which heretofore I have adopted, and
invariably followed, I now, with a trembling hand and anxious heart, set down
to answer your favor received last evening. The business being quite new, and
in every point of light very delicate, I must beg ten thousand pardons for
whatever may appear improper in sentiment and manner of communication.

Your professed esteem for my person is truly flattering; and what I never
thought of taking place in the heart of any gentleman of your rare
accomplishments But as flattery is too frequently used by young gentlemen, for
the language of politeness to ladies, you will excuse me if I treat it as such,
till I am furnished with more ample proofs of your sincerity. Perhaps the
impression of which you speak, may soon prove quite transient and illusory both
to you and myself. In this case, we may prove ourselves rash and inconsiderate,
if we reckon much upon them, before their reality is more fully ascertained.
Let this be as it may, be assured, Sir, your last visit left impressions on my
heart too powerful not to demand my most serious attention: These shall all be
unfolded to you as far as prudence shall dictate. From this declaration, you
will easily see that I wish not to let my heart run away with my head -- my
fancy with my judgment. The first impressions made on the heart cannot always
be relied on with safety; and therefore judgment must have time to be brought
to maturity.

I acknowledge my obligations to you, for that attention you have been pleased
to bestow on me, and shall be happy again to hear from you.

I am your obliged and most humble servant, HARRIOT.

LETTER III. DAMON to HARRIOT.
Lovely Harriot,
YOUR obliging and delicate letter has filled my heart with more pleasure than
I can command language to express. The line of conduct you formerly adopted,
and constantly pursued, was undoubtedly judicious for the time of life in which
it subsisted. But all general rules have some exceptions; and I am happy to
find, that in the present case you have laid hold of one so much in my favor.
Be assured, dear Madam, your confidence in me shall never be abused. I most
heartily confess, that the language of flattery is too often used to the ladies
as the language of politeness. For, upon recollection, I find that I have in
several instances been guilty of this ungentleman-like conduct to the ladies.
This is a folly which shows the great importance of examining general customs,
and shuning those things, which, though customary, are really unrighteous and
abusive. But in the present case, you must give me leave to assure you* that my
pen and heart have exactly corresponded with each other. And to convince you of
the sincerity of this declaration, I will wait on time and s^^rounding
circumstances as far as the fervent emotions of my soul will admit. Your
suggestion that my impressions (...) ^^ssibly prove illusory, and subject us
both (...) and rash steps, is so far from (...) ^robation, that it has
increased my original flame for you. For having detected my self in an error
respecting my philosophical sentiments concerning the ladies, I am now
determined to be more suspicious of my abilities to withstand the force of
their charms. By some means or other, in the present case, I find my strength
is weakness and my philosophy cool and unmeaning. -- I am therefore your
willing captive, and beg you would treat me with that generosity which becomes
a mind fraught with so much virtue and dignity as the mind of my ever lovely
H^^riot.

Be so kind as to lay me under new and fresh obligations of gratitude by a
second ^^ne from you, and believe me to be

Your true friend and unfeigned lover, DAMON.
P. S. Please to excuse the following lines.

Often had I laughed at female power
And flighted Venus' chain --
Then cheerful sped each fleeting hour,
Unknown to eating pain;
By Stoic rules, severely taught,
To scorn bright beauties charms,
Sage wisdom swayed each rising thought,
And wooed me to her arms --
Till Harriot, heavenly Harriot, came,
Sweet pleasure played her round;
Her lucid eyes shot forth a flame,
That hardest hearts would wound.
Quick from my breast each bold resolve
In empty Ether flew:
My limbs, in trembling bliss dissolve,
All wet with chilling dew.
O charmer! cease that ardent gaze.
Nor rob me of my (...);
Such lightenings from those eyelids plays*
It burns my tortured breast.
Deluded swains, who vainly proud,
Assume gay freedom's air,
And, boastful, scorn the prostrate crowd:
That sigh before the fair!
If once fair Harriot, you should meet,
And view her heavenly mien;
To love converted, at her feet,
You Will hug the pleasing chain.


LETTER IV. HARRIOT to DAMON.
Sir,
YOUR second letter has made a greater impression on my heart in your favor
than any thing which preceded it. I am happy to find that you approve of that
general line of conduct which I have observed till very lately, and that my
present deviation therefrom can be justified upon principles of reason and
expediency. Your approbation of my ideas of the language of flattery being used
for the language of politeness to the ladies, by the young and sprightly among
the gentlemen, is pleasing; and your abhorrence of this practice is truly
charming. I most sincerely thank you for that assurance you have given me, that
you will take time and lay hold of every opportunity to prove your profession
of friendship is well founded and sincere. The poetry with which you close your
letter is undoubtedly excellent. -- I wish its application to me may prove
judicious. Please to accept of the following lines and believe me

Your real friend and well wisher, HARRIOT.
A manly, modest piety informed,
His searching spirit, and his bosom warmed;
Blessed with a judgment, steady, strong and clear,
That shun^d alike the giddy and severe;
He scorned to drag superstitions chain,
Or mingle with the enthusiastic train.


LETTER V. DAMON to HARRIOT.
Dearest Harriot,
I AM more and more charmed with your sentiments; and know not what will be the
issue of my esteem and love for your person. I most sincerely thank you for the
liberty your letters give me of hoping for success. The lines with which you
closed your last, form a character in which I should glory much more than that
of an Alexander or Caesar -- for superstition and enthusiasm are things I most
heartily despise; and from the manner of your introducing them, I am ready to
conclude, that your religious sentiments are similar to my own -- which is a
circumstance in a lady I have been afraid I should never be so happy as to find.

Dearest of creatures adieu, DAMON.

LETTER VI. HARRIOT to DAMON.
Sir,
THE following letter from a near kinsman of mine, in your neighborhood, has
given me inexpressible pain. -- With all that frankness and sincerity belonging
to an honest heart, I send it enclosed for your inspection, and must humbly ask
whether you are injured thereby or not?

Your affectionate HARRIOT.

TO MISS HARRIOT -- B.
My much esteemed and dear Cousin,
THAT love and friendship which has subsisted between us, from our childhood,
shall be my apology for the following lines. I am told, and partly believe it,
that Damon, that beautiful, accomplished, young and rich gentleman, who lives
at my next door, is actually engaged in paying his addresses to you. His
parentage is good -- his education excellent, and his person is charming. But
-- how shall I express it? his sentiments differ as widely from yours as light
is from darkness. -- He is really a Deist, or what is more agreeable to him to
be called, a free thinker. I am sure you have not the least idea of this, or
you would never encourage his addresses, let them be ever so warm. He knows me,
and you are at liberty to read this letter to him.

I am your unfeigned friend and relative, HENRIETTA.

LETTER VII. DAMON to HARRIOT.
Dearest of Women,
YOUR last letter has occasioned much uneasiness in my breast -- I must -- I
will frankly own the truth of Henrietta's charge against me: I am really a
disbeliever in Revelation; and from the lines with which you closed your last
letter but one, I have been honored with, I had fondly hoped you were of the
same sentiment; but I find myself greatly mistaken. However, I have solemnly
engaged not to deceive you in any thing respecting myself; and therefore do
most readily acknowledge the truth respecting this matter.

However, I must likewise acknowledge, that I have never found one among my own
denomination, so agreeable to me as yourself. My philosophical sentiments have
been such, as to justify my denial of all Revelation to Mankind. I wish you not
to draw up any rash conclusions respecting this matter. -- I will as soon as
may be, communicate to you my reasons for my faith, provided you wish to hear
them. In the meantime, I wish you to read the writings of lord Herbert, lord
Bolingbroke, David Hume, and the celebrated Thomas Pain. With unabating
affection,

I am dear Harriot, Your friend and true lover, DAMON.

LETTER VIII. HARRIOT to DAMON.
Sir,
I AM chagrined and mortified beyond expression, to find the man, whom I have
esteemed more than any other, has imbibed sentiments which must separate us for
ever. At the same time I must applaud your integrity and frankness, in
acknowledging the charge laid against you by my cousin. A sincere Deist is a
more commendable character than an hypocritical believer in Revelation. The
books you have recommended for my perusal, are perfectly familiar to my mind,
having been in my possession a long time, and read with care and candor over
and over again; and indeed I know not of any Deistical writer of note, in the
English language, from Lord Herbert, the first English Deist, down to Thomas
Pain, whom I have not read. And I must confess, that notwithstanding several
of these writers stand high in the list of fame among the literati, they appear
to me, to have missed the truth, in a manner truly astonishing. Among the whole
groupe, I think Pain the greatest blockhead. By this time your patience is
probably gone, and you are ready to give me up as a weak and wrong headed
enthusiast -- be it so, Damon; I had rather be given up by you than by my God
and Savior; and I had rather give you up, as much as I love and esteem you,
than give up my bible, my savior and my soul. Please to reflect upon the
consequences of your sentiments, and believe me still

Your sincere friend and humble servant, HARRIOT.

LETTER IX. DAMON to HARRIOT.
Dear Harriot,
I AM confounded and grieved for your mortification at my sentiments respecting
Revelation. I am moreover surprised that this subject has been attended to with
so much care and candor by one of your age. My reasons for rejecting the bible
as the word of God -- as a revelation to man, are contained in those writings
you have read; and therefore there can be no propriety in my enumerating them
at this time. I will not hide it from you, Harriot, that, when I left your
sentiments, in which I was carefully educated, by my honored and dear parents,
and adopted those which I now embrace, I was young and greatly attached to
several members of the University, who were unbelievers in revelation, and at
the same time great philosophers. I may be in the wrong, and therefore will
most seriously examine the arguments in favor of my sentiments; for I assure
you, your solemn talk to me, respecting your attachment to Revelation, has
greatly shocked my heart. Be so kind, Harriot, as not speedily to give me up;
for I solemnly declare, I will not reject any light that can be thrown into my
mind on this important subject.

I must beg you to give me the reasons of your faith in Revelation; for I find
you have attended infinitely more to the subject, than I have ever done.

I am, Harriot, still your unfeigned friend and true lover, DAMON.

LETTER X. HARRIOT to DAMON.
Sir,
THE serious, candid and charitable way, in which you answered my last, has
encouraged me to undertake a task, which I am afraid is too great for my feeble
pen. However, relying on the assistance of that God, whose honor and glory I
wish ever to advocate -- and feeling for the welfare of him, who says* Harriot,
give me the reasons of your faith in Revelation, I will gird up my loins, and
attempt an answer to your request. In the mean time, let me humbly entreat you,
as far as possible, to divest yourself of all former prejudices against the
Book of God. -- Set down, Damon, and read this sacred Book, with the greatest
care and candor -- asking yourself the questions as you go through it -- Is
this like the productions of mere man -- are these sublime descriptions of
intelligent beings -- of Deity, of angels and men, to be found in compositions
merely human? Are the descriptions of creation -- of the fall of man -- of the
redemption of man -- of morality -- of religion -- of the resurrection -- a day
of judgment -- a heaven and hell -- equalled in any of the writings of any of
the philosophers, ancient or modern? This request, Damon, cannot justly be
thought unreasonable by you, who ingeniously have confessed that you have
formed an opinion of Revelation at a period in life, when you must be sensible,
that your judgment was not ^ipened to that degree it is now. Paradventure, a
judicious examination of the scriptures of the old and new Testament, may
finally issue in a system of theological sentiments quite different from those
which you now embrace. Remember, Damon, your philosophy has failed you with
respect to the power of love. Perhaps it may likewise fail you with respect to
the scrip^ures being a mere human composition. May the great God, whose
existence and providence y^^ cannot deny, inspire you with wisdom to discer^
the truth.

Your real friend and humble se^vant, HARRIOT.

LETTER XI. HARRIOT to DAMON.
Sir,
IN my last, I engaged to give you the reasons of my faith in Revelation. In
doing which I must be excused from any thing more than a bare statement of
them; for a f^ll illustration of them would require a volume of many pages.

The first reason of my faith, in Revelation is founded on the circumstances of
mankind, who are destitute of what, enlightened christians plead, is a
revelation from God. These are, in my view, evidently such as demonstrate that
human nature, unassisted by supernatural aid, is in a most deplorable
situation. The consequence must be that such supernatural aid is truly
desirable. -- When we contemplate the situation of the most enlightened and
improved nations on earth, who are destitute of Revelation, the idea that the
light of nature needs the assistanee of Revelation, rushes in upon our minds
with irresistible force* I need not inform you, Sir, (whose mind is open to the
various situations of those nations, which are destitute of Revelation) that
not one of these nations have ever been known to form and embrace a scheme of
religion which would bear the test of common sense: Witness the religions of
the Pagan world; yea, all the schemes of religion which have not been founded
on revelation -- the grossest idolatry -- the greatest injustice, as well as
the m^st immoral and obscene conduct, have been celebrated as acts of virtue
and religion. Thus the world by wisdom, or philosophy, knew not God.

2. By contemplating the character of the one living and true God, I find it is
not inconsistent with his perfections, to grant unto his depraved and benighted
creature, man, an express revelation of his mind and will. For if the great
characteristic of the Deity be goodness, and if the circumstances of men be
such as call for such aid as a revelation from God -- then his character cannot
be impeached, provided he should give men such a revelation. The objection
against the bible's being a revelation from God, because it is not given to all
the nations of the earth at once, cannot be admitted; for in this case, we
should be deprived of one of the greatest arguments in favor of revelation,
viz. the great need in which men stood of it. The revelation no^ being sent to
all men at the same time; those who enjoy it, may, by comparing themselves with
those who do not, see in a more striking manner, the blessings of such a
revelation, than otherwise it would be possible for them to do. Now, if it can
be made to appear, that the scrip^tures of the old and new testament are such
a^ aid to men as the circumstances of mankind required, and the character of
God admitted to be given to them -- I think we shall have gained our point,
that it is rational to believe that the Bible is a revelation from God.

This then is the third reason of my faith in revelation, viz. That the
scriptures of the old and new testament, are such a revelation of the mind and
will of God, as the circumstances of men required, and the holy character of
the God of Nature would admit to b^ given to mankind.

I shall not here stop to illustrate this idea, but proceed immediately to give
you a fourth reason of my faith in revelation; which is, That the scriptures of
the old and new testaments contain all the internal and external evidences of a
revelation of the mind and will of God, any one could reasonably expect or wish
for.

Thus, Sir, you see the ground upon which I go. Be so kind and generous as to
examine each step with care and candor, and put me right where I have
transgressed the laws of reason and common sense. I shall attempt some farther
remarks on this subject in my next. O that I might be the happy instrument of
convincing you that the Bible is in reality the word of the living God.

I am, Damon, your real friend. HARRIOT.

LETTER XII. HARRIOT to DAMON.
Sir,
IN my last I endeavored to state some of the first principles of my faith in
revelation. In this I shall attempt some farther arguments in favor of the
Bible's being the word of God.

1. All the doctrines of the Bible are (...) r^ght reason. It is not denied,
tha^ several of them, however, are such as men in the exercise of reason,
unassisted by revelation could never have discovered. B^t it is affirmed, that
after their discovery -- though several of them are too great and sublime for
our scanty faculties to comprehend -- yet none of them are contrary to right
reason. -- To exemplify -- The law of God requires supreme love to God, and
impartial and universal love to mankind -- which exactly corresponds with the
dictates of right reason and with common sense. The scheme of salvation
revealed in the Bible, though incomprehensible and undiscoverable by the light
of nature, has been acknowledged consonant to the dictates of right reason, by
many of those whose rational powers are acknowledgely inferior to none of their
fellow creatures. Witness a Boil, a Bacon, a Newton, an Addison, and ten
thousand more, whose names are recorded in the annals of religion and same.

Again, that true religion, according to the scriptures, consists in conformity
to the moral law, which requires love to God and man, and compliance with the
gospel -- which requires repentance toward God, and says in the Lord Jesus
Christ -- together with a faithful observance of all the commandments and
ordinances of God's house, has been found by the generation of the righteous in
all ages, to be consonant to reason. The universality and perfection of the
divine government -- a future state of rewards for the righteous, and
punishment for the unrighteous which is strictly eternal, are doctrines
perfectly agreeable to reason. The particular doctrines of total depravity,
human dependence, and the several operations of the spirit of God, with all
those which are their consequents, are so evident to every judicious mind, that
I need say nothing of their being consonant to right reason.

2. Another argument which I consider in favor of the Bible's being the word
of God, is the manner in which its doctrines were first propagated. The writers
of the several doctrines found in the holy scriptures, lived in different ages,
and in different parts of the world; but all appear to speak the same language,
to be moved by the same Holy Ghost; which could not have been the case had they
not been inspired of God. -- Moreover the propagation of these sentiments have
not been accomplished by the powerful arm of the civil law -- by the dint of
the sword; their intrinsic excellency has been felt and acknowledged by
thousands. The spirit of God has evidently attended the reading and preaching
of the great truths of the gospel, to the comfort and salvation of thousands
who have been favored with them.

Moreover, the original propagators of the doctrines contained in the
scriptures, were, generally speaking, illiterate men; and consequently
unfurnished with the means of deceiving the world; and the doctrines which they
preached and practiced were, in every point of light, contrary to the taste of
selfish and wicked men. Their rapid spread, therefore, must be owing to the
divine and not human agency.

A third argument in favor of the scri^s being of a divine original, is, that
their contents are of such a nature as far exceeds the highest stretches of the
most exalted created minds and powers. All finite powers are confined to limits
infinitely short of those exalted and ^^blime stretches of thought exemplified
in the scriptures of divine truth.

4. The whole of the scriptures are delivered, not in the name of the penman,
as would naturally have been the case, provided they had not been of a divine
original -- but in the name of the God of Nature, who undoubtedly is their
author.

5. Miracles, which were wrought in attestation of the truth of what the sacred
penman wrote, are, notwithstanding all the Deistical tribe have said and
written to the contrary, a powerful argument in favor of the divinity of the
scriptures.

6. The fulfillment of prophesies is an incontestible and powerful argument that
the Bible is the word of God.

7. The resurrection of Christ from the dead, must be considered by all
rational and candid minds in the same point of light -- Christ had foretold his
death, and the time of his resurrection -- If this had failed of proving true,
the scriptures must have been given up as a delusi^n -- the enemies of
revelation would have had great reason to have triumphed over the friends to
revelation and christianity. Perhaps you will say, this depends on the
scriptures themselves. We ackn^wledge that the scriptures do ascertain this
great and glorious fact; and we moreover affirm th^^ it is ascertained by human
testimony; and consequently ought not to be rejected by any rational man.

8. The internal evidences of the truth of the holy scriptures are very
singular. These writings, without exception, breath love and friendship to God
and man; they are stamped with the marks of a divine original. We find men
capable of comprehending the works of genius and piety of a human kind; but
where is the man to be found, who can grasp the lofty extent of thought, the
elevated and sublime stretch of sentiment contained in the lively oracles of
the living God? We look at them as we do at the extensive and mighty ocean, and
see a part, but not the whole of their meaning.

While these sacred writings have been hated and ridiculed by the vicious, they
have always been esteemed and loved by the generation of the righteous.

Thus, my dear Sir, I have given you some faint traces of the outlines of the
reasons of my faith in revelation.

I advise you carefully to peruse Kneeland's View of the English Deistical
writers, and the several answers to Pain's Age of Reason -- which might with
more propriety, have been styled the Age of Folly.

I am, Damon, your real friend and most humble servant, HARRIOT.

LETTER XIII. DAMON to HARRIOT.
Dearest of Women,
IN your three last letters you have convinced me of one important fact, at
least, viz. that there is one sincere believer in revelation. I must confess
however, that I feel myself unarmed, and cannot dispute the soundness of your
reasoning upon this great subject; though at the same time I must in honesty
say, my heart is not well pleased with the general ideas contained in your
defense of the divinity of the scriptures. I know not how to account for it,
but so the fact is, that since I sat down seriously to examine the contents of
what you call the holy scriptures, I have formed different ideas of my own
moral character than what I have ever heretofore imagined concerning myself. --
The dread of the majesty of all the world has strangely fallen upon my mind,
and I really have no peace of conscience.

I begin to mistrust, that the great difficulty in believing the scriptures are
the word of God, lies not in my understanding, nor yet in the nature of the
scriptures themselves, but in my own heart. O my dearest Harriot, pity and pray
for me, who am unfeignedly

Your friend and sincere lover, DAMON.

LETTER XIV. DAMON to HARRIOT.
Dearest Harriot,
SINCE my last I have given up the point, and drawn the solemn conclusion* that
the Bible must be the word of God; and from its contents, I imagine all men
must be saved -- for it says, that Christ has died for all, and wills, that
all men should be saved. This appears to me a glorious doctrine indeed; and
what is especially agreeable to me is, that if all men shall be saved, I myself
shall be saved too. I hope now we shall be of a mind. I feel myself relieved
from an insupportable burden, which like a mountain of lead, weighed down my
immortal spirit. Rejoice with me, dear Harriot.

I am yours for ever, DAMON.

LETTER XV. HARRIOT to DAMON.
Sir,
I CONGRATULATE you upon the acknowledgment of the divinity of the holy
scriptures. This appears to me an important step toward your salvation.
However, I must take the liberty to inform you, that the doctrine which you
have imbibed as contained in the scriptures, is a delusion; there really is no
such doctrine, as universal salvation, contained in those holy writings. --
Those who have wished for happiness, without being willing to become holy, have
^^inly flattered themselves with this idea of salvation; but it is undoubtedly
false: -- If it be possible, I must persuade you to lay it aside, as what will
by no means bear the test of revelation. Please to reflect, Damon, that nothing
can be more evident from scripture, than at the close of time, all men shall
appear before the judge of quick and dead -- the good at his right hand, the
bad at his left -- and the righteous shall enter into life eternal, and the
unrighteous shall go away into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his
angels. -- How solemn, dear Damon, is the scene which is just before us. With
increasing love and friendship, I am, Damon,

Your real friend, and most humble servant, HARRIOT.

LETTER XVI. DAMON to HARRIOT.
Dearest Harriot,
I KNOW not but I am ever to be in the wrong. -- I thought, that when I could
heartily acknowledge the divinity of the scriptures, I should be readily
allowed orthodox, but this I now perceive is not the case. And upon reviewing
my idea of universal salvation* as being contained in the scriptures, I feel
ashamed of having abused those holy writings. It is really a fact, that the
Book of God makes a wide difference between the believer and the unbeliever --
between the clean and the unclean -- between him that serves God, and him that
serves him not -- and heaven and hell are to receive the different characters.

Giving up then, the sentiment that all men shall be saved, I have come to a
conclusion, that salvation is by the deeds of the law -- for the righteous only
shall be saved. -- You must be sensible, however, that this idea of salvation,
must be very alarming and painful, to one so destitute of righteousness as I
am. I mean to apply myself, with the utmost diligence, to every requirement ^f
the law; and hope I shall be so happy, after all my follies, as to work out my
own salvation.

I am, dearest Harriot, your friend and unfeigned lover, DAMON.

LETTER XVII. HARRIOT to DAMON.
Sir,
I AM much pleased with your temper, respecting theological sentiments; and am
happy to find you readily yielding to the force of truth. You have frankly
given up the schemes of the Deists and Uni^ersalists, which encourages me to
hope that you will not retain that of the Arminians. I must, I will be faithful
to you, Damon. Arminianism will as effectually ruin your soul, as Deism, or
Universalism; therefore I must, if possible, persuade you to lay this
self-righteous and ruinous scheme of religion aside. The revealed and plain
truth is quite contrary to the leading features of Arminianism. In the
scriptures we are assured, that men by nature, are entirely depraved. -- This
depravity consists in voluntary opposition to the great Jehovah, the Father,
Son and Holy Ghost. We are moreover assured, that G^d has fixed upon, and
published, a plan for the salvation of sinners, which is entirely by rich, free
and sovereign grace. I confess that it is difficult for men who have not
carefully reflected on this subject, to gain an idea, how they can be saved by
grace, and not by works; and at the same time feel their obligations to
exercise repentance toward, and faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, and abound in
every good word and work.

I earnestly wish you, Damon, to take this subject under your most serious
consideration. May your mind b^ led into the truth by him in whom we all li^e,
move and have our being.

I am, as heretofore, truly your friend, HARRIOT.

LETTER XVIII. DAMON to HARRIOT.
Dear Harriot,
I KNOW not that ever I shall be otherwise than in the wrong. My early fixed
determination to steer clear of superstition and enthusiasm, landed me in the
deeps of Deism. Being driven from this ground by your masterly pen, I hastily
adopted the idea of Universal Salvation but being convinced that this sentiment
was unscriptural and illusory, I fell into the Arminian scheme, which promises
salvation to those who are careful to obey the law; and of course have been
seeking to establish my own righteousness as my only ground of hope. But from
your last, I perceive that I am still in the wrong; and indeed I find that my
own righteousness is far from that which God requires of every rational
creature; and that there is no evidence from the Bible, that the righteousness
of Christ is designed only to patch up our filthy rags. I now know not which
way to turn, unless it be to believe that I shall be saved, let me live and do
as I may. And yet this scheme of religion does by no means correspond with the
dictates of my reason.

Dear Harriot, be so kind as to unbosom your heart to your afflicted friend, on
the all important subject of real religion; be not contented with telling me
what is wrong, but tell likewise what is right: for I assure you, I begin to
^^^l more concerned about the welfare of my soul than I have ever heretofore
done. To encourage you in this infinitely important business, I will, with
blushing, confess to you, that previous to my acquaintance with you* religion
was never a subject of my serious consideration. Dearest of creatures,
cheerfully comply with my earnest request, and lay your friend and lover under
new obligations of esteem and gratitude.

DAMON.

LETTER XIX. HARRIOT to DAMON.
Sir,
THE account which you give of yourself is like that of a slender barge tossed
on the boisterous waves of the raging sea -- always in danger, though sometimes
faintly hoping soon to gain a safe and commodious harbor. God is my witness,
that I pity you from my very heart, and would cheerfully do any thing and every
thing in my power to pilot you into the only harbor of complete and eternal
safety. For this purpose I must be allowed the liberty to use great plainness
of speech -- My love and concern for the welfare of your soul being too great
to admit of flattery, or daubing with untempered mortar.

Be assured then, dear Sir, that the great obstacle, which lies in your way of
understanding and believing the truth unto salvation, is ^e^^ed in your own
breast. Be not angry with me, when I tell you, that this obstacle is nothing
more no^ less than the voluntary enmity of your heart against the blessed God.
Believe me, Damon, it was this that blinded your eyes against the reality and
glory of that revelation which the God of love has been pleased to make of his
mind and will, in the scriptures of the old and new testament. It was this
wickedness of heart which led you to catch hold of that mistaken idea of
salvation, which the Universalists have presumptuously palmed on the holy
scriptures. And after your good sense and uncommon talents had led you to give
up these too often fatal delusions, it was the corruption of your own depraved
heart, which spurre^ you on to embrace the Arminian notion of salvation by the
deeds of the law. And being again driven from the dangerous ground which you
had inconsiderately taken, by the mighty power of truth -- it was the same
deceitful heart that led you, as your last resort, to the absurd and
unscriptural scheme of salvation adopted by the Antinomians -- which, give me
leave to tell you, is no less foreign from the truth, than either of the
former. Now, as these various schemes of religion will by no means answer your
purpose, permit me in faithfulness to your best interest, to tell you, that
your feet undoubtedly stand on slippery places. O, Damon, forgive me, if, by
the terrors of the Lord I undertake to (...) you into the paths of peace and
happiness. It is a fact little known and less felt by the careless and
inattentive world, that men, as they are by nature, are totally depraved; that
this depravity consists in selfishness -- which, like a mighty fountain, bursts
forth in innumerable streams, and deluges human nature with shame, disgrace and
guilt; yea, ba^s up every avenue to life everlasting. Till you are convinced of
this great truth, you will be always laying hold of error instead of truth.
For, believe me, Damon, the gospel plan of salvation, in every point of light,
is absolutely contrary to the views and feelings of a selfish creature. Hence
have arisen those innumerable false schemes of religion, which have disgraced,
confounded and ruined a great part of the human race. Know, then, my dear
friend, thyself. By comparing your heart and life, with the moral law, which
indeed is a transcript of the moral image of that God, the peculiar glory of
whose nature is disinterested benevolence, you will soon see what a wretch
undone you are. Should you ask, And what shall I then do, when I have gained
this knowledge, which you consider of so much importance -- I answer, it will,
as it always has been, be your duty immediately to repent and believe in the
Lord Jesus Christ* -- From a sight of your true character, and a sight of your
absolute dependence on God, the way will be opened, or more strictly speaking,
prepared for you to understand the gospel scheme of salvation through Christ.
You will find, you need just such an atonement for sin, as that which is
published in the gospel -- that you need just such assistance as that which is
pr^ferred in the gospel. -- In one word, that you need just such a salvation as
that which is tendered to you by the Mediator. Here let me with pleasure tell
you, that if you are made the subject of saving grace, you will be charmed with
all these great and glorious truths, together with ten thousand others, which
now lie hidden from your eyes.

May the great God give you, O Damon, an heart to understand these important
things.

Your unfeigned friend and most humble servant, HARRIOT.

LETTER XX. DAMON to HARRIOT.
Dearest of creatures,
I FEEL myself laid under new and fresh obligations by every line you write me
on that all-important subject, true religion. It is a fact I can by no means
hide from you, that I am exceedingly distressed for the welfare of my immortal
soul. I perceive that you, by some means or other (I know not what) have got a
knowledge of my heart, which heretofore I supposed no one could have of the
heart of another. For, upon the most critical and deliberate examination, I
find you have described the very temper and soul of it. You say I must
immediately repent and believe on the Savior of mankind. -- This I easily
perceive to be my immediate duty; but alas! I find myself unable to do it; and
how can I be to blame for not performing that which I have no ability to
accomplish? I see not but I must perish after all. Harriot, were you ever in
such a distressing situation? If you were, and have got out of it, point me the
way in which I may do the same, and I shall be more than ever

Your friend and true lover, DAMON.

LETTER XXI. HARRIOT to DAMON.
Sir,
I THANK you for your acknowledgments of my sincere attempts to promote your
best interests. I am moreover exceedingly pleased, that the truth has found you
out -- that in fact it has showed yourself to yourself in any degree. But I
must be forgiven if I tell you, that you need further information still
respecting the deceitfulness of your own heart. Remember, my dear friend, the
human heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked. You say that
you perceive it your duty to believe on the Savior of men -- but find yourself
unable to perform this important task. Here let me freely observe, that this is
a difficulty not uncommonly felt by those who are brought to the knowledge of
the truth -- and frequently got rid of with no small trouble. I must,
therefore, grudge no pains to free you from it.

1. Be so kind, Sir, as to reflect seriously upon the absurdity of any thing's
being your duty which lies beyond the limits of your natural powers and
faculties to perform.

2. Carefully examine whether, strictly speaking, the great duties of
repentance and faith, are of this kind?

3. Carefully settle the matter, whether it be really a fact, that you feel
yourself under obligations to exercise repentance toward God and faith in the
Lord Jesus Christ immediately, or not?

Now, that I might contribute, as far as in me lies, to your properly solving
these momentuous questions -- please to attend to the following remarks:

1. There are many things incumbent upon men as duties, which they have no
inclination to perform; but none which lie beyond the limits of their natural
powers. The natural consequence is, that the inability which men are under to
obey God, must be of a moral and not a natural kind; and of course wholly
inexcusable. -- Hence

3dly. The want of natural ability is the only thing which can excuse us for
the nonperformance of any thing which God commands.

But remember, dear Sir, a disapprobation of our wrong conduct toward God,
lies within the limits of our natural powers and faculties; and of course is a
duty incumbent upon us -- for the nonperformance of which, we can have no
reasonable excuse. Therefore, we may easily see, that when we feel it a duty to
repent; and at the same time, feel no inclination to perform this duty, the
difficuly lies not in the want of power, but in the want of inclination only --
or in other words, in the positive and voluntary opposition of our hearts
against God. When you come carefully to examine these matters, I believe you
will find I am not out of the way in my thoughts on this great and interesting
subject. Wishing you much of the divine aid, I beg leave to subscribe myself

Your unfeigned friend, and and most humble servant, HARRIOT.

LETTER XXII. DAMON to HARRIOT.
Dearest of Christians,
YOUR attention to my best interest has more attached my heart to you than
beauty or gold could ever have accomplished. Sure I am, that if ever man had a
friend, I have one in you. I here acknowledge, though I should never see you
again, I am under obligations of gratitude to the great disposer of all events,
and to you, for that unwearied attention you have given to the welfare of my
precious and immortal soul. The unexampled sincerity, the unbounded
faithfulness, which you have exemplified toward me, can no more be forgotten
than it can be rewarded by me.

I have in very deed taken the things which in your last you so faithfully and
solemnly recommended to my serious consideration; and find, that
notwithstanding all my conviction, I have not yet been thoroughly stripped of
all excuses for my sins against God. But, blessed be the kind parent of nature,
I now begin to see and feel myself wholly destitute of any real excuse for the
wickedness of my heart. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the
body of that death which hangs so heavily around my immortal soul? -- O,
Harriot, what shall I say? what shall I do? My iniquities are great beyond
conception -- beyond description. Can you pity me? Will you pray for me?

I am your distressed friend and lover, DAMON.

LETTER XXIII. HARRIOT to DAMON.
Sir,
YOUR last letter gives me more hopes of your welfare, than all I have received
from you before. The commandment has come home to your conscience: sin has
revived, and you have died. O Damon, I heartily rejoice, that your iniquities
have stared you in the face; that your excuses for them have fled away, and
that you feel yourself a wretch undone. Depend upon it, Damon, the whole need
not a physican -- but they who are sick. Now, now my friend, the way seems
prepared for you to see the propriety of the gospel scheme of salvation; there
such a Savior as you need, is held up to your view; one who has made an
atonement for your sin; who has opened the way for God to grant you that
assistance, which you now feel you stand in the most pressing and dying need
of. And now, what can I say unto you more proper, more suited to your peculiar
circumstances, than, Damon, immediately prostrate yourself on the bended knees
of your distressed soul, before your offended Maker -- your abused Savior --
smiting on your breast, and crying, mercy! mercy! O thou God of mercy! for
Jesus sake, upon one, who deserves no pity, mercy or compassion. -- Sure I am,
Damon, if you can sincerely and heartily do this, the bowels of divine
compassion will roll over you, and the language of heaven to you will be, Son
be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven. -- May the God of all grace grant that
this may be your happy case, for Jesus' sake.

I am yours, HARRIOT.

LETTER XXIV. DAMON to HARRIOT.
Faithful and lovely Harriot,
IT is with inexpressible pleasure, I lay hold on the first opportunity to
inform you, that since I wrote my last, and before I received your last letter,
I have been carried through one of the most astonishing scenes that ever mortal
experienced. I am in an awful manner de^eived, or I have, in very deed, passed
from darkness to light, from death to life, from condemnation to justification,
from wretchedness and despair to joys inexpressible and full of glory. For all
this, I have nothing, by way of merit, t^ attribute to myself -- it is solely
the work of our God and Savior. Old things are done away* behold all things
are become new! Come, my dearest Harriot, rejoice with me, and shout grace,
grace, rich, free and sovereign grace, displayed to the vilest of the vile.

On the nineteeth of the present month, when the busy scenes of life were all
out of ^ight, and all nature hushed into silence; in a late hour of a dark and
tremenduous night, when my soul was evidently sinking in despair -- when sleep
had parted from my eyes, and attention to every thing but my own wretchedness,
was entirely gone; all, all on a sudden, as in the twinkling of an eye, the
thick darkness which had so long overshadowed my soul, vanished away; and light
poured into my mind in a manner truly astonishing. By light here, I wish to be
understood truth; or, in other words, a clear representation of the character
of the true God, the Father, Son and the Holy Ghost, as infinitely excellent; a
view of my own character as infinitely odious and hateful in the sight of all
intelligent and holy beings; a clear and affecting view of the character of
Christ as Mediator, and the method of salvation through him. These and several
other scenes of divine truth, arose and unfolded themselves to my mind in a
manner truly astonishing. By passing from death to life, I wish to be
understood, that whereas, previous to the moment I am now describing, my soul
was destitute of the least emotion of love to God; but now a sacred flame of
divine love was enkindled in it, and every power of my whole man, was exerted
in love to God, in repentance toward God, in faith in the Lord Jesus Christ,
and in love to his image, wherever I contemplated it. Upon the despair of my
soul vanishing, joy inexpressible filled my heart. Now I love God^s holy, just
and good law. I admire and love the gospel of Jesus Christ, which heretofore I
hated and ridiculed. I am charmed with the image of God stamped on his
children. I am delighted with every form of divine worship, and pleased with
every ordinance of the gospel. And you will not censure me as a flatterer,
dearest Harriot, if I say, I love you more than I have heretofore ever done.
Let us bless and adore God for all his goodness and mercy.

I am, dear Harriot, your affectionate DAMON.

LETTER XXV. HARRIOT to DAMON.
Sir,
I AM more pleased to hear of the pious and devout exercises of your heart,
than I should be to hear myself proclaimed the sole governess of all Europe. --
The reasons of this will be perceived by you more easily, than by those whose
hearts have never been expanded with disinterested benevolence; the excursions
of whose souls never leap the bounds of the narrow and contracted circle of
self-love. We read of joy in heaven among the angels of God* over one sinner,
that returns and repents. If the Hierarchies of the upper world feel
themselves so much interested in the welfare of an unworthy and insignificant
mortal, well may mortals rejoice at each others happiness. But let us not be
too sanguine in our hopes; but rejoice with trembling; for this becomes us,
while in this vail of tears -- while in this state of imperfection -- while we
have not gained the heights of glory -- while we have not ascended the mount of
God.

O Damon, let us not forget, that they only shall be saved, who hold out to the
end. -- That this may be the happy case of us both, let us never cease to pray.
I am, Damon,

Your rejoiced friend and most humble servant, HARRIOT.

LETTER XXVI. DAMON to HARRIOT.
Charming Harriot,
I CAN never be thankful enough for that unwearied pains you have taken to
reform me in sentiment, in heart and in life. I now humbly hope, God has in
reality blessed your pious and unwearied labors, to my everlasting good; and
doubt not but he will reward you for the same in the coming world, to which we
are hastening. -- When I reflect upon the remaining corruptions of my heart, I
feel that I ought to rejoice in my prospects of future glory, with fear and
trembling; r^^ling that none can be saved, but those who hold out to the end of
life, in the exercise of every christian grace and virtue.

And now, Harriot, I must inform you, that I begin to find myself engaged in a
warfare, of which previous to my change I had no idea. I find that I must, in
fact, fight not with flesh and blood only, but with principalities and powers,
with the rulers of the darkness of this world, or lose my soul after all.
Little did I think, in that happy moment, when, without reserve, I gave my all
into the hands of God, that I should so soon be called to put on the gospel
armor, and plunge into the battles of the Lord, the Captain and Bishop of my
soul. I find it impossible for one, who is really embarked in the cause of the
dear Redeemer, to live in this world without reproach and persecution. My
Deistical acquaintance have got some idea of my views of mind, feelings of
heart, and determinations of soul, and begin to despise my company -- Some say
I am beside myself; others that I am acting a lowlived and hypocritical part,
only to please a lady whom I wish to marry. The followers of the Lamb of God
seek my company, and call me brother; they mark the change through which I have
passed, and bid me God's speed.

I am pleased with the change of company, which seems to be the consequence of
my change of heart. But Oh, what will become of those sprightly youths, who
formerly were my dearest companions? They certainly are in the gall of
bitterness, and in the bonds of iniquity. Their feet stand on slippery places,
and must, unless sovereign grace prevent, slide in due time. Oh that each of
them had an Harriot, whose instructions would be attended to out of love. I am
determined to do all in my power to convince them of their errors, and persuade
them to embrace the christian religion. You will join with me in addressing the
throne of grace, night and day, with an express view to their salvation.

I am, dear Harriot, your obliged friend and most humble servant, DAMON.

LETTER XXVII. HARRIOT to DAMON.
Sir,
I AM extremely gratified with your last letter, because* it speaks the
language of the redeemed, struggling through this vale of tears -- to come off
conquerors, yea more than conquerors, through him who has loved and died for
them. The effects of that change of sentiment and heart, you mention, are what
I have been looking for, and so far as they evidence the reality of your
religion, rejoice at. I have felt similar ones pressing upon my spirits for
more than eight years; and no wonder, for the Lord God, immediately after the
fall of man, put enmity between the serpent and the woman whom he had deceived,
and between his seed and her seed. Hence the righteous are an abomination to
the wicked, and the wicked are an abomination to the righteous -- and can no
more have fellowship with each other, than Christ and Belial. Persecution is
the natural consequence of these different natures; but let us be careful that
we are reproached and persecuted for nothing but well-doing -- that we suffer
for righteousness sake; then may we rejoice and be exceedingly glad, for great
will be our reward in Heaven; for so persecuted they the Prophets who were
before us; yea our Lord and master himself. O Damon, be not afraid to suffer
the loss of all things for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus our
Lord, who has died for you; yea be not afraid to die for the promotion of his
cause, which you have so lately espoused.

Wishing you all that divine aid, which the God of love has promised those who
are not ashamed of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, I beg leave to subscribe myself

Your real friend and sister in Christ, HARRIOT.

LETTER XXVIII. DAMON to HARRIOT.
Dear Harriot,
IN the greater part of my letters I have said but little to you, on the
subject with which our correspondence was first introduced; and the reason has
been, because you have constantly entertained me with matters infinitely more
important. I would now inform you, that my love for your person, instead of
dying away, has increased ten thousand degrees; but notwithstanding all this,
my love for the honor of christianity, which I have lately professed, and mean
ever to advocate, is so much greater, that I can by no means adopt a line of
conduct toward you, that can bring the least disgrace upon christianity.

The Deists say, that my profession of religion is only to please you. I wish
to establish my own heart in the truth, and convince them, and you, and all the
world, that my religion is not of such a hypocritical and selfish kind. -- For
this reason, I am determined, at present, to say nothing to you upon the tender
and commanding subject, with which our correspondence was introduced.

I hope in a few months to see you, when I shall have an opportunity to unbosom
my heart, to one who has proved herself my greatest friend. With every sincere
and devout wish for your prosperity, I beg leave, dear Harriot, to subscribe

Your much obliged friend, and unfeigned lover, DAMON.

AFTER the exchange of the foregoing letters, (which took up the space of near
two years,) these pious youths had frequent interviews with each other, for
about three months; when Damon's business called him to part with his beloved
Harriot, for several months together. During this period the following letters
were exchanged between them.

LETTER XXIX. DAMON to HARRIOT.
Dearest Harriot,
SINCE I parted with you, I have come to a firm conclusion, to lay aside the
study of the law, and all my worldly schemes of ambition, and commence preacher
of that gospel, which I have heretofore reproached and ridiculed. The reason of
this is not because I imagined it impossible to be a christian, and at the same
time a lawyer -- to be a statesman, and at the same time a follower of the lamb
of God; but because I think I can in this way do more to build up the cause,
which before I strove to pull down, than in any other.

My dear and honored father, considers me as the prodigal son; and rejoices
over me, saying, my son was lost, but now is sound; was dead, but now is alive.
You will excuse my troubling you with an account of this change of my
circumstances, and believe me,

Your faithful friend, and true lover, DAMON.

LETTER XXX. HARRIOT to DAMON.
Sir,
I THANK you for the important intelligence with which you were pleased to
favor me in your last. And heartily wish you may be succeeded in the great and
important work you have engaged to pursue for life. Some may consider you as
descending exce^ding low, by leaving the law and politics, and confining
yourself to the generally despised business of a preacher of the gospel. But
this is by no means my opinion. For I consider the office, an ambassador for
Christ, as the most weighty and honorable, that man can sustain in this life.
What, my dear friend, can be more honorable, than to be vested with authority,
to negociate a peace between the offended heaven and the rebellious earth? Than
to bare the messages of love and peace to a perishing world? Gird up your loins
then, Damon, and prove yourself a workman that needs not to be ashamed. O,
that you may be a son of thunder unto those who are in a state of nature; and a
son of consolation to those who are in a state of grace. O, that you may prove
the happy instrument of turning thousands and tens of thousands to
righteousness; and have them as the crown of your rejoicing at the great and
last day*

I am, Damon, your real friend, and well wisher, HARRIOT.

LETTER XXXI. DAMON to HARRIOT.
Lovely Harriot,
GIVE me leave to propose a question to you, which is of great importance to
me, and I hope of no less importance to you. Are you willing to marry your
Damon? Can you give me your hand and heart; and make him who already is under
greater obligations to you than to any other person on earth, more happy than
he can be without you? Please to feel the importance of the question, and write
me an answer as soon as may be.

I am dearest Harriot, your unfeigned lover, DAMON.

LETTER XXXII. HARRIOT to DAMON.
Sir,
I AM not a little surprised at your delicate and important question; for I had
concluded you would not think seriously of entering into the married state till
you had been settled: However, it is a question which lies too near my heart to
admit of trifling. Our acquaintance with each other has been of so long
standing, that there can be no impropriety in our fully knowing each others
mind. You have declared yours by the question which you have proposed to me. I
will declare mine by the following answer: Damon, with cheerfulness of
sincerity of heart, I give myself to you.

I am, dear Damon, yours forever, HARRIOT.

LETTER XXXIII. DAMON to HARRIOT.
Loveliest of Creatures,
IT is my fortune to be continually laid under new obligations to you. I thank
you for that cheerful and generous donation of yourself to me; and to make you
a suitable return for your love and generosity, I do most cheerfully and
solemnly give myself to you. Harriot,

I am yours forever, DAMON.

A FEW months after the exchange of the two foregoing letters, to the great joy
of the parties, and their friends -- Damon and Harriot, in the full bloom of
youth, beauty and piety, were publicly given to each other, by their parents
and themselves, and their vows recorded by the proper officer.

Damon is now one of the most popular, fervent and useful preachers in the
nation; and Harriot one of the most amiable and pious women in the land.

FINIS.

