Mr. CULVER's STRANGE and WONDERFUL VISION OF HEAVEN and HELL.



A VERY REMARKABLE ACCOUNT OF THE VISION OF NATHAN CULVER. Late of NEWTOWN,
(NEW YORK.) SHOWING, His Deistical and vicious Principles, and how he was
converted to the TRUTH, by an extraordinaty and immediate REVELATION, Jan. 10,
1791.

JOEL xi. 28. And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my
Spirit upon all Flesh, and your Sons and your Daughters shall prophesy; your
old Men shall dream Dreams; your young Men shall see Visions.

FIFTH EDITION; now re-published by the particular and earnest Request of many
serious and well-disposed CHRISTIANS.

BOSTON, in AMERICA, printed by E. RUSSELL, near LIBERTY-POLE. 1795. (With
Privilege of Copy-Right.) [Price 3s. per Dozen, and Six Pence single.] Where is
now for Sale, MARY and MARTHA's DIALOGUE, and several other serious Pamphlets.

PREFACE.
IT is to be lamented that there are so many Imposters in the world, which say,
I have dreamed, I have dreamed, and perhaps have deceived some; but we shall do
well to attend to the Scriptures of Truth, which are a sufficient rule of faith
and practice, and able to make us wise unto salvation. The Apostle tells us to
believe no other doctrine but what we have already received; for faith he,
Though we or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel unto you, than that
which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed; Gal. i. 8.

IT appears by the life and conversation of the Author of this piece, that his
mind has been exercised in a wonderful manner; for whereas he lately delighted
in vice and folly, he is now quite the reverse, and has given us reason to
believe his words, partly by a message done by him to his Brother, telling him
that his time was short on earth, and that he must prepare for death, and in a
very few days appear before GOD in the eternal world of spirits. Acoordingly
soon after, it being in the month of March following, by an unhappy accident,
he was drowned in Susquehanna-River, which the people of Newtown affirm to be
true; and the VISION is most surely believed by those who at first were
regardless of it, not allowing it to be true, nor him to be worthy of their
approbation, rudely making him the topic of their discourse: But GOD has
chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise; and GOD has
chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty;
and base things of the world, and things which are despised has GOD chosen;
yea and things which are not to bring to naught things that are, that no flesh
should glory in his presence; 1 Cor. i. 27.

T. B.

The HOLY GUIDE.


A VISION, etc.
JOB, chap. iv. ver. 13, 14, 15, 16. In thoughts from the visions of the night,
when deep sleep falls on men -- Fear came upon me, and trembling, which made
all my hones to shake -- Then a Spirit passed before my face, the hair of my
flesh stood up: -- It stood still, but I could not discern the form thereof: An
image was before mine eyes; there was silence, and I heard a voice, etc.


IT is necessary, as I proceed, to acquaint you with the particular
circumstances of the matter.

FOR near two years before this uncommon thing happened to me, I was inclining
to believe there was neither Heaven or Hell, and grew so hardened in my heart
as to hate the Holy Bible, and was in a strange temptation to cast away all
thoughts of GOD, and give myself up to all evil, concluding I should die like
the beasts; but still had some fear at times, which put me in great trouble,
though I did not tell my tho'ts and feelings to any person for near two years;
and I think I may say I was on the brink of ruin: But O the wonderful mercy of
GOD, who saw me in my doleful and lamentable state! And as my case was
singular, the merciful GOD dealt with me in a singular manner, to convince me
of my folly. I think I may say as David said of old, Come unto me all you that
fear the LORD, and I will tell you what great things he has done for my soul.

JAN. 10th, 1791, at night I went to bed as usual, but slept none 'till late,
for trouble of mind; but sometime late in the night, when the people were all
asleep, I was risen up in the bed, and was praying to GOD that if there was any
Heaven or Hell I might instantly know it. As the words were in my mouth, I was
smitten with a heavy blow on my breast, which laid me backward on my bed: The
same instant I saw a man in the room with a bright shining light around him,
which appeared brighter than the sun, shining in his full strength; and he
spoke to me and said he knew all my vain thoughts before I told them to him,
and bid me fear not and follow him; and in a moment my spirit left my body and
followed my Guide, who conveyed me beyond the moon and starry regions: Then
instantly I was carried to the most-glorious City, which shone with such
brightness that it dazzled my eyes to behold it: Then I was brought to the bar
of GOD's awful justice, and CHRIST took his seat on the right hand of power;
and I was called as a criminal to answer for my sins. It appeared to me that
the awful Judge opened a very great book, which contained the names of the
righteous and the wicked; the former was on the right hand, the latter on the
left: Some of the names of the righteous were brighter than others; some seemed
to be dull: Those of the wicked were all black. The Judge then pointed to my
name, which was on the left hand, and bid me look and see it; and there I saw
my name, which was very black: I also saw my sins recorded in the book, and
that I had been to very wicked frolicks; but the most heinous sin was, that I
hated the Holy Bible, and did not believe in CHRIST, or that there was a Heaven
or Hell.

THEN I heard the awful Judge pronounce his glorious name JEHOVAH! which caused
the Heavens to rejoice and Hell to tremble; and he likewise said, if ever I
made game of that Holy Name, I should never have a right there, and the gates
should be forever shut against me. All this time I stood trembling to hear my
doom, and I saw all that was laid to my charge to be true, and GOD was just in
condemning me; my conscience also bearing witness against me: But O the terrors
that filled my soul, none can tell, unless they were in my soul's stead! -- It
appeared to me that the Judge held over my head a great sword of justice, ready
to take vengeance on me: But in the midst of my fears, unexpected to me JESUS
CHRIST came and kneeled down between me and the bar of GOD, and like a Mediator
plead my cause in a most affecting manner, and said, O Father, I have died for
this sinner! And now, O Father, spare this sinner! O Father, I stand between
him and the stroke of thy wrath! -- O Father, why should he die! -- And at
these words of the Mediator, the justice of GOD seemed to be silent; and GOD
was well pleased with what CHRIST had said on my behalf, and CHRIST turned to
me with a smiling face, and said, Your sins are forgiven, and your
transgressions I will remember no more. Then he showed me, and bid me look and
see the prints of the nails in his hands; this, said he, I bore for you: And at
those words of his, the heavenly host sung for joy, and CHRIST said, I was
welcome as any to all the joys and pleasures of the New-Jerusalem, and I could
not forbear to sing among the rest. I think I can say, There is more joy in
Heaven over one sinner that repents, than over ninety and nine just persons
that needs no repentance.

CHRIST said unto me you must go back to the world again, and gave me a great
charge to my Father and Family, that they should put away all sin, and live a
praying life to GOD, or they should never come to that place. CHRIST said, that
the Bible was his book, and it was all his, and it should remain to ages yet to
come; and if any should add unto, or diminish from that book, he never should
come to that glorious place. The people sung after the manner of the christian
churches on earth; CHRIST died, seemed to lead their song. I saw there, men,
women and children, and heard them sing together; the little children sung a
verse of the Gospel sonnet, which was as follows; Babes rather caught from womb
and breast,
Claim a right to sing above the rest,
Because they found the happy shore
They never saw nor sought before.


CHRIST said he had suffered for me in the world, and I must be willing to
suffer for him: Then CHRIST took me by the hand, and walked some distance from
the multitude; all which showed great reverence to him, for as he came toward
them they ceased from their music, and arose and bowed their heads, and gave
glory to him, that another sinner was suffered to come. I saw also that they
gave glory to him, that they had obtained salvation, and praised him as their
Savior and procurer of all they enjoyed in Heaven. When CHRIST came to the end
of his walk, he let go my hand, and pointed toward a man that was yet further,
and sat on his seat, and said, that was the man that made the Psalms. I asked,
if it was King David? He said, yea. He also showed me a man near the King,
which was Nathan the Prophet, and this, said he, was my name, and when I should
come here to stay I should sing with him: He walked back to the bar again, and
I followed him. He asked me, if I were now satisfied there was a Heaven? I said
I was. Then the Father spoke to the Son, and said he must know that there is a
Hell of woe. CHRIST put forth his hand, and hid me stand thereon, and I did so:
Then he carried me swift as lightning to Hell, and sat me down in the midst of
the blaspheming crew; and indeed as there is nothing on earth that can resemble
Heaven, so there is nothing that can resemble Hell: It is a place of woe, and
the wretched creatures appeared to be in the greatest distress and torment: I
heard them scream, and cry, and lament, and curse the day they were born. I
heard them blaspheme against the GOD of Heaven, and it appeared very frightful,
for they seemed to be in full despair; which they said was never to be at an
end, and they never expected to have any rest: When thousands of years were
past, it was still a beginning. Some have thought that Hell was a place of fire
and brimstones although that is the most ^^^^able comparison we can make, yet it
is far short of what it is indeed, to the wrath of GOD and a guilty conscience,
which is their torments. It appeared to burn more terrible than fire.



I SAW that old Serpent the Devil; he appeared to be something in human shape,
but black; his countenance appeared very frightful, and full of malice against
CHRIST, and in appearance he had a chain about his neck, which so bound him
down that he could not rise up before CHRIST, but lay and growled in the
greatest misery and torment.

I SAW that the damned crew were in fear of the day of judgment; for they said
their punishment would then be increased; and when I was in Hell I looked to
see if there were any infants in that place, but saw none: Then I asked CHRIST
if there were any infants there? He said no; for I said I have heard some say,
they believed there were. He said, I must read his Bible where it says, Suffer
little children to came unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is the
kingdom of Heaven: Then CHRIST asked me if I were now satisfied that there was.
Hell? I said I was: He put forth his hand, and I seemed to sit thereon, and he
brought me swift as lightning to my home, and I saw it no more.

I WOULD say a few words to the candid and honest Reader; whether it may be a
benefit to others I know not, but it is a reality to me, and is what I have
seen and heard: If any scruple the truth of it, it is all one to me, for I have
had no thoughts of the praise of men in relating this strange and uncommon Fact
and indeed I have been so far from writing any thing that is not true, I have
not wrote all that is true; nor is it possible for me to point out to your view
all that I saw while I was there. But I shall proceed to write a few words
more: I saw there faces of men which did so much resemble their faces when on
earth, that they could easily be known; I knew some of them. One man came and
spoke to me and said he once lived near my Father's house on earth: He said his
name was Simeon Dunn. Also I saw Dunn's Mother at some distance from me; and
Jonathan Hopkins, Barnabas Sweasey and my Wife's Mother, in the realms of
bliss. When CHRIST led me on the heavenly ground he asked me if I had ever a
child or earth? I told him I had. He pointed to a small child and said, there
it is; and I heard it sing the verse which I mentioned before. When CHRIST led
me on, he said, all the laws of nature are dissolved. -- Where I stood at the
bar of GOD, his awful justice appeared ^^^rible I could not endure his face and
words. He appeared with terrible majesty and glory, and had I ten thousand
times the gift to set it forth, and all the gifts of earth to help me, I could
not display the glory and majesty which I saw in him; for GOD is a Spirit
infinite, eternal and unchangeable.

I am the PUBLIC's Friend. NATHAN CULVER.

RETURNING PRODIGAL.
BEhold the wretch whose lust and wine
Had wasted his estate,
He begs a share among the swine,
To taste the husk they eat.
2.
I die with hunger here, he cries,
I starve in foreign lands!
My Father's house has large supplies,
And bounteous are his hands.
3.
I Will go and with a mournful tongue,
Fall down before his face,
Father I Have done thy justice wrong,
Nor can deserve thy grace.
4.
He said and hastened to his home,
To seek his Father's love,
The Father saw the Rebel come,
And all his bowels move.
5.
He ran and fell upon his neck,
Embraced and kissed the Son,
The Rebellious heart with sorrow break,
(...) he had done.
6.
Take off his robes of shame and sin,
The Father gives command;
Dress him in garments white and clean,
With rings adorn his hand.
7.
A day of feasting I ordain,
Let joy and mirth abound;
My Son was dead and lives again,
Was lost and now is found.

