Dr. FOBES's ELECTION SERMON.

MAY 27, 1795.

COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS. IN SENATE, MAY 27, 1795.
ORDERED, That ELISHA MAY and THOMAS DAWES, Esquires, be a Committee to wait on
the Reverend Dr. FOBES, and in the Name of the SENATE, to thank him for the
SERMON this Day delivered before His Excellency the GOVERNOR, His Honor the
Lt. GOVERNOR, the Honorable COUNCIL, and the two Branches of the LEGISLATURE;
and to request a Copy thereof for the Press.

Attest. SAMUEL COOPER, Clerk.

The unusual delay in publishing the following Discourse has been occasioned by
public business, and the want of health in the writer. Several passages,
omitted in the Delivery, are inserted in the publication.

A SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE HIS EXCELLENCY SAMUEL ADAMS, ESQUIRE. Governor, HIS
HONOR MOSES GILL, ESQUIRE. LT. Governor, THE HONORABLE THE COUNCIL, SENATE, AND
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF THE COMMONWEALTH of MASSACHUSETTS, MAY 27th 1795:
BEING THE DAY OF GENERAL ELECTION.

BY PEERS FOBES, L. L. D. Pastor of the Church in Raynham.

Dente Theonino cum circumroditur, ecquid Ad te post paulo ventura pericula
sentis? -- HOR. Boston: PRINTED AT THE MERCURY PRESS, By YOUNG and MINNS 1795.

AN ELECTION SERMON.
II. PETER, II. Chap. part of the 10th and 12th Verses. THEY DESPISE GOVERNMENT
-- ARE NOT AFRAID TO SPEAK EVIL OF DIGNITIES -- AND THINGS THEY UNDERSTAND NOT.
AN honest man is a character more frequently claimed than deserved. But of all
claims, that of a calumniator is one of the most unfounded. The pen of
inspiration has left a stigma on the evil of detraction. It is condemned by the
voice of nature, and the verdict of reason. Whether it is vented by the tongue,
the pen, or the press; whether it is conveyed under the disguise of dark
insinuation, affected silence, or the contumelious brow; whether it arises from
competitions of honor, or the jealousies of interest from prejudice, or
rancorous passion; or is retailed only for amusement, to supply the vacancy of
reason, or the barrenness of conversation; from whatever source it springs,
whatever form it assumes, or however confined in its walks, slander is a crime
of the deepest dye, base in itself, and baneful to society. But if such is the
criminality of "speaking evil one of another" in the circle of private life,
what is their crime "who dare to speak evil of dignities?" Presumptuous and
self willed are they called, and in company joined with characters of such
infamy, that the most copious language on earth, under the control of genius
and inspiration, was found too barren to describe them, without the aid of
metaphors, the most degrading that could be borrowed from Heaven, Earth, and
Sea.

"Fallen angels, wandering stars, raging waves of the sea, foaming our their
own shame, filthy dreamers, spots and blemishes in society, trees twice dead,
cursed children, brute beasts made to be taken and destroyed," with such
company are they ranked who despise government. And is there not a cause amply
sufficient to justify this marked distinction between evil speaking in common,
and speaking evil of dignities? An attempt to investigate this distinction,
while it diversifies a common topic, will perhaps suggest some useful
observations on civil government. I feel on this occasion, the want of more
than all the apologies that have ever been made in this place: but to ask the
candor and patience of such an audience as this, might be "to speak evil of
dignities;" and to speak evil, is in the original Greek, to blaspheme; to open
the mouth against the civil magistrate, the vicegerent of God on earth, is "to
set (...) against heaven." The word, dignities, is here taken in the abstract,
and signifies political authority; in the concrete it is put for persons
exercising power and jurisdiction. While it extends to all the grades and
departments of public office, it strongly implies, that all men in public
office ought to be men of dignity. But who are these dignities? What is that
government which cannot be spoken against, without incurring the guilt of
blasphemy, and the penalty of damnation? The answer is plain: That government,
which the Apostle calls an ordinance of God, is a government chosen by the
people; for he as expressly calls it the ordinance of man. Rulers are ministers
ordained of God, only when they are the ministers of good to the people.
Obedience therefore, to civil rulers imposed on the people, or to any form or
administration of government contrary to the will of the people, was never
inculcated by the inspired Apostle on pain of damnation: for the same authority
which in this instance condemns, in others justifies open resistance and
opposition to government. The unreasonable humor of Ahab King of Israel, the
menacing edicts of Nebuchadnezzar, and the peremptory mandate of the Egyptian
Monarch were disregarded with impunity, and even without blame. Was it a crime
in Hushai to develop the machinations of Ahitophel? or did Mordecai speak evil
of dignities when he exposed the plot of Haman against the whole nation of the
Jews? If Sir Edmund Andross is a tyrant, if Arnold is a traitor, or even Lord
Bacon is the bribed Judge, let their villainy be unmasked, let their guilt be
unkennelled. To do this every citizen is bound by prior and superior claims of
society. Should the highest officer of any government on earth, flagrantly
abuse the authority of his station, even by prosecuting private designs, or by
adopting public measures hostile to the public good, it is not a crime, but the
duty of a free people to be free enough to speak evil of him. The tongue in
this case is the proper weapon to chastise and restrain, where the laws of men
cannot reach. This will keep the public mind awake, by adding stimulus to
ardour and information.

Hence we conclude, that speaking evil of dignities is a crime on the
supposition only, that rulers are both the choice and ministers of good to the
people. When this is a fact, those words of the Apostle which seem to carry
horror in their sound, do not exaggerate its criminality. This will appear both
from the nature and design of government, and from the duties and character of
its officers.

In man, the noblest work of God on earth, three worlds co-exist: The material,
animal and angelic; or spirit, soul and body. These are all governed by Deity,
in a manner wisely adapted to their different natures and capacities. The
material world is governed by irresistible force, the brute creation by
instinct, man by law, he alone is endued with moral life, united with the
animal and intellectual. This triple life, which combines all the known powers
of nature, renders man a moral agent; amenable to God the moral governor of the
world. With the angel and the brute in his composition, he possesses power and
propensity to do wrong as well as right. This renders him a fit subject of
civil government. The impulses of animal nature render it necessary, and the
social principle makes it agreeable, as the author of these powers, God himself
is the author of government.

To that astonishing variety in his composition, which renders man a proper
subject, we may add, the still greater variety, visible in the human genius and
disposition, which demonstrates the necessity of subordination. Different
stations in life require different talents and qualifications. If every man had
the same degree of taste, of reason, or education, which are the portion of a
few individuals, how wretched would be the lot of those who occupy the lowest
offices, and perform the drudgeries of life. A sublime genius, a refined
imagination, without an object, or the possibility of gratification, would
serve only to tantalize and torment the possessor. Such is the difference of
intellectual abilities among men, that the condition of an ox or an ass, endued
with some human intellect, would not be more wretched, perhaps, than that of
some philosophic genius destined only to drive them. This diversity of genius,
which is independently the gift of providence, plainly indicates the necessity
of those distinctions in life, which are implied in government; it shows
moreover, the wisdom and benevolence of the deity, in providing for all, in
such manner, as proves at once the indispensability of every man in society;
and that the poorest in his humble condition may be as useful, contented and
happy as the richest and most elevated officer of government.

Again -- The signatures of subordination are legible in the human form. We
behold in the countenance of some persons a kind of dignity, which at once
beams reverence, and designates for dominion: in others, we observe such
vacancy and prostration of dignity, as equally marks them for subjection. This
diversity, although it may arise in part from the original constitution of the
mind, or from moral culture and improvement, is so conspicuous and captivating,
as none will affirm, that the elevated stature of King Saul, the beauty of
Absalom's person, the ruddy complexion of David, and the ennobling form of
Washington, had no share in raising them up to the highest stations in life.

There is yet another proof of the divine authority of government, and that is
the manner in which we come into existence. Had this been, like the original
pair of our race, in a state of adult maturity and independence, it would have
been, perhaps, more difficult to reduce fallen men to a state of government
than the most savage beasts, "which are tamed, and have been tamed of mankind."
But, happy for us, a different plan has been adopted. By a law of nature we all
begin to exist in a state of helpless infancy, under the entire control and
direction of parents. By this means children early become members of a family,
which is itself an empire in miniature. Having formed in the moulding age of
life, proper ideas and habits of government, they become at length prepared for
civil society, in larger communities. While this benevolent law of nature
announces government coeval with our existence, it speaks louder than the
tongue of men or angels, the necessity of early education. Her voice to
legislators is, "depend not on the number of your laws, or the severity of
fines and punishments; but lay the axe at the root of vice, take possession of
the heart, and charm, if possible, the young stranger to the love of virtue and
country, in the tenderest period of life. Do this, by giving birth and energy
to every possible institution for the education of youth." It teaches parents
also, the ministers of religion and others, that while employed in the humble
office of instructing youth, their services may be as patriotic, and perhaps
more useful to their country, than the wisdom of their counsels in the senate,
or the valor of their arms in the field. In fine, while it teaches all this,
it shows, that to despise government is to violate a law of nature.

But in still blacker colors does this crime appear, if we consider the design
of government, and the manner in which it is supported. Its benevolent design
embraces the greatest good of the whole community. But this can be effected in
that way only which GOD himself has taken, both to instruct mankind, and to
govern the world. His will is taught us in the sacred scriptures, not in
detail, but by general rules. In like manner GOD governs the world by the laws
of a general providence. These laws are calculated to secure the good of the
whole. They must therefore, equally affect each individual comprehended under
them, without any distinction of personal circumstance or character. Should the
thunderbolt be diverted in its course, or stopped in its career, contrary to
the fixed laws of electricity, to save one useful citizen, why not to save
another? "But shall the earth be forsaken, or the rock moved out of its place
for thee?" This would introduce such a train of miraculous events, as would
subvert the whole constitution of nature, and destroy that established
connection between cause and effect, which is now the principal source of human
knowledge and foresight.

Analogous to this divine model, all human governments must be constructed and
maintained; i. e. by general laws; laws adapted to the state and happiness of
men collectively. That endless variety in the condition and circumstances of
individuals who compose by a community, renders it impossible to secure by
general laws, the good of the whole, without injury or inconvenience to some
individuals. An attempt to avoid, by particular laws, the jarring claims, and
infinite collisions of interest, which happen in society, would be perfectly
nugatory. GOD himself has not done it. Inattention to this subject has been the
unhappy (...), not only of strong prejudices against the book of GOD, but of
bold censures against GOD and man. Under a mistake of this kind, the friends of
Job censured an innocent man. Is it not owing to this, more than to any other
cause, that men so often speak evil of dignities? Observing that some existing
law is less favorable to their own private interest, than to that of some
others, or than different regulations might be, they at once let loose the
tongue of censure against them; not considering perhaps, not knowing, that the
very law which would please them might injure, if not ruin thousands. Let us
further observe, that the same object in view, when the legislator frames a
law, ought to be in his eye, when the penalty is affixed; that is, the general
good: In order to which, he will consider that moral evil is estimated by the
intention of the agent; political evil by its consequences in society. Human
laws cannot reach the heart; the cognizable actions therefore, of men in
society, must be estimated in the abstract only; as such they are denominated
political crimes, varying in magnitude, according to their tendency or general
consequences to the community; that is, in proportion to the intensity and
extent of misery that would follow, if all actions of that description were to
be generally tolerated, or become common.

By this standard the penalty of every law should be adjusted; and not by the
supposed moral evil of the action, which cannot be known, nor by its particular
consequences to a few individuals, which cannot be regarded, but by its general
effects on society. This is the pole star of every statesman; by the ^ight of
which only it is that we can account for the capital punishment of Uzzah for
touching the ark, the zeal of Saint Paul in abstaining from meat, and the
necessity of severe punishments for burglary, counterfeiting money, running
contraband goods, exercitual desertion for cowardice, and many other actions,
which in themselves appear small offenses, if not innocent or indifferent. --
Inattention to this principle, it is presumed, has been the fruitful source of
great misdemeanors and public disturbance. Can it be supposed, that the late
insurgents in a southern state would have refused the payment of a small
excise, had they considered, that the general consequence of that refusal was
the certain loss of all public revenue, and the final subversion of all
government? -- From the same cause, have we not seen, what humanity ever
blushes to relate, a reputed honest man, in open town-meeting, hold up his hand
to defraud the public, or a public creditor, who would not, scarcely for his
right hand, have been seen to injure one of his neighbors?

Inattention, permit me to say, is the best apology I can make for numbers of
my fellow-citizens who neglect public worship, perform journeys, and
unnecessary business on the LORD's Day. They do not consider, that if every
other person, who had an equal right and the same excuse, should follow the
example, public worship, that great pillar of civil government, would be
entirely overthrown. But more than all, this principle now unfolds its chief
design, and shows, as with a sun beam, the enormity of reviling dignities. A
ruler is the father of his country; he stands at the head of government, at the
helm of the ship, in which our lives and fortunes are all embarked. An attack
upon him may sink the whole. Slander in this instance, is more then death; it
is parricide, more fatal than all the malignant influences once ascribed to
baleful comets, which spread plagues and desolations through a whole country.

But if we consider civil rulers in character of real dignities, it will strike
a deeper (...) of guilt and baseness into the crime.

If it could be said of David, on account of the dignity and importance of his
public character, that he was with 10,000 of the people; was it not a greater
crime to speak evil of such a "dignity," than of another man? Dignity is
opposed to meanness. It can be applied to no action but what is virtuous, and
therefore to no being on earth but man. To him it is applied in point of
character, sentiment and behavior, all which in some degree, must unite in a
man of dignity. But to form a ruler of that description, he ought to be -- 1st.
a man of a good discernment and information. Great talents, and erudition may
be indispensable in the learned professions, and in the pretorean department of
a government, in which the people are governed by laws and not men. The police
of some nations may indeed, be a science of operose attainment; but the
administration of a government, simple in its structure and formed as our own
is, by the common sense of a free, virtuous people, cannot be a subject of vast
depth or difficulty. Where men have honesty enough, they rarely will want skill
enough, to guide well the affairs of state. The human body is subsisted chiefly
by common food. This is the most easily obtained and the most wholesome,
otherwise it would not have been common. The grand object, let us remember, as
well as name of our government, is the "Commonwealth." It must however, be
granted, that the smallest accession of knowledge adds to every character a
dignity which is felt; and were it not for envy, would be acknowledged by all.
Children soon feel the superior authority, it gives a parent even in the
government of a family. Rulers may not all be men of science, but if they are
not men "who have understanding in the times, and know what Isreal ought to do,
it is at the risque of both of their country, and their own reputation, as
dignities. 2d. meekness of wisdom, a cool dispassionate temper, is a
distinguished trait in the character of official dignity. The greatest
legislator was the meekest man on earth. It was an excess of diffidence in
Moses; to decline, for want of abilities, the office of an ambassador to a
royal court. But it raises in the mind an idea of greater dignity, than the
conduct of that aspiring young man, who spoke the real sentiments of others,
besides his own, when he said, "O that I were made ruler in the land, that
every man who has any suit or cause, might come to me and I would do him
justice! Hypocrites may be found in politics, as well as in divinity. With
patriotism on the tongue, there may be faction or tyranny in the heart. High
pretensions of friendship to the rights of man, attended with bitter
criminations of men in public office, ought never to be admitted as a test of
sincerity, or of real qualifications for office; because great zeal and
ostentation are seldom united with that cool dispassionate temper which is
always necessary to form a just opinion upon any subject. In our coolest
moments, "we see through a glass darkly." But when we see through a ferment of
passion, we see and judge falsely. The medium has a property strange and
unknown in optics. It distorts and discolours, magnifies and diminishes every
object at the same time. The rash policy of boisterous men at the helm of
Government has been compared to a whirlwind at ^ea. When it happens to blow the
right way, it may drive the ship from rocks or shoals, and save the cargo. But
tornadoes are always dangerous to navigation.

To this cool dispassionate temper we must unite, 3d. resolution and
intrepidity of mind; for this gives great dignity and elevation to a ruler.
Unmoved by the fawnings of flattery or the sour scowls of ambition, deaf to the
croaking of anarchy and blind to the splendid baits of monarchy, he will nobly
dare to speak his opinion, and act with firmness and decision. Like a rock in
the midst of the ocean, he stands unshaken. The waves of violence, of intrigue
and faction may rise, foam and roar against him, but dash and die at his feet.
This firmness of mind is directly opposed to that indecisive temper, by which
some are perpetually halting between two opinions, without forming any at all.
It stands opposed also to another temper, which may be called decision in
excess, a rapid rotation of opinion. -- Men of this cast decide in such haste,
and with so little discretion, that they are given to change; vibrating from
one side to the other, that we know not where to find them. "A double minded
man is unstable in all his ways, unstable as water he shall not excel." There
is another contrast of this mental fortitude, and that is ductility of mind;
this renders the possessor too obsequious to flattery, to the lure of interest
and popularity; too prone to be duped by the intrigues of disaffected aspiring
men. Whatever may be the real cause or composition of these different tempers,
certain (...) is, that the indecisive character, a bivious mind, and the
ductile temper, all diminish dignity; and disqualify men for public office.

Firmness of mind must be accompanied with, 4th. consideration; for this, when
united as commonly it is with industry and a public spirit, is one of the most
prominent and pleasing features in the whole character of dignity. With what
mild and gentle rays it shines through the characters of David, Solomon and a
Washington, and gives them more real dignity, than all the dazzling splendours
of a throne? This will soften the splendors of their stations, and give them an
affable deportment, a complacency of behavior, and such conciliating manners,
as cannot fail to secure the most commanding influence over the people. -- In
this way the greatest monarch of the earth governed men, who were in debt, in
distress, and discontented. There our exasperated spirits, bankrupts, and
broken fortunes, who had no interest in the welfare of the country, he
influenced into one common concern for its property. -- Such a motley mass of
discordant materials he kneaded up, into one useful harmonious compound! It is
a unanimous vote in our world, never to respect, but always to despise a
haughty disposition. This disposition once degraded from his throne, the royal
brute of Babylon, and turned him out a grazing with the beasts of the field! it
sunk another as low in the eyes of millions, when in the haughtiness of his
spirit, he said "I will bring all America to my feet." Pride goes before
destruction, and a haughty spirit is the fall of dignity. How unreasonable in a
ruler as well as degrading is such a temper? What has he that he did not
receive? Is he superior to others in the dignity of his person? GOD is the
author of his frame. Has he more official dignity? It is derived from the
sovereignty of the people. Does he shine in the most elevated stations? Like
the moon he shines only in borrowed light. We do not particularly mention
justice, humanity and patriotism, because they are all included in 5th.
"Religion" which above all, gives to a ruler the highest dignity of character.
The patriarchal benediction truly applies to religion alone: "thou art the
excellency of dignity and the excellency of power." This refines, enables and
animates all the features that compose dignity, both of character and office.
-- Emancipated from inglorious passions and pursuits, which rob me of all true
honor, religion plants in the heart such undissembled virtue and piety, as
will ensure respect and reverence, even to men of the lowest rank, but in men
appointed to move in the higher spheres of life, religion casts a luster on
their elevated seats, and "by a strong reflection doubles the beams of
dignity." How amiable, how sublime in such a character! Every feature, every
action in it, creates esteem, and commands reverence. How sordid then is the
wretch who dares to speak evil of such dignities! Is it now possible to fully
this crime with an additional stain of infamy? Yes, it is done only by
considering that the character of a ruler deprives him of the power of
retaliation in his own defense. "When Michael the archangel contended with the
Devil about the body of Moses, he durst not bring against him a railing
accusation;" the dignity of Michael's character, rendered him an unequal match
for Satan, at railing; therefore he said, the Lord rebuke thee, and not I. From
the subject naturally arise the following

OBSERVATIONS:
1. Rulers are involved in the guilt of slander, when their conduct affords a
just occasion for the people to speak evil of them. Can it be possible, that a
legislator should enter the walls of the Senate, and under the solemnities of
an oath, there give his voice and sanction to a law which he sacredly commits
to the magistrate for execution; and then both of them be seen to violate that
law, which the one has made, and the other is sworn to execute? Is it a crime
to speak evil of such dignities? there is no dignity in such men. Vice is
eternally mean. 2d. The character given of a ruler, leads us to decide a long
controverted question, respecting the best form of civil policy, in favor of a
free republic. I mean "a democratical aristocracy, resting on the free election
of the people, and revocable at pleasure." -- The strength and glory of such a
republic depend on the virtue of the people, which is real dignity. That of
monarchy is supported by the glare of earthly grandeur, by the pageantry of
heroism, and the weapons of death, which is royal dignity. This intoxicates the
senses, but the other touches the heart. Hence a republican form was the choice
and fabric of GOD himself for his own people. Moses with a senate of seventy,
shared the government of Isreal. The nature of man, the character of christian
rulers, above all the benevolent principles of liberty and equality, embosomed
in the religion of JESUS, are congenial to no other form; at least they appear
incompatible with monarchical principles and the dynasty of kings. 3d -- The
advocated principle of calculating laws to embrace the aggregate sum of
happiness in a community, shows the absurdity of that doctrine, which maintains
that moral evil is political good; or that private vice is public virtue. Were
this a fact, it would be the duty of legislators to establish iniquity by law,
i. e. they ought to enact laws to encourage the practice of fraud, rapine,
falsehood, robbery, assassination etc. than which nothing can be more absurd,
or abhorrent to the principles of reason and commonsense. 4th. Since it is a
crime of such malignity to despise government, it highly concerns every
citizen, particularly to know in what manner this may be done. Government, I
would observe, may be despised by fallacious comparisons -- by inequality of
elections -- licentiousness of the press -- neglect to diffuse virtue and
knowledge -- disunion of the magistracy and christian priesthood -- exorbitant
wealth in the hands of individuals -- improper connexions with despotic
governments -- neglect to watch and provide for our own government, the means
of mili^tary defense -- in such ways as well as by speaking evil of dignities,
we may despise and even destroy a free government. On some of these articles, I
would subjoin a few observations.

1st. The palladium of Liberty may pull down the pillars of freedom. A
licentious press, like the unruly tongue, is full of deadly poison. It sows the
seeds of discord, and saps the foundation of all government. By corrupting the
source of public information, it becomes the bane both of private and social
felicity. When political poison is vomited from the press, few will escape the
contagion. When partiality in a printer loses its infamy, or the most
uncorrupted integrity ceases to be the summit of his ambition -- when he and
his readers are not struck with the horror of an earthquake, at the idea of
venality and misrepresentation -- when they print falsehood for hire, publish
scandal for money, sell the liberties of their country for a reward, and the
wicked bare rule by their means, and the people love to have it so -- what
shall we do in the end thereof?

2d. Whatever tends to destroy or diminish an equal voice in elections, will
endanger the immunities of a people. Associations of every description, whether
civil or ecclesiastical, whether self-created or sanctioned by government or by
the god of nature, all tend to create in the mind certain byasses and
attachments which produce an accretion of power and influence in future
elections; nor can this be avoided without eradicating the principles of human
nature. The existence of society depends on this principle; similar effects
will arise from a natural superiority of genius, from greater acquisitions in
knowledge, in wealth and in the arts of address. The Deity never intended a
perfect equality among men, not even in their elective power. This would have
been a scar, if not a solecism in the analogy of nature. This however, bears no
proportion to that inequality which prevails among despotic nations, and which
ought to be considered as the horror of all free governments. In nature we
always observe variety, but we seldom find extremes. The beauty and utility of
the human hand, that badge of human authority, would suffer great diminution,
if its fingers were equal, but much more if they were enormous, either in
length or size. It is only from an extreme or abuse of this inequality, that
danger is apprehended; and over which we ought ever to watch with a jealous eye.

3d. National wealth, especially when carefully accumulated in the hands of a
few individuals, is dangerous in the extreme to human liberty. The experience
of ages, the repeated admonitions of our Savior and his apostles prove beyond
a doubt, the power of riches corrupt the human heart. Hardly can we find one
period of prosperity, in the whole history of the Israelites; or of any other
nation on the earth, which has not been followed with a decay of piety, and a
corruption of morals. Shall we then rejoice and not tremble, when we see a
profusion of earthly good; flowing streams of prosperity, in which multitudes
are bathing themselves at ease, while the rapid current is carrying away the
liberties of mankind? Opulence is ^he common parent of idleness, luxury and
dissipation etc. The reflection of a moment will convince us, that wealth is
both the object and principal cause of avarice and ambition. These are the
common sources of anarchy and despotism, and these again, are the charybdis and
scylla of our country -- most of the disputes and quarrels that happen in the
world, originate from the idea of property. Savages live in tolerable peace
almost without government, because they feel not, as we do, the power of
wealth. While this attracts the gaze of vulgar admiration, it is apt to swell
the heart with pride, "that unsocial and unfriendly passion," only by pride
comes contention. Its influence on civil elections is still more pernicious.
Money is frequently the most forcible logic, and he that carries the longest
purse, will often carry the most votes. In this view of wealth, we see and
admire the policy as well as justice of a late act of our legislature, which
rescinded an old fragment of monarchy too long worn as the right of
primogeniture. We see also, and revere the wisdom of GOD in the appointment of
a jubilee, as an essential article in the Jewish policy. This, it is probable;
was the great palladium of liberty to that people. A similar institution
perhaps may be the only method in which liberty can be perpetuated among
selfish, degenerate beings in any government under heaven. But aside from this,
and in full view of the dangers of exorbitant wealth, permit me to say that the
prayer of one good man ever ought to be the united prayer of all America, "give
us not riches -- nor poverty."

4th. The baneful effects of ignorance among the subjects of a free government,
I need not describe. Inspiration has done it for me in one of her horrid
descriptions of wild beasts and birds of prey, prowling under the dreary
darkness of night, "Wherein all the beasts of the forest do creep forth, their
houses shall be full of doleful creatures, owls shall dwell there, and satyrs,
not fabulous, shall dance there." Happy for us, such darkness is past, and the
present is a period of unusual ardour; for inquiry and diffusion of knowledge.
Yea, the present is a most luminous period in that regular gradation of human
knowledge, which from the beginning of creation down to the present time, has
been constantly advancing. By a train of surprising events in providence,
calculated to throw light upon each other, the public mind in every age, and
among all nations, has been gradually opening, from the father of lights; as
much light and knowledge have been sent down to earth, as the circumstances of
its inhabitants would bear. At certain periods however, knowledge on earth,
like the heavenly bodies, has proceeded with unequal velocity; and like them,
it has sometimes appeared stationary and even retrograde: but this was in
appearance only. Upon the whole it has been progressive, and will probably
continue its progress, until its final completion in the full effulgence of
millennial glory, when "the earth shall be full of the knowledge of GOD."
Partial interruptions have only paved the way for accelerating its progress.
Great conquests and revolutions in the world, have given the people an
opportunity for reforming their systems of government, and for great
improvements, in useful arts and knowledge. -- The American revolution is an
instance of this kind, beyond a parallel. A large portion of the globe
inhabited by millions of people, rapid in population, had long been held in
subjection to one distant island. But the vision which the young Hebrew saw in
his dream, was but for an appointed time. No longer could the sun, the moon,
and stars, be made to gravitate round a pebble: no longer could they make
obeisance to Briton's king. -- Nature itself revolted. They arose to
independence, ascended their native sphere, and formed a new solar system; a
system complete of federal democracy; in which equal power, emanating from each
individual, uniting, formed one central luminary. This is retained in its
station by a balance of gravitating power, accumulated in separate branches of
the same body, as well as in a number of separate bodies or states. These are
each independent in jurisdiction, different in structure, magnitude and
distance from the center; around them a number of secondaries perform their
judicial circuits in periodical times; these are attended with satellites of
executive power. A large judiciary body, created and impelled by solar
influence, ranges like a comet through the whole system; spreads terror among
evil doers; and gives luster and stability to the whole frame. In a word, the
influence of the solar orb pervades every other body, retains each in its own
orbit, and gives to all energy and motion, by confederating all into one vast
harmonious system. No sooner was this luminary kindled up in America, than it
darted its beams of science and liberty across the Atlantic. It dawned in
Europe -- it glows in France. New discoveries and vast accessions of knowledge,
and the arts of life astonished the world. We lived an age in a few years; we
saw a nation born in a day. Having felt the pangs and pleasures of the
parturition of a new empire, we now behold the aurora of science fast rising to
meridian luster. Hardly can we contemplate the present, and anticipate the
future state of our country, without moments of triumph. When we reflect on the
present improved state of commerce, agriculture and of tactics, the mechanical
and fine arts, geography and natural history, surgery and the medical art,
chemistry, electricity, areology with the infant, but real science of
physiognomy etc. all in progression; then lift up our eyes and behold a new
galaxy of American geniuses, lately risen and still rising in our hemisphere,
what in the name of science, what may we not expect? At least, we may hope,
that modern polish of literature will not, like Pharoh's lean kine, eat up the
more substantial parts; and that the time will soon arrive, when four years at
a college will not roll away, without consecrating a portion of it, to the
classical, scientific study of natural history, and those practical principles
of chemistry, on which the rationale and improvements of agriculture and the
mechanical arts, so much depend; and which at the present day are so highly
necessary to the growth and prosperity of this young American empire. May we
not also indulge the pleasing hope, that the orthography of our own language,
that vehicle and repository of arts and sciences, will soon be purged of its
barbaric dross, and become as pure, simple, and systematic as our politics. May
the genius, the unconquerable spirit of Americans, forbid that a language
formed by accident in days of Gothic ignorance, and refined and enriched with
so many infusions of elegance and learning, that a language which probably will
become the vernacular tongue of more millions than ever spoke one language on
earth, should long remain perplexed and incumbered with so many literal defects
and redundancies easily corrected. On this account I beg leave to say that the
orthography of the English language, in its present state, is a tax on life,
the opprobrium of science, a load of expensive lumber on the tender minds of
millions of our race. In such a nation as this, it is intolerable. I will not
think of it, but proceed to a thought more pleasing, 5th. virtue and religion
above all are the strongest pillars of government. The mask of hypocrisy is a
public acknowledgment of the worth of religion. The suggestion even of
Atheists, when they dub religion a state engine to awe men into obedience, is a
tacit confession of its utility in government. A safe engine it is, and of such
force too, that the want, or weakness of but a single spring in it, I mean the
belief of a future state, has always proved fatal to the establishment of
government over any one whole nation on earth. Inspectors of the public
manners, appointed by the lawgivers of antiquity, prove that virtue was
esteemed essential to the prosperity and even existence of government. Should
we appeal to the records of history -- to that of the Jewish nation -- to the
Egyptians, Persians, Grecians, Romans, and to most of the flourishing states in
the world, her verdict would be in favor of virtue. The interchange of virtue
and vice, graduated the scale, by which the wealth, power and respectability of
all nations may be accurately measured. Polybius, who ascribes to irreligion
the ruin of his own country, which preceded that of Rome, observes that a
tenfold security given by a Grecian trustee for a small sum of public money,
was sure to be violated, while the religion an oath among the Romans was ample
security for every engagement. While virtue prevailed in the Roman Empire, her
feet in the language of Daniel, were iron. But when the people began to
degenerate, the iron began to be mixed with clay. Her feet were broken, and the
empire fell. -- In a word, it can no more be doubted that happiness and misery
of public communities, as well as individuals, are connected with virtue and
vice, than that gravitation is a property of matter. But if ethical virtue was
the existence and prosperity of ancient governments, what may not be expected
from the purest system of moral virtue ever taught on earth? Compared with
this, the finest morals of Socrates or Confucius, or Plato, or Epictetus, are
no more than the light or heat of a glow worm, to that of the meridian sun. The
religion of nature teaches men to be just and righteous; but a righteous man is
not the character which christianity calls a good man. A good man will do more
than strict justice can demand of him; he will do more than others. His
services done for the public are performed not with servility, but affection.
-- Not merely to escape censure, or for the sake of reward, "but as a servant
of Christ with good will to mankind, doing service as unto the Lord, and not to
men. Religion requires those who rule over men to be more than just; they must
rule in the fear of GOD: Because gods on earth are the subjects of Heaven, and
must give an account of their stewardship to GOD, as well as to men. It was
from this principle only, that the viceroy of Egypt could assure his brethren,
that he would be just to them; that he was a man that could be trusted; for
says he, I fear GOD. This will operate with peculiar force on the people as
well as on rulers. This will seize the heart. And the subject yields to the
magistrate, not for wrath, but for conscience sake. He will not despise
government; he is afraid to speak evil of dignities, because he believes that
one is the ordinance, and the other, the minister of GOD. And those who resist,
however they may escape punishment from men, will yet receive to themselves
damnation. To him the word of GOD is sharper than the magistrate's sword; a
guard stronger to human laws, than all their penal sanctions.

A judgment to come awes him more than all the terrors of an earthly tribunal.
By those sublime and interesting discoveries which revelation unfolds, a new
tribunal of justice is erected in the human breast; where conscience sits as
judge, a judge that will be heard, when all others are silent. Such is the
energy of religion! O religion the scorn of infidels, "a pitiful and paltry
thing," but the everlasting pillar of government; for the sake of which, may
heaven save us from the vortex of deism -- that old harlot, lately rebaptized
by the name of reason -- the age of reason. Immortalized indeed, for the
discovery of a new proof, that infidelity is only another name for ignorance;
and that a great politician in Europe as well as insurgents in America, may be
guilty of speaking evil of "DIGNITIES," and things they "understand not" --
with proper deference to lord Boling-brooke, Bill Beadle, He pistoled himself
at Weathers field in Connecticut, December 11, 1782, after he had murdered an
amiable wife and four children. This appears to have been done in cool blood,
and from the genuine principles of his boasted, benevolent deism!
and Tom Pain. I will close this article with an aphorism of the wisest and
one of the greatest politicians that ever lived, and presume to recommend it,
as more than equal to the Spanish proverbs, or even those of the American
Franklin -- it is this -- "RIGHTEOUSNESS EXALTS A NATION, BUT SIN IS A
REPROACH TO ANY PEOPLE."

In the presence of an assembly, that contains so many living characters of
dignity; His Excellency claims our first attention. Two annual suns have not
yet revolved over the silent corpse of the patriotic, the generous, the amiable
Hancock, since we saw him here. The man of dignity, the patron of Liberty, the
friend of religion, of its ministers, and institutions, must die! But happy for
us, his co-patriot lives, and this day fills his vacant seat. Venerable with
age, more venerable for his piety and unconquerable love of liberty, we behold
him again placed in the first seat of Government, by the United voice of his
grateful country. She loved his brother in proscription, and still remembers
the name of Adams enrolled with him, on the immortal list of exemptions from
pardon, for no other crime but that of being a friend to his country. If his
inflexible attachment to the same principles has since procured him the wounds
of censure, are they not wounds without a cause? and will he not with his dying
breath, forgive his enemies, and pray for the liberties of mankind. His eminent
services in the cause of freedom are too deeply engraved on the hearts of all
true republicans ever to be forgotten. May the fostering hand of heaven guard
him, at this critical period of life, from every adverse event which might
shake the few remaining sands, that now measure his important life. With all
the sensibilities of an imperfect offending mortal, united with the honest
intrepidity of virtue, may he not appeal to heaven and earth, in the language
of an inspired patriot of his own name, and say -- "I am old and gray headed, I
have walked before you from my childhood to this day; behold here I am, witness
against me, before the LORD; and before his people, whom have I defrauded? Whom
have I oppressed? Or of whose hand have I taken a bribe. And the people will
say -- thou have not defrauded, thou have not oppressed us, the LORD is
witness, the LORD think upon you for good, according to all that you have done
for this people."

The re-election of a distinguished character to the second office in this
Commonwealth bears an honorable attestation to his abilities and public virtue.
-- His early attachment to the principles of republicanism, his patriotic
exertions in the accomplishment of our happy revolution, with later services,
in promoting the true interests of his country, have fully justified the
wisdom, the gratitude and patriotism of his electors. May heaven reward his
faithful services with honors unfading and eternal.

With grateful hearts we hail the return of an anniversary, which has once more
convened those honored gentlemen who compose the two branches of our happy
Legislature. From their known abilities, and the characters of their electors,
we presume they have brought with them, to this consecrated spot, real dignity
of character.

We rejoice in the senatorial branch of our government -- chosen by the people
at large. Their influence will operate as a useful check on the more local
interest of the other branch, which otherwise might interfere and diminish the
sum of public happiness. -- This influence of the patrician order may indeed
operate as a check on the dispatch of business, but repeated discussions of the
same subject, in a different branch of the same body, will be more than a
compensation for delay. As the object is ever the same, both branches will
harmoniously cooperate for the general good. Every member holds an office,
that is rendered highly momentous, both by the magnitude of its object, and the
solemnity of an oath by which their fidelity is pledged. Guardians of the
public rights, great confidence is reposed in them. -- The eyes of the people,
yea, the eyes of GOD himself are upon them. Unto Heaven may they look for
assistance, and to the most perfect models on earth, for imitation.

JESUS was "the prince of the kings of the earth;" but he washed his disciples
feet. He went about doing good. Learn of him, learn industry, condescension,
philanthrophy: "whosoever would be greatest among you, let him be the servant
of all." Moses, when he stood on the mount with the laws of the Hebrew nation
in his hand, with what astonishing dignity and splendor did this great
magistrate appear in the eyes of the people? But Moses wist not that his face
shone: "be instructed ye rulers of the earth." This man had been with his GOD
in the mount; and Judah rules with GOD, and therefore is faithful. -- "The
power of godliness" is the supreme dignity of all rulers in Heaven or earth.
Acquainted with human nature, our civil fathers will not be disappointed to
find honest men, who from ignorance of the duties, the expenditures and
responsibility of public office, will be apt to consider rulers in a state like
drones in the hive, which live on the honey of the poor laboring bees. --
Others will mutter against government, and clamor for different measures, when
they neither know nor can tell what they want. While they condemn rulers for
oppressing the people, they are themselves acting the very part of that tyrant,
who having once had a dream, threatened to kill his officers, if they did not
interpret it, when he himself could not tell his own dream. When evils or
inconveniences are felt in society, too many are apt to imagine the fault is in
rulers, when it is in the people: hence they will seek a remedy in a change of
the former; not considering, that an army infected with the plague, or composed
of cowards, cannot be cured by a new choice of officers. Others will be found
turbulent and disappointed -- men of desperate minds and fortunes, who
constantly carry about them the tinder of faction, waiting only for a spark to
produce an explosion. They wish for convulsions in the state, that they may
rise into view, "ride in the tempest, and direct the storm." From such men, no
honest ruler can escape the calumny of the tongue. Envy is the tax of eminence,
and must be paid by every man in public office. While the Son of GOD remained
in private life, he increased in favor both with GOD and "Men." But when he
assumed his public office he suffered more than the scourge of tongues. If our
amiable President has made his escape, beyond any human character, it must be
remembered, that he, like the amiable and intrepid Daniel, said to the people,
"Let thy gifts be to thyself and thy reward to another;" otherwise HE might
have heard the growls of avarice and the curses of clowns. -- In proportion to
the degree in which a public spirit, or the social principle, prevails over the
selfish, rulers will feel their own dignity, and make others feel it too.
Conscious integrity will raise them far above the petulance of the tongue, or
the virulence of party rage; "none of these things move them." Nothing will
abate the ardor of their exertions for the public good. They know that silence
is the school of wisdom, and "with well doing they will put to "silence" the
ignorance of foolish men." We shall see them moving on, in silent majesty, like
the full-orbed moon, above the reach of the arrows of slander, and beyond all
danger of an eclipse or even a spot, from the little shadows of ten thousand
beagles barking at them. -- Example unblemished in public life will forever be
held sacred: they know that man is an imitative being; that between mind and
body there exists such a reciprocity of influence, that even imitating the
gestures and manners of others tends to produce a similarity of disposition.
The passions of the people are molded by the inclinations of the great. The
actions of rulers, like the rods of Jacob, which he peeled and set before the
flocks, will give color and complexion to all that behold them; yea, more than
this, the influence of public example will operate on the people, like the
magnetic influence upon iron, which not only attracts or repels, but even
communicates its own nature. This theory is authenticated by the most striking
facts of inspiration. "As in water face answers to face," so did the
character of GOD'S ancient people, both of Israel and Judah, correspond to that
of her rulers. Whether they neglected or attended to religion and the worship
of GOD, the people generally followed their example. What a lesson is before
us! a volume of the most serious instruction in a single fact. May "the
honorable of the earth" never forget, that character gives currency as well as
dignity to their laws and public administrations; and while enforced by
example, their own exertions to promote piety and morality, industry and
temperance, with all the useful arts of life, will be productive of the most
salutary effects.

Among numerous objects that may claim the attention of our honored rulers, and
to which their own wisdom is fully competent, I would only suggest that the
property of numbers among us while they and their families are attending public
worship on the Lord's Day, is liable to invasion, from licentious neighbors
who attend no worship at all. -- When the people of Israel left their own
habitations and went up to Jerusalem to worship, GOD himself interposed; and by
a miracle guarded in their absence, the property of his own people against the
rapacity of their enemies. But without a miracle, or the least invasion of the
rights of conscience, may not our legislators, in this instance, place the
property of every citizen upon the same ground of security. This would be done,
if those who do not, should be obliged either to attend public worship
themselves, or to furnish at their own expense a guard to the property of
others, while they do attend. -- "With that confidence wherewith I am bold to
say, that our civil rulers will not forget their own names as "dignities," it
may be presumed, they will not forget that public institution of learning, to
which they are so much indebted both for their literary and official dignity.
May "stand as a seal upon their arm, and a signet on their right hand." --
Above all, our venerable fathers will bear it in mind, that while employed in
the service of their country, they are all acting a part for eternity. Fired
with a noble emulation of transmitting their names to posterity in laurels of
honor, they will be infinitely more concerned, to secure an enrolment of their
names on the Lamb's book of life; where "the righteous shall be had in
everlasting remembrance."

My fellow citizens of this numerous and respectable assembly,

We know the value of freedom. We can truly appreciate the blessings of a free
and happy constitution. When our birthright was sold, with a great sum the
purchase was made. Most ardently we wish they may never be abused, despised or
lost. May Heaven, auspicious, forever guard them: -- but this cannot be done
unless men will guard their own tongues. A savage undisciplined tongue is more
to be dreaded than undisciplined troops, or the most inhuman savage. Sharper
than a two edged sword, it cuts the bands of love which unite man to man, and
thrusts its deadly stab into the bosom of society; it is a pestilence that
walks in darkness and wastes at noon day. When the cause of liberty bleeds,
let the patriotic tongue blow the trumpet, and plead its injured rights.
Freedom of speech and of the press, in such a cause, is the terror of tyrants
and the scourge of anarchy. But when licentious and ungoverned, they create
jealousies, infuse suspicions, weaken public confidence, kindle, and augment
the flames of such contention, as may desolate a country, and crimson it with
blood! While every man claims, as he justly may, a right to watch his own
government, let him watch his own tongue. In this way the poorest man may plant
one of the strongest guards around the liberties of his country, by that which
will cost him nothing, but silence. If he cannot keep his heart from deceit, he
may keep his lips from speaking evil of dignities. Should we ever behold what
Solomon saw and lamented in his day, viz. "Folly set in great dignity;" the
fault must be chiefly in the people who set them up. While therefore, we
censure our rulers, we condemn ourselves. Never let us dare to sport with the
character of a ruler. Public character especially ought to be treated as one of
the most dear and delicate of all possessions. How easily is it tarnished? and
how often is it done in ways unknown and unsuspected? Is there a man on earth
willing, that his faults should be enumerated without naming his virtues?
Partiality in this case is a species of the blackest slander. -- Names and
epithets of the most honorable import are, from the poverty of language,
always liable to this kind of partiality; and when perverted, they become
vehicles of the most abusive scandal: Just as the rankest poison may be
conveyed in the richest perfumes. The names appropriated to express power, as
it resides in the two branches of our own legislature, have not escaped this
kind of perversion. Monarchy is exploded; but the idea still remains. Should an
appropriate name to express that idea be wanted, etymology will present us with
the word, "Autocratical," i. e. the power of self, or self-important. This, it
is presumed, truly expresses the feelings of the heart, and is perhaps the best
definition of both the others, when they are bandied on the tongues of zealous
partisans by way of reproach.

Where encomiums on the one side -- ridicule and obloquy on the other, are both
extravagant, it becomes difficult if not impossible to find the truth.

Among a free people there will be a variety of opinions, from whence different
plans and systems of civil policy will be adopted, even where the object is the
same. In this case, if different paths should not lead us with equal safety to
the desired object, candor and moderation are the best remedies.

When political heresy creeps in, the standard must be lifted up against it.
"To the law and to the testimony" -- to the constitution and to the sovereign
people we must appeal -- the majority must decide, and all the people shall say
Amen. While we are watching our own, and speak with freedom on the great
republic of France, let us be afraid to speak evil of "dignities" and things we
understand not. Let no envenomed tongue or sacrilegious hand dare touch the ark
of liberty, or presume to make one link in that infernal chain of confederation
against human happiness! May heaven secure us from systems of monarchical
policy, and the devouring gulf of European politics! In fine, may all the
^riends of peace and harmony in our own and in the federal government, that
admired fabric of human policy; may the friends of union without division, and
of union without consolidation, yea, let every individual among us, unite and
display his friendship by a strict government over the tongue, that "unruly
member" of society; the greatest tyrant, the vilest insurgent on earth! "fight
neither with small nor great, but with the King" of tyrants, this demagogue of
faction. To do this we are bound, both by the highest claims of society and the
more sacred ties of christianity. For, "if any man speak with the tongues of
men and angels, and bridleth not his own tongue," this man's religion is vain.
Convinced of this, and knowing that the heart is the guilty source from whence
proceed evil thoughts, and speaking evil of dignities, let us look up to him,
under whose dominion is the heart of man, and pray him to create within us a
pure heart, and form us anew in CHRIST JESUS, that we may govern our passions,
and bridle our tongues. May the most ardent gratitude from every heart, and
every tongue arise to the eternal throne of the Supreme Ruler of nations, for
the present peace and prosperity of our nation. Luminated with the hope of its
continuance, let every one follow the unerring path of national and individual
happiness, delineated by the dictates of infinite wisdom in such language as
this -- "He that will love life, and see good days, let him refrain his tongue
from evil and his lips that they speak no guile, let him depart from evil and
do good." Traveling in this peaceful path of wisdom and rectitude. A few days
more the journey of life will be ended, the strife of tongues will cease, all
our connexions with civil society be dissolved; while the renovated soul,
washed in the Redeemer's blood, panting for liberty, will burst the chains of
its prison, and bound over the long range of eternity, exploring and triumphing
in all the "LIBERTIES OF THE SONS OF GOD."

AMEN.

