AN ORATION ON MUSIC.

DELIVERED AT THE COURTHOUSE IN COOPERSTOWN, IN OTSEGO; APRIL, 1794: AT THE
CONCLUSION OF A SINGING SCHOOL, TAUGHT BY NATHANIEL BILLINGS.

By Dr. H. Farnsworth.

Music has charms to soothe the savage breast,
To soften rocks, and bend the knotted oak.
COOPERSTOWN: PRINTED BY ELIHU PHINNEY: FOR THE AUTHOR. -- M, DCC, XCV. --

DEDICATION.
TO you my friends, I humbly dedicate
This piece: and if it please, your friend is paid;
To you, (...) whom sweet music's charms are life,
To you, whom God with liberal hand has blessed
With ears, to hear harmony's cordial sound;
With hearts to melt, cement and sympathize:
Accept with this (and if you please to own)
A hearty friend to music's powerful charms:
May we, when ever we meet, like masons give
The hand, and know all music's friends indeed:
Thus pass this life, where discord often wounds;
Aspire ^o gain the victory as we pass;
And when immortalized, shall join in one*
In endless songs, and anthe^s to the King,
In whom perfection, harmony and love,
Unite and shin(...) through aether's endless space,
And every orb bespeaks him infinite!
An ORATION ON MUSIC.
TO this audience, I have the honor and pleasure to address myself, as a friend
to the polite art of music; and to investigate the nature, the beauty, and the
civilizing and religious effects of melody, when suitably and feelingly
practiced, is my present design.

I have full assurance that no one will censure me as ostentatious in this
laudable task; to which I am invited by the silence of others -- that upon this
principle I shall meet with your forgiveness, for assuming the place, in which
many in this audience who are friends to music would have done better justice,
and greater honor to this pleasing and beautiful art: which is too much
neglected, to the great detriment of the cultivation of genius, to the sweets
of society, and especially to religious worship.

MUSIC is the gift of Heaven -- a fountain of joy on earth -- the earnest of a
future inheritance in unspeakable Glory; the theme of saints and angels above;
and the highest adoration ever paid to Deity: which I shall attempt to prove
both from its nature, and from sacred writ Consequently, if it is the highest
adoration which saints, or angels, can pay to Deity, it is his darling delight;
for it must have been his object, from eternity, to glorify himself, in the
creation, salvation, and happiness, of his dependent creatures, whose duty it
is to acknowledge him, as he has revealed himself in the harmonious system of
nature; both in creation and formation; and to do it with all the faculties of
the soul, in the most elevated accents we are capable of; for that which falls
short of giving him all the praise, and the whole heart is idolatry; and
according to our belief of things, in a sense displeasing to God, as expressed
in sacred writ.

MUSIC is a deep art, when viewed in its true principles: the plan or ground
work of music, is allowed by those who have made great proficiency, in the
various arts, and sciences, which are brought to great perfection; to afford
the greatest field for contemplation, to give the greatest exaltation of
thought, and to afford the sweetest amusement of all the various arts and
sciences of the schools ^ indeed so great is the art of music, that we find but
few who have become real Masters; although many profess, and thousands pay the
most assiduous attention to it, who are possessed of bright genius, and a high
esteem for the art. It may be argued by some, that acquirements in music,
depend upon a certain taste, or fondness for it; but the reverse of this is
evident; for there are but few who have no ears for music, and many who have
the most accurate ears, who are great performers, and will sing every piece of
music they hear, and therefore may be said to have a talent for music; who have
not that penetration of thought* by which they can by the closest attention
become masters of the art. Indeed, among those who understand the composition
of music, there is a great difference in the grandeur, and majesty of their
pieces; so that ^t may with propriety be said that few minds have the greatness
to become useful to mankind, in the composition of music. Another argument, to
vindicate that fleeting fancy can never comprehend the principles of music is,
that he who writes music, must have a most feeling sense of the words to which
he annexes his music; for unless the musician is skilled in the spirit of the
subject, and has a feeling sense of it too, he can never write good music: for
music is is always designed to express our ^^eas, in a more feeling manner, and
with higher animation of soul, than is possible from the impressions of silent
reflection, or the dull sounds of emphasis, and cadence in speaking. And as the
great use of music, is to assist in public worship, in addressing, and paying
homage to Deity; and in setting forth the greatness, and wisdom of God; it
requires an exalted mind, suitably to express the greatness of the subject, in
accents of harmony, and the sweetness of the voice.

MUSIC is calculated to refine the manners to increase the sensibility, and
sweeten the temper: the first by exciting youth to attend public worship; which
is calculated to polish and refine the manners, independent of its religious
effects. Notice a family, or neighborhood, which seldom attend religious
worship for a length of time, and you will commonly see a set of clowns.

MUSIC is calculated to promote literature, by the ambition which is always
excited among youth by public performance: and exclusive of music, there is
none which can be called suitable, and subservient to public good: dancing may
be said to be a public performance; true it is in a sense, and greatly
discovers bodily activity; gives a familiar address, and acquaintance with good
manners: but is chiefly calculated to entertain those individuals who compose
the ball. To commit to memory, pieces, and tragedies on various subjects, is
practiced in schools, and academies: and to deliver them on certain days
appointed for that purpose; which much excites ambition, and creates confidence
in youth; but perhaps not one to fifty are qualified for public speakers, or
ever become elegant orators; and are seldom of great use to society, by having
learnt to speak a few pieces, which are then worn out, dismissed, and soon
forgot. And the fair sex, are seldom ever favored with the opportunity of
serving their community, by public performance, except through the medium of
music.

WHO can flight so liberal, so polite an art? by which gentlemen and ladies, of
every sect and rank, may associate together, in a most entertaining and useful
manner.

THUS music is pleasing, and greatly strengthens society, as it cultivates
friendship; and especially as it marks no different sectarian; for almost all
denominations of men are ready to sing together, and view it as a very
essential part of public worship -- Psalmody is calculated to entertain almost
every member of society, who has arrived to years of understanding; both the
cheerful and the sedate, the old and the young: Thus the fire of ambition
kindles with their voices to please the audience, which together with the
subject of their melody, gives a decent confidence and exquisite delight

FRIENDLY and religious societies are very intimately connected, and dependent
on each other: so those things which prove baneful to the one, commonly do so
to the other; whereas those things which are of salutary tendency to the one,
are equally so to the other.

Music is a very great help to religion, as without this part of public
worship, much less attention would be paid to it. Both vocal and instrumental
music, have a tendency to excite many to attend public worship, who would
otherwise neglect; whereas it must be allowed that assembling together, which
we are commanded to do, has a greater tendency to promote religion than the
contrary: It likewise serves as a spur to religion, by awakening the careless
to a sense of the words they sing; and by arousing the sleepy saint indeed
without music, public worship is apt to sink into dull and heedless
formalities; almost without the appearance of religion.

I PRESUME that every musician will agree in this, that he who sings well,
whether the subject be love, praise, or a description of the wisdom and
perfections of Deity, has an elevation of thought, and transport of soul, which
none but the musician ever felt.

MUSIC gives eyes to explore the beauty, and wings to rise, to the high palace
of the happified being above; and if we in this life, do ever anticipate the
extatic joys of the celestial regions above; if the aspiring thought of finite
beings, is ever elevated, to join with the Angelic host, in the high praises of
the king of glory; it is when our voices are employed in melodious accents, to
express in a more feeling and lively manner, those noble psalms of David, the
songs of solomon, and other beautiful modern productions, in tunes and anthems.

NATURAL reason, and daily observation teaches us, that the benefit we derive
from music, in a great measure depends upon the variety of it; for to sing but
one tune, or to be confined to a certain set of tunes, would create
indifference, and inattention to music; for in this, as in almost all
impressions which are made upon the senses, a repetition of the same
impression, renders us less susceptible of it; till at length, that which was
at first pleasing, becomes a matter of indifference, and its salutary effects
upon the mind in a great measure cease: as in the dull formality of a family
prayer, which has been repeated every morning, and evening, for many years
without the least alteration except that which is accidental. It is evident,
that a great variety of objects, are well accommodated to the variety of
tastes, so as to afford a variety of amusements; why then should we slight, and
contemn, this great source of happiness, of which God is the author. There is
in the art of music, a great field for variety* which must first be explored,
by the assiduous application of great minds, when impressed with the reality of
important truths; and is then suited to the lowest, as well as the most exalted
capacity. Rigidity, and superstition, are the companions of partiality, in the
choice of the most innocent, and laudable amusements; and are commonly
affrighted at the sight of a novelty; whereas they are diametrically opposed to
improvements, and are as a great wall of separation betwixt us, and the light
of knowledge. Music is the great theme of the inspired writers; and it remains
to be proved from scripture, that it is the gift of heaven; a fountain of joy
on earth; the earnest of a future inheritance in unspeakable glory; the theme
of saints and angels above; and the highest adoration ever paid to Deity, as
before asserted.

David was a man after Gods own heart, and a great musician; he frequently
calls upon the righteous: and all nations likewise, to bless and praise the
Lord, and to sing praises and play skillfully with a loud noise: he not only
invites to sing but to use musical instruments to assist the voice.

Rejoice in the LORD ye righteous, for praise is comely for the upright. Praise
the LORD with harp, sing unto him with the psaltery and an instrument of ten
strings. Sing unto him a new song; play skillfully with a loud noise. Make a
joyful noise unto GOD all ye lands, sing forth the honors of his name, make his
praise glorious. O let the nations be glad and sing for joy, for thou shall
judge the people righteously. Sing unto God, sing praises to his name; extol
him that rides upon the heavens by his name JAH, and rejoice before him. Sing
aloud unto GOD our strengh, make a joyful noise unto the GOD of Jacob; take a
psalm, and bring hither the tabret, the pleasant harp and the psaltery; blow up
the trumpet in the new moon, in the time appointed on our solemn feast day; for
this was a statute for Israel, and a law of the God of Jacob.

It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises unto thy
name, O most high; to show forth thy loving kindness in the morning, and thy
faithfulness every night, upon an instrument of ten strings, and upon the
psaltery, with a solemn sound.

SOUND abstractly considered, cannot with propriety be called adoration, nor a
fountain of joy; any more than we can conceive of sin, or holiness separate
from rational beings, inclined to evil or good: -- but the sense in which
singing may be considered a fountain of joy, etc. Is* that it is the most
joyful mode of rejoicing; and that by which we express those emotions which we
call adoration, in the most feeling and elevated manner; and not only so, but
it begets emotions, excites ideas and improves the mind.

THE four first propositions laid down relative to music are too lucid* even to
deserve a comment; for the Psalmist frequently exhorts to rejoice, and sing
praises. Christ himself when on earth but a few hours previous to his being
crucified sang an hymn with his disciples and when they had sang an hymn they
went out into the mount of Olives, as though that was the most agreeable, and
most expressive of their affections for each other; -- as much as to say our
last and parting interview, and highest token of friendship is singing; for we
expect soon to join in an eternal song of Glory.

IT remains to be proved that singing is the highest adoration ever paid to
Deity. And they sung a new song saying, thou art worthy to take the book, and
to open the seals thereof; for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by
thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation* and have
made us unto God, kings and priests and we shall reign on the earth. And I
beheld and I heard the voice of many angels, round about the throne, and the
beasts, and the elders; and the number of them was ten thousand times ten
thousand, and thousands of thousands; saying with a loud voice, worthy worthy
is the Lamb that was slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and
strength, and honor, and glory and blessing. The song of redemption and
salvation, is the greatest that ever was sung in earth, or heaven; because the
work of redemption and salvation is the greatest, and the most glorious:
therefore as they praised God for it in a song, it follows that it is the
highest adoration ever paid to Deity; for if there had been any form more
adequate to this sublime employment, it would certainly have been adopted, to
the neglect of singing. -- The revelator has also a view of new music in
heaven, as expressed above. And I heard a voice from heaven, as the voice of
many waters, and as the voice of great thunder; and I heard the voice of
harpers, harping with their harps; and they sung as it were a new song before
the throne, and before the four beasts, and the elders.

It is needless to quote any more passages of scripture respecting singing as
it would render my essay prolix.

Now will this audience Permit my muse, to waft along:
And paint the beauties of a song.
Sweet music, refinement, politest of arts;
Reformer of manners; the badge of good hearts;
The bond of society; angel of love;
The offspring of heaven, and born from above.
The beauties of Music, are concord and love;
The joyfulest harmony, native above;
It softens the manners, and sweetens the heart;
Enlivens the spirits and makes them alert;
'Twill drown all sorrows of fortune, and fate;
In family, neighborhood, county and state.
O music the ladder on which we may climb,
To things more celestial, to things more sublime.
Enraptured in music, we waft on thy wings,
Immortal felicity; where the song rings:
The echo re-echo's, and echos again;
The melody suffers no discord within;
There swallowed in pleasure, eternally sing,
The glories, and beauties of our heavenly king.
No soul in that region of harmony sweet,
But drinks into musics, wide ocean complete:
Their voices are sweeter than words can express;
Their hands are uplifted, clad with righousness;
On wings they are mounted, on wings they do fly;
While shouting, and singing, with Myriads nigh;
Infinitude swells with their warbleing notes;
Their voice is the ocean in which they do float.
My soul that is immortal, begin in their song;
I Will sing till united to that heavenly throng.


Let me desire you to pardon the Muse, for such boldness of expression; and to
consider that poets think they may take great liberty that way.

If singing is as before asserted, the highest adoration ever paid to Deity,
and his darling delight; of what importance is it that we pay due attention to
it.

My friends let me remind you of the parable of the good and slothful servants;
and to consider whether those who neglect the voice, are as the slothful
servant, who hid his Lords money, -- buried the talent that was given him, and
incurred the Lord's displeasure. As singing is that form of worship which is
most pleasing to God as has been proved; those who neglect to cultivate the
voice bury a great talent, for which they will be obliged to give an account,
and then they will say, Alas! how mistaken in object of choice,
In point of amusement, to neglect the voice.


LET me solicit your attention to a few observations, negatively setting forth
in a few words those things which tend to discord, and are in their nature
opposed to Music. Those who are opposed to music if there be any in this
assembly, may think me partial in my essay, if I omit a description of discord.

THOSE sounds which clash with each other, so as to excite horror, and disgust
the ear, are discord; and the term discord is frequently used to signify
disagreement in neighborhood and in society; thus we say of a people where
quarrels abound, they are lovers of discord: those who are busy to propagate
slander are lovers of discord: those who are biased by national prejudices are
inclined to discord: those who are filled with the prejudices of education in
general are much inclined to discord: those who condemn all but those of their
denomination are much inclined to discord: those who contemn and speak evil of
every body but themselves, and will countenance nothing but for the sake of
their own emolument, are fit for masters of discord, and are so fond of it,
that they devote up their whole time to composition without any reward, except
the pleasure of hearing new jargon. Every thing which falls short of treating
mankind according to their true merit, is strictly discord, in that degree in
which it differs from that fitness of things, which we call harmony; because it
stands opposed to society, and is certainly opposed to all good.

IT is impossible to conceive of society among the lovers of discord; as the
whole composition of their minds is a mass of heterogeneous combustible, which
being put into action enkindles to a flame of discord, and confusion. Let me
quit this painful task; an investigation of the principles of discord, and I
would charitably hope there is not one such in this audience. Let me invite the
friends to Music and harmony, to distinguish themselves by their exertions to
promote it. We wish all the blessings of life, health and peace to attend you
in this life; and are assured, that the coming world, will afford you an
eternal and joyful theme.

BUT, what will be the porrtion of the lovers of discord in a coming world, is
hard to tell; but if we may be allowed to imitare the langurge of sacred writ,
As he loved cursing so let it come unto him, as he delighted not in blessing,
so let it be far from him: It will stand thus; As he loved discord, so let it
come unto him; as he delighted not in harmony, so let it be far from him.

What remains is an address, first to my honorable Preceptor, and then to my
fellow students in Music. THE polite, and honorable post which you now hold by
virtue of merit; entitles you to the notice, and attention of every person of
merit, and reputation. It becomes us who have received your salutary
instructions, in the rudiments of the art of music, gratefully to acknowledge
you as our preceptor and friend. May you never have the displeasure to see or
hear, that we slight the benefit which you have conferred upon us, by
forgetting to attend to Music, and so losing what knowledge we have acquired
under your tuition. The highest mark of gratitude we can express toward you,
is to persevere in Music; and to slight, and neglect it would be the very
grossest ingratitude.

Gentlemen and ladies of the school of music. LET me address you in the style
of a hearty friend to the cause -- May we ever refrain from those things which
tend to discord, and frequently give a stain, which is never wiped away. May we
long have the pleasure of singing together in friendship; and never let too
much vanity possess our minds, when singing sacred words.

THAT an acquaintance with music, may render us useful members of society, an
ornament to the public worship of GOD, and an honor to the art we profess;

THAT it may be our happy lot to escape the snares of him who is the father of
discord and lies; and to have an admittance to the mansions of of peaceful
harmony, where love and adoration, furnish an eternal song, is the desire of
your sincere FRIEND;

New Year's Song.
SET TO MUSIC, BY MR. NATHANIEL BILLINGS,
HAIL! New Year's morning! tune, O tune the voice!
Hail! friends to virtue! triumph, and rejoice!
Hail! patriots hail! whom lively joys inspire.
Where emulation kindles to a fire.
All hail! sweet Phoebus, hear our gladsome song,
Thy glittering smiles roll ninety-four along.
May wisdom's angel mark the peaceful road,
Which leads to happiness, that blessed abode,
The Rights of Man may every voice proclaim,
And distant nations shout WASHINGTON's fame
May all monarchal usurpation cease,
And the wide world her tyrant kings release
The RIGHTS OF MAN, or Freedom's dawning day,
First shone with strength, in North America,
Freedom's great Herald, PAIN, has told the tale,
And France has lately rent the ancient veil,
That old Egyptian yoke, a tyrant king,
Has broke, and monarch's fearful howlings ring.
May kings dethroned the rights of man confess,
And save their lives, by works of righteousness
May ninety-four proclaim a happy close,
And France victorious over all her foes,
May discord cease, when this new-year is done,
And all the nations have their rights as ONE.

