

BELISARIUS: A TRAGEDY.

BY MARGARETTA V. FAUGERES.

NEW YORK: Printed by T. and J. SWORDS, No. 99 Pearl-street. 1795.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
BELISARIUS, the Roman General. JUSTINIAN, the Roman Emperor. TIBERIAS, the
Emperor's Nephew. GILIMER, the Captive King of the Vandals. BESSUS, a Courtier
retired from business, the foe of Belisarius. THE PRINCE OF BULGARIA. MATHON,
the Prince's Friend. ARSACES, a Bulgarian Noble, in love with Julia. BARSAMES,
High Treasurer, and favorite of the Empress. AGRESTIS, the Friend of Tiberias.
COURTIE. BULGARIANS. SOLDIERS. ATTENDANTS. A CHILD, the Guide of Belisarius.
WOMEN.
EUDOXA, the Daughter of Belisarius. THEODORA, the Empress. JULIA, the Sister
of Tiberias, in love with Belisarius. AMALA, the Wife of Gilimer. LADIES.
PREFACE.
EVER indulgent to the weakest emanations of genius, a benevolent public has
enabled the author of BELISARIUS to bring forward her first Dramatic
Performance; and though it may not be as perfect as those pieces which are
produced by authors who have paid long and strict attention to the Theater, yet
she flatters herself, that as an historical Tragedy, it will meet with a kind
reception.

She has endeavored to avoid all that unmeaning rant which forms so
conspicuous a part in most productions of this kind, together with the awful
asseverations and maledictions. -- What their effect upon the stage may be, she
knows not, but to a mere reader they are ever tiresome, and frequently
disgusting; for which reason, as BELISARIUS was from its commencement intended
for the closet, she has attempted, in their stead, to substitute concise
narrative and plain sense.

It was her intention to have prefixed a list of the subscribers names to the
piece, but as several people objected to having their's printed, it was thought
unnecessary to publish only a part of them. However, she has with many thanks
to acknowledge the encouragement she has met with.

NEW YORK, May, 1795.
BELISARIUS.
ACT THE FIRST.
SCENE -- An outer Chamber belonging to the Palace.
Enter the EMPEROR. EMPEROR. IT IS not in man to cherish chaste content
In his tumultuous soul; discordant passions,
Now rising like the billows in a storm,
Carry him far beyond where reason reigns,
And now exhausted by the boisterous fray
Drop far below her sphere --
He who is poor longs for the chink of gold,
The unsocial pomp of stiff magnificence,
The jargon of a thousand senseless terms --
And thinks that greatness is exempt from woe;
Nor knows that dainties pall upon the taste,
And pleasures made too common lose their relish.
Pleasures! can grandeur boast of pleasures then!
Ah no -- it is but another word for care:
Nor can the sparkling of a diadem
Eclipse its mournful meaning. --
The precious gale, that through the lattice blows
On the tired body of some sleeping slave,
(When weary day has sunk beneath the main)
Cools the high ferment of his feverous blood,
And gives him slumbers sweeter; but to me
Its gentle whisperings seem like sounds of death --
From dreams of mutiny, and schemes, and murder,
I start, and think some bold conspirator
Breathes near my bed, and springing up dismayed,
I stalk around my chamber a sad prey
To torturous reflection -- my broken rest
Sheds a damp on my heart -- I Will streach me here;
Perhaps calm sleep, the dear oblivious power,
May yield by day the bliss that night denies.
[Throws himself upon a sopha, and drops a curtain before him.
Enter TIBERIAS and AGRESTIS. AGRESTIS. You look, my friend, as though some
mighty woe
Hung on your heart, and weighed down all your smiles.
And such a gloom sits brooding on your front,
That if a friend, with cheerful countenance,
Does look upon you, your aspect so dismayed
Straightway discomforts him. --
Tell me, Tiberias, what is it grieves you?
Have your unwary eyes, by wily love
Enticed, strayed on some youthful object fair,
Who, heedless of your sighs and soft confessions,
Your midnight watchings, and uneasy days,
Laughs with your rival, and upon your face
Casts a disdainful glance of pitiless pride?
Or has --

Tib. You cannot guess the cause.


Agr. Is it so wonderful, so secret then?


Tib. Oh yes, it is very wonderful indeed!


Agr. What is it?


Tib. It is that BELISARIUS, the brave,
Though injured and debased beyond redress,
Can yet forgive!

Agr. How know you it?


Tib. I have seen him.


Agr. You have?


Tib. Yes, the last day that Felix held his feast,
Where the young nobles were convened for sport,
Ere well the viands were removed, and we
Began to fill our goblets, one arrived,
Whose wrinkled forehead bald, and homely garb,
Pronounced him old and poor -- with port erect,
Nor bent by age, nor humbled by distress,
He entered the pavilion, led by a child,
And asked from us a shelter for the night:
Which being granted, on a little stool
The boy placed the old man, for he was blind. --
Quite inattentive to his aged presence
We spoke without reserve each busy thought:
And as the bowl went round, our warming hearts
P^nted with deeds of fame -- we talked of war,
The fate of kingdoms and of laws corrupt --
And had we mingled power with desire,
Each one had swayed the empire of the world.

Agr. Truly you formed a loyal company.


Tib. A smile sarcastic, ere we were aware,
Brightened the features of our hoary guest,
And when one asked the reason, he replied,
In accents mild, 'twas our simplicity!

Agr. And what said you?


Tib. Nothing; for in a soft bewitching strain
He checked the rudeness of our speech unguarded,
And in the most pathetic language wail'd
Sad Rome's undone condition;
Reproached the selfishness of crafty men
Who ruled the Emperor, and sold for gold
The favors due to merit.
Experienced wisdom floated from his lips;
And a deep silence testified our wonder;
Till a bold youth, whose eyes did swim with wine,
Rose sudden from his seat, and stammering said,
" And who are you, that in this lordly strain
" Would school your noble hosts, in state affairs?"
The stranger gravely answered "BELISARIUS."

Agr. Heavens!


Tib. Deep glowed each crimson cheek, with conscious shame
Thus to have laid our follies before him,
Whom all the world had reverenced for his virtue;
And no full eye dared raise its quivering beam
To that scared face, unconscious of its glances. --
But awful silence spoke our blushing thoughts
More eloquently than a gust of sound.

Agr. Said he aught more?


Tib. Yes, but not till, with a long burdened sigh,
I interrupted the dumb stillness -- "Ah! (said I)
" And can you still, though injured beyond measure,
" Cast down from GLORY's pinnacle, disgraced
" And made more wretched than earth's vilest offspring?
" And can you still, with ardour and affection
" Attempt to wake in us a sacred love
" For this our country?" The venerable chief
Serenely answered me, "And who, young man,
" Is he from whom you do expect to hear
" Lessons of virtue, and of public spirit?
" Is it the venal Courtier -- the great man,
" Whose wealth flows on him like a sea -- whose path
" The hand of luxury has paved with gems?
" Is he to be your teacher? -- No, my friend,
" It Is the Old Warrior, whose hardy limbs
" The storm of war has fiercely beat upon,
" Who feels the value of the truth he preaches --
" Who acts from principle, and not for hire!
-- "And though neglect and shame await his labors,
" Still loves his sovereign, and reveres the laws!"

Agr. And where is the old veteran now?


Tib. Perhaps at home -- for early the next morn,
While dull Intemperance bound us to our pillows,
He rose and journey'd on toward his castle.
-- But yonder comes my melancholy sister
With her sad lover; let us leave the place!

Agr. Your sister! sure I heard that she was dead,


Tib. It was so rumored; but Bulgaria's prince
As a state prisoner has long detained her;
-- She early was betrothed to BELISARIUS,
And loved him tenderly; but THEODORA,
Fearful lest the proud soldier should aspire
One day to wear the royal diadem,
Sent Julia off by force, and imprisoned her
For many a lingering year.

Agr. How came she to be freed?


Tib. I have not time to tell the story now,
But meet me at the Theater tonight
And you shall hear it; until then adieu.
[Exeunt different ways.
Enter ARSACES and JULIA. JULIA. Leave me, Arsaces, I am tired of love;
It Is an old theme; a very foolish one --
Besides, it makes me sad to see thee thus --
I pray thee leave me.

Ars. Ah! Julia, all my soul is fixed on thee;
When driven from thee, I leave myself behind;
In thee are all my bosom's wishes centered;
Nor does my heart a single comfort own
When thou art absent -- Pity me, sweet maid!
Think on the tedious years of dire suspense
And languishing disease that I Have endured,
And let one feeling word now leave thy lips
To ease the anguish of a bleeding breast.

Jul. Oh! I want pity for my hapless self --
None have I to bestow -- I too have loved;
But, ah! like thee I did not love in vain --
My BELISARIUS had a tender heart
That answered all my wishes -- never sigh
Bore from my soul the index of distress;
Nor did a tear (save tears of sudden joy)
Ere damp the down upon this faded cheek:
Then youth, and health, and gaiety were mine,
And constant love, and oh! how blessed was I!
-- Often, with childish transport have I hung
Upon his neck, and found my fingers twined
His glossy curls, and scattered rich perfume
Upon his robes; while my enraptured lover
Covered the busy hand with ardent kisses,
And pressed me to his heart -- days of blessedness!
Oh! why did ye exist so short a time?
Or why exist at all?
(Weeps.)
Ars. My darling Julia drop these vain regrets,
For BELISARIUS is no longer thine:
Is he not wedded?

Jul. Too sure he is, and therefore I will weep,
For he was mine, and naught by wicked craft
Ere rent him from my bosom -- Oh! my love!
Oh! my betrothed love, how are we severed!
Curse on the monsters of iniquity,
Who thus have burst the tenderest bands asunder
Affection ever knew -- thou art betrayed!
Dungeons, and poverty, and shame are thine,
And everlasting blindness; while I, deserted,
Roam round the world in search of envied Peace,
Who still eludes my grasp -- Stripped of my friends.
I suffer all alone, unheard, unheeded.

Ars. Oh! say not so -- wrong not my humble love;
Sure I would make thy sufferings all my own;
And if that might not be, I Would mingle tears
And answer sighs with sighs, till weary life
Should quit its feeble hold; when folding thee
Close in my dying arms, I Would groan my last;
And then my unchain'd spirit, true in death,
Won by thy woes, should fleet around thee still.

Jul. Oh! my big heart is full -- a doleful load
Oppresses every nerve -- would it could break --
But no! that will not be! it cannot burst
Till BELISARIUS dies; and then, O then!
Lured by his gentle call, each aching string
Shall lose its power to feel, and all entranced,
My soul shall spring above this world of woe
And join his blameless spirit in the skies:
(Tiberias crosses the stage in haste, she runs toward him.) My brother, stay
-- what tidings of your General?

Tib. He is upon his way toward his castle
On foot, and only guided by a child.
[Exit.
Jul. Arsaces, do thou love me?

(Returning.)
Ars. Ah! Julia, can thou doubt it?


Jul. Then aid me in an enterprise of vengeance;
Haste to Bulgaria, tell thy warlike prince
That Rome's defender is disgraced, that now
He wanders towered his place of banishment;
Tell him to be the injured exile's friend,
And yield him the command of half his forces --
Then (if his swelling heart resembles mine)
Soon shall this hated empire be destroyed --
BYZANTIUM shall be involved in smoke --
Shoutings, and cries, and shriekings we shall hear;
The hum of chariots, and the hideous crash
Of falling towers; while the elated victors
Shall plunge their daggers in the boiling bosoms
Of the voluptuous despots -- haste! begone!

Ars. Julia.


Jul. Pause not a moment, else thou lose my love;
This deed can but secure it; go, young man,
And soon as this destruction is accomplished,
This glorious destruction! I am thine.

Ars. And will thou not retract?


Jul. Not for my life; go! haste and do thy errand!


Ars. Then grant me this, (kneels and kisses her hand) an earnest of my bliss,
And smile propitious on my enterprise.

Jul. Go, and may angels guard thee.
[Exit Ars.
Now Love, thou art my friend, though my vexed mind
Feels not thy happy influence -- I love not --
No, I despair; and nothing charms my soul
But deeds of death, and thoughts of deep revenge;
Though the birds chaunt in every rustling copse,
And fountains warbling roll, and scented gales
Blow cool along the shadowy mountain's side,
They yield me no delight -- from blissful views
Rancorous I turn away -- and, like the spider,
From most salubrious and precious sweets,
I only gather poison.
[Exit. The EMPEROR rises and comes forward. EMPEROR. Oh! most unfortunate! --
Can this be true?
And have I been deceived? -- Is BELISARIUS
My subject once so loyal, still the same?
Oh! is he innocent? -- are his hands pure?
I shudder at the thought! -- it cannot be --
It must not -- Heavens! 'twould tarnish all my glories;
The world would pour contumely on my name,
Holding me infamous -- and future ages
Hear the recital of my acts with horror;
And wonder why the world did not combine
To drown in his own blood so dire a monster.
-- Pshaw -- it is all folly -- hold -- yet let me think --
I Will hear Tiberias tell the whole again;
I Will have him in my chamber, and, oh! then,
If I have wronged that ruined old man,
I Will seek, and weeping, sue him for a pardon:
Then hide my hoary head, and die with shame.
[Exit.
ACT THE SECOND.
SCENE -- A Garden -- a Cottage adjoining it.
Enter GILIMER, with a spade in his hand; AMALA leaning on his arm, (time
daybreak.) AMALA. IT IS yet too soon to labor, love; come sit,
This air blows fresh, and these sweet bending flowers,
Heavy with dew, shed such a fragrance round,
And so melodious sings the early lark,
'Twould be a pity not to enjoy the hour:
Come sit upon this sod; (they sit) see the morn breaks
In streams of quivering light upon the hills,
And the loose clouds in changeful colors gay,
Now tinged with crimson deep, with amber now,
Sail slow along the brightening horizon.

Gil. Yes, my Amala, it is a lovely morn,
And might inspire me with calm ideas,
But that my thoughts are dwelling on the stranger
Who claimed your hospitality last night.
You said he was a soldier, old and poor,
And that excites compassion; for I grieve
To see a veteran who has spent his strength
In the big perils of uncertain war,
Far from his home, his comforts and his friends!
Who often has slept upon the frozen earth,
And suffered grievous want; that he, when age
Has made him bald, and chilled his sickly veins,
And rendered him quite useless to himself,
Should then be turned upon the world adrift,
To seek a scanty sustenance from alms;
It Is much to be lamented.

Enter BELISARIUS, led by a Boy. AMALA. See our guest comes; I will retire, my
love,
And bid my daughter gather some choice fruits
For his refreshment.
[Goes into the cottage.
Boy. This way good Sir.

(To Belisarius)
Gil. How fares my aged friend?


Bell. Why much refreshed with the last night's repose. Is it my host that makes
this kind demand?


Gil. It is.


Bell. May heaven its blessings pour profusely round him,
For his compassion to the worn-out warrior.

Gil. I reverence the name; but pray be seated --
I, like yourself, have stood the test of battle,
And love to hear again of feats of arms.
Where served you, friend? and in what noisy fight
Did you receive those honorable scars?

Bell. 'Twas in the dubious wars against the Persians,
Whose thousands fell upon the plains of DARA,
With horrible destruction, while thousands more
Fled from the hasty storms of whistling arrows;
Then where the savage Goths over captive Rome
Spread barbarisms, and lawless blotted out
The vestiges of science, our eager bands
Cast their entrenchments round the hardy foe.

Gil. Fought you in Africa?


Bell. We did, against the Vandals and the Moor.


Gil. Then you know BELISARIUS, that great man!
Does he still live, that pattern for all soldiers?
For here, secluded from the bustling throng,
I seldom hear what passes in the world.

Bell. Yes, he still lives.


Gil. Doubtless the idol of a grateful people,
Mantled in power and guarded by his friends,
Who wait on all his wishes; tired of war
He spends his age in honorable ease:
Oh* what an ornament is he to man!
Where find we such abilities as his,
So much experience, such an equal temper,
Such strength of judgment, nobleness of mind,
And amiable valor?

Bell. You knew him then?


Gil. Yes, by the chance of battle -- as my conqueror;
He vanquished me, and I revere him still;
For when a thousand sorrows rose against me,
Adversity became a virtuous master,
And taught me by the sufferings I endured
To feel for other men --
That men were brethern -- that to be humane
Was to be great -- NATURE made no reserve,
But all who bore the sacred stamp of reason
Might claim one general law.
-- You have seen GILIMER, the Vandal King,
Brought in a triumph to BYZANTIUM?

Bell. I did see him.


Gil. It Is he beneath whose shed you have reposed.


Bell. Ha! can it be! the mighty Vandal King
Who rolled in affluence -- is he become
An humble peasant?

Gil. He is.


Bell. The great, the warlike Gilimer?


Gil. Even so.


Bell. Oh, wondrous fortune!


Gil. I am contented with it; I desire
No higher appellation than I bear;
Honors were proffered me by your old Emperor,
Which I refused; for tired indeed was I
Of fluctuating grandeur: hither then
I bore my humbled family of captives,
Where, far retired from Pomp's fastidious train,
They might in peace improve the fertile earth,
And live by industry. My pampered sons
Now till my fields, and my accomplished girl
Toils with her mother, or attends the sheep,
While GILIMER here labors with his spade.

Bell. Where learned you this philosophy?


Gil. Upon the rugged mountains of Papua,
In the dark caverns of the treacherous Moor,
Whither, from the pursuit of the brave Romans,
I fled with my sad mutilated army.
There famine glar'd in every haggard eye,
And desperation hardened every heart;
Noisome diseases overran the camp,
While winter's rigors numbed our dwindling limbs;
And when we sought a respite from our griefs
In tranquil slumbers and illusive dreams,
Soon were we rifled of the golden vision,
Waked by the pealing war-trump's dreary blast!

Bell. Ah! such are the calamities of war.


Gil. Roused by their woes I cast mine eyes around
Upon the famished wretches that I swayed:
" And who," I cried, "has brought you all this misery!
" Say, is it I? what have I done for you
" That thus your lives you offer as a prey
" To such sad desolation? Rise, my friends,
" You are my slaves no more -- equals in grief
" Let us our interests join, and now descend
" As prisoners to the Romans." They paused -- they wept,
But not a tongue replied. "Alas!" said I,
" Are you in love with Sorrow, that you thus
" Refuse to be delivered? If it is for me you feel,
" Banish your cares, for GILIMER is a man,
" And values more the comforts of a nation
" Than his own private weal! Tell me, my friends,
" Is it more glorious here to stay and suffer,
" To see our unoffending offspring pine,
" And our sad consorts perish on our bosoms,
" Than by a single effort to recall
" The blessedness of peace? If you have loved,
" If ever you have honored GILIMER,
" Rise and obey him now."

Bell. 'Twas nobly said.


Gil. Weeping they rose,
And as we slowly marched toward the plain
Calm Reason floated in upon my soul,
And pointed out the follies of the great,
The childishness, the emptiness of pomp:
And as I mused upon the mock parade
The ceremonious sons of splendour make,
The scene grew ludicrous: and when your chief
Thought to have seen my tears, o'erpower'd with mirth
I burst into immoderate fits of laughter!

Bell. I well indeed remember the strange scene;
'Twas thought your mighty woes had made you wild.

Gil. Oh no! till then I had been simple too;
But when I saw how the mad multitude
Ran after Fame, a short-lived, captious being,
Who praise dispenses to the worthless, and withholds
From the deserving; how they toiled, and urged,
And often perished in the vain pursuit,
(Which, if accomplished, brought them no repose;)
Then I grew sick of vanity, and resigned
My crown without a sigh; and now declare,
That as a peasant I enjoy more bliss
Than when a king.

Bell. Happy the man whose steadfast bosom feels
Unmoved the rudest shocks of varying Fortune;
Who, when despoiled of his gem-deck'd couch,
Can slumber sweetly on a sheaf of straw.
-- Yet think not that the barb'd shafts of Misfortune
Were spent on you alone, sage GILIMER;
For in the person of an old blind beggar
You may trace BELISARIUS!

Gil. Ha! did I hear aright -- said you --


Bell. Yes, I said BELISARIUS -- I am he.


Gil. Oh, wondrous change! and are you BELISARIUS!
A blind, abandoned, beggared old man!
He at whose feet the Carthagenians laid
My regal robes -- who brought a world of wealth
To the Byzantine court? And is it he
That asks an alms from GILIMER, his captive?

Bell. Yes, it is the same! and him the Byzantines
Have banished, and deprived of both his eyes!

Gil. Horrid barbarity! who did the deed?


Bell. They were the favorites of the Emperor,
And he fast verges toward second childhood.
They imprisoned me -- and he whom I had served
With so much zeal did pass the sad decree!
-- When I first heard it my full heart beat slow --
My wonted fortitude forsook me -- and when I thought
That 'twas JUSTINIAN that urged the blow,
(Casting my hopeless eyes to yon bright heaven,
As 'twere to take a lasting leave of light)
I wrung my hands, and bathed me in my tears.
-- The executioner, touched with my sorrows,
Sunk on the ground, and cried, "You are undone!
" Wretched old man! why does your heart not break
" And give you a release from such a woe!"
But it is past, and tranquil as the flood,
When gently kissed by Twilight's softliest gale,
My spirits rest, and scarce consent to weep,
When Memory would the piteous tale recall.

Gil. Stay with me, sufferer! end thy wanderings here!
Beneath my roof let Death perform his office!

Bell. It cannot be! a mournful family
Expect me daily -- though, alas! they think not
How wretched I shall come. Farewell, my friend,
May comforts crown your days. Let me embrace you
[ They embrace -- the boy leads Belisarius away -- Gilimer covers his face
with his hands and retires into the cottage
SCENE -- An elegant apartment.
Tables spread with fruits, wines, etc. Bessus and several Courtiers sitting
round -- Servants. BESSUS. Come fill your goblets high -- salute the day
With festive mirth, and banish every grief;
For know, today triumphant Innocence
Gains her reward, and bloody Infamy
Draws down upon her own polluted soul
The ruin she had framed for others. Come, drink.

All. To Bessus' health.

(They drink.)
1st Court. Aye, right! for while he lives his open heart
Shall pour profusely on his grateful friends
The choicest gifts of Affluence: you do right
To wish him health who is so bountiful.

2d Court. Come give me music, and I Will strain my voice
To utter the hot feelings of my soul
On such a day as this. Fill me more wine!
May swift destruction seize on Bessus' foes!
(Drinks.)
Bess. You are too warm, my dear, my generous friends!
I own the jealous BELISARIUS wronged,
And would, perhaps, have ruined me completely,
Had not the POWER that weighs our every act
Repelled the burning shaft. But I forgive,
And wish him no more evil, though I joy,
For Virtue's sake, that this has come upon him.
-- But I prevent your song -- I pray go on.

SONG.
As when Old Ocean, fraught with tempest roars,
And stormy gales howl the dark shores along,
And swelling foam smokes the arched caves among,
And on the rough rocks dash the thundering waves:
The rocks repel the force -- the waves retreat,
Spent with the idle war, and seek the main;
Then loud the rushing north winds blow, and beat
Back to the shore the surging waves again.
Thus, though with dark insidious aim
Fell Envy threw a deadly dart
To sully Bessus' spotless fame,
And wound his generous, feeling heart;
Avenging HEAVEN beheld the deed,
And bidding angry thunders roll,
Hurled back the shaft with horrid speed,
To blast the wretch's cruel soul.
Bess. Thanks, thanks, my friends! I feel your generous love,
And only ask how I shall ever repay it?

Enter a SERVANT. SERVANT. A stranger asks admittance.

Bess. Let him enter.

[Exit servant.
Enter a BULGARIAN. BESSUS. Welcome, my friend; what would you


Bulg. I come to give you joy of BELISARIUS!


1st Court. Come you from Byzantium?


Bulg. I do.


2d Court. Saw you the prisoner freed?


Bulg. I did, and quite alarming was the scene.


3d Court. How so?


Bulg. Some of the old disbanded regiments,
Who often had sent petitions to the throne
In his behalf, receiving no return
Grew quite outrageous, and, with din of arms,
Rushed on toward his dungeon, fully bent
To give their General liberty by force;
And the misguided citizens united
Their clamours with the soldiery. Dire confusion
Now spread throughout the city; armed bands
Attempted to disperse the madd'ning crowd,
Who, quite infuriate, threatened sure destruction
On all that dared oppose them. To the palace
Expresses drove with speed, and THEODORA,
Seeing the EMPEROR worked up to a phrenzy,
Seized the glad moment, and gave instant orders
For the enlargement of the prisoner.

Bess. And is it possible she gave such orders?


Bulg. She did, and gave these dread directions with them.
" Wrench out his eyes, lest, prompted by revenge,
" He should again aspire to royalty,
" And raise a mutiny among the slaves."
They hasted to the prison, and with speed
Performed the dread command; then led him forth,
Bending from his harsh chains. He scarce appeared
Ere one sad shriek burst from the frantic host
And shook the atmosphere: tumultuous groans
And drowning tears succeeded, and these were lost
In curses dire on the barbarian's head
Who framed the hellish deed.

2d Court. But what said he?


Bulg. To the blue sky he raised his sightless eyes
(That never more should drink its crystal luster,)
And waved his withered hand, demanding silence:
A solemn pause ensued -- each sound suspended,
And every murmur or impassioned sigh
Breathless attention awfully suppressed.
-- Touched with this mournful tribute of respect
His rising sobs impeded utterance,
Till by one effort he over came his griefs,
And spoke -- "My brethren, my afflicted fellows,
"Let not your love deprive me of the bliss
" My enemies have left me -- make me not
" The guilty cause of a sad insurrection;
" Murder and blood will not restore my sight,
" Nor add one hour to my exhausted life;
" Whatever is left me is my innocence!
" That is my ALL! oh! force me not to lose it!"

3d Court. And did this sophistry quell the fierce riot?


Bulg. Oh, yes! the attentive, melting populace
Embraced his knees, and wept upon his garments,
And in the vehemence of their affection
Tendered him all they owned. "No!" he replied,
" Treasures may comfort you -- me they cannot;
" My relish for them is long since decayed;
" Keep them, and be you blessed -- I only ask
" One of your little ones, to be my guide
" To ANTONINA's castle."

1st Court. What a strange man!


Bess. Aye! strange indeed, that in this heavy age
He still retains his wicked subtilty,
To win the people and delude JUSTINIAN.
He knows the channel to his Sovereign's heart
Is flattery, and therefore, thus afflicted,
He means to soften, with endearing words,
The sottish mob, and make them weep and wail him.
Oh! would they tender him a crown again,
Even in his desolate, decriped age,
His feeble hand would grasp the glittering bauble
And he commence a tyrant!

Bulg. Not so! your General never was ambitious;
He sought his country's welfare, not its riches.
Did not the Vandals offer him the rule
Of conquered Carthage, and its mighty spoils?

Bess. And did he not accept it? Did he not,
Garb'd like a fool, sit on the Vandal throne,
And act as King? Did ever GILIMER
Display more splendour at his solemn feasts
Than BELISARIUS at a common meal;
Served by the Lords and Princes of the city,
Who bore the gold and crystal goblets round?
And when in Italy, did he not aspire
To wear the diadem of the Gothic King?

Bulg. And what prevented him? was it the people?
Or was it his unblemished fealty
To his ungrateful Emperor?

Bess. The apprehensions of JUSTINIAN's fury
Prevented him; for very well he knew,
That had he deviated from his duty,
The union'd vengeance of Byzantium's nobles
Had burst upon him like a thunder storm,
And blasted him forever.

Bulg. Oh fallacy! and was it ever supposed
That sons of impotence, wallowing in luxury,
Disabled by their vices, even to mount
Their cushion'd chariots without assistance,
That these would ever dare to meet the man
Inured to hardships, and grown gray in war?
Would he whose valor charmed the wondering world
Fear such a host of courtly invalids,
With an old biggot Emperor at their head,
Bidding his beads, and praying to his saints?
Oh! the extreme of folly!

2d Court. Dastardly wretch! dare you thus ridicule
Our holy Sovereign and his piety?
Take that for your reward!
(Attempts to stab him.)
(The Bulgarian runs to the door.) Bulg. What, ho! Bulgarians! my companions,
ho!


Bulgarian soldiers rush in. They fight and overcome the courtiers. LEADER. Ha,
monsters! is this revelling and riot
Because a good man suffers shamefully,
While you, whose lives have been a round of villainies,
Whose crimes pollute the mighty Roman name,
Retire in peace to enjoy your countless stores,
Obtained by ruthless rapine and extortion?

2d Bulg. Which of all these is Bessus?


1st Court. He with the purple mantle.


2d Bulg. Say, shall I slay him?


Leader. That would be no revenge; call BELISARIUS,
And let his hand, while yet his strength remains,
Guide this broad sabre to the caitiff's heart.

Bess. Oh! spare my life, take all I have beside,
My gold, my castle, and my hosts of slaves;
Take them, and make a sacrifice of all,
I only ask my life.

Enter Soldiers with BELISARIUS. BELISARIUS. Nay, my good friends, this is
indeed unkind
Thus to make me the author of a riot;
Let me return, I do not want revenge.

1st Bulg. No, but we do; come, here is Bessus, strike him.


Bess. Oh, BELISARIUS! if it is you I see,
Thus kneeling do I crave your clemency;
(Kneels.) You are too good -- too kind, to see me suffer.

2d Court. And me, dear General, was I not your friend?
Oh! think how often you blessed me with your council.

Leader. And how thou have abused his proffered friendship;
No! thou shall die, for vengeance, soon or late,
Will overtake such bloodhounds as thou art.

Bell. Nay, give them time, good soldiers, to repent;
Cut them not off in such an evil day,
For they are filled with wine. Oh! spare their lives.

2d Bulg. No, they are a stain upon the book of nature;
They thirst for blood, and they shall have their fill:
Men, lead them off.
(The soldiers lead away the courtiers.)
Bess. Oh, mercy!


2d Bulg. Peace, fool; die quietly.

(Stabs him.)
Bell. Oh! my good friends, you wound me to the quick,
Thus to deprive my countrymen of life;
Truly it grieves me, and the world will fix
Upon my name the stigma of this act.

1st Bulg. And have they not long since deserved this fate?


2d Bulg. They have, for they were ravenous and cruel;
I have known Bessus, in a time of dearth,
(Of which he was the merciless occasion)
Monopolizing all Byzantium's bread,
And vending it at an enormous rate;
Nor noticed the deep wailings of the poor,
Who, mad with want, and hopeless of relief,
Listed their famished children to his eyes
And offered them for food.

Leader. Most horrible! and grievest thou for such men?
Wherever I find them they shall meet destruction!

Bell. Ah! not while I am with you, rather slay me;
Such outrage ill befits my drooping age.

Leader. Well, be composed, we will restrain ourselves:
Here, slaves, remove this body, and prepare
A chamber where we may refresh ourselves.
Come General, let me lead thee.
[Exeunt
ACT THE THIRD.
SCENE -- The Tent of the Prince of Bulgaria.
The PRINCE and MATHON. PRINCE. BORNE on the broad wings of swift slighted Time,
Full many a variant moon has past away,
Since first bedizen'd with these robes of state
I held the scepter in Bulgaria's court.
Bright was that day -- it was in early spring,
And smiling Nature was profuse in kindness;
The cattle lowed upon the misty hills,
And the gay birds poured forth their mellow tunes,
As 'twere to chide the tardiness of morn,
And wake the slumbering clarion -- all did bode
A reign of peace to him that should be crowned:
But, ah! since then I have been undeceived,
And WAR's fell breath has blighted all my hopes:
Riot, sedition, broils internal, craft,
And fierce invasions have obscured my sun,
Tearing away each flowery pride of youth;
And now, when sinking in Life's cloudy dell,
The mingled storm assails my frighted heart,
Threatening a sure destruction to this realm.

Math. Have we then no resource? Are we such cowards,
That, all disheart'ned, we should yield the palm
To those who but demand it? No; if they come,
Our brave and hardy hosts, with giant strength,
Will hurl their steady spears, in glittering storms,
Upon the daring foe, even if we perish.

Prince. I know your bravery; but it is not strength
That always overcomes -- cautious cunning
Often does more -- it is necessary then
That leaders should, as well as brave, be wily;
Such was the Roman General BELISARIUS.

Math. Alas! poor man, how lowly is he fallen!


Prince. Yet he may rise to wear his master's crown.


Math. How?


Prince. I Have chosen him chief of all Bulgaria's forces.


Math. Thou have!


Prince. I have; and see, the august soldier comes
To thank and bless me for my unsought kindness.

Enter BELISARIUS, led by a Soldier. PRINCE. Welcome, my friend, to this our
favored region;
Once had I frowned upon thy presence here,
My victor or my captive -- but it is past,
And now I press thee thus upon my bosom,
And greet thee as my brother.

Bell. I deeply feel your generosity,
And was I as I was in former days,
Would ask you in what way I might repay it;
But honest Truth her tablets reads aloud,
And tells me I have nothing to bestow.

Prince. Not so, my friend; know thou thine errand here
Is to become the General of my troops?
Thou have been ruined by the vile Justinian,
Still more thy foe than mine; now thou may go
And overthrow Byzantium's boasted bulwarks,
Prison the hideous wretch who imprisoned thee,
And take thy fill of vengeance -- Is it not right?

Bell. You know me not, kind prince, if you suppose
Revenge can yield me pleasure. I am old,
And kindness soothes my spirits. Peace I love,
But dread commotion wrings my heart's best nerve,
And makes me forward look, with anxious eyes,
To that blessed moment when the lonely grave
Shall mantle me in silence.

Prince. Ha! has oppression enervated thee?
Does that firm spirit, once so fierce in war,
Shrink from the tumult of the glorious onset?
And did the hand that quenched thine eyes' gay luster
Darken the SUN-LIKE optics of thy soul?
Rouse, warrior, rouse! Rome's empire shall be thine;
And ere the uplifted blow tremendous falls
Upon the sanguinary monster's heart,
He shall be told, it is thy bold hand arrests him.
(Flourish of trumpets, etc. heard without.)
Bell. And can you foster in your arms the man,
Who, all-forgetful of the laws of nature,
Boiling with wrath vindictive, barbs his dart,
And wets it in the bosom of his country?
Can you confide in him? Do you expect
A ray of gratitude will light his soul
For all your favors -- when each atom spark
That glimmer'd for the realm, that gave him life,
A sense of injury has quite extinguished?
Trust me, good Sir, your love I should not merit
If I were capable of such a deed.
Unshaken fealty toward his sovereign
Is the best virtue Belisarius owns.

Math. And do thou then reject our princely offers?


Bell. How can my troth accept them? Shall I now
Sully the glories of a long life's toil,
And justify the cruelty of my foes?
Nor think to dazzle me with Splendor's name:
Even in my youth (Ambition's darling season)
Carthage unfolded all her warlike gates,
Tendering me her scepter; and Itaria,
Oppressed, and discontented with her King,
Bade me supply his place; but I refused,
And even though Persecution's horrid crest
Was reared already full upon my view,
Unstained allegiance had more charms for me
Than regal power could yield. Still in my breast
That sworn allegiance dwells, and must forever.
Had ever JUSTINIAN stretched a lawless arm
To infringe the rightful liberties of my country,
Then had I quick unsheathed a vengeful sword,
And flown to crush the despot and his minions;
But as it is me alone whom he has injured,
My private wrongs shall never wake mine ire
To whelm a mighty city in destruction,
Even if I could atchieve it.

Prince. And can thou not?


Bell. It would be difficult -- The Byzantines
Are skilled in warlike arts, and their brave chiefs,
NARSUS and MUNDUS, HERMES, SOLOMON,
With their accoutred legions, might defy
The world equipt for battle.
(Flourish of martial instruments heard again.) What mean those martial sounds?

Math. Bulgaria's sons, rejoiced at thine arrival,
Salute thee with such strains to animate thee,
And wake in thee the memory of past scenes,
When thy proud steed, champing his golden bit,
Bore thee over heaps of slaughtered enemies;
While vanquished thousands at thy presence knelt,
And kissed the dust over which the conqueror rode.
Such are the thoughts that warm the warrior's bosom;
Such the loud music that the soldier loves.

Bell. Yes, when the battle burns, and maniac Rage
Bites the hot earth, and like a demon roars,
While clouds of dust inshrou'd his starting eyes,
And streams of blood spout from his mangled limbs,
Oh! then, amid the horror, sonorous notes,
Peal'd from an hundred brazen mouths at once,
Drown the deep groans of those who dying fall,
And bear their cries, on Clamour's wings, to heaven:
But music, such as lulls my wayward cares.
Is often heard within the peasant's hamlet,
What time gray Twilight veils the eastern sky,
When the blight maiden carols rustic songs,
To soothe the infirmities of peevish Age,
Or (when the moon shines on the dew-gem'd plain)
Attunes her voice to chaunt some lightsome air
For those who dance upon the tufted green.
Such are the strains I love, and such as float
On the cool gale from a far mountain's side,
Where some lone shepherd fills his simple pipe,
Calling the echoes from their dewy beds,
To chase mute sleep away. Ah! blessed is he
If his choice melody be never disturbed
By the death-breathing trumpet's woeful tone.

Prince. If thou were ever thus averse to war,
General, why did thou fight?

Bell. To purchase peace, not to extend dominion.
Peace was the crown of conquest. He who fought
And screen'd his country from the invading foe,
Returning, sheathed his sword, and reaped his grain,
Eating his fruits in safety and content;
Nor wiped his shield, nor burnished his spear,
Till outrage called him to the field again --
Such is the triumph of humanity!

Math. And art thou still resolved to serve the Emperor?
Cannot his savage deeds make thee detest him?

Bell. Ah! no; I hate him not -- I pity him,
That when he most does need true-hearted friends
He should have fewest -- that designing men
Should gain his credulous love, and bribe his will
With flatteries unheard of, moulding him
To their own wicked purpose -- poor deceived!

Prince. What, though I am JUSTINIAN's bitterest foe,
Yet, BELISARIUS, I am thy friend,
And pray thee, ever thou journeyest towered thy home,
To take these gems, it is Friendship's hand bestows them.
(Places a casket in the hands of Belisarius.)
Bell. As Friendship's boon, the gems I would receive,
If I might use them; but his country's spoils
Must never adorn the robes of Belisarius.
(Returning it.)
Prince. Take then this wreath; hero, it is thy due,
(Takes a tiara of laurel entwined with gold, from his own head, and places it
upon that of Belisarius.) Frail emblem of thy glory: yet as this
Holds in contempt all earth's gay, transient flowers,
So shall thy fame shine to succeeding ages,
When mine is buried with me in the dust,
And all my rival princes sleep forgotten.
Yet, if the world shall ask who crowned thee thus,
Say 'twas a mortal enemy of Rome;
Who, while he sought to gain her richest treasure,
Revered the virtue he could not subdue.

Math. Have thou a wife?


Bell. I had when erst confined -- whether she lives
I know not; perhaps the storm of sorrow
That blew so fiercely on my tender lily,
Has crushed its fragile form, and now it droops
Forlorn and unsupported. A daughter fair
Alone was left my exiled ANTONINA,
And she, perchance, sinks too beneath the weight
Of complicated woes -- those woes to soften
Was my best wish, when from my dungeon's portals
I grop'd my way, and every feeble step
That brought me nearer my neglected mansion
Gave to my withered cheek a grateful glow,
And bade my pulse beat quicker: the dear thought
That I might cheer with philosophic virtue
The hearts so long devoted to distress,
Lent to my limbs new vigor -- and ere now
(Had not your gallant bands arrested me)
I might have wiped off many an anxious tear,
And dried the source whence they too freely flowed.

Prince. I grieve that such consoling meditations
My mandate should have clouded: but, my friend,
Thou shall not be detained -- Yet, stay one hour,
And some refreshment take, for thy weak frame,
Exhausted by the travel of this morn,
Demands a short repose. We will retire.
[Exeunt.
SCENE -- The Palace Hall of Justinian.
Enter THEODORA. THEODORA. Things go on well; my ancient prying foe
Is now dismissed, with all his cares of state,
And now may ruminate in solitude
How often he thwarted me in my designs,
While he his own accomplished. Had he done
As other courtiers, honored and obeyed,
He had been General still; but he was proud,
And still opposed, or slighted my bequests,
Till he worked up my anger to a storm,
And framed his own destruction.
And yet, methinks I do not feel revenged,
While he in haughty stubbornness of soul
Looks on his punishment with cool contempt,
Or rather, an indifference that shocks me.
Can I believe, that, stripped of courtly honors,
Blinded, and sunk in abject poverty,
Cast in a dungeon, cumbered there with fetters,
He should be happy still? It cannot be;
It Is all hypocrisy -- a base invention;
The last resource of mortified ambition,
That still would lift itself above the crowd
For the fool world to gaze at.
Enter BARSAMES. What news Barsames?

Bars. None, Madam, save that JULIA is returned
From the Bulgarian court.

Theo. What says she of her hero?


Bars. Storms and rages -- sometimes she fits and weeps,
Calls herself fool, and says she will forget him;
Then, starting in the wildness of despair,
Tears off her locks and casts them to the winds;
And in the horrid phrenzy of her soul,
With broken speech, utters such imprecations
As makes one's blood grow chilly.

Theo. Whom does she curse?


Bars. Dreadful to tell, your majesty and the EMPEROR.


Theo. Base, vile, rebellious wretch! are these the thanks
For all my sisterly attentions to her?
Did I not take her from obscurity,
A poor illiterate orphan, train her up
As an own child, and loaded her with honors?
And yet, because I sent her from BYZANTIUM,
To shield her from the ruin I saw would fall
And crush the traitor, now she curses me.
Were it not for TIBERIAS, her brother,
This night my dungeon's heaviest iron doors
Should close on her forever.
(Makes a long pause.) Barsames, have you seen the cells today?

Bars. I have, and saw the stubborn EUCHUS die.


Theo. Ha! Made he no confession?


Bars. None, for, soon as they brought him to the torture,
He called on HEAVEN, and swore an awful oath,
That neither scourge, nor fiercest fires, nor racks,
Should ever compel him to disturb the silence
That then should seal his lips.
They tortured him, and though his pangs were keen,
His heart disdained to utter even a groan:
But as his life began to lose its hold,
Sinking upon the skeleton of his father,
He kissed the bones, and laying his scorched hand
Upon his shrivelled mouth, looked up, and died.

Theo. Then have I lost all hopes of a discovery.
Oh! this conspiracy, how it gnaws my bosom!
Euchus I stole from out a dismal prison;
I singled him from all the rest, and life,
With riches, honors, and my choicest gifts,
I proffered him, but proffered all in vain.

Bars. Are they all dead?


Theo. None of the band remain save the vile head,
And he perhaps secure drinks of my cup,
And saunters unmolested in my chamber.
Did you see Phaedrus?

Bars. Yes; but he did not know me:
He sat upon a heap of mouldering bones,
With his shrunk hands, thus, folded on his breast,
And his sunk eyes were fixed upon the ground
Half shut, and over his bosom streamed his beard,
Hoary and long. I twice accosted him
Ere he regarded me; then looking up,
He eyed me with a vague and senseless gaze,
And heaving a most lamentable sigh,
Dropped his pale face upon his breast again.

Theo. I Will go myself this moment and give orders
For his removal to some cheerful place,
Where kind attendance, and my best physician,
May woo his scattered senses back again;
For thus insane he loses sense of woe.
This MANIA is a balm, a sovereign cure
For all the ills that fester in the heart;
It sets the warring passions all asleep,
Blotting out good and evil -- it is peace -- it is bliss,
And that my vengeance meant not to bestow:
I meant him anguish and eternal pangs;
But this the mad feel not -- therefore, when life,
Fraught with rich vigor, through his arteries rolls,
And reason rises cloudless in his brain,
Embracing courteous hope, then will I go
And break the vain enchantment: galling chains
Shall load his shivering limbs, and shocking curses
Pursue him to his lurid den again.
This will be sweet revenge -- there let him try
If the bright wit that jeered a woman's foibles
Will light the dungeon where her fury dwells.
[Exit hastily.
BARSAMES solus, (after a long pause.) Bars. Dwells there beneath thine arch
immense, O sky!
Another heart so stained with shameful crimes?
Black as the caverns where her victims suffer --
Devil incarnate, scourge of this wide empire --
Here Is is the task to plan deep cruelties,
Horrid as hell! and mine to execute them;
Nightly to wander, thief-like, through the streets,
And bid my sabre drink the bosom's blood
Of him she deems offending;
Or basely lurking in some fated mansion,
To watch till Midnight's soporific bands
Have lulled the willing world in sweet repose,
Then rushing like a tiger from his den,
To burst where the devoted victim sleeps,
And tear him from his frighted consort's arms,
Who faintly screams and swoons, while he, aghast,
Clasps her cold body in a dumb embrace,
And looks a last adieu. Most horrible!
This is my mission -- Oh! my heart revolts
From the infernal ministry -- blood -- blood!
Yet soft -- thou dust, and ye encircling walls
Hear not these overflowings of my soul,
Lest they transpire, and I this awful night
Groan in the prison with those whose fate I mourn.
[Exit.
Enter TIBERIAS and JULIA. JULIA. Begone -- I say begone! let me alone,
I am no child -- I will not be controlled --
I tell thee I will see her.

Tib. Nay, but the Emperor --


Jul. The Emperor! who cares? what of him pray?
Think thou I fear to whisper in his ear,
Or tell the Empress of her faults before him?
Or think thou that I love his Majesty,
That thus his name is offered as a charm?

Tib. But hear me sister --


Jul. I swear TIBERIAS, though thou art my brother,
If still thou thwart'st my bosom's fixed design,
I Will plunge this dagger to thy very soul.
This instant quit thy hold!

Tib. A dagger -- ha! no, then you shall not go.


Jul. Help! murder! help!


Enter the EMPEROR, THEODORA, BARSAMES, and others. THEODORA. Who dares make
this outcry so near my chamber?


Jul. I made it, Madam, for I wished to enter,
And this, my lordly brother, did prevent me;
He has learned tyranny within these walls,
A goodly school I tro.

Tib. Madam, a mania has possessed her brain;
I pray you heed her not.
(Kneels.)
Theo. Rise, gentle youth, I --


Jul. No, it is no mania that directs my tongue;
It is proud Reason, who, defying danger,
Dares lift her angel voice, and trumpet forth
The cruelties of power -- yes, and dares tell
How easy Emperors, hoodwinked by their minions,
Stab their best friends, and clasp polluted Ruin
To their own bosoms.

Tib. My sister, let me lead you to your chamber.


Jul. Avaunt, nor till I Have told the hideous tale
That weeping Truth poured in my startled ear,
Think to decoy me hence. Thou, JUSTINIAN,
Have from my heart torn every bleeding nerve
Sacred to love or pity. The stern mandate
That bore me mad from my deluded lover,
Stamped on its seal the horrors of my fate,
And doomed me to a life of ceaseless woe.
A -- thou, vile woman, impious THEODORA,
Who dared to break the ligaments of affection,
What though thou now may steep thine hands in blood,
Yet think, oh! think, remorseless, fiend-like woman,
The day of retribution is at hand.

Theo. Guards, lead her off -- Tiberias, go with her.


Jul. Off, monsters off!

(They take her off, Tib. follows.) [ Exit Theodora and attendants another way.
JUSTINIAN solus, (after a long pause.) Emp. Is such the lot of rulers? are
they all
Subject to such deceptions? must they all
Be sad accessaries to their people's sorrows?
If so, how hard their fate! sure happier they
On whom Fate hash in kindly mood bestowed
The blessings of retired tranquillity;
Whose hearts, untortured by Ambition's blaze,
Glow with the flame, so pure, of doing good.
Re-enter TIBARIAS. Well, my young friend, what tidings?


Tib. My liege, I have obeyed your good commands.


Emp. And you have seen old BELISARIUS then?


Tib. I have, my liege; I saw him at the castle,
Where I arrived before him, and was witness
To a pathetic scene.

Emp. How did poor ANTONINA bear the shock?


Tib. Most sadly; when I entered first the chamber
A feverish paleness over her aspect gleam'd,
And leaning languidly upon her pillow,
She scarcely did regard me; but as soon
As BELISARIUS' name fell from my lips,
A beam of life shot from her brightening eyes,
And over her pallid cheeks exulting Hope,
With liberal hand, suffus'd purpureal beauty.
But when her sight glanced on his altered visage,
With violent fury springing from her bed,
She shrieked so awfully, and formed such curses,
As shook my soul with horror; then she wept,
And strained her husband to her beating bosom,
And pitied him awhile -- then raged again,
And tore her hair, and mangled her poor flesh,
Till wasted quite with the tremendous combat,
She sunk upon her consort's breast, and died.

Emp. Alas! alas!


Tib. Moved even to tears I grasped and kissed his hand,
Then silent led him to a distant chamber,
Where, after the first hour of bitter grief
Was passed, I ventured to announce my errand;
I told him that I was his nearest neighbor,
And as he was now helpless and alone,
I prayed him to accept of my abode,
Tendering him my friendliest offices;
All which he did reject, yet not from pride,
But from a modest fear lest his appearance
Should provoke men to scan his Sovereign's deeds.
" Retirement (said he) best does suit mine age,
" Where quiet Contemplation may preside
" Over every leisure hour: yet, young man,
" If you can listen to the tales of age,
" Come often to this castle. -- I love youth --
" Its motives are as pure as HEAVEN's ether
" Ere yet it is tainted by the world's fel^ breath.
" Here we will sit and sweet converse of virtue,
" And I will be your tutor." I consented,
And told him I would bring my hoary father
To witness our next interview.

Emp. But said he naught of me?


Tib. Oh! yes he did, and tender were his words;
Mild as the gentlest dews that fall from HEAVEN;
Nor did he name the ills that had befallen him,
Save in the calmest voice of Resignation.
But, Sire, whenever he spoke of you, his terms
Seemed all dictated by the warmest love:
Ah! sure they were sincere, for never man
Could feign such kind expressions.

Emp. And did he not reproach me?


Tib. No, my liege;
But he bewailed you as a mother fond
Would wail an only child.

Emp. Oh! we will hasten to his happy mansion,
Where the rude passions know not to command;
Where mild Content and dreaded Poverty
Have formed an envied union -- where no swollen sigh,
Rising in sad appeal toward yon HEAVEN,
Brings down upon its author weighty curses; --
But every breath is calm, and every breath
Wafts upward prayers sincere for the old man,
While angels crowd around his silvery head,
And screen him from the cares that shorten life.
Ah! me, our different lot!

Tib. Sire, you seem moved.


Emp. I am indeed, TIBERIAS. I will go
And steal his dying blessing; then on my knees
Implore forgiveness for the wrongs I Have done him,
And tell him who I am; say I am he
Who blinded him -- who robbed him of the light --
Who sent him home in poverty and shame --
Who widowed him, and left him but one reed,
One slender reed, to rest his age upon,
And bear his numerous griefs. Oh! he will weep
To feel an humbled Emperor at his feet.

Enter a SERVANT running. SERVANT. Oh! royal Sir --


Emp. What means this frighted haste?


Serve. The beauteous lady JULIA --


Tib. What of her?


Serve. Is dead!


Tib. Dead?


Serve. Yes, my Lord; you scarce had left her chamber
Ere she was seized with horrible convulsions;
She spoke not, but she groaned, and her heart beat
So fierce, that from her mouth and streaming eyes
Blood gushed abundantly, and so she died.

Tib. Oh! my ill-fated sister.

[Exeunt.
ACT THE FOURTH.
SCENE -- A Sepulcher.
Enter men with a bier covered with white, and ornamented with flowers --
several ladies follow with baskets of flowers -- BELISARIUS supported by EUDOXA
and TIBERIAS -- the men set the bier down. BELISARIUS. LEAD me I pray, my
children, to the corse.
(He kneels by it.) Thus though I kiss thee, senseless clod of clay,
And Nature draws a few warm sighs upon thee,
Sighs of regret that thus thou art forsaken,
Yet do I hail the sainted essence freed.
-- Spirit, I greet thee,
Whether thou art involved in robes of light,
And sit'st enthroned among the choirs of Heaven;
Or whether destined to some Eden star,
Thou there shin'st peerless in thy bright abode;
Or whether still (maternal cares invading)
Thou hoverest over the bosom of thy child,
Chasing away the big drops as they rise,
Instilling peace, her guardian angel thou --
Oh! I congratulate thy charmed escape,
Nor wish thee back again; no, my love,
Thou never shall return to me; but I,
Whose sun is almost down, shall go to thee.
Then, ANTONINA, when my wildered soul
Shall struggle on the borders of eternity,
Come thou with smiles, and songs divine, to meet me
And guide me to my destined place of rest.
(Rises.)
Tib. Permit me, honored Sir, to lead you hence,
You are too much affected.
(Leads Belisarius away.) (The men place the corse in the sepulcher -- Eudoxa
kneels -- the women walk round it and sing -- the men retire.)
SOLEMN MUSIC. DIRGE.
Flower of beauty, ah! how soon
Woe has robbed thee of thy bloom;
Ere thy sun had gained its noon
Thou have found the dreary tomb.
Bud of youth, how changed art thou!
All the flush thy cheek that graced,
All the charms that decked thy brow,
Death's rude pencil has defaced.
Those eyes that rivalled Phosphor's light
Are shrouded in perpetual night;
Thy lip has lost its ruby glow; --
Oh! bud of youth, how changed art thou!
Thou who were wont with active mind,
To bathe thee in the morning's wave,
Or climb the mount, art now confined
Within the dark, the chilly grave.
Yet though thy cell be dark, O grave!
And chill the damps that round thee rise,
Sure thou from pain this form wilt save,
And shut out sorrow from these eyes.
Then be our blossoms round thee shed,
The sleep of death to her is sweet,
With life its lingering ills retreat,
No cares afflict the happy dead.
(They scatter their flowers over the tomb -- Eudoxa rises and bends over it.)
Eud. Yes, thou indeed art gone; the sleep of death
Sits heavy on thy lids -- ah! shut forever --
Nor Tempest's rage, nor Trumpet's vengeful blast,
Nor Thunder's roar, shall break the awful slumber;
Nor mournful sigh, nor agonizing groan,
Steal through the portals of the death-clos'd ear.

1st Lady. Eudoxa, cease to weep;
Sorrow indulged makes inroads on the heart
Which all the power of medicine cannot heal;
It drinks up cheerfulness, the balm of life,
Turning, alas! each wonted sweet to gall:
Makes youth grow gray, and ere we know to live
Sends us, sad victims, to the greedy grave.

2d Lady. Oh! pity BELISARIUS, your fond sire;
Let not the hasty drops that dew your cheeks
Fall on his aged breast -- surely his heart
Has woes enough already of its own
To make it burst its fragile bands away.
Add not your griefs to his, lest one sad stroke
Leave you an orphan in this dangerous world.

Eud. Oh! bear with me, my kindly pitying friends;
I must give vent to this big flood of woe,
Or my sad heart will burst -- Yet, oh! think not
That ever I mean to grieve my aged sire:
This tribute paid to ANTONINA's shade,
I haste to him, and all my future hours
Shall be devoted to him; and perhaps
My cares may make him half forget his own,
And lead him gently down the hill of life,
Soothing the rugged path with many a song.
[Exeunt.
SCENE -- The Ruins of a Portice belonging to the Castle of Belisarius -- a
Garden.
Enter BELISARIUS and EUDOXA. BELISARIUS (sitting down.) And do you still, my
dear, my sorrowing daughter,
Afflict your heart with unavailing griefs?
Have you not wept enough? or can your tears
Recall to life the inmate of the tomb?
Oh! wherefore should you pine? Your darling mother,
Freed from the cares, the pains, the ills of earth,
Dwells in the regions of immortal peace,
And (...) with pity on her hapless friends
Who here are wedded to distress for life.

Eud. Ah me! I know the folly of my tears,
And yet cannot restrain them. Oh, my father!
On me alone had Fortune poured her rage,
I could have borne the mighty shock unmoved:
But when I saw my poor afflicted mother
Sink, with the bitter anguish of despair --
Saw her breast heave with fierce contortive pangs --
Saw life, exhausted, from her lips retire --
Saw her expire within your feeble arms --
What! could my heart but break?
And you, my father, all that Fate has left me,
Can I behold without emotions keen
That dear adored visage so defaced
By ruffian hands impure?

Bell. Cease these regrets, my child; uncourteous Age
Ere long had spread upon my weakening eyes
A film, obscure and lasting; worse than this
Mine enemies have not done; and the loss
Of fortune and her dignities, it is worth
Not even a careful thought; we have enough
To yield us all Life's necessary goods,
And all beside is only luxury.

Eud. No, my loved parent, all the wreck of fortune
From my swollen breast has never wrung a sigh,
For while these hands are mine, decrepit WANT
Shall never dwell within our peaceful mansion.

Bell. Then cheer your drooping spirits, and when cares
Intrusive rush upon your gentle mind,
Bring them to me, and with the tenderest love
I Will try to soothe, or freely share them with you. And with his hand he wiped
the falling tear from her cheek.

MARMONTEL.

[They retire into the castle.
Enter TIBERIAS from an opposite gate. TIBERIAS. Ah! there she moves, the
empress of my soul,
Whom still I follow as yon golden flower
Turns to her idol SUN. Sweet innocent,
How do her virtues gild this solitude,
And make even exile enviable!
But must they radiate forever here?
Shall a bright bud of such rare excellence
Shed all its fragrance in the wilderness,
And only bloom for him who cannot see?
Oh! would that it were mine, I Would bear it hence,
And fondly place it in a kindlier soil,
Where every latent beauty might shoot forth,
To bless my heart and charm the wondering world.
If I may but obtain her -- if those blushes
That burnt upon her cheek as I addressed her,
And told her how I loved -- if they assented,
Oh! then, not all the treasures of the sea,
Nor all the victories by battle won
Since first this world was framed, were they all mine,
Could yield one transport like that I should feel
Possessing my EUDOXA. But it is time
That I should hasten to the impatient Emperor --
Tomorrow's setting sun shall find him here.
[Exit.
ACT THE LAST.
SCENE -- The Chamber of Arsaces.
ARSACES (sitting on a black sopha) in mourning -- soft music -- he waves his
hand -- the music ceases. ARSACES. CEASE, cease fond strains, ye can no more
delight,
Your softest warblings grate upon my soul,
For she in whom all harmony did dwell
Is dead! --
-- Yes, the insatiable grave
Has swallowed my beloved -- she hears no more --
Quenched is the rayful luster of her eyes,
And every pulse lies still. Envious spoiler,
How have thou robbed me of all I did love!
Oh! I was rich, the wealth of the wide world
Could not have bought my treasure -- 'twas my joy
Daily to ponder on its innate worth,
And through the watches of each tranquil night
It gilt my every vision. Remorseless Death!
Now thou have plundered me, no wretch that crawls
Along the common way, and sues for bread,
And takes the flinty pavement for his pillow
Each cheerless night, is half so poor as I.

Enter BARSAMES. BARSAMES. Why all this grief ARSACES?


Ars. Ah! can thou ask, BARSAMES? Is not the star
That guided my soul's actings set forever?
Or shall the blushing morning of delight
Dawn ever on my severed heart again?

Bars. Doubt it not, my sad friend, you still are young,
And flowery years of happiness await you,
In which the memory of all former woes
Shall sink as in the ocean.

Ars. No, never while this breast shall know to feel
Can I forget the melancholy image
Of my loved JULIA dead -- Oh! yes, I saw her
Stretched on a bed, a poor, insensate corse,
Pale as yon marble; while the gory streams
That from her face had issued, lay congealed
Upon her ice-like bosom -- mournful picture,
Oh! can I ever lose thee?

Bars. Come lay these tears aside, they are unmanly;
Beside, the EMPRESS she has sent me hither
With warm professions of her kindest friendship:
Ask what you will, she grants you your request.

Ars. Then all I ask is that I may reside
Near the lone cemetery where my love,
In darkness veiled, sleeps an eternal sleep;
Where I may nightly wander, and recall
Ideas of joys long past -- where I may sit
And pluck the weeds that shoot around her tomb,
Or sadly sympathetic join the wail
Of the lone dove that perches on her urn.

Bars. The Empress waits to see you at the palace --
Will you attend me?

Ars. I will, my friend. Oh! my afflicted spirit!

[Exeunt.
SCENE -- The Portico in the Garden of BELISARIUS.
BELISARIUS sitting alone -- Time, near Sunset. BELISARIUS. What though thy
rays, oh! luminary bright,
Glow not superbly on these eyeless sockets,
Infusing glorious LIGHT as heretofore;
Yet does thy vital warmth encompass me,
Cheering the limbs benumbed by frosty age;
And through thy medium my soul adores
Thy bountiful Creator, whose wide hand
Diffuses most munificently GOOD
To Earth's unnumbered creatures.

Enter TIBERIAS, JUSTINIAN, and AGRESTIS. TIBERIAS. My General, here I bring to
your retreat
My venerable father, and a friend.

Bell. Then let me press them fondly to my bosom,
For though they are strangers, yet I love them much
On your account, my amiable young man.
(Tiberias leads the Emperor to Belisarius' s embrace -- the Emperor sobs
aloud.) But why this voice of sorrow?

Tib. My father, penetrated by your woes,
Yields you this mournful tribute of compassion.

Bell. May HEAVEN's choicest gifts descend upon him,
Not till the lamp of life sheds its last luster
May he ever want the pity he bestows.

Emp. Oh! cruel Monarch, who could treat you thus!
Who thus could rifle you of every joy!

Bell. Not so, my neighbor, I have comforts yet,
Which amply compensate for all the ills
My variant life has known -- Though here you find me
The aged tenant of this ruinous pile,
Deserted by my Sovereign, poor, infirm,
Yet I review with joy six glorious lustres
Devoted to the service of my country,
And marked with splendid triumphs. Still one pang
Often clouds the sunshine of my brightest hours,
And checks my rising exultations.

Tib. And what is that?


Bell. It is, lest my JUSTINIAN should expire,
With the persuasion of my treachery
Instampt upon his heart -- oh, grievous thought!

Emp. But do you still, forgetful of his outrage,
Think of him with affection?

Bell. Most sure I do;
And oh! may no remembrance of my griefs
Disturb the visions of his tranquil slumbers,
Nor dim the peaceful setting of his sun;
But may --

Emp. No more, my friend, (aside) this tenderness over* comes me;
He merits your upbraidings more than blessings:
Where can he boast of such another friend?
Ah! who will ever trust him after this?

Bell. Reproach not my old Sovereign, for* alas!
He is still more unfortunate than me;
He saw not for himself -- he was deceived;
Nor do I wonder at it: envious men
Construed each patriot deed of mine
Into ambitious selfishness and treason;
And then, some unexplained acts gave weight
To every warm assertion; all was laid,
Distorted and deformed, before his Majesty --
And he is but a man.

Cour. What were those unexplained acts you speak of?


Bell. A seeming acquiescence to the GOTHS,
When they petitioned me to be their KING;
And making the proud throne of GILIMER
My seat of Justice when I conquered Carthage:
This, and the clamorous honors of the people
Whenever I returned from war, victorious,
Raised a suspicion in my master's breast,
That I was leagued with all the mal-contents
That would aspire to place me in his seat.
To close the whole, a plot was then discovered
To massacre the Emperor and his friends;
And as all the conspirators expired,
Refusing to divulge their leader's name,
(Though they sustained the torture) Calumny
On me fixed the foul deed; but HEAVEN does know
How differently I was then affected.

Emp. Oh! what a source of everlasting sorrow,
Deep groans of anguish, and remorseful tears,
Has the sad Emperor, did he but know
The heart of him whom he has made thus wretched!
-- Kindness unlooked for! over each cruel act
The hand of love casts an excusing veil.
-- Oh! miserable sovereign!

Bell. Cease these complaints, respect his sinking age,
And learn from this a lesson -- that all men
Are frail; 'twas not a crime to be deceived,
'Twas a calamitous event, for which,
Should he ever learn the truth, he will repent.

Emp. He does, he does! -- Oh! that the shroud of night
Would hide his whelming shame! -- Yes, dear old man,
Here at your feet the unjust tyrant kneels,
(Clasps the knees of Belisarius.) And if his tears could but efface his guilt,
Would weep his life away!

Bell. Forbid it HEAVEN! -- What, is my Sovereign here!


Emp. Yes, he is here -- the vilest of all men --
Infamous beyond all that sin -- cruel,
Undone, detested, base, ungrateful!

Bell. Oh! rise, my royal master; let not grief
(Raising him.) Immoderate thus degrade you: why should my Lord
Be humbled thus before an abject being?
-- Though you was led to err in this one instance,
Yet the admiring world can witness for you,
That you are not a tyrant; and the vast good
Your bounty has diffused, obliterates
The smart of whatsoever has fallen on me.
-- Forget not then to reverence yourself,
My noble sire, when all the world reveres you.

Emp. Your goodness veils me in a cloud of blushes!
My matchless friend, my brother, never, never
Can I make restitution for the wrongs
That I have poured upon you.

Bell. Oh! yes, my generous Sovereign, this compunction
Much more than compensates for all.

Emp. Then show the world my pardon: come with me,
And let us part no more: your sapient presence
Is necessary for my future comfort:
Come and reside with me, that men may see,
If I by calumny have been seduced,
I own a heart that knows to wail its crimes.

Tib. (taking Bell. by the hand) And will my friend, amid this grateful scene,
List to the applications of TIBERIAS?
Will you consent to make him happy too?

Bell. What is it you demand to make you so?


Tib. ALL that you own, save innocence and peace.


Bell. My daughter? -- Yes, my heart accedes with joy;
You are deserving of my GEM, Tiberias;
Take her, my son, and may revolving years
In all their changes only find you blessed.

Tib. (kneeling) May peace benign attend you to the grave
For this your precious gift, my honored father!
[Rises and exit.
Bell. Now the best wishes of my heart are answered!
Brought to my much-loved Emperor's arms again,
Forgiving and forgiven -- to place my child
Beneath the fostering care of generous LOVE --
Oh! it renews my age, and makes my heart,
That mansion late of woe, to sing for joy.

Re-enter TIBERIAS with EUDOXA. EUDOXA. What would my honored father?


Bell. Oh! my loved child, kneel, and demand a blessing,
On your approaching nuptials, from the Emperor.

Eud. The Emperor!


Emp. Fair creature, yes: Oh! turn not from me thus,
Nor let those eyes dart such indignant rays:
Behold me humbled, see me bathed in tears,
The bitterest tears of anguish for my crime.
But now, since Belisarius has forgiven
The nameless griefs that I have made him suffer,
Let the free pardon of his duteous daughter
Approve her father's deed, and seal the blessing.
(Tiberias takes her hand -- they kneel.) Under the ministry of gracious HEAVEN,
May angels shed their influence divine
Over all your paths, protecting you from evil --
Aid you to crush each rising wish unlawful,
And lead you in the way of holy PEACE!
-- And when you fill the throne I soon must quit,
May the remembrance of my death-like sorrows
Deter you from the cruel me of power,
Lest you, like me, when verging toward the grave,
Should have to drain the deep cup of Repentance.

Bell. Surely the changeability of fortune
Never shone more conspicuous than (...)
-- And Oh! may men, when gathering wreaths of ^
Pause a few moments in their golden travel,
And spend a casual thought on BELISARIUS;
-- And henceforth, may no poor afflicted soul,
Though drenched in tears, and deep ingulph'd in woe,
Look off from HEAVEN, and call himself forsaken;
But, in his gloomiest hour, may he reflect,
That from behind the darkest cloud of sorrow,
The Sun of Joy may rise supremely bright.

FINIS.

