THE YOUNG MILL-WRIGHT and MILLER'S GUIDE. IN FIVE PARTS -- EMBELLISHED WITH
TWENTY FIVE PLATES.

CONTAINING,
PART I. -- Mechanics and Hydraulics; showing errors in the old, and
establishing a new system of theories of water-mills, by which the power of
mill-seats and the effects they will produce may be ascertained by calculation.
PART II. -- Rules for applying the theories to practice; tables for
proportioning mills to the power and fall of the water, and rules for finding
pitch circles, with tables from 6 to 136 cogs. PART III. -- Directions for
constructing and using all the authors patented improvements in mills. PART IV.
-- The art of manufacturing meal and flour in all its parts, as practiced by
the most skilful millers in America. PART V. -- The Practical Mill-wright;
containing instructions for building mills, with tables of their proportions
suitable for all falls from three to thirty-six feet.
APPENDIX.
Containing rules for discovering new improvements -- exemplified in improving
the art of thrashing and cleaning grain, hulling rice, warming rooms, and
venting smoke by chimneys, etc.
BY OLIVER EVANS, OF PHILADELPHIA.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR, AND SOLD BY THE AUTHOR, No. 215, NORTH SECOND
STREET. 1795.

District of Pennsylvania --
to wit:

"The Young Mill-wright and Miller's Guide: in five parts, embellished with
twenty-five plates, etc. By Oliver Evans, of Philadelphia" -- in conformity to
the act of the Congress of the United States, entitled, "An act for the
encouragement of learning, by securing the copies of maps, charts and books, to
the authors and proprietors of such copies, during the times therein mentioned."

SAMUEL CALDWELL, Clerk of the District of Pennsylvania.

PREFACE.
THE reason why a book of this kind although so much wanted did not sooner
appear, may be -- because they who have been versed in science and literature,
have not had practice and experience in the arts; and they who have had
practice and experimental knowledge, have not had time to acquire science and
theory, those necessary qualifications for completing the system, and which
are not to be found in any one man. Sensible of my deficiences in both, I
should not have undertaken it, was I not interested in the explanation of my
own inventions. I have applied to such books and men of science as I expected
assistance from, in forming a system of theory; and to practical mill-wrights
and millers for the practice; but finding no authors who had joined practice
and experience with theory, (except Smeaton whom I have quoted) finding many of
their theories to be erroneous, and losing the assistance of the late ingenious
William Waring, the only scientific character of my acquaintance, who
acknowledged that he had investigated the principles and powers of water acting
on mill-wheels, I did not meet the aid I expected in that part.

Wherefore it is not safe to conclude that this work is without error -- but
that it contains many, both theoritical, practical, and grammatical; is the
most natural, safe, and rational supposition. The reader whose mind is free and
unbiassed by the opinion of others, will be most likely to attain the truth.
Under a momentary discouragement, finding I had far exceeded the prescribed
limits, and doubtful what might be its fate, I left out several expensive
draughts, of mills, etc. -- But since it went to press the prospects have
become so encouraging that I may hope it will be well received: Therefore I
request the reader, who may prove any part to be erroneous, can point out its
defects, propose amendments, or additions; to inform me thereof by letter; that
I may be enabled to correct, enrich, and enlarge it, in case it bears another
^^lition, and I will gratefully receive their communications: For if what is
kn^^^ on these subjects by the different ingenious practitioners in America
could be collected in one work, it would be precious indeed, and a sufficient
guide to save thousands of pounds from being uselessly expended. For a work of
this kind will never be perfected by the abilities and labors of one man.

The practical part received from Thomas Ellicott will doubtless be useful,
considering his long experience and known genius

Comparing this work with other original, difficult works, with equally
expensive plates, the price will be found to be low.

CONTENTS.
PART I.
MECHANICS.
1. AXIOMS, or self evident truths. 1 2. Of the first principles of mechanical
motion. 2 3. -- elasticity, its power unknown. 4 4. -- motion, absolute and
relative. 5 5. -- do. accelerated and retarded. 6 6. -- the momentum, or
quantity of motion. ibid. 7. -- general laws of motion. 7 8. -- the momentum of
elastic and non-elastic bodies in motion. 9 9. -- laws of motion and force, of
falling bodies; table and scale of their motion. 14 10. -- the laws of motion
of bodies descending inclined plains, and curved surfaces. 20 12. -- the motion
of projectiles. 21 13. -- circular motion and central forces. 22 14. -- centres
of motion, magnitude and gravity. 25 15. -- general laws of mechanical powers.
27 16 -- 2^. Of levers, simple and compound; their laws applicable to
mill-wheels; general rule for calculating their power. 29 21. Power decreases
as the motion increases. 35 22 -- 2^ No power gained by enlarging
undershot-wheels, nor by double gearing mills. 36 24. The pulley, 25 the axle
and wheel, 26 the inclined plain, 27 the wedge, and 2^ the screw. 38 30. The
fly-wheel, its use. 42 31 -- 33. Of friction, its laws, and the inventions to
reduce it. 44 34. Of maximums or the greatest effect of machines. 48 35 -- 37
Old theory of the motion of undershot-wheels investigated; new theory proposed;
scale of experiments. 50 38 -- 39. William Waring's new theory. 59 40. --
theory doubted. 63 41 -- 42. Search for a true theory on a new plan, and one
established agreeing with practice. 65 43 -- 44. The maximum motion of
overshot-wheels, with a scale thereof. 75
HYDRAULICS.
45 -- 47. Laws of the motion and effects of spouting fluids; their application
to undershot-mills.80 48 -- 50. Hydrostatic paradox; on which is founded a
theorem for finding the pressure of water on any surface.87 51. Rule for
finding the velocity of spouting water.89 52. Rule for finding the effect of
any gate of water on undershot-wheels.90 53 -- 54. Water applied by gravity;
the power thereof on the principles of overshot-mills, equal in theory to the
best application possible.92 55. Friction of the aperture on spouting fluids.
97 56. Pressure of the air the cause of fluids rising in pumps and cyphons,
etc. 98 57. Directions for pump-makers, with a table.100 58. Tubes for
conveying water over hills and under valleys.102 59. Paradoxical mill
explained, that will not move empty; the difference of force of indefinite and
definite quantity of water.ibid. 60. The motion of breast and pitch-back
wheels. They do not run before the gravity of the water on account of the
impulse.104 61. Simple rule for calculating the power of a mill-seat.107 62.
Theory compared, with a table of experiments of 18 mills in practice, and found
to agree.110 63. Rules for proportioning the size of millstones to the power;
with a table of their areas, powers required, and quantity ground, etc.118 The
surface passed by millstones of different size and motion.119 64 -- 65. Of
digging canals; with their proper fall and size to suit the stones.122 66. Of
air-pipes, to prevent trunks from bursting.226 67. Smeaton's experiments
concerning overshot-mills.128 68. -- experiments concerning overshot-mills.145
69. -- experiments concerning wind-mills.154
PART II.
70. OF undershot-mills, with a table containing the motion of the water and
wheels, and proportion of the gears, suitable to any head from 1 to 25 feet,
both double and single gear; the quantity of water required to turn them, and
the size of the gate and canal.3 71. Of tub-mills, with a table showing the
diameter of the wheels to suit any size stone, or head of water.11 72. Of
breast and pitch-back wheels, with a table complete for them.17 73. Of overshot
mills, with tables for them.25 Of mills moved by re-action.33 74. Rules for
calculating the motion of wheels, and number of cogs to produce the desired
motion.35 75. Rules for finding the pitch circles.40 76. A true, simple, and
expeditious method for finding the diameter of the pitch circle, with a table
showing the diameter of pitch circles, etc.41 77. Rules for measuring garners,
hoppers, etc.46 78. Of the different kinds of gears and forms of cogs.48 79 --
81. Of spur, face, and bevel gears.49 82. Of matching wheels, to make them wear
even and well.56 83. Theories of rolling-screens and fans for cleaning the
grain, improved application of them.57 84 Of gudgeons, the cause of their
heating and getting loose, with the remedies therefore.60 85. On building
mill-dams.64 86. On laying foundations and building mill-walls. 67
PART III.
87. GENERAL account of the new improvements. 71 88. Particular description of
the machines. 73 89. Application of the machines in the process of
manufacturing flour. 78 90. Of elevating grain from ships. 82 91. A mill for
grinding parcels. 85 92. A grist-mill improved. 88 93. Of elevating from ships
and storehouses by a horse. 90 94. Of an elevator wrought by a man. 92 95.
Construction of the wheat elevator, particularly directed. 97 96 -- 100. Of the
meal elevator, the meal conveyer, the grain conveyer, the hopper boy, and the
drill. 110 101. Of the utility of the machines. 121 102. Bills of materials,
both of wood and iron, etc. to be prepared for building the machines. 127 103.
A mill for hulling and cleaning rice. 132
PART IV.
104. THE principles on which grinding is performed, explained.139 105. Of the
draught necessary to be given to the furrows of millstones.143 106. Directions
for facing new millstones.149 107. Of hanging millstones.151 108. Of
regulating the feed and water in grinding.154 109. Rules for judging of good
grinding.155 110. Of dressing and sharpening the stones when dull.157 111. Of
the most proper degree of fineness for flour.158 112. Of garlic, with
directions for grinding wheat mixed therewith; and for dressing the stones
suitable thereto.160 113. Of grinding over the middlings, stuff and bran, or
shorts, if necessary, to make the most of them.163 114. Of the quality of the
millstones, to suit the quality of the wheat.166 115. Of bolting-reels and
cloths, with directions for bolting and inspecting flour.169 116. Directions
for keeping the mill, and the business of it in good order.173 117. Peculiar
accidents by which mills are subject to catch fire.175 118. Observations on
improving of mill-seats.175
PART V.
See the contents at the beginning of it.

CONTENTS of the APPENDIX.
Rules for discovering new improvements -- exemplified -- I. In improving the
art of thrashing grain. -- II. Cleaning do. by wind. -- III. Distillation of
spirits. -- IV. In venting smoke from rooms by chimneys. -- V. Warming rooms by
fire to save fuel. -- VI. Hulling and cleaning rice. -- VII. Saving ships from
sinking at sea. -- VIII. Preserving fruits and liquors from putrefaction and
fermentation.

EXPLANATION OF THE TECHNICAL TERMS, etc. USED IN THIS WORK.
Aperture -- The opening by which water issues. Area -- Plain surface,
superficial contents. Atmosphere -- The surrounding air. Algebraic signs used
are + for more, or addition. - Less, or subtracted. x Multiplication. /
Division. = Equality. The square root of. 862 for 86 squared, 883 for 88 cubed.
By quadrate -- A number twice squared: the byquadrate of 2 is 16. Corollary,
Inference. Cuboch -- A name for the unit or interger of power, being one cubic
foot of water multiplied into one foot perpendicular descent. Cubic foot of
water -- What a vessel one foot wide and one foot deep will hold. Cube of a
number -- The product of the number multiplied by itself twice. Cube root of a
number -- Say of 8, is the number, which multiplied into itself twice will
produce 8, viz. 2. Or it is that number by which you divide a number twice to
quote itself. Decimal point, set at the left hand of a figure shows the whole
number to be divided into tens, as, 5 for 5 tenths;,57 for 57 hundredths;,577
for 577 thousandth parts. Equilibrio, Equilibrium -- Equipoise, or balance of
weight. Elastic, Springing. Friction -- The act of rubbing together. Gravity --
That tendency all matter has to fall downwards. Hydrostatics -- science of
weighing fluids. Hydraulics -- Waterworks, the science of motion of fluids.
Impulse -- Force communicated by a stroke. Impetus -- Violent effort of a body
inclining to move. Momentum -- The force of a body in motion. Maximum --
Greatest possible. Non-elastic -- Without spring. Octuble -- Eight times told.
Paradox -- Contrary to appearance. Percussion -- Striking a stroke, impulse.
Problem -- A question. Quadruple -- Four times, four fold. Radius -- Half the
diameter of a circle. Right Angle -- A line square, or perpendicular to
another. Squared -- Multiplied into itself; 2 squared is 4. Theory --
Speculative plan existing only in the mind. Tangent -- A line perpendicular or
square with a radius touching the periphery of a circle. Theorem -- Position of
an acknowledged truth. Velocity -- Swiftness of motion. Virtual or effective
descent of water: See Art. 61.
SCALE from which the FIGURES are drawn.
PLATE II, Fig. 11, 12 -- 8 feet to an inch; fig. 19 -- 10 feet to an inch. --
III, Fig. 19, 20 -- 23, 26 -- 10 feet to ditto. -- IV, Fig. 28, 29 -- 30, 31,
32, 33 -- 10 feet ditto -- VI, Fig. 1 -- 10 feet to an inch; fig.
2,3,8,9,10,11, two feet ditto. -- VII, Fig. 12,13,14,15 -- two feet to an inch;
fig. 16, ten ditto. -- X. Fig. 1,2 -- 18 feet ditto; fig. H, I in fig. 1 --
four feet to an inch. -- XI. Fig. 1,2,3 -- two feet ditto; fig. 6,8, one foot
to ditto.
THE YOUNG Mill-wright's and Miller's GUIDE.
PART THE FIRST.
CHAPTER I.
Art. 1. OF THE FIRST PRINCIPLES OF MECHANICS.
MOTION may be said to be the Beginning or Foundation of all Mechanics, because
no Mechanical Operation can be performed without Motion.

AXIOMS, or Self-evident Truths.
1. A body at rest will continue so for ever, unless it is put in motion by
some force impressed. This sluggish, inactive principle, or force, by which a
body inclines to a state of rest, is called Inertia.


2. A body in motion will continue so for ever, with the same velocity in the
same direction, unless resisted by some force. The same principle of inertia,
which inclines a body to remain at rest, also inclines it to continue in motion
for ever, if once put in motion, and that in a right-lined direction, unless
changed by some force; therefore no body, moving in a strait line, can be
turned into a curve line, but by some force; the consideration of which may
lead us to the knowledge of the true principles of some mills. See the latter
part of art. 73.


3. The impulse that gives motion, Art. 1.
and the resistance that destroys it, are equal.

4. Causes and effects are equal, or directly proportional.

POSTULATUMS, or Positions without Proof.
A quadruple impulse, or moving power, is requisite to communicate double
velocity to a body In the course of this work, I shall show, that a quadruple
impulse produces only double velocity: See art. 7 and 46. We should follow
philosophers only in the paths of truth; because, if all men are subject to
err* even the most eminent philosophers may have erred.

If a theory will not agree with practice, we may suspect it is not true; and
the theory of the momentum or force of bodies in motion, being as their
velocities simply, does not agree with practice, with respect to the effects
they produce, either in circular motion, art. 30, falling bodies, art. 9,
spouting fluids, art. 45, wind on mill-sails, art. 69, therefore we have reason
to suspect that this theory may not be true, in every respect.


; therefore a quadruple resistance is requisite to destroy double velocity in a
body, by axiom 3d.

The impulse we may call power, and the resistance that it overcomes, the
effect produced by that power.

COROLLARY.
Consequently, the powers of bodies in motion, to produce effects, are as the
squares of their velocities; that is, a double velocity, in a moving body,
produces 4 times the effect.

Art. 2. OF THE PRINCIPLES OF MECHANICS.
THERE are two principles, which are the foundation of all mechanical motion
and mechanical powers, viz. Gravity and Elasticity; or Weight and Spring.

By one or the other of these principles or powers every mechanical operation
is performed.

Gravity, Art. 2.
in the extent of the word, means every species of attraction; but more
especially that species which is common to, and mutual between, all bodies; and
is evident between the sun and its planetary attendants, as also the earth and
moon. It is this attraction of gravity between the heavenly bodies, that keeps
up the order of their motion, in their revolutions round each other. See
Ferguson's Lectures, page 23.
But we will only consider it, as it relates to that tendency which all bodies
on this earth has to fall toward its center; thus far it concerns the
mechanical arts, and its laws are as follows, viz.

Laws of Gravity.
1. Gravity is common to all bodies, and mutual between them.

2. It is in proportion to the quantity of matter in bodies.

3. It is exerted every way from the center of attracting bodies, in
right-lined directions; therefore all bodies on the earth tend to the center of
gravity of the earth. The center of gravity of a body, is that point on which,
if the body be suspended, it will remain at rest in any position; or it is the
center of the whole weight or matter of the body. Art. 14.


4. It decreases as the squares of the distance increase; that is, if a body,
on the earth, was to be removed to double the distance from the center of
gravity of the earth, about 4000 miles high, it would there have but 1-4 of the
gravity or weight it had when on the ground: but a small height from the
surface of the earth (50,100, or 500 feet) will make no sensible difference in
gravity. The diameter of the earth is allowed to be about 8000 miles; therefore
we may suppose the center of gravity of the earth to be about 4000 miles from
its surface; and any small distance from its surface, such as 1 mile high, will
make no sensible difference in gravity. But when the distance is so great as to
bear a considerable proportion to the distance of the center of gravity of the
earth, then the power of gravity will decrease sensibly. Thus, at the distance
of the moon, which, at a mean, is about 60 semi-diameters of the earth, the
power of gravity is to that on the surface of the earth, as 1 to 3600. See
Martin's Philosophy.


By the 3d law, Art. 2.
it follows, that all bodies descending freely by their gravity, tend toward
the earth, in right lines, perpendicular to its surface, and with equal
velocities (abating for the resistance of the air) as is evident by the 2d law.
This resistance will be as the surfaces of the bodies; therefore the smaller
the body of equal matter, the greater will be the velocity of its fall. But it
has been proved, by experiment, that a feather will fall with the same velocity
as a guinea, in vacuo. See Ferguson's Lectures, page 183.


Art. 3. ELASTICITY.
Elasticity is that strength or power, which any body or quantity of matter,
being confined or compressed, has to expand itself; such as a spring that is
bent or wound up, heated air or steam confined in a vessel, etc. and by it many
mechanical operations are performed.

Elasticity, in the full sense of the word, here means every species of
repulsion.

The limits of the prodigious power of repulsion, which takes place between the
particles of heated air and steam, are not yet known. Their effects are seen in
the explosion of gunpowder, the bursting and cracking of wood in the fire, etc.
In short, in every instance, where steam could not find room to expand itself,
it has burst the vessel that confined it, endangering the lives of those who
were near it. A worthy and ingeuius young man, having prepared a vessel of
wrought iron, about 3 inches diameter, and 9 inches long, partly filled with
water, had put it into a smith's fire, and was trying some experiments, when
the aperture. by which the steam was meant to issue, got stopped by some means
(as is supposed) and the vessel burst with noise like a cannon, carried off his
right arm, and left it laying across one of the upper beams of the shop, and
otherwise desperately wounded him. This prodigious power is applied to raise
water out of coal-mines, etc. from great depths, in surprising quantities, and
to turn mills; it may (in my opinion) be applied to many other useful purposes,
which it is not yet applied to.

On this subject much might be said; but as it does not immediately concern
this work, perhaps I have said enough to excite the reader to peruse the
several (...) authors on philosophy, who have treated largely and well (...)
and to them I must refer.




Having premised what was necessary to the right understanding of the science
of mechanics, Art. 3.
which mostly depends upon the principles of gravitation,

We come to consider the Objects thereof, viz. the Nature, Kinds, and various
Effects of Motion and moving Bodies, and the Structure and Mechanism of all
Kinds of Machines, called Mechanical Powers, whether Simple or Compound.

CHAPTER II.
Art. 4. OF MOTION AND ITS GENERAL LAWS.
MOTION is the continual and successive change of space or place, Motion,
and is either absolute or relative.

Absolute motion is the change of space or place of bodies, Absolute.
such as the flight of a bird, or the motion of a ball projected in the air.

Relative motion is the motion one body has with respect to another, Relative.
such as the difference of motion of the flight of two birds, or of two ships
sailing. If two ships, A and B, move with the same velocity, in the same
direction, then their absolute motion is the same, and they have no relative
motion, and neither of them will appear, to a person on board of the other,
(...) move at all. Hence it is, that although the earth is continually
revolving about its axis, with a velocity, at the equator, of about 1042 miles
in an hour, and round the sun, in continual absolute motion, with a velocity of
about 58000 miles an hour -- yet, as all objects on its surface have the same
absolute motion, they appear to be at rest, and not to move at all: therefore
all motion of bodies on the earth, appears to us to be absolute motion, when
compared with objects fixed on the earth; yet, if we take into consideration
(...) absolute motion of the earth, all motion on it will appear to be merely
re^^tive.

If two ships, A and B, moving with equal velocities, pass each other then they
will appear, to a spectator on board of either, to move with (...) their
respective real velocities.

Hence the reason, why a person, riding against the wind, finds its (...)
greater, and with it, its force less, than it really is.




Art. 5.
MOTION is either Equable, Accelerated, Motion,
(...) Retarded.

Equable motion is when a body passes over equal distances in equal times.
Equable.


Accelerated motion, Accelerated.
is that which is continually increased; such is the motion of falling bodies.
A falling body is constantly acted upon by all the power of its own gravity;
therefore its motion is continually increased.


Retarded motion, Retarded.
is that which continually decreases; such is the motion of a cannon-ball throw
perpendicularly upwards. A cannon-ball, projected perpendicular upwards, is
constantly resis^^^ by the whole power of its own gravity; therefore its motion
will be continually decreased, and totally stopped as soon as the sum of this
resistance amounts to the first impulse, by axiom 3d, art. 1, when it will
begin to descend, and its motion will be continually increased by the same
power of (...) own gravity: its motion downwards will be equal to its motion
upwards, (...) every part of its path, and it will return to the mouth of the
cannon (...) the velocity and force that it left it; and the time of its ascent
and descent will be equal, supposing there was no resistance from the air --
but this resistance will make a considerable difference.

From this principle of accelerated motion in falling bodies, may app^^^ the
reason, why water poured from the spout of a tea-kettle, will not continue in a
stream farther than about two feet, and this stream become smaller as it
approaches the place where it breaks into drops; because (...) attraction of
cohesion keeps the water together, until the accelerated motion of its fall,
which stretches the stream smaller and smaller, overcome the cohesion, and then
it breaks into drops, and these drops become further asunder while they
continue to fall: therefore, if the clouds were to (...) themselves in
torrents, the water would fall on the earth in drops. (...) may serve to show
the disadvantage of drawing the gate of a water-mill at (...) great distance
from the float-board: but more of this hereafter. (...) art. 59.




Art. 6.
THE Momentum or quantity of motion, is (...) the power or force which a moving
body has (...) strike an obstacle to produce effects, and is equal to that
impressed force by which a body is compelled to change its place, by axiom 3,
art. 1^ which, Art. 6.
I think, ought to be distinguished by two names, viz. Instant and Effective
Momentums.

1. The Instant Momentum, or force of moving bodies, Momentum of bodies in
motion.
is in the compound ratio of their quantities of matter and simple velocities
conjointly; that is, as the weight of the body A, multiplied into its velocity,
is to the weight of the body B, multiplied into its velocity, so is the instant
force of A to the instant force of B. If A has 4lbs. of matter, and 1 degree of
velocity, and B has 2lbs. of matter, and 4 degrees of velocity; then the
momentum of their strokes will be as 4 is to 8; that is, supposing them to be
instantaneously stopped by an obstacle.

2. The Effective Momentum, or force of moving bodies, is all the effect they
will produce by impinging on any yielding obstacle, and is in the compound
duplicate ratio of their quantities (or weights) multiplied into the squares of
their velocities; that is, as the weight of the body A, multiplied into the
square of its velocity, is to the weight of the body B, multiplied into the
square of its velocity, so is the effective momentum of A to that of B. If A
has 2lbs of matter and 2 degrees of velocity, and B 2lbs of matter and 4
degrees of velocity, then their effective momentums are as 8 to 32; that is, a
double velocity produces a quadruple effect.

Art. 7.
THE general Laws of Motion are the three following, viz.

Law 1. Every body will continue in its present ^^ate, Laws of motion.
whether it be at rest or moving uniformly (...) a right line, except it be
compelled to change that state by some force impressed. By the first law, a
body at rest, inclines to continue so for ever, by its ^sinertia or inactive
power, and a body in motion inclines to continue so (...) ever, passing over
equal distances in equal times, if it meets with no resistance, and will move
on in a right line. For want of resistance the planets and comets continue
their motions undiminished, while moving bowls or wheels are reduced to a
state of rest by the resistance of the air, and th^^ friction of the parts on
which they move. See Ferguson's Lectures on Mechanics.

It is this friction of the parts, and resistance of the air, which renders it
impossible for us to make a perpetual motion; because this friction and
resistance are to be overcome, and although it may be reduced to be very small,
yet man cannot, with all his art, by mechanical combinations, (...) as much
power as will overcome it. Philosophers have demonstrated the impossibility of
making it; but I think none ought to assert that it will never be found; for
there are many perpetual motions in the heavens. If any man would spend his
time in this way, it should be to seek for a created power that he might apply
to this purpose, and not to create one.




Law 2. Art. 7.
The change of motion or velocity is always proportional to the square root of
the moving force impressed, New position.
and in a right line with that force, and not as the force directly. This is
evident, when we consider that a body must fall a quadruple distance to obtain
double velocity, by art. 9; and a quadruple head or pressure of fluid produces
a double velocity to the spout, by art. 46. The velocity, in both these cases,
is as the square root of the impulse, and the impulse as the squares of the
velocity, therefore the change of effective motion or velocity will always be
as the square root of the impulse or force impressed, and the force impressed
as the squares of the velocity or effective motion.


Law 3. Action and re-action are always equal, and in contrary directions to
each other. Action and re-action are equal; that is, if a hammer strikes an
anvil* the anvil will re-act against the hammer with an equal force to the
action of the hammer.

The action of our feet against the ground, and the re-action of the ground
against our feet, are equal.

The action of the hand to project a stone, and the re-action of the stone
against the hand, are equal.

If a cannon, weighing 6400lbs. gives a 24lb. ball a velocity of 640 (...) per
second, the action of the powder on the ball, and its re-action against the
cannon, are equal; and if the cannon has liberty to move, it will have a
velocity, which multiplied into its weight, will be equal to the velocity of
the ball multiplied by its weight: their instant momentums are always equal.
See Martin's Philosophy.




CHAPTER III. Art. 8.
OF THE MOMENTUM OR FORCE OF BODIES IN MOTION.
IF two non-elastic bodies, A and B, fig. 1, Fig. 1.
each having the same quantity of matter, move with equal velocities against
each other, they will destroy each other's motion, and remain at rest after the
stroke: Of instantaneous momentums of bodies in motion.
because their momentums will be equal; that is, if each has 2lbs of matter and
10 degrees of celerity, their instantaneous momentums will each be 20.

But if the bodies be perfectly elastic, they will recede from each other with
the same velocity with which they meet; because action and re-action are equal,
by the 3d general law of motion, art. 7. This shows that non-elastic bodies
communicate only half their original force; because the force required to cause
the bodies to recede from each other, is equal to the force that gave them
velocity to meet; and the force that caused the body to recede with velocity
10, is equal to the force that stopped velocity. 10.


2. If two non-elastic bodies, A and B, fig. 2, Fig. 2.
moving in the same direction with different velocities, impinge on each other,
they will (after the stroke) move on together with such velocity, as, being
multiplied into the sum of their weights, will produce the sum of their instant
momentums which they had before the stroke; that is, if each weigh 1lb. and A
has 8 and B 4 degrees of celerity, the sum of their instant momentums will be
12, then, after the stroke, their velocity will be 6; which, multiplied into
their quantity of matter 2, Art. 8.
produces 12, the sum of their instant momentums. But if they had been elastic,
then A would have moved with 4 and B with 8 degrees of velocity after the
stroke, and the sum of their instant momentums would be 12, as before. Because
elastic bodies impinging, recede, after the stroke, with the same velocity with
which they meet; therefore, a heavy body in motion, impinging on a lighter body
at rest, will give it a greater velocity than that with which it was struck;
for if the heavy body be not stopped, but move forward after the stroke, with a
certain velocity, that velocity, added to the velocity before the stroke, will
be the velocity of the lighter body.


3. If a non-elastic body A, with quantity of matter 1, and 10 degrees of
velocity, strike B at rest, of quantity of matter 1, they will both move on
together with velocity 5; but if they be elastic, B flies off with velocity 10,
and A remains at rest, by 3d general law of motion, art. 7. This also shows
evidently, that non-elastic bodies communicate only half their force. A
knowledge of this is of great use in establishing a true theory of water-mills.
It is universally true, that whatever instant momentum is communicated to a
body, is lost by the body that communicates it.

4. If the body A, Fig. 4.
fig. 4, Compound motion.
receive two strokes or impulses at the same time, in different directions, the
one sufficient to propel it from A to B, and the other to propel it from A to
D, in equal time, then this compound force will propel it in the diagonal line
A C, and it will arrive at C in the same time that it would have arrived at B
or D, by one impulse only; and the projectile force of these strokes are as the
squares of the sides of the parallelogram, by law 2, art. 7. This doctrine of
the momentum of bodies in motion, and communication of motion, being as their
velocities simply, was taught by Sir Isaac Newton, and has been received by his
followers to this day; which appears to be true, where the whole force is
instantaneously spent or communicated; therefore I have changed the term to
instant momentum. I have tried the experiment, by causing different weights to
strike each other with different velocities, both on the principle of
pendulums, and by causing them to move in horizontal circles; and, in both
cases, 4lbs. with velocity 1, balanced 2lbs. with velocity 2; their momentums
each were 4: so that the theory appears to be proved to be true. Yet I think we
have reason to doubt its being true in any other sense; because it does not
agree with practice. All the bodies we put in motion, to produce effects,
produce them in proportion to the squares of their velocities, or nearly, as
will appear in the course of this work: But I fear I shall draw on me the
ridicule of some, if I should doubt a theory long established; but I think we
should follow others only in the paths of truth. Doubtless Sir Isaac meant the
force to be instantly spent: and I have understood that the Dutch and Italian
philosophers have held and taught, these 100 years past, that the momentum of
bodies in motion, is as the squares of their velocities; and I must confess it
appears to be really the case, with respect to the effects they produce; which
is generally as their quantity or weight multiplied into the squares of their
velocities. I found it impossible to reconcile the theory of the force of
bodies in motion, being as their simple velocities, to the laws of circular
motion, art. 13, where a double velocity produces a quadruple central force; of
falling bodies, art. 9, where the velocity is as the square root of the impulse
or distance fallen, and the effects as the squares of the velocities; of
projectiles, where a double velocity produces a quadruple random, art. 12; of
bodies descending on inclined plains, art. 10, where the velocities are as the
square roots of the perpendicular descents, and the effects as the squares of
their velocities; of spouting fluids, art. 45, where their velocities are as
the square roots of their perpendicular heights or pressures, and their effects
as the squares of their velocities, with equal quantities; of wind on
mill-falls, art. 69, where the effects are as the cube of the velocity of the
wind; because here the quantity is as the velocity, and the effect of equal
quantities being as the squares of the velocity, amounts the effects to be as
the cubes.

But when I discovered that a quadruple impulse was requisite to give double
velocity, both in falling bodies and spouting fluids, and, by axiom 3, the
power that produced a motion in a body, and the power that destroyed said
motion, were equal, I concluded that the effects produced by bodies in motion,
were as the squares of their velocities; and then I found the whole theory to
agree with practice. Hereafter I shall say, that the effective momentum, or
force of bodies in motion, is as the squares of their velocities.




5. If a perfect elastic body be let fall 4 feet, Art. 8.
to strike a perfect elastic plain, A double velocity produces a quadruple
effect.
by the laws of falling bodies, art. 9, it will strike the plain with a
velocity of 16, 2 feet per second, and rise, by its re-action, to the same
height from whence it fell, in half a second: If it falls 16 feet, it will
strike with a velocity of 32, 4 feet, and rise 16 feet in one second. Now, if
we call the rising of the body the effect, we shall find that a double
velocity, in this case, produces a quadruple effect in double time. Hence it
appears, that a body moving through a resisting medium, with a double velocity,
will continue in motion a double time, and go 4 times the distance; which will
be a quadruple effect. We should pay no regard to time, in calculating the
effective force of bodies in motion. Because, if 1lb of matter move with 1
degree of velocity, it will produce a certain effect (before it ceases moving)
in an unknown time. Every other pound of matter, moving with equal velocity,
will produce an equal effect in equal time. But if each pound of matter move
with double velocity, it will produce 4 times the effect, but requires a double
time; which difference in time no way affects the sum total of the effects of
the matter put in motion to move any practical machine. Therefore we should
totally leave time out of this calculation, seeing it tends to lead us into
errors.


OF NON-ELASTICITY IN IMPINGING BODIES. Art. 8.

1. IF A and B, fig. 3, Fig. 3.
fig. 3, be two columns of matter in motion, meeting each other, and equal in
non-elasticity, quantity, and velocity, they will meet at the dotted line e e,
destroy each other's motion, and remain at rest, provided none of their parts
separate.

2. But if A is elastic, and B non-elastic, they will meet at ee, but B will
give way by battering up, and both will move a little further; that is, half
the distance that B shortens.

3. But if B is a column of fluid, and, when it strikes A, flies off in a
lateral perpendicular direction, then whatever is the sum total of the
momentums of these particles laterally, has not been communicated to A;
therefore A will continue to move, after the stroke, with that said momentum.

4. But with what proportion of the striking velocity the fluid, after the
stroke, will move in the lateral direction, I do not find determined; but, from
small experiments I have made (not fully to be relied on) I suppose it to be
more than one half; because water falling 4 feet, and striking a horizontal
plain, with 16,2 feet velocity, will cast some few drops to the distance of 9
feet (say 10 feet, allowing one foot to be lost by friction, etc.) which we
must suppose take their direction at an angle of 45 degrees; because it is
shown, in Martin's philosophy, page 135, Vol. I, that a body projected at an
angle of 45 degrees, will describe the greatest possible horizontal randum;
also, that a body falling 4 feet, and reflected with its acquired velocity 16,2
feet, at 45 degrees, will reach 16 feet horizontal randum, Art. 8.
or 4 times the distance of the fall. Therefore, by this, 1-4 of 10 feet, equal
to 2,5 feet, is the fall that will produce the velocity that produced it, viz.
Velocity 12,64 feet per second, about 3-4 of the striking velocity.

5. And if the force of striking fluids be as the squares of their velocities,
6-10ths of power lost by non-elasticity.
as proved in art. 67; by experiment, and demonstrated by art. 46; then the
ratio of the force of this side velocity, 12,64 feet per second, is to the
force of forward velocity, as 160 to 256, more than half (about, 6) of the
whole force is here lost by non-elasticity.

6. This side force cannot be applied to produce any further forward force,
after it has struck the first obstacle; because its action and re-action
balance each other afterward: which I demonstrate by fig. 27.

Let A be an obstacle, against which the column of water G A, of quantity 16
and velocity per second 16, strikes; as it strikes A, suppose it to change its
direction, at right angles, with 3-4 velocity, and strike B B; then change
again, and strike forward against C C, and backwards against D D; then again in
the side direction E E; and again in the forward and backward directions all of
which counteract each other, and balance exactly.

Therefore, if we suppose the obstacle A to be the float of an undershot
water-wheel, the water can be of no further service, in propelling it, after
the first impulse, but rather a disadvantage; because the elasticity of the
float will cause it to rebound in a certain degree, and not keep fully up with
the float it struck, but re-act back against the float following; therefore it
will be better to let it escape freely as soon as it has fully made the stroke,
but not sooner, as it will require a certain space to act in, Art. 8.
which will be in direct proportion to the distance between the floats.

7. From these considerations, Greatest effect of striking fluids not more than
half their moving power
we may conclude, that the greatest effect to be obtained from striking fluids,
will not amount to more than half the power that gives them motion; but much
less, if they be not applied to the best advantage: And that the force of
non-elastic bodies, striking to produce effects, will be in proportion to their
non-elasticity.

CHAPTER IV. OF FALLING BODIES. Art. 9.
BODIES descending freely by their gravity, in vacuo, or in an unresisting
medium, are subject to the following laws:

1st. They are equably accelerated. It is evident, that in every equal part of
time, the body receives an impulse from gravity, that will propel it an equal
distance, and give it an equal additional velocity; therefore it will produce
equal effects in equal times, and their velocity will be proportional to the
time.


2d. Their velocity is always in proportion to the time of their fall, and the
time is as the square root of the distance fallen. If the velocity, at the end
of one second, be 32,4 feet, at the end of two seconds it will be 64,8, at the
end of three seconds 97,2 feet per second, and so on.


3d. The spaces through which they pass, are as the square of the times or
velocities. That is, as the square of 1 second is to the space passed through
16,2, so is the square of 2 seconds, which is 4, to 64,8 feet, passed through
at the end of 2 seconds, and so on, for any number of seconds. Therefore the
spaces passed through at the end of every second, will be as the square numbers
1,4,9,16,25,36, etc. and the spaces passed through, in each second separately,
will be as the odd numbers 1,3,5,7,9,11,13,15, etc.
Therefore,

4th. Art. 9,
Their velocities are as the square root of the space descended through; That
is, as the square root of 4, which is 2, is to 16,2, the velocity acquired in
falling 4 feet: so is the square root of any other distance, to the velocity
acquired, in falling that distance.
and their force, to produce effects, as their distances fallen directly.

5th. The space passed through the first second, is very nearly 16,2 feet, and
the velocity acquired, at the lowest point, is 32,4 feet per second.

6th. A body will pass through twice the space, in a horizontal direction, with
the last acquired velocity of the descending body, in the same time of its
fall. That is, suppose the body as it arrives at the lowest point of its fall,
and has acquired its greatest velocity, was to be turned in a horizontal
direction, and the velocity to continue uniform, it would pass over double the
distance, in that direction that it had descended through in the same time.


7th. The total sum of the effective impulse acting on them to give them
velocity, is in direct proportion to the space descended through, This is
evident from the consideration, that in every equal part of distance it
descends through, it receives an equal effective impulse from gravity.
Therefore 4 times the distance, gives 4 times the effective (but not instant)
impulse.
and their velocity being as the square root of the space descended through;
or, which is the same, as the square root of the total impulse. Therefore,

8th. Their momentums, or force to produce effects, are as the squares of their
velocities, This is evident, when we consider, that a quadruple distance or
impulse, produces only double velocity, and by axiom 3 a quadruple resistance
will be required, to stop double velocity; consequently their force is as the
squares of their velocities, which brings them to be directly as their
distances descended through: and this agrees with the second law of spouting
^^uids. Art. 45.
or directly as their distances fell through; and the times expended in
producing the effects, are as the square root of the distance fallen through.
That is, if a body fall 16 feet, and strike a non-elastic body, such as hot
iron, soft lead, clay, etc. it will strike with velocity 32, and produce a
certain effect in a certain time. Again if it fall 64 Feet, it will strike with
velocity 64, and produce a quadruple effect, in a double time; because, if a
perfectly elastic body fall 16 feet in one second of time, and strike a
perfectly elastic plain, with velocity 32 feet, it will rise 16 feet in one
second of time. Again, if the body fall two seconds of time, it will fall 64
feet, and strike with velocity 64, and rise 64 feet in two seconds of time.
Now, if we call the rising of the body the effect of the striking velocity
(which it really is) then all will appear clearly. But any thing here advanced,
if contrary to the opinion of many learned and ingenious authors, ought to be
doubted, unless known to agree with practice.


9th. Art. 9.
The resistance they meet with in any given time, in passing through a
resisting medium, is as their surfaces, and as the cubes of their velocities.
This is evident when we consider,

1. That it is a proportion of the surfaces, that meets the resistance; and,

2. That a double velocity strikes a double quantity of resisting particles in
the same time.

3. That a double velocity strikes each particle with double the instant, and
four times the effective force, by art. 6.

Therefore, the instant resistance is as the squares of their velocities, and
will soon amount to the whole force of gravity, and reduce the motion to be
uniform. This is the reason why hail and rain falls with such moderate force;
whereas if it was not for the resistance of the air, they would prove fatal to
those they fall upon. Compare this with the effect of wind on mill-sails,
proved by experiment, to be as the cubes of the velocity, Art. 69, and with the
effects of spouting fluids, proved to be as the cubes of their velocities, with
equal apertures. Art. 67, and 7th law of spouting fluids.

Again, consider that the solid content of bodies decreases, as the cubes of
their diameters, while their surfaces decrease only as the squares of their
diameters; Consequently the smaller the body, the greater the resistance, in
proportion to its weight: and this is the reason why heavy bodies, reduced to
dust, will float in the air; as, likewise, feathers, and many other bodies of
great surface and little matter. This seems to show, that air is, perhaps, as
heavy as any other matter whatever, of an equal degree of fineness or smallness
of particles.

These are the laws of falling bodies supposing them to fall in vacuo, or in an
unresisting medium; and without considering that gravity increases, as the
square of the distance from the center of gravity of the attracting power
decreases (4. law of gravity, art. 2;) because any small distance, such as
comes in our practice, will make no sensible difference. But as they fall in
the air, which is a medium of great resistance, the instant resistance is as
the opposing surfaces of the falling body, and as the squares of their
velocities, their motion will greatly differ from these laws, in falling great
distances, or with light bodies; but in small distances, such as 30 feet or
less, and heavy bodies, the difference will be imperceptable in common practice.




A TABLE OF THE MOTION OF FALLING BODIES, SUPPOSED IN VACUO.
Distance passed through in feet. The velocity acquired by the fall, in feet and
parts, counted per second. Seconds of time that a body is supposed to be
falling. Distance passed through in said time, in feet and parts. Velocity per
second acquired at the end of every second, in feet and parts. 1 8.1.125.25 4.
2 11.4.25 1.01 8.1 3 14..5 4.05 16.2 4 16.2.75 9.11 24.3 5 18. 1 16.2 32.4 6
19.84 2 64.8 64.8 7 21.43 3 145.8 97.2 8 22.8 4 259.2 129.6 9 24.3 5 305. 162.
10 25.54 6 583.2 194.4 11 26.73 7 793.8 226.8 12 28. 8 1036.8 259.2 13 29.16 9
1312.2 291.6 14 30.2 10 1620. 324. 15 31.34 30 14580. 972. 16 32.4 60 58320.
1944. 17 33.32 18 34.34 19 35.18 20 36.2 21 37.11 36 48.6 49 56.7 64 64.8 100
81. 144 97.2 A SCALE OF THE MOTION OF FALLING BODIES. In this table, the first
column contains the total space fallen through, which is as the squares of the
times or velocities, by law 3. The second column contains the velocity
acquired, which is as the square root of the distance fallen, and as the time
of the fall, by laws (...) and 4. The third column contains the space fallen
through each second, which is as the odd numbers.

16.2 feet is the space fallen through the 1st second, by law 5, which let be
equal to 1 Which is also the whole space fallen through at the end of the 1st
second, which let be equal to 1 16.2 32.4 feet per second is the velocity
acquired by the fall, ditto 1 1 --. --.a 64.8 48.6 feet is the space fallen
through the 2d second, ditto 3 64.8 feet do. at the end of 2 seconds, do. 4 b
64.8 feet is the velocity per second, acquired at the end of the 2d second, do.
2 3 --. --. --. --.c 81. feet is the space fallen through the 3d second of
time, ditto 5 145.8 feet ditto in 3 seconds of time, do. 9 d 97.2 feet is the
velocity acquired by the fall at the end of 3 seconds, ditto 3 5 --. --. --.
--. --. --.e 113.4 feet is the space fallen through in the 4th second of time,
ditto 7 259.2 feet ditto in 4 seconds, ditto 16 f 129.6 feet per second, is the
velocity acquired at the end of 4 seconds, do. 4 7 --. --. --. --. --. --. --.
--.g

This scale shows, Art. 8.
at one view, all the laws to be performed by the falling body o, which falls
from o to 1, 16, 2 feet, the first second, and acquires a velocity that would
carry it 32,4 feet, from 1 to a, the next second, by laws 5 and 6; this
velocity would also carry it down to b in the same time, but its gravity,
producing equal effects in equal times, will accelerate it so much as to take
it to 3 in the same time, by law 1. It will now have a velocity of 64,8 feet
per second, that will take it to c horizontally, or down to d, but gravity will
help it on to 5 in the same time. Its velocity will now be 97,2 feet, which
will take it horizontally to c, or down to f, but gravity will help it on to 7;
and its last acquired velocity will be 129,6 feet per second from 7 to g.

If either of these horizontal velocities be continued, the body will pass over
double the distance it fell, in the same time, by law 6.

Again, if o be perfectly elastic, and, falling, strikes a perfect elastic
plain, either at 1, 3, 5 or 7, the effective force of its stroke will cause it
to rise again to o in the same space of time it took to fall.

Which shows, that in every equal part of distance, it received an equal
effective impulse from gravity, and that the total sum of their effective
impulse is as the distance fallen directly -- and the effective force of their
strokes will be as the squares of their velocities, by laws 7 and 8.

CHAPTER V. OF BODIES DESCENDING, INCLINED PLAINS AND CURVED SURFACES. Art. 10.
BODIES descending inclined plains and curved surfaces, are subject to the
following laws:

1. They are equably accelerated, because their motion is the effect of gravity.

2. The force of gravity propelling the body A, Fig. 5.
fig. 5, to descend an inclined plain A D, is to the absolute gravity of the
body, as the height of the plain A C is to its length A D.

3. The spaces descended through are as the squares of the times.

4. The times, in which the different plains A D, A H, and A I, or the altitude
A C, are passed over, are as their lengths respectively.

5. The velocities acquired in descending such plains, in the lowest points D,
H, I or C, are all equal.

6. The times and velocities of bodies descending through plains alike inclined
to the horizon, are as the square roots of their lengths.

7. Their velocities, in all cases, are as the square roots of their
perpendicular descent.

From these laws or properties of bodies descending inclined plains, are
deduced the following corollaries, viz.

1. That the time, in which a body descends through the diameter A C, or any
cord A a, A e or A i, are equal.Hence,

2. All the cords of a circle are described in equal times. Art. 10.


3. The velocity acquired in descending through any arch, or cord of an arch, of
a circle, as a C, in the lowest point C, is equal to the velocity that would be
acquired in falling through the perpendicular height F C.

The motion of pendulums have the same properties, the rod or string acting as
the smooth curved surface.

For demonstration of these properties, see Martin's Philosophy, vol. I, page
111 -- 117.

CHAPTER VI. OF THE MOTION OF PROJECTILES. Art. 12.
A PROJECTILE is a body thrown or projected in any direction; such as a stone
from the hand, water spouting from any vessel, a ball from a cannon, etc. fig.
6. Fig. 6.


Every projectile is acted on by two forces at the same time, viz. the Impulse
and the Gravity.

By the impulse, Of projectiles.
or projectile force, the body will pass over equal distances, A B, B C, etc.
in equal times, by 1st general law of motion, art. 7, and, by gravity, it
descends through the spaces A G, G H, etc. which are as the squares of the
times, by 3d law of falling bodies, art. 9. Therefore, by these forces
compounded, the body will describe the curve A Q, called a parabola; and this
will be the case in all directions, Art. 12.
except perpendicular; but the curve will vary with the elevation, yet it will
still be what is called a parabola.

If the body is projected at an angle of 45 degrees elevation, it will be
thrown to the greater horizontal distance possible; and, if projected with
double velocity, it will describe a quadruple random.

For a full account and demonstration, see Martin's Phil. vol. I, p. 128 -- 135.

CHAPTER VII. OF CIRCULAR MOTION and CENTRAL FORCES. Art. 13.
IF a body A, Fig, 7.
fig, 7, Central forces.
be suspended by a string A C, and caused to move round the center C that
tendency which it has to fly off from the center, is called the centrifugal
force; and the action of the string upon the body, which constantly solicits it
toward the center, and keep it in the circle A M, is called the centripital
force. Speaking of these two forces indefinitely, they are called central
forces. It may be well to observe here, that this central force is no real
power but only an effect of the power that gives the body the motion. Its
iner^^^ causes it to recede from the center, and fly off in a direct tangent
line, (...) the circle it moves in. Therefore this central force can neither
add to, (...) diminish from the power of any mechanical or hydraulic engine,
unless it be by friction.


The particular laws of this species of motion, are,

1. Equal bodies describing equal circles in equal times, Art. 13.
have equal central forces. Laws of ^entral forces.


2. Unequal bodies describing equal circles in unequal times, their central
forces are as their quantities of matter multiplied into their velocities.

3. Equal bodies describing unequal circles in equal times, their velocities
and central forces are as their distances from their centres of motion, or as
the radius of their circles. This shows, Laws of central forces, to be
considered in draughting millstones.
that when millstones are of unequal diameters, and revolve in equal times,
the largest should have the draught of their furrows ^ess, in proportion as
their central force is more, which is inverse proportion; also that the draught
of a stone should vary, and be in inverse proportion to the distance from the
center. That is, the greater the distance (...) less the draught.

Hence we conclude, that if stones revolve in equal times, their draught must
be equal next the center: that is, so much of the large stones, as is equal to
the size of the small ones, must be of equal draught. But that ^^art which is
greater, must have less draught in inverse proportion, as the distance from the
center is greater, the furrows must cross at so much less ^^gle; which will be
nearly the case (if their furrows lead to an equal distance from their centres)
at any considerable distance from the center of (...) stone; but near the
center the angles become greater than the proportion, if the furrows be
straight, as appears by the lines g 1, h 1, g 2, h 2, g 3, (...) 3, in fig. 1,
pl. XI. the angles near the center are too great, which seems to ^^dicate, that
the furrows of millstones should not be straight, but a little curved; but
what this curve should be is very difficult to determine exacted by theory. By
theory it should be such as to cause the angle of furrows ^^ossing, to change
in inverse proportion with the distance from the center, which will require the
furrows to curve more, as they approach the center.




4. Unequal bodies describing unequal circles in equal times, their central
forces are as their quantities of matter multiplied into their distance from
^he center or radius of their circles.

5. Equal bodies describing equal circles in unequal times, their central
forces are as the squares of their velocities; or, in other words, a double
velocity generates a quadruple central force. This shows that millstones of
equal diameters, having their velocities unequal, should have the draught of
their furrows, as the square roots (...) their number of revolutions per
minute. Thus, suppose the revolutions of one stone to be 81 per minute, and the
mean draught of the furrows 5 inches, and found to be right; the revolutions of
the other to be (...); then to find the draught, say, As the square root of 81,
which is 9, is (...) the 5 inches draught: so is the square root of 100, which
is 10, to 4, 5 inches, the draught required (by inverse proportion) because the
(...) must decrease as the central force increases.
Therefore,

6. Unequal bodies describing equal circles i^ unequal times, Art. 13.
their central forces are as their quantities multiplied into the squares of
their velocities.

7. Equal bodies describing unequal circles (...) equal celerities, their
central forces are inverse^^ as their distances from the center of motion (...)
radius of the circles. That is the greater the distance the less the central
force. This (...) that millstones of different diameters, having their
peripheries revolvi^^ with equal velocities, should have the angle of draught,
with which (...) furrows cross each other, in inverse proportion to their
diameters, beca^^^ their central forces are as their diameters, by inverse
proportion, (...) and the angle of draught should increase, as the central
force (...) and decrease, as it increases.

But here we must consider, that, to give stones of different diameter
equal-draughts, the distance of their furrows from the center, must be direct
proportion to their diameters. Thus, as 4 feet diameter, is (...) inches
draught: so is five feet diameter to 5 inches draught. To (...) the furrows of
each pair of stones cross each other at equal angles, (...) proportional
distances from the center, see fig. 1, plate XI. where (...) g d, g f, h a, h
c, and h e, show the direction of the furrows of the 4, 5^ 6 feet stones, with
their proportional draughts; now it is obvious (...) they cross each other at
equal angles, because the respective lines are ^^rallel, and cross in each
stone, near the middle of the radius, which (...) that in all proportional
distances, they cross at equal angles, consequently their draughts are equal.

But the draught must-be further increased, with the diameter of stone, in
order to increase the angle of draught in the inverse ratio, (...) central
force decreases.

To do which say: If the 4 feet stone has central force equal 1, what ^^^tral
force will the 5 feet stone have? Answer:,8 by the 7th law.

Then say) If central force I requires 5 inches draught, for a 5th stone, what
will central force, 8 require? Answer: 6,25 inches dra^^^. This is, supposing
the verge of each stone, to move with equal velo^^^. This rule may bring out
the draught nearly true, provided there be (...) much difference between the
diameter of the stones. But it appears me, that neither the angles with which
the furrows cross, nor the distance of the point from the center, to which they
direct, is a true (...) of the draught.




8. Equal bodies describing unequal circles having their central forces equal,
their periodical times are as the square roots of their distances.

9. Therefore the squares of the periodical time are proportional to the cubes
of their distances when neither the periodical times nor the cele^^ties are
given. In that case,

10. Art. 13.
The central forces are as the squares of the distances inversely. These are
the laws of circular motion and central forces. For experimental demonstrations
of them, see Ferguson's Lectures on Mechanics, page 27 to 47.

I may here observe that the whole planetary system is governed by these laws
of circular motion and central forces. Gravity acting as the string, and is the
centripetal force; and as the power of gravity decreases, as the square of the
distance increases, by the 4th law of gravity, art 2; and as the centripetal
and centrifugal forces must always be equal, in order to keep the body in a
circle. Hence apears the reason why the planets most remote from the sun have
their motion so slow, while those near him have their motions swift; because
their celerities must be such as to create a centrifugal force equal to the
attraction of gravity.

I may here observe, that modern philosophers begin to doubt the existence of
inertia, as defined by Newton, to be different and independent from gravity,
but seem to conclude that they are both one thing; but when we consider that
the whole force of gravity is exerted as centripetal force, to keep the
heavenly bodies in a circle. It cannot be that same power, cause or principle,
that causes the bodies to continue their motion, unless one cause can produce
two effects each equal to itself, contrary to axiom 4. Again we may consider,
that gravity decreases, as the squares of the distance of the body from the
attracting power increases, but inertia is the same every where; and if we
suppose the body to be removed out of the sphere of attraction of gravity,
Attempt to prove the existence of inertia.
there will be no gravity at all, yet inertia will act in its full power, to
continue the motion or rest of a body, by axiom 1 and 2. Hence in this light
gravity and inertia appear to be two very different principles and ought to be
distinguished by different names: but here we may dispute about words, for in
other light^ they appear to be the very same thing.




CHAPTER VIII. OF THE CENTRES OF MAGNITUDE, MOTION, AND GRAVITY. Art. 14.
THE center of magnitude is that point which is equally distant from all the
external parts of a body.

2. The center of motion is that point which remains at rest, Art. 14.
while all other parts of the body move round it.

3. The center of gravity of bodies, is of great consequence to be well
understood, it being the principle of much mechanical motion, and possesses the
following particular properties:

1. If a body is suspended on this point, as its center of motion, it will
remain at rest in any position.

2. If a body is suspended on any other point than its center of gravity, it
can rest only in such position, that a right line drawn from the center of the
earth, through the center of gravity, will intersect the point of suspension.

3. When this point is supported, the whole body is kept from falling.

4. When this point is at liberty to descend, the whole body will fall.

5. The center of gravity of all homogeneal bodies, as squares, circles,
spheres, etc. is the middle point in a line connecting any two opposite points
or angles.

6. In a triangle, it is in a right line drawn from any angle to bisect the
opposite side, at the distance of one third of its length from the side
bisected.

7. In a hollow cone, it is in a right line passing from the apex to the center
of the base, and at the distance of one third of the side from the base.

8. In a solid cone, it is one fourth the side from the base, in a line drawn
from the apex to the center of the base.

Hence the solution of many curious phenomenon, as, why many bodies stand more
firmly on their bases than others; and all bodies will fall, when their center
of gravity falls without their base.

Hence appears the reason, Art. 14.
why wheel-carriages, loaded with stones, Fig. 12. Reasons why wheel carriages
overturn.
iron, or any heavy matter, will not overturn so easy, as when loaded with
wood, hay, or any light matter; for when the load is not higher than a b, the
center of gravity will fall within the center of the base at c; but if the load
is as high as d, it will then fall outside the base of the wheels at e,
consequently it will overturn. From this appears the error of those, who
hastily rise in a coach or boat, when likely to overset, thereby throwing the
center of gravity more out of the base, and increasing the danger.

CHAPTER IX. OF THE MECHANICAL POWERS.
Art. 15.
HAVING now premised and considered all that is necessary for the better
understanding those machines called Mechanical Powers, we come to treat of
them, and they are six in number, viz.

The Lever, the Pulley, the Wheel and Axle, the Inclined Plain, the Wedge, and
the Screw.

They are called Mechanical Powers, because they increase our power of raising
or moving heavy bodies; and, But one principle in mechanical powers.
although they are six in number, they seem to be reducible to one, viz. the
Lever, and appear to be governed by one simple principle, which I shall call
the First General Law of Mechanical Powers; which is this, General laws of
mechanical powers.
viz. the Momentums of the power and weight are always equal when the engine is
in equilibrio. Art. 15.


Momentum, her^ means the product of (...) weight of the body multiplied into
the distance (...) moves; that is, the power multiplied into its distance
moved, or into its distance from the center of motion, or into its velocity, is
equal to (...) weight multiplied into its distance moved, or into its distance
from the center of motion, or unto (...) velocity; or, the power multiplied
into its perpendicular descent, is equal to the weight multiplied into its
perpendicular ascent.

The Second General Law of Mechanical Powers, is,

The power of the engine, and velocity of the weight moved, are always in the
inverse proportion to each other; that is, the greater the velocity of the
weight moved, the less it must be; and the less the velocity, the greater the
weight may be; and that universally in all cases. Therefore,

The Third General Law is,

Part of the original power is always lost in over coming friction, inertia,
etc. but no power can be gained by engines, when time is considered i^ the
calculation.

IN the theory of this science, we suppose al^^ plains to be perfectly smooth
and even, levers (...) have no weight, cords to be perfectly pliable, and
machines to have no friction; in short, all imperfections are to be laid aside,
until the theory (...) established, and then proper allowances are to be made.

Art. 16. Of the Lever.
A Lever is a bar of iron, wood, etc. one part of which is supported by a prop,
and all other parts turn or move on that prop, as their center of motion; and
its length, on each side of the prop, is called its arms: the velocity or
motion of every part of these arms, is directly as its distance from its center
of motion, by 3d law of circular motion.

The Lever -- Observe the following laws:

1. The power and weight are to each other, Laws of the lever.
as their distances from the center of motion, or from the prop, respectively.
That is, Fig. 8.
the power P, fig. 8, which is 1 multiplied into its distance B C, from the
center 12, is equal to the weight 12 multiplied into its distance A B I, each
product being 12.


2. The power is to the weight, as the distance the weight moves is to the
distance the power moves, respectively. That is, the power multiplied into its
distance moved, is equal to the weight multiplied into its distance moved.


3. The power is to the weight, as the perpendicular ascent of the weight is to
the perpendicular descent of the power. That is, the power multiplied into its
perpendicular descent, is equal to the weight multiplied into its perpendicular
ascent.


4. Their velocities are as their distances from their center of motion, by 3d
law of circular motion.

These simple laws hold universally true in all mechanical powers or engines;
Laws of the lever hold universally true in all mechanical powers or engines.
therefore it is easy (from these simple principles) to compute the power of
any engine, either simple or compound; for it is only to find how much swifter
the power moves than the weight, or how much farther it moves in the same time;
and so much is the power, (and time of producing it) increased by the help of
the engine.

Art. 17. GENERAL RULES FOR COMPUTING THE POWER OF ANY ENGINE.
1. DIVIDE either the distance of the power from its center of motion, by the
distance of the weight from its center of motion. Or,

2. Divide the space passed through by the power, by the space passed through
by the weight. This space may be counted either on the arch described, or
perpendiculars. And the quotient will show how much the power is increased by
the help of the engine.

Then multiply the power applied to the engine, by that quotient, and the
product will be the power of the engine, whether simple or compound.

EXAMPLES.
Let A B C, fig. 8, Fig. 8.
represent a lever; then, to compute its power, divide the distance of the
power P from its center of motion B C 12, by the distance of the weight W, A B
1; and the quotient is 12: the power is increased 12 times by the engine;
which, multiply by the power applied 1, produces 12, the power of the engine at
A, or the weight W, that will balance P, and hold the engine in equilibrio. But
suppose the arm A B to be continued to E, then, to find the power of the
engine, divide the distance B C 12, by B E 6; and the quotient is two; which
multiplied by 1, the power applied, produces 2, the power of the engine, or
weight w to balance P.

Or divide the perpendicular descent of the power C D equal 6, by the
perpendicular ascent E F equal 3; and the quotient 2, multiplied by the power P
equal 1, produces 2, the power of the engine at E.

Or divide the velocity of the power P equal 6, Art. 17,
by the velocity of the weight w equal 3; and the quotient 2, multiplied by the
power 1, produces 2, the power of the engine at E. If the power P had been
applied at 8, then it would have required to have been 1 1-2 to balance W, or
w; because 1 1-2 times 8 is 12, which is the momentum of both weights W and w.
If it had been applied at 6, it must have been 2; if at 4, it must have been 3;
and so on for any other distance from the prop or center of motion.

Art. 18. There are Four kinds of Levers.
1. THE common kind, Different kinds of levers.
where the prop is placed between the weight and power, but generally nearest
the weight.

2. When the prop is at one end, the power at the other, and the weight between
them.

3. When the prop is at one end, the weight at the other, and the power applied
between them.

4. The bended lever, which differs only in form, but not in properties, from
the others.

Those of the first and second kind have the same properties and powers, and
are real mechanical powers, because they increase the power; but the third kind
is a decrease of power, and only used to increase velocity, as in clocks,
watches, and mills, where the first mover is too slow, and the velocity
increased by the gearing of the wheels.

The machinery of the human frame is composed of the last kind of lever; Great
power exerted by the muscles of the human frame.
for when we lift a weight by the hand, resting the elbow on any thing, the
muscle that exerts the force to raise the weight, is fastened at about one
tenth of the distance from the elbow to the hand, Art. 18.
and must exert a for^ ten times as great as the weight raised; therefore, he
that can lift 56lbs with his arm at^ right angle at the elbow, exerts a force
equal (...) 560lbs. by the muscles of his arm. Wonder^^ is the power of the
muscles in these cases. He^ appears the reason, why men of low stature stronger
than those of high, in proportion to the thickness, as is generally the case.

Art. 19. Compound Lever.
IF several levers are applied to act one upon another, Fig.9 Compound Lever.
as 2 1 3, in fig. 9, where No. 1 is (...) the first kind, No. 2 of the second,
and No. 3 (...) the third. The power of these levers, united act on the weight
w, is thus found by the following rule, which will hold universally true in an^
number of levers united, or wheels (which is similar thereto) acting upon one
another.

RULE.
1st. Multiply the power P, General rule.
into the length (...) all the driving levers successively, and note the
product.

2d. Then multiply all the leading levers in^^ one another successively, and
note the product.

3d. Divide the first product by the last, and the quotient will be the weight
w, that will hold the machine in equilibrio.

This rule is founded on the first law of the lever, art. 16, and on this
principle, viz.

If the weight w, Fundamental principle of all rules for calculating the power
or velocity of any combination of wheels or levers.
and power P, are such, tha^ when suspended on any compound machine, whether of
levers united, Art. 19.
or of wheels and axles, they hold the machine in equilibrio. Then, (...) the
power P, is multiplied into the radius of all the driving wheels, or lengths of
the driving levers, and the product noted; and the weight w multiplied into the
radius of all the leading wheels, or length of the leading levers, and the
product noted; these products will be equal. If we had taken the velocities or
circumferences of the wheels, instead of their radius, they would have been
equal also.

On this principle is founded all rules for calculating the power and motion of
wheels in mills, etc. See art. 20 and 74.

EXAMPLES.
Given, the power P equal to 4, Fig. 9.
on lever 2, at 8 distance from the center of motion. Required, with what force
lever 1, fastened at 2 from the center of motion of lever 2, must act, to hold
the lever 2 in equilibrio. In order to abreviate the work, I shall hereafter
use the following Algebraic signs, viz.

The sign + more, for addition. - less, for subtraction. x multiplied, for
multiplication. / divided, for division. = equal, for equality.
Then, instead of 8 more 4 equal 12, I shall write 8+4=12. Instead of 12 less 4
equal 8, 12-4=8. Instead of 6 multiplied by 4 equal 24, 6x4=24. And instead of
24 divided by 3 equal 8, 243=8.




By the rule, 4x8 the length of the long arm, is 32, and divided by 2, the
length of the short arm, quotes 16, the force required.

Then 16 on the long arm, lever 1, at 6 from the center of motion. Required,
the weight on the short arm, at 2, to balance it.

By the rule, 16x6=96, which divided by 2, Art. 19.
the short arm, quotes 48, for the weight required.

Then 48 is on the lever 3, at 2 from the center. Required, the weight at 8 to
balance it.

Then 48x2=96, which, divided by 8, the length of the long arm, quotes 12, the
weight required.

Given, the power P=4, on one end of the combination of levers. Required, the
weight w, o^ the other end, to hold the whole in equilibrio.

Then by the rule, 4x8x6x2=384 the product (...) the power multiplied into the
length of all the driving levers, and 2x2x8=32 the product of all the leading
levers, and 38432=12 the weight w required.

Art. 20. Foundation of the rules for finding the motion of wheels, or number
of cogs to produce motions.
THE same rule holds good in calculating the powers of machines, consisting of
wheels whether simple or compound, by counting the radius of the wheels as the
levers; and because the diameters and circumferences of circles are
proportional; we may take the circumference instead of the radius, and it will
be the same. Then again, because the number of cogs in the wheels, constitute
the circle, we may take the number of cogs and rounds instead of the circle or
radius, and the result will be the same.

Let Fig. 11 represent a water-mill (for grinding grain) double geared: Fig. 11.
Number 8 The water-wheel, 4 The great cog-wheel, 2 The wallower, 3 The counter
cog-wheel, 1 The trundle. 2 The millstones,


And let the above numbers also represent the radius of the wheels in feet.
Art. 20.


Now suppose there be a power of 500lb. on the water-wheel, required what will
be the force exerted on the millstone, 2 feet from the center,

Then, The power on the water-wheel given, to find the power exerted on the
millstone.
by the rule, 500x8x2x1=8000, and 4x3x2=24, by which divide 8000, and it quotes
333,33 lb. the power or force required, exerted on the millstone two feet from
its center, which is the mean circle of a 6 feet stone. -- And as the
velocities are as the distance from the center of motion, by 3d law of circular
motion, art. 13, therefore, to find the velocity of the mean circle of the
stone 2, deduce the following rule, viz.

1st. Multiply the velocity of the water-wheel into the radius or circumference
of all the driving wheels, Rule to find the velocity of the mean circle of a
millstone.
successively, and note the product.

2. Multiply the radius or circumference of all the leading wheels,
successively, and note the product; divide the first by the last product, and
the quotient will be the answer.

But observe here, that the driving wheels in this rule, are the leading levers
in the last rule.

EXAMPLES.
Suppose the velocity of the water-wheel to be 12 feet per second; then by the
rule 12x4x3x2=288 and 8x2x1=16 by which divide the first product 288, and it
quotes 18 feet per second, the velocity of the stone, 2 feet from its center.

Art. 21. Power decreases as motion increases.
IT may be proper to observe here, that as the velocity of the stone is
increased, the power to move it is decreased, and as its velocity is decreased,
the power (...) it to move it is increased, Art. 21.
by 2d general law of mechanical powers. This (...) universally true in all
engines that can possibly (...) contrived; which is evident from the 1st law of
the lever, viz. the power multiplied into its velocity or distance moved, is
equal to the weight multiplied into its velocity or distance moved.

Hence the general rule to compute the power of any engine, Rule to find the
force exerted to move a millstone.
simple or compo^nd, art. 17. (...) you have the moving power, and its velocity
o^ distance moved, given, and the velocity or distance of the weight, then, to
find the weight (which, in mills, is the force to move the stone, etc.) divide
that product by the velocity of the weight or millstone, etc. and it quotes
the weight or force exerted on the stone to move it: But a certain quantity or
proportion of this force is lost, in order to obtain a velocity to the stone;
which is shown in art. 29. Philosophers have hitherto attributed this loss of
power to friction, which is owing to the vis^nertia of matter.


Art. 22. No Power gained by enlarging Undershot Water-Wheels.
THIS seems a proper time to show the absurdity of the idea of increasing the
power of the mill, No power gained by increasing the diameter of undershot
water-wheels, on the principle of lengthening the lever.
by enlarging the diameter of the water-wheel, on the principle of lengthening
the lever, or by double gearing mills where single gears will do; because the
power can neither be increased nor diminished by the help of engines, while the
velocity of the body moved is to remain the same.

EXAMPLE.
Suppose we enlarge the diameter of the water-wheel from 8 to 16 feet radius,
fig. 11, Fig. 11.
and leave the other wheels the same; then, Art. 22.
to find the velocity of the stone, allowing the velocity of the periphery of
the water-wheel to be the same (12 feet per second); by the rule, 12x4x3x2=288,
and 16x2x1=32, by which divide 288, it quotes 9 feet in a second, for the
velocity of the stone.

Then, to find the power by the rule for that purpose, art. 20,
500x16x2x1=16000, and 4x3x2=24, by which divide 16000, it quotes 666,66lb. the
power. But as velocity as well as power, is necessary in mills, we shall be
obliged, in order to restore the velocity, to enlarge the great cog-wheel from
4 to 8 radius.

Then, to find the velocity, 12x8x3x2=576, and 16x2x1=32, by which divide 576,
it quotes 18, the velocity as before.

Then, to find the power by the rule, art. 20, it will be 333,33, as before.

Therefore no power can be gained, upon the principle of lengthening the lever,
by enlarging the water-wheel.

The true advantages that large wheels have over small one^, The true
advantages that large wheels have over small ones.
arises from the width of the buckets bearing but a small proportion to the
radius of the wheel; because if the radius of the wheel be ^8 feet, and the
width of the bucket or float-board but 1 foot, the float takes up but 1-8 of
the arm, and the water may be said to act fairly upon the end of the arm and to
advantage. But if the radius of the wheel be but 2 feet, and the width of the
float 1 foot, part of the water will act on the middle of the arm, and act to
disadvantage, as the float takes up half the arm. The large wheel also serves
the purpose of a flywheel; (art. 30) it likewise keeps a more regular motion,
and casts off back water b^tter. See art. 70.

But the expense of these large wheels is to be taken into consideration, and
then the builder will find that there is a maximum size, Art. 22.
(see art* 44) or a size that will yield him the greatest profit.

Art. 23. No Power gained by double gearing Mills, but some lost.
I might also go on to show that no power or advantage is to be gained by
double gearing Mills, No power gained by double gears, but some loft.
upon any other principles than the following, viz.

1. The motion necessary for the stone, can sometimes be obtained without
having the trundle too small, because we are obliged to have the pitch of the
cogs and rounds, and the size of the spindle large enough, to bear the stress
of the power. This pitch of gear and size of spindle may bear too great a
proportion to the radius of the trundle (as does the size of the float to the
radius of the water-wheel, art 22) and may work hard. Therefore there may be a
loss of power on that account; as there can be a loss but no gain, by 3.
general law of mechanical powers, art. 15.

2. The mill may be made more convenient for two pair of stones to one
water-wheel. Many and great have been the losses sustained by mill-builders,
Losses sustained by errors.
on account of their not properly understanding these principles. I have often
(...) with great high wheels built, where those of half the size and expense
would do better; and double gears, where single would do better, etc. etc.


Art. 24. Of the Pulley.
2. The pulley is a mechanical power well-known. One pulley, Fig. 10.
if it be moveable by the weight doubles the power, Art. 24.
because each rope sustains half the weight.

But if two or more pulleys be joined together in the common way, Of the
pulley, an easy way to compute its power.
then the easiest way of computing their power is, to count the number of ropes
that join to the lower or moveable block, and so many times is the power
increased; because all these ropes have to be shortened, and all run into one
rope (called the fall) to which the moving power is applied. If there be 4
ropes the power is increased fourfold. In this engine there is great loss of
original power, Great improvement on a system of pullies.
by the great friction of the pullies and ropes in bending, etc. But there is a
very great improvement lately discovered, on the pulley, which is as follows:
Make a system of pullies of such construction, that when those of the upper
block all fixed together on one pin will revolve in equal time, and the same in
the lower block, which effectually evades all the friction of the sides of the
pullies and ropes passing through the blocks. But as it is almost impossible to
proportion the diameters of the pullies to the motion of the ropes so exactly,
it will be best to let them have liberty to turn on the pin, so as to stretch
all the ropes equally.
See plate 1, fig. 10.

Art. 25. Of the Wheel and Axle.
3. THE wheel and axle, fig. 17, is a mechanical power, the same as the lever
of the first kind; there fore the power is to the weight, as the diameter of
the axle is to the diameter of the wheel; or the power multiplied into the
radius of the wheel, is equal to the weight multiplied into the radius of the
axle, There is but little loss of original power in this engine, because it has
but little friction.
in an equilibrium of this engine.

Art. 26. Of the inclined Plain.
4. The inclined plain is the fourth mechanical power: and in this the power is
to the weight, Inclined plain its use.
as the height of the plain is to its length. This is of use in rolling heavy
bodies, Art. 26.
such as barreled hogsheads, etc. into wheel-carriages, etc. and for letting
them down again. See plate V, fig. 1. If the height of the plain be half its
length, the^^ half the force will roll the body up the plain, that would lift
it perpendicularly.

Art. 27. Of the Wedge.
5. The wedge is only a^ inclined plain. Whence, The wedge equal to an inclined
plain.
in the common form of it, the power applied will be to the resistance to be
overcome as the thickness of the wedge is to the length thereof. This is a very
great mechanical power, and may be said to excel all the rest; because wi^^ it
we can effect, what we cannot with any (...) in the same time, and I think may
be comput^^^ in the following manner.

If the wedge be 12 inches long and 2 inches thick, Rule to compute the power
of the wedge.
then the power to hold it in equilibrio (...) as 1 to balance 12 resistance;
that is, 12 resistance pressing on each side of the wedge, Now if we consider
that ^he one 12 acting on one side of the wedge (...) presents the re-action of
the ground on the underside of the inclined pl^i^^ will then plainly see that
the wedge and inclined plain are both one (...) for if this wedge be applied to
raise a weight of 12, it will require 2 (...) of 1 to drive it under the
weight. But if the ground would give way (...) the wedge as easily, and move
the same distance that the weight raises, (...) the weight would be raised only
half the height; consequently, I would (...) the wedge under the weight, and
this yielding of the ground equal to (...) raising of the weight, will truly
represent the yielding of the cleft on (...) side of the wedge. And this is the
true principle of the wedge notwithstanding so much has been said to prove it
to be equal to (...) inclined planes. (...) Ferguson's lectures.
and when struck with a mallet, the whole force of the gravity of the mallet,
added to the whole force (...) the agent exerted in the stroke, is communicated
to the wedge in the time it continues to move (...) and this force to produce
effect, is as the square of the velocity, with which the mallet strike^
multiplied into its weight; Art. 27.
therefore the mallet should not be too large, (see art. 44) because it may be
too heavy for the workman's strength, and will meet too much resistance from
the air, so that it will loose more by lessening the velocity, than it will
gain by its weight. Suppose a mallet of 10lb. strike with 5 velocity, its
effective momentum 250; but if it strike with 10 velocity, then its effective
momentum is 1000. The effects produced by the strokes will be as 250 to 1000;
and all the force of each stroke, except what may be destroyed by the friction
of the wedge, is added in the wedge, until the sum of these forces amount to
more than the resistance of the body to be split, therefore it must give way;
but when the wedge does not move the whole force is destroyed by the friction.
Therefore the less the inclination of the sides of the wedge, the greater
resistance we can overcome by it, because it will be easier moved by the stroke.

Art. 28. Of the Screw.
6. THE Screw is the last mentioned mechanical power, Principles and power of
the screw.
and is a circular inclined plain (which will appear by wrapping a paper, cut
in form of an inclined plain round a cylinder) and the lever of the first kind
combined (the lever being applied to force the weight up in the inclined plain)
and is a great mechanical power; its use is both for pressure and raising great
weights. The power applied is to the weight it will raise, as the distance
through which the weight moves, is to the distance through which the power
moves; that is, as the distance of the threads of the screw, is to the circle
the power describes: so is the power to the weight it will raise. If the
distance of the thread be half an inch, Art. 28.
and the lever be 15 inches radius and the power applied be 10lb. then the
power will describe a circle of 94 inches, while the weight raises half an
inch; then, as half an inch is to 94 inches, so is 10lb to 1888lb the weight^
the engine would raise with 10lb power. But this is supposing the screw to have
no friction, (...) which it has a great deal.

Perhaps an improvement might be made on the screw, for some particular uses,
by introducing rollers to take off the friction. See art. 33.

WE have hitherto considered the action (...) effect of these engines, Art. 29.
as they would answer (...) the strictness of mathematical theory, were the^ no
such thing as friction or rubbing of parts upon each other; by which means,
philosophers have allowed, that one third of the effect of the machine is, at a
medium, destroyed: which bring us to treat of it next in course. But I think it
is evident, One third of the original power lost, to overcome inertia, in many
machines.
that this loss of 1-3 of the original power producing effects by machines,
arises from the visinertia of the matter (...) to be moved. For suppose the
machine be an elevator, applied to (...) wheat, fig. 17, art. 34, it is
evident, that if we apply only as much power will hold the weight of the wheat
in the buckets in equilibrio, we will (...) no motion: then in order to obtain
a lively motion, we will be obliged ^^^^ply a further power, which I expect we
will find will be nearly 1-3 of whole, art. 41; and this 1-3 part of the power
will be continually emp^^^^ in changing the state of the wheat from rest to a
lively motion. Besides, is shown in art. 31, that the friction of most machines
is not more than (...) part of the weight upon a plain; and by the difference
between the diameters of the wheels and gudgeons, is reduced to 1-1000 part of
the (...) or the moving power.


Art. 30. Of the Fly-wheel, and its Use.
BEFORE I dismiss the subject of mechanics powers, I shall take notice of the
fly-wheel, (...) use of which is to regulate the motion of engines, Art. 30.
Fly-wheel no increaser of power.
and should be made of cast metal, of a circular form, that it may not meet
with much resistance from the air.

Many have taken this wheel for an increaser of power, whereas it is, in
reality, a considerable destroyer of it; which appears evident, when we
consider that it has no motion of its own, but receives all its motion from the
first mover, and, as the friction of the gudgeons and resistance of the air are
to be overcome, it cannot be done without some power; yet this wheel is of
great use in many cases, viz.

1st. For regulating the power, Its use.
where it is irregularly applied, such as the treadle or crank moved by foot or
hand, as spinning-wheels, turning lathes, flax-mills, or where steam is
applied, by a crank, to produce a circular motion.

2d. Where the resistance is irregular, by jerks, etc. such as saw-mills,
forges, flitting-mills, powder-mills, etc.

The fly-wheel, by its inertia, regulates the motion; because, if it be very
heavy, it will require a great many little shocks or impulses of power to give
it a considerable velocity, and it will require as many equal shocks of
resistance to destroy said velocity, by axiom 3, art. 1.

While a rolling or flitting mill is running empty, the force of the water is
employed in generating velocity to the fly-wheel [a heavy water-wheel will have
the same effect] which force, summed up in the fly, will be sufficient to
continue the motion, without much abatement, while the sheet is running between
the rollers; whereas, had the force of the water been lost while the mill was
empty, she would have slack^ned in motion too much before the sheet got
through. This may be the case where water is ^carce.

CHAPTER X. OF FRICTION.
Art. 31.
FROM what I can gather from different authors, Friction.
Philosophers, Philosophers opinions about it.
treating of friction, seem to agree in telling us, that (...) perfectly hard
body of any weight could be made perfectly smooth and (...) and laid on a
horizontal plain perfectly hard, smooth and even, that then (...) least force
would move the said weight in any horizontal direction; and (...) it is the
roughness of the best polished and smoothed bodies, that is the (...) cause of
friction; because the body in being moved, has first to be (...) ^ver the
prominent parts, which is of the nature of an inclined plain. (...) also say,
in treating of the attraction of c^hesion, that if two bodies of (...) same
kind of matter could be made perfectly smooth and even, so that (...) parts
would meet exactly, they would strongly cohere or stick together attraction; by
which it appears that the doctrine of friction is not yet (...) explained.
and by my own experiments, (...) conclude that the doctrine of friction is as
follows and we may say it is subject to the following laws (...) viz.

Laws of Friction.
1. It is neither increased nor decreased by increasing or decreasing the
surfaces of contact (...) the moving body. Its laws.
They also say, Fig. 13.
that it is proved by experiment, that if a square (...) wood or brass, as F,
fig.13, four inches wide, and 1 inch thick, be made (...) and laid on a smooth
plain, A B C D, and the weight P hung over a (...) that it will require the
weight P to be nearly 1-3 part of the weight of (...) body F, to draw it along;
and that the same, whether it be on its (...) or edge. This proves law 1st,
that friction is not increased by incre^^^ the surface of contact.


2. It is in proportion to the weight and velocity, conjointly, of the moving
body. It has also been proved by experiment, that if we fix the lever L, to
(...) the weight F, Increased by velocity.
making o its center of motion, and by a cord make F (...) the lever at the
point 1, and hang the weight Q at the end of the lever (...) pullie, and make Q
just sufficient to move F; Q will then be found to be (...) of P, because it
will have to move F but 1-7 of the distance. Then move the cord from 1 to 2, Is
directly as the distance of the rubbing surfaces from the center of motion.
and we find the weight Q must now be doubled equal to 2-7 of P to move F; (the
reason is evident from the laws of the lever) because F is double the distance
from the center of motion that it was at 1, and it will have to move double the
distance if the lever, or power Q move the same distance. This shows that
friction is as the distance from the center of motion; that is, it is as the
diameter of the gudgeons, double diameter, double friction; therefore gudgeons
ought to be as small as possible, so as to be sufficiently strong to endure the
stress of the weight.


3. This proportion decreases as the weight and velocity increases, Art. 31.
but by what ratio, is not determined. They have also proved by experiment, It
is not increased in direct proportion with the weight.
that if F be a brass plate of 6 ounces, and A B C D a brass plate, both well
polished and oiled, then it will require the weight P to be nearly 2 ounces to
move F. But if F be loaded with 6, 8 or 10lb. then a sixth part of that weight
will be sufficient to draw it along. This proves that the ratio of the friction
to the weight decreases, as the weight increases: the reason of which decrease
of proportion I take to be as follows, viz. Great part of the friction arises
from the cohesion of the parts, even the grease put on to destroy the cohesion,
The ratio decreases as the weight and velocity increases.
has a cohesion of its own; and this cohesion of parts or of the grease, will
not increase with the weight or velocity. -- Again, if we allow the friction to
be occasioned by the weight of the body having to be raised over the prominent
parts of the rubbing surface, it is evident, that when it is raised by being
started, that it has not to be raised again; therefore the greater the
velocity, the less proportion will this resistance (occasioned by the raising
of the body) bear to the velocity.

I have made an experiment similar to that of fig. 13, with a flat sided glass
bottle, Experiment made.
on a smooth poplar plank, oiled; also on a well polished steel plate oiled,
and when loaded with 10lb. it was drawn by 1lb. and when loaded with 22lb. it
was drawn by 2lb. and when loaded with 60lb. it was drawn by 4 1-2 lbs. which
is about 1-13 part: and the motion was greatly accelerated, which gives reason
to conclude, that less weight would have continued the motion, after once begun.

We may reasonably suppose, Ratio of friction to the weight.
that the gudgeons of mills, etc. well polished, running on good stones or
brass boxes, etc. and well oiled, have as little friction as the bottle and
plank; and as we find that the proportion of friction decreases as the weight
increases, we may suppose that in great weights it will not amount to more than
1-20 part of the weight, Not more than 1-20 part on a plain in great weight.
supposing the gudgeons to be the full size or diameter of the wheels, for so
they must be in order to be on the same principles of plains rubbing together.
Upon these principles I compute the friction of the gudgeons of a well hung
water-wheel, as follows: viz. As the diameter of the wheel is to the diameter
of the gudgeons, so is 1-20 part of the weight of the wheel, to the weight that
will balance the friction.

EXAMPLE.

Suppose a wheel 15 feet diameter, with gudgeons 3 inches diameter, and
weighing 4000lb. by supposition; then, Not more than 1-1000 part in great
machines and great weights.
say as 15 feet is to 3 inches, so is 400020 to 3,3lb. the weight on the
periphery of the wheel that will balance the friction of 4000lb.: which is less
than 1-1000 part of the weight. But note that for the same reasons, that
friction does not increase with the velocity in direct proportion, neither will
it decrease in direct proportion with the velocity of the rubbing surface of
the gudgeon: hence we must conclude again that the friction is more than 1-1000
part. By which it appears, that the friction of the gudgeons, well set on good
stones or (...) boxes, is not in mills worthy of the expense of evading. It
bears but a (...) proportion to the friction or resistance of the air,
especially where the velocity is great. See art. 9, and 9th law of falling
bodies.




4. It is greatly varied by the smoothness or roughness, Art. 31.
hardness or softness, of the surfaces of contact of the moving bodies.

5. A body without motion has no friction; therefore, the less the motion, the
less the friction.

Art. 32. Of reducing Friction.
TO reduce friction, we must, by mechanical contrivances, To reduce friction.
reduce the motion of the rubbing parts as much as possible; which is done,
either by making the gudgeons small and the diameter of wheels large, or by
fixing the gudgeons to run o^ friction-wheels. By friction wheels. Fig. 14.
Thus, let A, fig. 14, represent the gudgeon of a wheel set to run on the
ver^^^ of two wheels of cast metal passing each other (...) little, and the
gudgeon laying between them. It is evident, that as A turns, it will turn both
friction-wheels; and, if the diameter of gudgeon A is 2 inches, and that of the
wheels 12, then the wheels will turn once while A turns 6 times, so that the
velocity of the gudgeons C C of the wheels, is to the velocity of the gudgeon
A, as (...) is to 6, supposing them to be equal in size; but (...) there are 4
of them to bear A, they may be bu^ half the diameter, and then their velocity
will be to that of A, as 1 is to 12; or A might be set on one wheel, as at B,
with supporters to keep it on; and, if friction-wheels are added to friction
wheels, the friction may be reduced to almost nothing by that means.

Art. 33. Late Invention to reduce Friction.
WHEEL-CARRIAGES, Rollers applied to reduce friction.
pullies, and such wheels as have large axles in proportion to their diameters,
have much friction. There has been a late discovery, in England, of applying
the principle of the roller to them; which may be so done as almost totally to
destroy the friction.

The easiest method possible, of moving heavy bodies horizontally, is the
roller.

Let A B, fig. 15, Fig. 15.
represent a body of 100 tons weight (with the underside perfectly smooth and
even) set on two rollers, perfectly hard, smooth, and round, rolling on the
horizontal plain C D, No friction in rollers.
perfectly hard, smooth, and even; it is evident that this body is supported by
two lines perfectly perpendicular, and, if globes were used instead of rollers,
the least force would move it in any horizontal direction; even a spider's web
would be sufficient, giving it time to overcome the visinertia of the body: But
as perfect hardness, smoothness, etc. are not attainable, a little friction
will still remain.

This principle is, or may be, applied to wheel-carriages, in the following
manner:

Let the outside ring B C D, fig. 16, Fig.16.
represent the box of a carriage-wheel, the inside circle A the axle, the
circles a a a a a a the rollers round the axle between it and the box, and the
inner ^ring a thin plate for the pivots of the rollers to run in, to keep them
at a proper distance from each other. When the wheel turns the rollers pass
round on the axle, and on the inside of the box, and we may say without
friction, because there is no rubbing of the parts past one another. To explain
this, let us suppose the rollers aaaaaa to have cogs, and the shaft A, and box
to have cogs also, the rollers gearing into the shaft and into the inside of
the box. Now it is evident, The principles of the application of rollers
explained.
that if the box will turn round the axle, it must be without any sliding of
parts; (and in fact, the prominent (...) of the rollers, axle and box, will act
as cogs) then, if the rollers and axle (...) all of one diameter, they will
have an equal number of cogs; and as the diameter of the box will be 3 times
the diameter of the rollers, it will (...) 3 times a^ many cogs. Now it is
evident, that the axle must turn 1 (...) times round, before the same cogs of
the rollers and shaft will meet, (...) were together when it started; because,
in that time the rollers will (...) moved over 1-3 of the box: therefore the
axle must turn 3 3-3 times equal (...) 4 times round, by the time the box is
once measured by the rollers. (...) suppose we hold the axle at rest, and turn
the box round like a carriage (...) then, while the box turns 1 1-3 times round
the axle, it will cause the (...) to move once round; and while the box or
wheel turns round the (...) times, the rollers will run round it three times.
For suppose we divide (...) box into 3 parts, B C and D, then beginning to turn
the box from B to (...), is evident, that while the roller a b measures once
round the axle and (...) to the same place, it will also measure the box from B
to C, and C will (...) taken the place of (...), and the next revolution of the
roller, D will take (...) place of C, and the third revolution B returns to
where it was at first, (...) the box has made 4 revolutions, while the rollers
have made 3 round (...) axle, and without any sliding of parts, therefore
without friction. I (...) go on to show, that if the axle be much larger than
the rollers, they will (...) work without sliding.


CHAPTER XI. OF MAXIMUMS, OR THE GREATEST EFFECTS OF ANY MACHINE.
Art. 34.
THE effect of a machine, Effect of a machine, what.
is the distance which it moves or the velocity with which i^ moves any body to
which it is applied to give motion, in a given time; and the weight of the body
multiplied into its distance moved, or into its velocity, shows the effect.

The theory published by philosophers, Old theory of maximum, motion, and load
of engines.
and received and taught as true, for several centuries past, is, that any
machine will work with its greatest perfection when it is charged with (...)
4-9 of the power that would hold it in equilibrio, Art. 34.
and then its velocity will be just 1-3 of the greatest velocity of the moving
power.

To explain this, they suppose the water-wheel, fig.17, Fig. 17.
to be of the undershot kind, 16 feet diameter, turned by water issuing from
under a 4 feet head, with a gate 1. foot wide, 1 foot high drawn; then the
force will be 250lbs. because that is the weight of the column of water above
the gate, and its velocity will be 16,2 feet per second, as shall be shown
under the head of Hydraulics; then the wheel will be moved by a power of
250lbs. and if let run empty, will move with a velocity of 16 feet per second;
but if we hang the weight W to the axle (of 2 feet diameter) with a rope, and
continue to add to it until it stops the wheel, and holds it in equilibrio, the
weight will be found to be 2000lbs. by the rule, art. 19; and then the effect
of the machine is nothing, because the velocity is nothing: But as we decrease
the weight W, the wheel begins to move, and its velocity increases accordingly;
and then the product of the weight multiplied into its velocity, will increase
until the weight is decreased to 4-9 of 2000=888,7, which, multiplied into its
distance moved or velocity, will produce the greatest effect, and the velocity
of the wheel will then be 1-3 of 16 feet, or 5,33 feet per second. So say those
who have treated of it.

This will appear plainer to a young learner, Theory of maximums explained by
application of an elevator. Fig. 17.
if he will conceive this wheel to be applied to work an elevator, as E, fig.
17, to hoist wheat, and suppose that the buckets, when all full, contain 9
pecks, and will hold the wheel in equilibrio, it is evident it will then hoist
none, because it has no motion; then, in order to obtain motion, we must lessen
the quantity in the buckets, when the wheel will begin to move, and hoist
faster and faster until the quantity is decreased to 4-9, Art. 34.
or 4 pecks, and then, by the theory, the velocity of the machine will be 1-3
of the greatest velocity, when it will hoist the greatest quantity possible in
a given time: for if we lessen the quantity in the buckets below 4 pecks, the
quantity hoisted in any give^ time will be lessened.

This is the theory established, for demonstration of which, see Martin's
Philosophy, vol. 1, page 185-187.

Art. 35. Old Theory investigated.
IN order to investigate this theory, Investigation of the old theory.
and the better to understand what has been said, let us consider as follows,
viz.

1. That the velocity of spouting water, under 4 feet head, is 16 feet per
second, nearly.

2. The section or area of the gate drawn, in feet, multiplied by the height of
the head in feet, gives the cubic feet in the whole column, which multiplied by
62,5 (the weight of a cubic foot of water) gives the weight or force of the
whole column pressing on the wheel.

3. That the radius of the wheel, multiplied by the force, and that product
divided by the radius of the axle, gives the weight that will hold the wheel in
equilibrio.

4. That the absolute velocity of the wheel, subtracted from the absolute
velocity of the water, leaves the relative velocity with which the water
strikes the wheel in motion.

5. That as the radius of the wheel is to the radius of the axle, so is the
velocity of the wheel to the velocity of the weight hoisted on the axle.

6. That the effects of spouting fluids are as the squares of their velocities
(see art. 45, law 6) but the instant force of striking fluids, Art. 35.
are as their velocities simply. See art. 8.

7. That the weight hoisted, multiplied into its perpendicular ascent, gives
the effect.

8. That the weight of water expended, multiplied into its perpendicular
descent, gives the power used per second.

On these pinciples I have calculated the following scale; first supposing the
force of striking fluids to be as the square of their striking or relative
velocity, which brings out the maximum agreeably to the old theory, viz.

When the load, at equilibrio, is 2000, then the maximum load is 888,7=4/9; of
2000, when the effect is at its greatest, viz. 591,98, as appears in the 6th
column, and then the velocity of the wheel is 5,333 feet per second, equal to
1-3 of 16, the velocity of the water, as appears in the 5th line of the scale:
but as there is an evident error in the first principle of this theory, Old
theory doubted.
by counting the instant force of the water on the wheel to be as the square of
its striking velocity, therefore it cannot be true. See art. 41.

I then calculate upon this principle, viz. That the instant force of striking
fluids is as their velocity simply, then the load that the machine will carry,
with its different velocities, will be as the velocity simply, as appears in
the 7th column, and the load, at a maximum, is 1000lb= of 2000, the load at
equilibrio, when the velocity of the wheel is 8 feet= of 16 the velocity of the
water per second; and then the effect is at its greatest, as shown in the 8th
column, viz. 1000, as appears in the 4th line of the scale.

This I call the new theory, New theory.
(because I found that William Waring had also, about the same time,
established it, see art. 38) viz. That when any machine is charged with just
1-2 of the load that will hold it in equilibrio, Art. 35.
its velocity will be just 1-2 of the natural velocity of the moving power, and
then its effect will be at a maximum, or greatest possible.

This appears to be the way by which this great error has been so long
overlooked by philosophers, and which has rendered the theory of no use in
practice, but led many into expensive errors, thereby bringing great discredit
upon philosophy.

For demonstrations of the old theory, see Martin's Phil. vol. I, page 185 --
187.

A SCALE FOR DETERMINING THE MAXIMUM CHARGE AND VELOCITY OF UNDERSHOT MILLS.
Velocity of the wheel per second, by supposition. Velocity with which the
water strikes the wheel in motion, or relative velocity. Velocity of the weight
ascending. Weight hoisted, according to the old theory. Effect, by the old
theory Weight hoisted, according to new theory. Effect, by new theory. Ratio of
the power and effect at a maximum, the power being 4000 in each case. feet.
feet. feet. feet. lbs. feet. lbs. feet. Radius of the wheel 8 16 0 2 0 0
Maximum by new theory* Radius of the axle 1 12 4 1, 5 125 187, 5 500 750
Section of the gate in square feet 1 10 6 1, 25 281 351 750 937 8 8 1 500 500
1000 1000 4 to 1 Height of the head of water 4 6 10,75 781,2 585,9 1250 937
Velocity of the water per second 16 5,333 10,666,666 888,7 591,98 1332 878 10
to 1,47 Weight of the column of water pressing on the wheel 1bs. 5 11,625 945
590,6 1375 859 Maximum by old theory 250 4 12,5 1125 562,5 1500 750 The weight
that holds the wheel in equilibrio 2000 2 14,25 1531 382,7 1750 375 0 16 0 2000
2000

Art. 36. New Theory doubted.
BUT although I know that the velocity of the wheel, by this new theory is much
nearer practice than the old, (though rather slow) yet I am led to doubt the
theory, for the following reasons, viz.

When I consider that there are 16 cubic feet of water, equal 1000lbs. expended
in a second, which multiplied by its perpendicular descent, 4 feet, produces
the power 4000. The ratio of the power and effect by the old theory is as 10 to
1,47, and by the new as 4 to 1; as appears in the 9th column of the scale;
which is a proof that the old theory is a great error, and sufficient cause of
doubt that there is yet some error in the new. And as the subject is of the
greatest consequence in practical mechanics. Therefore I proceed, to endeavor
to discover a true theory, and will show my work in order, that if I establish
a theory it may be the easier understood, if right; or detected, if wrong.

Attempts made to discover a true Theory.
In the search, I constructed Fig 18,pl. II. which represents a simple wheel
with a rope passing over it and the weight P, of 100 lbs. at one end to act by
its gravity, as a power to produce effects, by hoisting the weight w at the
other end.

This seems to be on the principles of the lever, and overshot wheel; but with
this exception, that the quantity of descending matter, acting as power, will
still be the same, although the velocity will be accelerated, whereas in
overshot wheels, the power on the wheel is inversely, as the velocity of the
wheel.

Here we must consider, 1. That the perpendicular descent of power P, (...)
second, Art. 36.
multiplied into its weight, shows the ^^wer. 2. That the weight w when
multiplied into perpendicular ascent gives the effect. 3. That the natural
velocity of the falling bo^ P, is 16 feet the first second, and the distance
has to fall 16 feet. 4. That we do suppose that the weight w, or ^istance will
occupy its proportional part of the velocity. That is if w be=1/2 P, the
velocity ^^th which P will then descend, will be 16=8 (...) per second. 5. If w
be = P, there can be no velocity, consequently no effect; and if w = o then P
will de^nd 16 feet in a second, but produces no effect; because, the power,
although 1600 per second, applied to hoist nothing.
Upon these principles I have calculated the following scale.

A SCALE for determining the Maximum Charge, Velocity of 100lbs. descending by
its Gravity.
Power applied on the wheel. Natural velocity in feet per second, of the power
falling freely. Weight w hoisted, or the resistan^ in lbs. Proportion of the
velocity occupied by the resistance or weight w hoisted. Proportion of velocity
left in motion. which is the velocity of both power and weight. Effect, which
is the weight w multiplied into its ascent per second. Power, which is the
power?, multiplied into its descent per second. Ratio of the power and effect.
lb. 100 feet. 16 lb. feet. feet. 1600 10:0 1,16 15, 84 15,84 1584 10:,01 10 1,6
14, 4 144 1440 10:1 20 3,2 12, 8 256 1280 10:2 30 4,8 11, 2 336 1120 10:3 40
6,4 9, 6 384 960 10:4 50,8 8, 400 800 10:5 maximum by new th^^ 60 9,6 6, 4 384
640 10:6 70 11,2 4, 8 336 480 10:7 80 12,8 3, 2 256 320 10:8 90 14,4 1, 6 144
160 10:9 99 15, 84,16 15,8 16 10:9,9 100 16, 0, 0 0

By this scale it appears, Art. 36.
that when the weight w is=50= P the power; the effect is at a maximum, viz.
400, as appears in the 6th column, when the velocity is half the natural
velocity, viz. 8 feet per second; and then the ratio of the power to the effect
is as 10 to 5, as appears in the 8th line.

By this scale it appears, Theory for the motion and load of engines moved by a
power whose motion is equably accelerated.
that all engines that are moved by one constant power, which is equably
accelerated in their velocity (if any such there be) as appears to be the case
here must be charged with weight or resistance equal to half the moving power,
in order to produce the greatest effect in a given time; but if time be not
regarded, then the greater the charge, so as to leave any velocity, the greater
the effect, as appears by the 8th column. So that it appears, that an overshot
wheel, if it be made immensely capacious, and to move very slow, may produce
effects in the ratio of 9,9 to 10 of the power.

Art. 37. Scale of Experiments.
THE following scale of actual experiments were made to prove whether the
resistance occupies its proportion of the velocity, in order that I might judge
whether the foregoing scale was founded on true principles; the experiments
were not very accurately performed, but often repeated, and proved always
nearly the same. See plate II, fig. 18.

A SCALE OF EXPERIMENTS.
Power applied on the wheel, in pounds. Distance it had to descend, in feet.
Weight, in pounds, hoisted the whole distance. Equal parts of time (each being
2 beats of a watch) in which the weight was hoisted the whole distance.
Distance, in feet, that the weight moved in 1 of the equal parts of time, found
by dividing 40, the whole distance, by the number of equal parts of time taken
up in the ascent. Effect, found by multiplying the weight w into the velocity
or distance ascended in one of those parts of time. Power, found by multiplying
the weight of P into its descent in one of those parts of time Ratio of the
power and effect. Effect, supposing it to be as the square of the velocity of
the weight, found by multiplying the weight into the square of the velocity. 7
40 7 0 0 6 20 2x6 12 14 10:8,5 24 5 15,5 2, 6x5 13 18,2 10:7,1 33, 8 4 12 3,
33x4 13,32 23,31 10:5,7 44, 35 3,5 10 4x3, 5 14 28 10:5, max. new theor^ 3 9 4,
44x3 13,32 31,08 10:4,2 59, 14 2 6, 5 6x2 12 42 10:2,8 72 maximum. 1 6 6,6x1
6,6 46,2 10:1,4 33,56 0 5 8 0 56

By this scale it appears, Art. 37.
that when the power P falls freely without any load, it descends 40 feet in
five equal parts of time, but when charged with 3,5lbs.=1/2 P, which was 7lbs.
it then took up 10 of those parts of time to descend the same distance; which
seems to show, that the charge occupies its proportional part of the whole
velocity, which was wanted to be known, and the maximum appear as in the last
scale. Since writing the above, I have seen Atwood's Treatise on Motion,
wherein he gives a set of accurate experiments, to prove (beyond doubt) that
the conclusion I have drawn is right, viz. That the charge occupies its
proportional part of the whole velocity. See the American Encyclopedia, Vol. X.
p. 786.
It also shows, that the effect is not as the weight multiplied into the square
of its ascending velocity, this being the measure of the effect that would be
produced by the stroke on a non-elastic body.

This experiment partly confirmed me in what I have called the New Theory; but
still doubting, and after I had formed the foregoing tables, I called on the
late ingenius and worthy friend, William Waring, teacher in the Friends'
Academy, Philadelphia, for his assistance. He told me he had discovered the
error in the old theory, and corrected it in a paper which he had laid before
the Philosophical Society of Philadelphia, wherein he had shown that the
velocity of the undershot water-wheel, to produce a maximum effect, must be
just one half the velocity of the water.

Art. 38. William Waring's Theory.
The following are extracts from the above mentioned paper, William waring's
theory.
published in the third volume of the Transactions of the American
Philosophical Society, held at Philadelphia, p. 144.

After his learned and modest introduction, in which he shows the necessity of
correcting so great an error as the old theory, he begins with these words, viz.

"But, Art. 38.
to come to the point, I would just promise these

DEFINITIONS.
If a stream of water impinge against a wheel is motion, there are three
different velocities to be considered appertaining thereto, viz.

First, Definition.
The absolute velocity of the water.

Second, The absolute velocity of the wheel.

Third, The relative velocity of the water to that of the wheel; i.e. the
difference of the absolute velocities, or the velocity with which the water
overtakes or strikes the wheel.

Now the mistake consists in supposing the momentum, or force of the water
against the wheel, to be in the duplicate ratio of the relative velocity:
Whereas,

PROP. I.
The force of an invariable stream, impinging against a mill-wheel in motion,
is in the simple proportion of the relative velocity.

For, Demonstration.
if the relative velocity of a fluid against (...) single plain, be varied,
either by the motion (...) the plain, or of the fluid from a given aperture, or
both, then the number of particles acting on the plain, in a given time, and
likewise the momentum of each particle being respectively as the relative
velocity, the force, on both these accounts, must be in the duplicate ratio of
the relative velocity, agreeable to the common theory with respect to this
single plain; but the number of these plains, ^wowrd^ parts of the wheel, acted
on (...) a given time, will be as the velocity of the wheel or inversely as the
relative velocity; therefore the moving force of the wheel must be as the
simple ratio of the relative velocity Q. E. D.

Or the proposition is manifest from this consideration, that while the stream
is invariable, whatever be the velocity of the wheel, the same number of
particles, or quantity of the fluid, must strike it somewhere or other in a
given time; consequently, the variation of the force is only on account of the
varied impingent velocity of the same body, occasioned by a change of motion in
the wheel; that is, the momentum is as the relative velocity.

Now this true principle, substituted for the erroneous one in use, will bring
the theory to agree remarkably with the notable experiments of the ingenius
Smeaton, published in the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London, for the year 1751, vol. ^I; for which the honorary annual medal was
adjudged by the society, and presented to the author by their president.

A^ instance or two of the importance of this correction, may be adduced, as
follows:

PROP. II.
The velocity of a wheel, moved by the impact of a stream, must be half the
velocity of the fluid, to produce the greatest effect possible.

V=the velocity, M=the momentum, of the fluid.

v=the velocity, P=the power, of the wheel.

Then V -- v=their relative velocity, by definition 3d.

And, as V:V -- v::M:M / VxV -- v= P, (Prop. I) whichXv=P, v=M / VxV / Vv --
v2=a maximum; hence Vv -- v2=a maximum and its fluction (v being a variable
quantity=Vv -- 2vv=o; therefore=1/2V; that is, the velocity of the wheel=half
that of the fluid, at the place of impact, when the effect is maximum, Q. E. D.

The usual theory gives v=1/3V, Art. 38.
where the ^^ror is not less than one sixth of the true velocity!"

WM. WARING.
Philadelphia, 7th 9th mo. 1790. Note, Part omitted.
I omit quoting prop. III. as it is in algebra, and refers to a figure, because
I am not wr^ing so particularly to men of science, as to practical Mechanics.



Art. 39. Extract from a further paper, read in the philosophical society,
April 5th, 1793.
"Since the philosophical society were pleased favor my crude observations on
the theory mills, Further extracts from W. Waring's publication concerning his
new theory.
with a publication in their transaction (...) am apprehensive some part
thereof may be ^^^^plied, it being therein demonstrated, that '(...) force of
an invariable stream, impinging against mill-wheel in motion, is in the simple
direct ratio of the relative velocity.' Some may suppose that the effect
produced, should be in the (...) proportion, and either fall into an error, or
^^^ing by experiment, the effect to be as the sq^^^ of the velocity, conclude
the new theory to be (...) well founded; I therefore wish there had been little
added, to prevent such misapplication, ^^^^fore the society had been troubled
with the ^^^ing of my paper on that subject: perhaps something like the
following.

The maximum effect of an undershot wh^^ produced by a given quantity of water,
The effect of under shot wheels as the squares of the velocities of the water.
in a ^^en time, is in the duplicate ratio, of the velocity of the water; for
the effect must be as the imetus acting on the wheel, multiplied into the
velocity thereof: but this impetus is demonstrate to be simply as the relative
velocity, prop and the velocity of the wheel, Art. 39.
producing a maximum, being half of the water by prop. II. is likewise as the
velocity of the water; hence the power acting on the wheel, multiplied into the
velocity of the wheel, or the effect produced, must be in the duplicate ratio
of the velocity of the water. Q. E. D.

COROL. Hence the effect of a given quantity of water, in a given time, will be
as the height of the head, because this height is as the square of the
velocity. This also agrees with experiment.

If the force, acting on the wheel, were in duplicate ratio of the water's
velocity, as usually asserted, then the effect would be as the cube thereof,
when the quantity of water and time are given, which is contrary to the result
of experiment."

Art. 40. Waring's Theory doubted.
From the time I first called on William Waring, W. Waring's theory doubted.
until I read his publication on the subject (after his death) I had rested
partly satisfied, with the new theory, as I have called it, with respect to the
velocity of the wheel, at least; but finding that he had not determined the
charge, as well as the velocity, by which we might have compared the ratio of
the power and the effect produced, It not agreeing fully with practice.
and that he had assigned reasons somewhat different for the error; and having
found the motion to be rather too slow to agree with practice, I began to
suspect the whole, and resumed the search for a true theory, thinking that
perhaps no person had ever yet considered every thing that affects the
calculation, I therefore premised the following

POSTULATES. Art. 40.

1. A given quantity of perfect elastic or (...) matter, impinging on a fixed
obstacle, its e^^tive force is as the squares of its different vel^ties,
although its instant force may be as its ve^ties simply, by annotation, art. 8.
Because the distance it will recede after the stroke through any (...) medium,
will be as the squares of its impinging velocities.


2. An equal quantity of elastic matter, imp^ing on a fixed obstacle with a
double velocity, reduces a quadruple effect, art. 8; i.e. their (...) are as
the squares of their velocities Consequently,

3. A double quantity of said matter, impin^^ with a double velocity, produces
an octuble (...) or their effects are as the cubes of their velocity art. 47
and 67.

4. If the impinging matter be non-elastic, as fluids, then the instant force
will be but in each case, but the ratio will be the same in case.

5. A double velocity, through a given ^^ture, gives a double quantity to
strike the ^cle or wheel, therefore the effects, by post^^^ 3, will be as the
cubes of the velocity. See (...) 47.

6. But a double relative velocity cannot incr^ the quantity that is to act on
the wheel, therefore the effect can only be as the square of the velocity, by
postulate 2.

7. Although the instant force and effect striking fluids, on fixed obstacles,
are only as (...) simple velocities, yet their effects, on mo^^ wheels, are as
the squares of their velocities; cause, 1, a double striking velocity gives a
do^ instant force, which bears a double load on wheel; and 2, a double velocity
moves the (...) a double distance in an equal time, Art. 40.
and a double load moved a double distance, is a quadruple effect.

Art: 41. Search for a true Theory, commenced on a new Plan.
IT appears, that we have applied wrong principles in our search after a true
theory of the maximum velocity and load of undershot water-wheels, or other
engines moved by a constant power, that does not increase or decrease in
quantity on the engine, as on an overshot water-wheel, as the velocity varies.

Let us suppose water to issue from under a head of 16 feet, on an undershot
water-wheel; then, if the wheel moves freely with the water, its velocity will
be 32, 4 feet per second; but will bear no load.

Again, suppose we load it, so as to reduce its motion to be equal the velocity
of water spouting from under 15 feet; it appears evident that the load will
then be just equal to that 1 foot of the head, the velocity of which is
checked; and this load multiplied into the velocity of the wheel, viz. 31,
34x1=31,34 for the effect.

This appears to be the true principle, from which we must seek the maximum
velocity and load, for such engines as are moved by one constant power; and on
this principle I have calculated the following scale.

A SCALE FOR DETERMINING THE TRUE MAXIMUM VELOCITY AND LOAD FOR UNDERSHOT
WHEELS.
Total head of water in action. Head of water (...) unbalanced to give motion
to the wheel. Velocity of the wheel in feet per second, being (...) the
velocity of the water from under the head left unbalanced. Load of the wheel
being equal that part of the total head, the motion of which is checked. Effect
per second, being the velocity of the wheel, multiplied by the lo^d. feet.
feet. feet. Maximum motion (...) load. 16 16 32,4 0 0 15 31,34 1, 3^,34 14 30,2
2, 60,4 12 28, 4 112 10 25,54 6 153,24 8 22,8 8 182,4 7 21,43 9 192,87 6 19,84
10 198,4 5,66 19,27 10,33 198,95 5,33 18,71 10,66 199,44 5 18, 11 198 4 16,2 12
194,4 3 14 13 172 2 11,4 14 159,6 1 8,1 15 120, 0 0 16 0

In this scale, Art. 41.
let us suppose the aperture of the gate to be a square foot; then the greatest
load that will balance the head, will be 16 cubic feet of water, and the
different loads will be shown in cubic feet of water.

And then it appears, by this scale, that when the wheel is loaded with 10,66
cubic feet of water, just 2-3 of the greatest load, its velocity will be 18,71
feet per second, just,577 parts of the velocity of the water, and the effect
produced is at a maximum, or the greatest possible, viz. 199,44.

To make this more plain, Fig. 19.
let us suppose A B, plate II, fig. 19, to be a fall of water 16 feet, which we
wish to apply to produce the greatest effect possible, by hoisting water on its
side opposite to the power applied; first, on the undershot principle, where
the water acts by its impulse only. Now let us suppose the water to strike the
wheel at I, then, if we let the wheel move freely without any load, it will
move with the velocity of the water, viz. 32,4 feet per second, but will
produce no effect, if the water issue at C; although there be 32,4 cubic feet
of water expended, under 16 feet perpendicular descent. Let the weight of a
cubic foot of water be represented by unity or 1, for ease in counting; then
32,4x16 will show the power expended, per second, viz. 518,4; and the water it
hoists multiplied into its perpendicular ascent, or height hoisted, will show
the effect. Then, in order to obtain effect from the power, we load the wheel;
the simplest way of doing which, is, to cause the tube of water C D to act on
the back of the bucket at I; then, if CD be equal to AB, the wheel will be held
in equilibrio; this is the greatest load, and the whole of the fall AB is
balanced, and no part left to give the wheel velocity; therefore the effect=0.
But if we make C D=12 feet of A B, then from 4 to A=4 feet, is left unbalanced,
to give velocity to the wheel, which is now loaded with 12 feet, and exactly
balanced by 12 on the other side, Art. 41.
and perfectly free to move either way by the least for (...) applied:
Therefore it is evident, that the (...) pressure or force of 4 feet of A B will
act to (...) velocity to the wheel, and, as there is no re^^^ance to oppose the
pressure of these 4 feet, (...) velocity will be the same that water will (...)
from under 4 feet head, viz. 16,2 feet per second which is shown by the
horizontal line 4=16 (...) and the perpendicular line 12=12 represents (...)
load of the wheel; the rectangle or product of the (...) two lines, form a
parallelogram, the area of (...) is a true representation of the effect, viz.
the (...) 12 multiplied into 16,2 the distance it moves (...) second=194,4, the
effect. In like manner we (...) try the effect of different loads; the less the
(...) the greater will be the velocity. The horizon lines all show the velocity
of the wheel, produ^^ by the respective heads left unbalanced, and the
perpendicular lines show the load on the wheel; (...) we find that when the
load is 10,66= 16,(...) load at equilibrio, the velocity of the wheel (...) be
18,71 feet per second; which is 577/1000 parts, (...) a little less than 6
tenths, or 2/4 the velocity the water, Power and effect as 3 to 2 on overshot
wheels.
and the effect is 199,44, the maximum or greatest possible; and if the
aperture of (...) gate be 1 foot, the quantity will be 18,71 (...) feet per
second. The power being 18,71 (...) feet expended per second, multiplied by 16
(...) the perpendicular descent, produces 299,36, (...) the ratio of the power
and effect being 10 to 6 5/(...) as 3: 2; but this is supposing none of the
(...) lost by non-elasticity.

This may appear plainer, if we suppose the water to descend the tube A B, and,
by its pressure to raise the water in the tube C D; now it is ^^^dent, that if
we raise the water to D, we (...) no velocity, therefore effect=o. Then again,
we open the gate at C, we have 32,4 feet per second velocity, but because we do
not hoist (...) water any distance, Art. 41.
effect=o. Therefore the maximum is somewhere between C and D. Then suppose we
open gates of 1 foot area, at different heights, the velocity will show the
quantity of cubic feet raised; which multiplied by the perpendicular height of
the gate from C, or height raised, gives the effect as before, and the maximum
as before. But here we must consider, that in both these cases, the water acts
as a perfect definite quantity, which will produce effects equal to elastic
bodies, or equal to its gravity (see art.59) which is impracticable in
practice: Whereas when it acts by percussion only, it communicates only half of
its original force, on account of its non-elasticity, the other half being
spent in splashing about (see art. 8); therefore the true effect will be
33/100,(a little more than 1-3) of the moving power; because nearly 1-3 is lost
to obtain velocity, and half of the remaining 2-3 is lost by non-elasticity.
These are the reasons, why the effects produced by an undershot wheel is only
half of that produced by an overshot wheel, the perpendicular descent and
quantity of water being equal. And this agrees with Smeaton's experiments (see
art.68); but if we suppose the velocity of the wheel to be 1-3 that of the
water-10,8, and the load to be 4-9 of 16, the greatest load at equilibrio;
which is-7, 111, as by old theory, then the effect will be 10,8x4-9 of 16-76,79
for the effect, which is quite too little, the moving power being 32,4 cubic
feet of water, multiplied by 16 feet descent-518,4, the effect by this theory
being less than, 15/100 of the power, about half equal to the effect by
experiment, which effect is set on the outside of the dotted circle in the
fig.(19.) The dotted lines join the corner of the parallelograms, formed by the
lines that represent the loads and velocities, in each experiment or
supposition, the areas of which truly represent the effect, and the dotted line
A a d x, meeting the perpendicular line x E in the point x, Art. 41.
formi^^ the parallelogram ABCx, truly represents the power=518,4.

Again, if we suppose the wheel to move w^ half the velocity of the water, viz.
16,2 feet (...) second, and be loaded with half the greatest (...)=8, according
to Waring's theory, then the effect will be 16,2x8=129,6 for the effect, abo^^
23/100 of the power, which is still less than by experiment. All this seems to
confirm the maximum brought out on the new principles.

But, if we suppose according to the new principle, that, when the wheel moves
with the velocity of 16,2 feet per second, which is the velocity of a 4 feet
head, that it will then bear as load the remaining 12 feet, then the effect
(...) be 16,2x12=194,4, which nearly agrees wi^^ practice: but as most mills in
practice move ^^ter, rather than slower, than what I call the (...) maximum,
shows it to be nearest the truth, (...) true maximum velocity being, 577 of the
velocity of the water, and the mills in practice movi^ with 2-3, and generally
quicker. The reason why the wheel hears so great a load at a maximum, (...)
pears to be as follows, viz.

A 16 feet head of water over a gate of 1 foot, issues 32,4 cubic (...) water
in a second, to strike the wheel in the same time, that a heavy (...) will take
up in falling through the height of the head. Now if 16 (...) feet of elastic
matter, was to fall 16 feet, and strike an elastic (...) would rise by the
force of the stroke, to the height from whence it (...) or, in other words, it
will have force sufficient, to bear a load of 16 ^^bic feet.

Again, if 32 cubic feet of non-elastic matter, moving with the same velocity,
(with which the 16 feet of elastic matter struck the plain) strike a (...) in
the same time, although it communicate only half the force, that (...) it
motion; yet, because there is a double quantity striking in the (...) time, the
effects will be equal, that is, it will bear a load of 16 cubic (...) or the
whole column to hold it in equilibrio.

Again, to check the whole velocity, requires the whole column, (...) produces
the velocity, consequently, to check any part of the velocity will require such
a part of the column that produces the part (...) and we find by art. 41, that,
to check the velocity of the wheel, (...),577 of the velocity of the water, it
requires 2-3 of the whole (...) and this is the maximum load. When the velocity
of the wheel, is (...) plied by 2-3 of the column, it produces the effect,
which will be to (...) power, as 38 to 100; or as 3,8 to 10, somewhat more than
1-3, and (...) friction and resistance of the air may reduce it to 1-3.




This scale also establishes a true maximum charge for an overshot wheel, Art.
41.
when the case is such, Maximum charge of overshot wheels, supposing the same
quantity to be always in the buckets.
that the power or quantity of water on the wheel at once, is always the same,
even although the velocity vary, which would be the case, if the buckets were
kept always full: for, suppose the water to be shot into the wheel at a, and by
its gravity to raise the whole water again on the opposite side; then, as soon
as the water rises in the wheel to d, it is evident that the wheel will stop,
and effect=o; therefore we must let the water out of the wheel, before it rises
to (...), which will be in effect to loose part of the power to obtain
velocity. If the buckets both descending and ascending, carry a column of water
1 foot square, then the velocity of the wheel will show the quantity hoisted as
before, which, multiplied by the perpendicular ascent, shows the effect, and
the quantity expended, multiplied by the perpendicular descent shows the power;
and we find, that when the wheel is loaded with 2-3 of the power, the effect
will be at a maximum, i. e. the whole of the water is hoisted, 2-3 of its whole
descent, or 2-3 of the water the whole of the descent, therefore the ratio of
the power to the effect is as 3 to 2, double to the effect of an undershot
wheel: but this is, supposing the quantity in the buckets to be always the
same; where^^, in overshot wheels, the quantity in the buckets is universally
as the velocity of the wheel, i.e. the slower the motion of the wheel, the
greater the quantity in the buckets, and the greater the velocity the less the
quantity: but, ^gain, as we are obliged to let the overshot wheel love with a
considerable velocity, in order to obtain a steady, regular motion to the mill,
we will find this charge to be always nearly right; hence I deduce the
following theory.

THEORY. Art. 41. (...)

This scale seems to have shown, A true theory deduced.


1. That when an undershot mill moves (...),577 or nearly,6 of the velocity of
the wa^^ it will then bear a charge, equal to 2-3 of the (...) that will hold
the wheel in equilibrio, and (...) the effect will be at a maximum. The ratio
(...) the power to the effect will be as 3 to 1, nearly.

2. That, when an overshot wheel is charg^ with 2-3 of the weight of the water
acting up the wheel, then the effect will be at a maximum i. e. the greatest
effect, that can be produced said power in a given time, and the ratio of the
power to the effect will be as 3 to 2, nearly.

3. That 1-3 of the power is necessarily lost obtain velocity, or to overcome
the visinertia the matter, and this will hold true with all (...) chinery that
requires velocity as well as pow^^. This I believe to be the true theory of
wat^^ mills, for the following reasons, viz.

1. The theory is deduced from original reas^ing, without depending much on
calculation.

2. It agrees better than any other theory with the ingenious Smeaton's
experiments.

3. It agrees best with real practice, from (...) best of my information.

Yet I do not wish any person to receive it ^^plicitly, without first informing
himself, wheth^ it be well founded, and agrees with practice^ for this reason I
have quoted said Smeaton's experiments at full length, in this work, that
reader may compare them with the theory.

Art. 42.
Theorem for finding the Maximum Charge for (...) shot Wheels.
As the square of the velocity of the water (...) wheel empty, is to the height
of the (...) or pressure, Art. 42.
which produced that velocity, so is the square of the velocity of the wheel,
to the head, pressure, or force, which will produce the velocity; and this
pressure, deducted from the whole pressure or force, will leave the load moved
by the wheel, on its periphery or verge, which load, multiplied by the velocity
of the wheel, shows the effect.

PROBLEM.
Let V-32,4, the velocity of the water or wheel, P-16, the pressure, force or
load, at equilibrio,

Art. 42. Theorem for finding the Velocity of the Wheel, when we have the
Velocity of the Water, Load at Equilibrio, and Load on the Wheel given.
As the square root of the whole pressure, force or load at equilibrio, is to
the velocity of the water, so is the square root of the difference, between the
load on the wheel, and the load at equilibrio, to the velocity of the wheel.

PROBLEM.
Let V=velocity of the water-32,4,

Now, if we seek for the maximum, by eith^^ of these theorems, it will be found
as in the (...) fig. 19.

Perhaps here may now appear the true (...) of the error of the old theory,
art. 35, by (...) posing the load on the wheel, to be as the squ^^ of the
relative velocity, of the water and when^

And of the error of what I have called the (...) theory, by supposing the load
to be in the simp^ ratio of the relative or striking velocity of the water,
Art. 42.
art. 38; whereas it is to be found by neither of these proportions.

Neither the old nor new theories agree with practice; therefore we may suspect
they are founded on error.

But if, what I call the true theory, should continue to agree with practice,
the practitioner need not care on what it is founded.

Art. 43. Of the Maximum velocity for Overshot Wheels, or those that are moved
by the weight of the Water.
BEFORE I dismiss the subject of maximums, I think it best to consider, whether
this doctrine will apply to the motion of the overshot wheels. It seems to be
the general opinion of those, who consider the matter, that it will not; but,
that the slower the wheel moves, provided it be capacious enough to hold all
the water, without losing any until it be delivered at the bottom of the wheel,
the greater will be the effect, which appears to be the case in theory (see
art. 36); but how far this theory will hold good in practice, is to be
considered. Having met with the ingenious James Smeaton's experiments, where he
shows, that, when the circumference of his little wheel, of 24 inches diameter,
(head 6 inches) moved with about 3,1 feet per second (although the greatest
effect was diminished about 1/20 of the whole) he obtained the best effect,
with a steady, regular motion. Hence he concludes about 3 feet to be the best
velocity for the circumference of overshot mills. See art. 68. I undertook to
compare this theory of his, with the best mills in practice, Art. 43.
and, finding that those of about 17 feet diameter, generally moved about 9
feet per second, Smeaton's opinion of the proper velocity for the circumference
of overshot wheels, does not agree with practice.
being treble the velocity assigned by Smeaton, I began to doubt the theory,
which led (...) to inquire into the principle, that moves an overshot wheel,
and this I found to be a body descending by its gravity, and subject to all the
laws of falling bodies, (art. 9.) or of bodies descending inclined plains, The
principle of the power that moves overshot wheels is that of a falling body.
and curved surfaces (art. 10, 11,) the motion being equably accelerated in the
who^^ of its descent, its velocity being as the square ro^^ of the distance
descended through, and that the diameter of the wheel was distance the water
descended through. Their velocities vary, and will be as the square root of
their diameters.
From thence I concluded that the velocity of the circumference of the overshot
wheels, was, as the square root of their diameters, and of the distance the
water has (...) descend, if it be a breast of pitch-back wheel^ then, taking
Smeaton's experiments, with (...) wheel of 2 feet diameter, for a foundation,
(...) say, As the square root of the diameter of Smeaton's wheel, is to its
maximum velocity, so is the square root of the diameter of any other wheel to
its maximum velocity. Upon these principles I have calculated the following
table; This rule found to agree with practice.
and, having compared it with at least 50 mills in practice found it to agree
so nearly with all the best constructed ones, that I have reason to believe it
is founded on true principles.

If an overshot wheel moves freely without resistance, Their velocities will be
a mean between the least and greatest of a body falling through its diameter.
it will acquire a mean velocity, between that of the water coming on the
wheel, and the greatest velocity it would acquire, by falling freely through
its whole descent: therefore this mean velocity will be greater, than the
velocity of the water coming on the wheel; consequently the backs of the
buckets will overtake the water, and drive a great part of it out of the wheel.
But, the velocity of the water being accelerated by its gravity, overtakes the
wheel, perhaps ha^^ way down, Art. 43.
and presses on the buckets, until it leaves the wheel: Water presses harder on
the lower than upper quarter of the whele.
therefore the water presses harder upon the buckets in the lower, than in the
upper quarter of the wheel. Hence appears the reason why some wheels cast their
water, which is always the case, when the head is not sufficient to give it
velocity enough to enter the buckets. But this depends also much on the
position of the buckets, and direction of the shute into them. It, however,
appears evident that the head of water above the wheel, should be nicely
adjusted, to suit the velocity of the wheel. Here we may consider, that the
head above the wheel acts by percussion, or on the same principles with the
undershot wheel, and, as we have shown (art. 41) that the undershot wheel
should move with nearly 2-3 of the velocity of the water, it appears, that we
should allow a head over the wheel, that will give such velocity to the water,
as will be to that of the wheel as 3 to 2. Thus the whole descent of the water
of a mill-seat should be nicely divided, The whole descent must be nicely
divided between head and fall.
between head and fall, to suit each other, in order to obtain the best effect,
and a steady-moving mill. First find the velocity that the wheel will move
with, by the weight of the water, for any diameter you may suppose you will
take for the wheel, and divide said velocity into two parts; then try if your
head is such, as will cause the water to come on with a velocity of 3 such
parts, making due allowances for the friction of the water, according to the
aperture. See art. 55. Then, if the buckets and direction of the shute be
right, the wheel will receive the water well, and move to the best advantage,
keeping a steady, regular motion when at work, loaded or charged with a
resistance equal to 2-3 of its power, (art. 41. 42.)

A TABLE OF VELOCITIES OF THE CIRCUMFERENCE OF UNDERSHOT WHEELS, Suitable to
their Diameters, or rather to the Fall, after the Water strikes the Wheel; and
of the head of Water above the Wheel, suitable to said Velocities, also of the
Number of Revolutions the Wheel will Perform in a Minute, when rightly charged.
Diameter of the wheel in feet. Velocity of its circumference in feet and
parts, per second. Head of water above the wheel to give velocity as 3 to 2 of
the wheel, in feet and parts. Additional head to overcome the friction of the
aperture, by conjecture only. Total head of water. No. of revolutions of the
wheel per minute. 2 3,1 3 3,78 4 4,38 5 4,88 6 5,36 7 5,8 8 6,19 9 6,57 1,41,1
1,51 14,3 10 6,92 1,64,1 1,74 13, 11 7,24 1,84,1 1,94 12,6 12 7,57 2,,2 2,2 12
13 7,86 2,17,3 2,47 11,54 14 8,19 2,34,4 2,74 11,17 15 8,47 2,49,5 2,99 10,78
16 8,76 2,68,6 3,28 10,4 17 9, 2,8,7 3,5 10,1 18 9,28 3,,8 3, 8 9,8 19 9,5
3,13,9 4,03 9,54 20 9,78 3,34 1, 4,34 9,3 21 10, 3,49 1,05 4,54 9,1 22 10,28
3,76 1,1 4,86 8,9 23 10,5 3,84 1,15 4,99 8,7 24 10,7 4,07 1,2 5,27 8,5 25 10,95
4,2 1,25 5,45 8,3 26 11,16 4,27 1,3 5,57 8,19 27 11,36 4,42 1,35 5,77 8,03 28
11,54 4,56 3,4 5,96 7,93 29 11,78 4,7 1,45 6,15 7,75 30 11,99 4,9 1,5 6,4 7,63

Art. 44. Application of the doctrine of maximums.
THIS doctrine of maximums is very interesting, and is to be met with in many
occurrences through life.

1. It has been shown, that there is a maximum load and velocity for all
engines, to suit the power and velocity of the moving power.

2. There is also a maximum size, velocity and feed for millstones, to suit
the power; and velocity for rolling-screens, and bolting-reels, by which the
greatest work can be done in the best manner, in a given time.

3. A maximum degree of perfection and closeness, with which grain is to be
manufactured into flour, so as to yield the greatest profit by the mill in a
day or week, and this maximum is continually changing with the prices in the
market, so that what would be the greatest profit at one time, will sink money
at another. See art. 113.

4. A maximum weight for mallets, axes, sledges, etc. according to the strength
of those that use them.

A true attention to the principles of maximums, will prevent us from running
into many errors.

CHAPTER XII. HYDRAULICS.
UNDER the head of Hydraulics we shall only consider such parts of this
science, as immediately relate to our purpose, viz. such as m^^lead to the
better understanding of the principle and powers of water, acting on
mill-wheels, (...) conveying water to them.

Art. 45. Of Spouting Fluids.
SPOUTING Fluids observe the following laws:

1. Their velocities and powers, under equal pressures, or equal perpendicular
heights, and equal apertures, are equal in all cases. It makes no difference
whether the water stands perpendicular above the aperture, or incliningly (see
plate III, fig. 22.) providing the perpendicular height be the same; or whether
the quantity be great or small, providing (...) be sufficient to keep up the
fluid to the same height.


2. Their velocities under different pressures or perpendicular heights, are as
the square roots of those pressures or heights; and their perpendicular heights
or pressures, Art. 45.
are as the squares of their velocities. This law is similar to the 4th law of
falling bodies, Foundation of the rule for finding the velocity of water under
any head.
their velocities being as the square root of their spaces passed through; and
by experiment it is known, that water will spout from under a 4 feet head 16,2
feet per second, and from under a 16 feet head, 32,4 feet per second, which is
only double to that of a 4 feet head, although there be a quadruple pressure.
Therefore by this law we can find the velocity of water spouting from under any
given head; for as the square root of 4 equal 2 is to 16,2 its velocity, so is
the square root of 16 equal 4, to 32,4 its velocity. And again, as 16,2
squared, is to 4 its head, so is 32,4 squared, to 16 its head; by which ratio
we can find the head that will produce any velocity.


3. Their quantities expended through equal apertures, in equal times, under
equal pressures, are as their velocities simply. It is evident that a double
velocity will vent a double quantity.


4. Their pressures or heights being the same, their effects are as their
quantities expended. If the pressure be equal, the velocity must be equal; and
it is evident, that double quantity with equal velocity will produce a double
effect.


5. Their quantities expended being the same, their effects are as their
pressure, or height of their head directly. That is, if we suppose 16 cubic
feet of water to issue from under a 4 feet head in a second, and an equal
quantity to issue in the same time from under 16 feet head, then their effects
will be as 4 to 16. But we must note, that the aperture in the last case must
be only half of that in the first, as the velocity will be double.


6. Their instant forces with equal apertures, are as the squares of their
velocities, or as the height of their heads directly.

7. Their effects are as their quantities, multiplied into the squares of their
velocities. This is evident from this consideration, viz. that a quadruple
impulse is required to produce a double velocity, by law 2nd, where the
velocities are as the square roots of their heads; therefore their effects must
be as the squares of their velocities.

DEMONSTRATION. Art. 46. Fig. 26.


LET A F, (plate III, fig. 26) represent a head of water 16 feet high, and
suppose it divided into 4 different heads of 4 feet each, as B C D E; then
suppose we draw a gate of 1 foot square at each head successively, always
sinking the water in the head, so that it will be but 4 feet above the center
of the gate in each case.

Now it is known that the velocity under a 4 feet head, is 16,2 feet per
second; say 16 feet to avoid fractions, which will issue 16 cubic feet of water
per second, and for sake of round numbers, let unity or 1 represent the
quantity of a cubic foot of water; then, by the 7th law the effect will be as
the quantity multiplied by the square of the velocity; that is, 16 multiplied
by 16 is equal to 256, which 1 multiplied by 16, the quantity, is equal to
4096, the effect of each 4 feet head; and 4096 multiplied by 4 is equal to
16384, for the sum of effects, of all the 4 feet heads.

Then as the velocity under a 16 feet head is 32,4 feet, say 32 to (...)
fractions: the gate must be drawn to only half the size, to vend the (...) feet
of water per second as before, (because the velocity is double) (...) find the
effect, 32 multiplied by 32, is equal to 1024; which multiplied 16 the
quantity, gives the effect, 16384, equal the sum of all the 4 feet (...) which
agrees with practice and experience, the best teachers. But (...) effects were
as their velocities simply, then the effect of each (...) head would be, 16
multiplied by 16, equal to 256; which, multiplied is equal to 1024, for the sum
of the effects of all the 4 feet heads: and multiplied by 32 equal to 512, for
the effect of the 16 feet head, which (...) half of the effect of the same head
when divided into 4 parts; which is contrary to both experiment and reason.

Again, Fig. 26.
let us suppose the body A of quantity 16, to be perfectly (...) fall 16 feet
and strike F, a perfect elastic plain, it will (by laws of (...)) strike with a
velocity of 3^ feet per second, and rise 16 feet to (...)

But if it fall only to B, 4 feet, it will strike with 16 feet per (...) rise 4
feet to A again. Here the effect of the 16 feet fall is 4 times the (...) of
the 4 feet fall, because the body rises 4 times the height.

But if we count the effective momentum of their strokes to be as velocities
simply, th^n 16 multiplied by 32 is equal to 512, the momen^^ (...) the 16 feet
fall; and 16 multiplied by 16 is equal to 256; which, (...) by 4, is equal to
1024, for the sum of the momentums of the str^^ (...) feet divided into 4 equal
falls, which is absurd. But if we count (...) momentums to be as the squares of
their velocities, the effects will be equal.

Again, it is evident that whatever impulse or force is required to (...) body
a velocity, the same force or resistance will be required to (...) therefore,
if the impulse be as the square of the velocity produced, (...) or resistance
will be as the squares of the velocity also. But the (...) as the squares of
the velocity produced, which is evident from this (...) ration, Suppose we
place a light body at the gate B, of 4 feet head, and ^^sed with 4 feet of
water; when the gate is drawn it will fly off with (...) ^^^city of 16 feet per
second; and if we increase the head to 16 feet, it (...) off with 32 feet per
second. Then, as the squares of 16 equal to 2^^ the square of 32 equal to 1024,
so is 4 to 16. Q. E. D.

Art. 47
To compare this 7th law with the theory of undershot mills, (...) art. 42,
where it is shown that the power is to the effect as 3 to 1; (...) by the 7th
law, Theory that is established compared with the established laws. And found
to agree.
the quantity shown by the scale, plate II, to be 32,4 multiplied by 1049,76
the square of the velocity, which is equal to 3401, 212 (...) effect of the 16
feet head: then, for the effect of a 4 feet head, with (...) aperture quantity,
by scale, 16,2 multiplied by 262,44, the velocity ^ed, is equal to 425,1528,
the effect of a 4 feet head; here the ratio of effects are as 8 to 1.

Then, by the theory, which shows that an undershot wheel will (...) of the
water that turns it, to the whole height from which it descended 1-3 of 32,4
the quantity, being equal to 10,8 multiplied by 16, perpendicular ascent; which
is equal to 172,8, effect of a 16 feet head; and (...) 16,2 quantity, which is
equal to 5,4 multiplied by 4, perpendicular (...) is equal to 21,6 effect of 4
feet head, by the theory: and here again ^^tio of the effects are as 8 to
(...); and, by 7th law, as 3401,2124, the effect of 16 feet head, is to
425,1528, the effect of 4 feet head,
by the theory. to is 172,8 the effect of 16 feet head, to 21,6 the effect of 4
feet head,

The quantities being equal, their effects are as the height of their head
^^rectly, as by 5th law, and as the squares of their velocities as by 7th (...)
Hence it appears, that the theory agrees with the established laws, (...) take
to be a confirmation that it is well founded.




8. Therefore their effects or powers with (...) Art. 46.
appertures, Art. 47.
are as the cubes of their velocities. The effects of striking fluids with
equal apertures are as the cubes of their velocities, for the following
reasons, viz. 1st, If an equal quantity strike with double velocity, the effect
is quadruple on that account by the 7th law; and a double velocity expends a
double quantity by 3d law; therefore, the effect is amounted to the cube of the
velocity. -- The theory for undershot wheels agrees with this law also.


ASCALE founded on the 3rd, 6th and 7th laws, showing the effects of striking
Fluids, with different Velocities.
Aperture. Multiplied by the Velocity. Is equal the Quantity expended. Which
multiplied by the Square of the velocity, Is equal the Effect. Which is as the
Cube of the velocity. 1 X 1 = 1 X 1 = 1 as 1 1 X 2 = 2 X 4 = 8 as 8 1 X 3 = 3 X
9 = 27 as 27 1 X 4 = 4 X 16 = 64 as 64

9. Their velocity under any head is equal to the velocity that a heavy body
would acquire, in falling from the same height. The falling body is acted on by
the whole force of its own gravity, in the whole of its descent through any
space; and the whole sum of this action that is acquired as it arrives at the
lowest point of its fall, is equal to the pressure of the whole head or
perpendicular height above the issue; therefore their velocities are equal.


10. Their velocity is such under any head or height, as will pass over a
distance equal to twice the height of the head, in a horizontal direction, in
the time that a heavy body falls the distance of the height of the head.

11. Their action and reaction are equal. That is, they re-act back against the
penstock with the same force that it issues against the obstacle it strikes:
this is the principle by which Barker's mill, and all those that are
improvements thereon, moves.


12. They being non-elastic, communicate only half their real force by impulse,
in striking obstacles; but by their gravity produce effects, Art. 47.
equal to elastic or solid bodies. When non-elastic bodies strike an obstacle,
one half of their force is spent in a lateral direction, in changing their
figure, or in splashing about See art. 8.

For want of due consideration or knowledge of this principle, many have been
the errors committed by applying water to act by impulse, when it would have
produced a double effect by its gravity.




Art. 47. Application of the Laws of Motion to Undershot Wheels.
To give a short and comprehensive detail of the ideas, I have collected from
the different authors, and from the result of my own reasoning on the laws of
motion, and of spouting fluids, as they apply. to move undershot mills, I
constructed fig. 44 plate V.

Let us suppose two large wheels, one of 1^ feet, and the other of 24 feet
radius, then the circumference of the largest, will be double that (...) the
smallest: and let A 16, and C 16, be two (...) stocks of water, of 16 feet
head, each.

1. Then, if we open a gate of 1 square foot at, (...) to issue from the
penstock A 16, Laws of motion and spouting fluids applied in practice.
and impinge (...) the small wheel at I, the water being pressed by 4 feet
head, will move 16 feet per second.(we omit fractions) The instant pressure or
force on that gate, being 4 cubic feet of water, it will require a resistance
of 4 cubic feet of water, from the head C 16 to stop it, and hold it in
equilibrio (but we suppose the water cannot escape unless the wheel moves, so
that no force be lost by non-elasticity) Here equal quantities of matter, with
equal velocities, have their momentums equal.

2. Again, suppose we open a gate of 1 square foot at A 16 under 16 feet head,
it will strike the large wheel at k, with velocity 32, its instant force or
pressure being 16 cubic feet of water, it will require 16 cubic feet
resistance, from the head C 16, to stop or balance it. In this case the
pressure or instant force is quadruple, Art. 47.
and so is the resistance, but the velocity only double, to the first case. In
these two cases the forces and resistances being equal quantities, with equal
velocities, their momentums are equal.

3. Again, suppose the head C 16 to be raised to E, 16 feet above 4, and a gate
drawn of a square foot, then the instant pressure on the float I of the small
wheel, will be 4 cubic feet, pressing on of a square foot, and will exactly
balance 4 cubic feet, pressing on 1 square foot, from the head A 16; and the
wheel will be in equilibrio, (supposing the water cannot escape until the wheel
moves as before) although the one has power of velocity 32, and the other only
16 feet per second. Their loads at equilibrio are equal, consequently their
loads at a maximum velocity and charge, will be equal, but their velocities
different.

Then, to try their effects, suppose, first, the wheel to move by the 4 feet
head, its maximum velocity to be half the velocity of the water, which is 16,
and its maximum load to be half its greatest load, which is 4, by Waring's
theory; then the velocity 162 x by the load 42=16, the effect of the 4 feet
head, with 16 cubic feet expended; because the velocity of the water is 16, and
the gate 1 foot.

Again, suppose it to move by the 16 feet head and gate of of a foot; then the
velocity 322X by the load 42=32, the effect, with but 8 cubic feet expended,
because the velocity of the water is 32, and the gate but of a foot.

In this case the instant forces are equal, each being 4; but the one moving a
body only (...) as heavy as the other, moves with velocity 32, and produces
effect 32, while the other, moving with velocity 16, produces effect 16. A
double velocity, with equal instant pressure, produces a double effect, which
seems to be according to the Newtonian theory. And in this sense the momentums
of bodies in motion, Art. 47.
are as th^^ quantities, multiplied into their simple velocities, and this I
call the instant momentums.

But when we consider, that in the above case, it was the quantity of matter
put in motion, (...) water expended, that produced the effect, we find that the
quantity 16, with velocity 16, produced effect 16; while qu. 8, with velocity
32 produced effect 32. Here the effects are as the^^ quantities, multiplied
into the squares of their velocities; and this I call the effective momentums.

Again, if the quantity expended under each head, had been equal, their effects
would have been 16 and 64, which is as the squares of their velocities, 16 and
32.

4. Again, suppose both wheels to be on one shaft, and let a gate of of a
square foot be drawn at 16 C, to strike the wheel at k, the head being 16 feet,
the instant pressure on the gate will be 2 cubic feet of water, which is half
of the 4 feet head with 1 foot gate, from A 4 striking at I; but the 16 feet
head, with instant pressure 2, acting (...) the great wheel, will balance 4
feet on the small one, because the lever is of double length, and the wheels
will be in equilibrio. Then, by Waring's theory, the greatest load of the 16
feet head being 2, its load at a maximum will be 4 and the velocity of the
water being 32, the maximum velocity of the wheel will be 16. Now the velocity
16x1=16, the effect of the 16 feet head, and gate of 1/8 of a foot. The
greatest load of the 4 feet head being 4, its maximum load (...) the velocity
of the water 16, and the velocity of the wheel 8, now 8x2=16, the effect. Here
the effects are equal: and here again the effects are as the instant pressures,
multiplied into their simple velocities; and the resistances that would
instantly stop them, must be equal thereto, in the same ratio.

But when we consider, Art. 47.
that in this case, the 4 feet head expended 16 cubic feet of water, with
velocity 16, and produced effect 16; while the 16 feet head expended only 4
cubic feet of water, with velocity 32, and produced effect 16, we find, that
the effects are as their quantities, multiplied into the squares of their
velocities.

And when we consider, that the gate of of a square foot, with velocity 32,
produced effects equal to the gate of 1 square foot, with velocity 16, it is
evident, that if we make the gates equal, the effects will be as 8 to 1; that
is, the effects of spouting fluids, with equal apertures, are as the cubes of
their velocities; because, their instant forces are as the squares of their
velocities by 6th law.

Art. 48. The Hydrostatic Paradox.
THE pressure of fluids is as their perpendicular heights, without any regard
to their quantity: and their pressure upwards is equal to their pressure
downwards. In short, their pressure is every way equal, at any equal distance
from their surface. To explain which, Hydrostatic paradox explained.
let A B C D, plate III, fig. 22, be a vessel of water of a cubical form, with
a small tube as H, fixed therein; let a hole of the same size of the tube be
made at o, and covered with a piece of pliant leather, nailed thereon, so as to
hold the water. Then fill the vessel with water by the tube H, and it will
press upwards against the leather, and raise it in a unequal form, requiring
just as much weight to press it down, as will be equal to the weight of water
in the tube H. Or if we set a glass tube over the hole at o, and pour water
therein, we will find that the water in the tube o, must be of the same height
of that in tube H, before the leather will subside, even if the tube O be much
larger than H; which shows, that the pressure upwards is equal to the pressure
downwards; because, the water pressed up against the leather with the whole
weight of the water in the tube H. Again, If we fill the vessel by the tube I,
it will rise to the same height in H that it is in I; the pressure being the
same in every part of the vessel as if it had been filled by H; and the
pressure on the bottom of the vessel will be the same, whether the tube H be of
the whole size of the vessel, or only one quarter of an inch diameter. For
suppose H to be 1-4 of an inch diameter, and the whole top of the vessel of
leather as at o, and we pour water down H, it will press the leather up with
such force, that it will require a column of water of the whole size of the
vessel, and height of H, to cause the leather to subside. Q. E. D.

Art. 49.
And again, Suppose we make two holes in the vessel, one close to the bottom,
and the other in the bottom, both of one size, the water will issue with equal
velocity out of each; which may be proved by holding equal vessels under each,
which will be filled in equal time; which shows, that the pressure on the sides
and bottom are equal under equal distances from the surface. And this velocity
will be the same whether the tube be filled by pipe I, or H, or by a tube the
whole size of the vessel, provided the perpendicular height be equal in all
cases. Water may be conveyed to the wheel of a mill any way most convenient.


From what has been said, it appears, that it makes no difference in the power
of water on mill-wheels, whether it be brought on in an open forebay and
perpendicular penstock, (...) down an inclining one, as I C; or under ground in
a close ^^^nk, in any (...) that may best suit the situation and circumstances,
provided that the (...) be large enough to supply the water fast enough to
(...) from sinking.

This pric^^^ (...) has sometimes taken place in undershot mills. (...) against
the bottom of the buckets, thereby destroying or (...). See art. 54.




In a vessel of a cubic form, Art. 48.
whose sides and bottom are equal, the pressure on each side is just half the
pressure on the bottom; therefore the pressure on the bottom and sides, is
equal to (...) times its pressure on the bottom. For demonstration (...) Brita^.


And in this sense fluids may be said to act with three times the force of
solids. Solids act by gravity only, but fluids by gravity and pressure jointly.
Solids act with a force proportional to their quantity of matter; but fluids
act with (...) pressure proportional to their altitude only.

Art. 50.
The weight of a cubic foot of water is found by experience, to be 1000 ounces
avoirdupoise, or 62,5lb. On these principles is founded the following theorem.

THEOREM I.
The area of the base or bottom, Theorem for finding the pressure of the water
on the gate, etc.
or any part of a vessel, of whatever form, multiplied by the greatest
perpendicular height of any part of the fluid, above the center of the base or
bottom, whatever be its position with the horizon, Art. 50.
produces the pressure on the bottom of said vessel.

PROBLEM. I.
Given, the length of the sides of the cubic vessel (fig. 22. pl. III.) 6 feet,
required the pressure on the bottom when full of water.

Then 6x6=36 feet, the area, multiplied by 6, the altitude,=216, the quantity,
or cubic feet of water, pressing on the bottom; which multiplied by
62,5=13500lb. the whole pressure on the bottom.

PROBLEM. II.
Given, the height of a penstock of water 31,5 feet, and its dimensions at
bottom 3 by 3 feet, inside, required the pressure on 3 feet high of one of its
sides.

Then, Great strength required to hold water under high heads.
3x3=9 the area, multiplied by 30 feet, the perpendicular height or head above
its center=270 cubic feet of water pressing, which x62,5=16875lb. the pressure
on one yard square, which shows what great strength is required, to hold the
water under such great heads.

Art. 51. Rule for finding the Velocity of spouting Water.
BY experiments it has been found, that water will spout from under a 4 feet
head, with a velocity equal to 16,2 feet per second, and from under 16 feet
head, with a velocity equal to 32,4 feet per second.

On these experiments, and the 2nd law of spouting fluids, is founded the
following theorem, or general rule for finding the velocity of water under any
given head. Art. 51.


THEOREM II.
As the square root of a 4 feet head (=2) is to 16,2 feet, Rule for finding the
velocity of spouting water.
the velocity of the water, spouting under it, so is the square root of any
other head, to the velocity of the water spouting under it.

PROBLEM. I.
Given, the head of water 16 feet, required the velocity of water spouting
under it.

Then, as the square root of 4(=2) is to 16,2, so is the square root of 16,(=4)
to 32,4, the velocity of the water under the 16 feet head.

PROBLEM II.
Given, a head of water of 11 feet, required the velocity of water spouting
under it.

Then, as 2:16, 2::3, 316:26,73 feet per second, the velocity required.

Art. 52.
FROM the laws of spouting fluids, theorems I. and II. the theory for finding
the maximum charge and velocity of undershot wheels, (art. 42) and the
principle of non-elasticity, is deduced the following theorem for finding the
effect of any gate, drawn under any given head, upon an undershot water-wheel.

THEOREM III. Art. 52.

Find, Rule for finding the effect of any gate, drawn under any head on an
undershot wheel.
by theorem I. (art. 50) the instantaneous pressure of the water, which is the
load at equilibrio, and thereof is the maximum load, which, multiplied by,577
of the velocity of the water, under the given head, (found by theo. II.)
produces the effect.

PROBLEM.
Given, the head 16 feet, gate 4 feet wide, 25 of a foot drawn, required the
effect on an undershot wheel, per second. The measure of the effect to be the
quantity, multiplied into its distance moved, (velocity) or into its
perpendicular ascent.

Then, by theorem I. (art. 50) 4X,25=1 square foot, the area of the gate x16=16
the cubic feet pressing; but, for the sake of round numbers, we call each cubic
foot 1, and although 32,4 cubic feet strike the wheel per second, yet, on
account of non-elasticity, only 16 cubic feet is the load at equilibrio, and of
16 is 10,666, the maximum load.

Then, by theorem II. the velocity is 32, 4,,577 of which is=18,71, the maximum
velocity of the wheel X 10,66, the load=199,4, the effect.

This agrees with Smeaton's observations, where he says, (art. 67) "It is
somewhat remarkable, that though the velocity of the wheel, in relation to the
velocity of the water, turn out to be more than 1/3, yet the impulse of the
water, in case of the maximum, is more than double of what is assigned by
theory; that is, instead of 4/8; of the column, it is nearly equal to the whole
column." Hence I conclude, that non-elasticity does not operate so much against
this application, as to reduce the load to be less than. And when we consider,
that 32,4 cubic feet of water, or a column 32,4 feet long, strike the wheel
while it moves only 18,71 feet, the velocity of the wheel being to the velocity
of the water as 577 to 1000. May not this be the reason why the load is just
2/3 of the head, which brings the effect to be just,38 (a little more than 1/3
of the power.) This I admit, because it agrees with experiment, although it be
difficult to assign the true reason thereof. See annotation, art. 42.

Therefore,577 the velocity of the water=18,71, multiplied by 2/3 of 16, the
whole column, or instantaneous pressure, pressing on the wheel -- art. 50 --
which is 10,66, produces 199,4, the effect. This appears to be the true effect,
and if so the true theorem will be as follows, viz.

THEOREM.
Find, by theorem I. art. 50, the instantaneous pressure of the water, and take
for the maximum load; multiply by,577 of the velocity of the water -- which is
the velocity of the wheel -- and the product will be the effect.

Then 16 cubic feet, the column, multiplied by 2/3=10,66, the load, which,
multiplied by 18,71, the velocity of the wheel, produces 199,4, for the effect;
and if we try different heads and different apertures, we find the effects to
bear the ratio to each other, that is agreeable to the laws of spouting fluids.

Art. 53. Water applied on Wheels to act by Gravity.
BUT when fluids are applied to act on wheels to produce effects by their
gravity, they act on very different principles, producing double effects, to
what they do by percussion, and then their powers are directly as their
quantity or weight, Art. 53.
multiplied into their perpendicular descent.

DEMONSTRATION
Let fig. 19, Fig. 19.
plate III. be a lever, turning on its center or fulcrum A. Let the long arm A
B represent the perpendicular descent, Demonstration that the power of water on
overshot wheels, is as the quantity, multiplied into their diameters or
perpendicular descent.
16 feet, the short arm A D a descent of 4 feet, and suppose water to issue
from the trunk F, at the rate of 50 lb, in a second, falling into the buckets
fastened to the lever at B. Now, from the principles of the lever -- art. 16 --
it is evident, that 50lb. in a second, at B, will balance 200lb. in a second,
at D, issuing from the trunk G, on the short arm; because 50x16=4x200=800,
each. Perhaps it may appear plainer if we suppose the perpendicular line or
diameter FC, to represent the descent of 16 feet and the diameter G I a descent
of 4 feet. By the laws of the lever -- art. 16 -- it is shown, that, to
multiply 50 into its perpendicular descent 16 feet or distance moved, is=200,
multiplied into its perpendicular descent 4 feet, or distance moved; that is,
50x16=200x4=800; that is, their power is as their quantity, multiplied into
their perpendicular descent; or, in other words, a fall of 4 feet will require
4 times as much water, as a fall of 16 feet, to produce equal power and
effects. Q. E. D.

Upon these principles is founded the following simple theorem, for measuring
the power of an overshot mill, or of a quantity of water, acting upon any
mill-wheel by its gravity.

THEOREM IV.
Cause the water to pass along a regular canal, and multiply its depth in feet
and parts, by its width in feet and parts, Art. 53.
for the area of its section, which product multiply by its velocity per second
in feet and parts, Rule for measuring the power of the mill-seat.
and the product is the cubic feet used per second, which multiplied by 62,5lb.
the weight of 1 cubic foot, produces the weight of water per second, that falls
on the wheel, which multiplied by its whole perpendicular descent, gives a true
measure of its power.

PROBLEM I.
Given, a mill-seat with 16 feet fall, width of the canal 5,333 feet, depth 3
feet, velocity of the water passing along it 2,03 feet per second, required the
power per second.

Then, 5,333x3=15,999 feet, the area of the section of the stream, multiplied
by 2,03 feet, the velocity, is equal 32,4 cubic feet, the quantity per second,
multiplied by 62,5 is equal 2025lb. the weight of the water per second,
multiplied by 16, the perpendicular descent, is equal 32400, for the power of
the seat per second.

PROBLEM II.
Given, the perpendicular descent 18,3, width of the gate 2,66 feet, height,
145 of a foot, velocity of the water per second, issuing on the wheel 15,76
feet, required the power.

Then, 2,66X,145=,3857 the area of the gate, x15,76 the velocity=6,178 cubic
feet, expended per secondx62,5=375,8lb. per secondx18,3 feet perpendicular
descent=6877 for the measure of the power per second, which ground 3,75lb. per
minute, equal 3,75 bushels in an hour, with a five feet pair of bur stones.

Art. 54. Investigation of the Principles of Overshot Mills
SOME have asserted, and many believed, that water is applied to great
disadvantage on the principle of an overshot mill; Art. 54
because, say they, there are never more than two buckets, at once Water acts
with as much power on an overshot, as if it was all to act fairly on the breast
bucket, in the whole of its perpendicular descent.
that can be said to act fairly on the end of the lever, as the arms of the
wheel are called in these arguments. But we must consider well the laws of
bodies, descending inclined plains, and curved surfaces. See art. 10, 11. This
matter will be cleared up, if we consider the circumference of the wheel to be
the curved surface: for the fact is, that the water acts to the best advantage,
and produces effects equal to what it would, in case the whole of it acted upon
the very end of the lever, in the whole of its perpendicular descent. This
error has been the cause of many expensive errors in the application of water.


DEMONSTRATION.
Let A B C, fig. 20, Fig. 20, pl. III.
represent a water-wheel, and F H a trunk, bringing water to it from a 16 feet
head. Demonstration.
Now suppose F G and 16 H to be two penstocks under equal heads, down which the
water descends, to act on the wheel at C, on the principle of an undershot, on
opposite sides of the float C, with equal apertures. Now it is evident from the
principles of hydrostatics, shown by the paradox (art. 48, and the 1st law of
spouting fluids art. 45.) that the impulse and pressure will be equal from each
penstock respectively. Although the one be an inclined plain, and the other a
perpendicular their forces are equal, because their perpendicular heights are;
(art. 48) therefore the wheel will remain at rest, because each side of the
float is pressed on by a column of water of equal size and height, as
represented by the lines on each side of the float. Then suppose we shut the
penstock F G, and let the water down the circular one rx, which is close to the
point of the buckets; this makes it obvious, from the same principles, that the
wheel will be held in equilibrio, if the columns of each side be equal. For,
although the column in the circular penstock is longer than the perpendicular
one, yet, because part of its weight presses on the lower side of the penstock,
its pressure on the float is (...) equal to the perpendicular.

Then, again, suppose the column of water is the circular penstock, to be
instantly thrown into the buckets, it is evident, that the wheel will still be
held in equilibrio, and each bucket will then bear a proportional part of the
column, that the bucket C bore before; and that part of the weight of the
circular column, which rested on the under side of the circular penstock, is
now on the gudgeons of the wheel. This shows that the effect of a stream,
applied on an overshot wheel, is equal to the effect of the same stream,
applied on the end of the lever, in its whole perpendicular descent, Fig. 21.
as in fig. 21, where the water is shot into the buckets fastened to a strap or
chain, Demonstrated by a chain and buckets.
revolving over two wheels; and here the whole force of the gravity of the
column acts on the very end of the lever, in the whole of its descent. Yet,
because the length of the column in action, in this case, is only 16 feet;
whereas on a 16 feet wheel the length of the column in action is 25,15,
therefore the powers are equal.

Again, if we divide the half circle into 3 arches Ab, bc, eC, the center of
gravity of the upper and lower arches, will fall near the point a, 3,9 feet
from the center of motion, and center of gravity of the middle arch, near the
point 6,7,6 feet from the center of motion. Now each of these arches is 8,38
feet, and 8,38x2x3,9-65,36, and 8,38x7,6 feet -- 63,07, which two products
added -- 128,43, for the momentum of the circular column, by the laws of the
lever and for the perpendicular column 16x8 the radius of the wheel=128, for
the momentum; Art. 54
by which it appears, that if we could determine the exact points on which the
arches act, the momentums would be equal, all which shows, that the power of
water on overshot wheels, is equal to the whole power it can any way produce,
through the whole of its perpendicular descent, except what may be lost to
obtain velocity, (art. 41) overcome friction, or by part of the water spilling,
before it gets to the bottom of the wheel. Q. E. D.

I may add, Proved by experiment.
that I have made the following experiment, viz. I fixed a truly circular wheel
on nice pivots, to evade friction, and took a cylindric rod of thick wire,
cutting one piece exactly the length of half the circumference of the wheel,
and fastening it to one side, close to the rim of the wheel its whole length,
as at G X r A. I then took another piece of the same wire, of a length equal to
the diameter of the wheel, and hung it ^n the opposite side, on the end of the
lever or arm, as at B, and the wheel was in equilibrio. Q. E. D.

Art. 55. Of the Friction of the Apertures of Spouting Fluids.
THE doctrine of this species of friction appears to be as follows: Of the
friction of the apertures of spouting fluids.


1. The ratio of the friction of round apertures are as their diameters,
nearly, while their quantities expended, are as the squares of their diameters.

2. The friction of an aperture, of any regular or irregular figure, is as the
length of the sum of the circumscribing lines, nearly; the quantities being as
the areas of the aperture. Art. 55.
Therefore,

3. The less the head or pressure, and the large the aperture, the less the
ratio of the friction therefore,

4. This friction need not be much regards in the large openings or apertures
of undershot mills, Need not be regarded in undershot mills; But must be noted
in overshots.
where the gates are from 2 to 15 inches (...) their shortest sides; but it
very sensibly affect the small apertures of high overshot or undershot mills,
with great heads, where their shortest (...) are from five tenths of an inch to
two inches. This seems to be proved by Smeaton, in his experiments; (see (...)
art. 67) where, when the head was 33 inches, the sluice small, draw^, (...) to
the 1st hole, the velocity of the water was only such as is assigned theory, to
a head of 15,85 inches, which he calls virtual head. But (...) the sluice was
larger, drawn to the 6th hole, and head 6 inches, the (...) head was 5,03
inches. But seeing there is no theorem yet discovered which we can truly
determine the quantity or effect of their friction, acc^^ing to the size of the
aperture, and height of the head; therefore (...) not, by the established laws
of hydrostatics, determine exactly, the (...) or quantity expended through any
small aperture; which renders the (...) but little better than conjecture in
these cases.


Art. 56. Of the Pressure of the Air on Fluids.
THE second cause of the motion or rise fluids, Pressure of the air the cause
of the rise of fluids.
is the pressure of the air on the surface them, in the fountain or reservoir;
and this (...) sure is equal to a head of water 33; feet perpendicular height,
under which pressure or (...) of head, the velocity of spouting water is 46.^
feet per second.

This will appear, if we consider and suppose, that the friction does ^^^^bly
retard the velocity of the fluid to a certain distance. Say half as (...) from
the side or edge of the aperture, toward its center; and we may ^^sonably
conclude, that this distance will be nearly the same in a 2 and (...) aperture;
so that in the 2 inch aperture, a ring on the outside, half a^ (...) wide, is
sensibly retarded, which is about 3-4 of the whole; while, (...) 12 inch
aperture, there is a ring on the outside half an inch wide, (...) about 1-6 of
its whole area.
Therefore, Art. 56.
if we could by any means take off the pressure of the atmosphere, from any one
part of the surface of a fluid, that part would spout up with a velocity of
46,73 feet per second, and rise to the height of 331/3 feet, nearly. This seems
to be the principle of whirl winds at sea, Principles of water-spo^ at sea.
called water spouts; the wind meeting from different points, forms a quick
circular motion; and by the centrifugal force forms a partial vacuum in the
center, which gives liberty to the water to rise a little, which is by the
rapidity of the motion of the air, rent into very small particles: which so
increases the surface, that the air takes sufficient hold of it to carry it up.
And as the wind meeting has no way to vent itself but in a perpendicular
direction, therefore, a brisk current is formed upwards, carrying the water
with it, at sea; but on the land, it raises leaves of trees and other light
bodies. See Franklin's Letters.


On this principle act all siphons or cranes, and all pumps for raising water
by suction, as it is called. -- Let fig. 23, Fig. 23. pl. III.
pl. III. represent a cask of water, with a siphon therein, to extend 33 feet
above the surface of the water in the cask. Principles of siphons for decanting
liquors.
Now if the bung be made perfectly air-tight, round the siphon, so that no air
can get into the cask, and the cask be full, then, if all the air be drawn cut
of the siphon, at the bended part A, the fluid will not rise in the siphon,
because the air cannot get to it to press it up; but take out the plug P, and
let the air into the cask, to press on the surface of the water, and it will
spout up the short leg of the siphon B A, with the same force and velocity, as
if it had been pressed with a head of water 33 feet high, and will run into the
long leg and will fill it. Then if we turn the cock c, and let the water run
out, its weight in the long leg will overbalance the weight in the short one,
drawing the water out of the cask, until the water sink so low, that the leg B
A will be 33 feet high, above the surface of the water in the cask; then it
will stop, because the weight of water in the leg, in which it rises, will be
equal to the weight of a column of the air of equal size, and of the whole
height of the atmosphere. The water will not run out of the leg A c, but will
stand full 33 feet above its mouth because the air will press up the mouth c,
Art. 56.
with force that will balance 33 feet of water (...) the leg c A. This will be
the case, let the ^^per part of the leg be any size whatever -- (...) there
will be a small vacuum in the top of the long leg.

Art. 57. Of Pumps.
LET fig. 24, Fig. 24, pl. III.
pl. III. represent a pump of the common kind, used for drawing water out (...)
wells. The moveable valve or bucket A, principles of Pumps for raising water.
is cas^ with leather, which springs outward, and (...) the tube so nicely,
that neither air nor water (...) pass freely by it. When the lever L is worked
the valve A opens as it descends, letting the (...) or water pass through it.
As it ascends again the valve shuts; the water which is above the bucket A is
raised, and there would be a vacuum between the valves, but the weight of the
(...) presses on the surface of the water in the well at W, forcing it up
through the valve B to (...) the space between the buckets; and as the valve. A
descends, B shuts, and prevents the water (...) descending again: But if the
upper valve A be (...) more than 33 feet above the surface of the water in the
well, the pump cannot be made to draw because the pressure of the atmosphere
will not cause the water to rise more than 33 feet.

A TABLE FOR PUMP-MAKERS.
Height of the pump in feet above the surface of the well. Diameter of the
bore. Water discharged in a minute in wine measure. inches. 1^0 parts of an in.
Galls. Pints. 10 6 93 81 6 15 5 66 54 4 20 4 90 40 7 25 4 38 32 6 30 4 00 27 2
35 3 70 23 3 40 3 46 20 3 45 3 27 18 1 50 3 10 16 3 55 2 95 14 7 60 2 84 13 5
65 2 72 12 4 70 2 62 11 5 75 2 53 10 7 80 2 45 10 2 85 2 38 9 5 90 2 31 9 1 95
2 25 8 5 100 2 19 8 1

"All pumps should be so constructed as to work with equal ease, in raising the
water to any given height above the surface of the well: and this may be done
by observing adue proportion between the diameter of that part of the pump bore
in which the piston or bucket works, and the height to which the water must be
raised.

"For this purpose I have calculated the above table, in which the handle of
the pump is supposed to be a lever, increasing the power five times: that is,
the distance or length of that part of the handle that lies between the pin on
which it moves, and the top of the pump-rod to which it is fixed, to be only
one fifth part of the length of the handle, from the said pin to the part where
the man (who works the pump) applies his force or power.

"In the first column of the table, find the height at which the pump must
discharge the water above the surface of the well; then in the second column,
you have the diameter of that part of the bore in which the piston or bucket
works, in inches and hundredth parts of an inch; in the third column is the
quantity of water, (in wine measure) that a man of common strength can raise in
a minute. -- And by constructing according to this method, pumps of all heights
may be wrought by a man of ordinary strength so as to be able to hold out for
an hour."

JAMES FERGUSON.

Art. 58. Of conveying Water under Valleys and over Hills.
WATER, by its pressure, and the pressure of the atmosphere, Fig. 20.
may be conveyed under valleys and over hills, to supply a family, a mill, or a
town. To convey water under valleys and over hills.
See fig. 20. pl. III. F H is a canal for conveying water to a mill-wheel. Now
let us suppose F G 16 H to be a tight tube or trunk -- the water being let in
at F, it will descend from F to G, and its pressure at F will cause it to rise
to H, passing along if permitted, and may be conveyed over a hill by a tube,
acting on the principle of the siphon. (art. 56) But where some have had
occasion thus to convey water under any obstacle for the convenience of a mill,
which often occurs in practice they have gone into the following expensive
error: They make the tube at G 16 smaller than if it had been on a level,
because, say they, a greater quantity will pass through a tube, pressed by the
head G F, than on a level. But they should consider that the head G F is
balanced by the head H 16, and the velocity through the tube G 16 will only be
such that a head equal to the difference between the perpendicular height of G
F and H 16 would give it; (see art. 41, fig. 19) therefore it should be as
large at G 16 as if on a level.

Art. 59. Of the Difference of the Force of indefinite and definite Quantities
of Water Striking a Wheel. DEFINITIONS.
1. BY an indefinite quantity of water we here mean a river or large quantity,
much larger than the float of the wheel, so that, Art. 59.
when it strikes the float, it has liberty to move or escape from it in every
lateral direction. Of the force of definite and indefinite quantities of water.


2. By a definite quantity of water we mean a quantity passing through a given
aperture along a shute to strike, a wheel; but as it strikes the float, it has
liberty to escape in every lateral direction.

3. By a perfectly definite quantity, we mean a quantity passing along a close
tube so confined, that when it strikes the float it has not liberty to escape
in any lateral direction.

First, Indefinite quantity of water applied
when a float of a wheel is struck by an indefinite quantity, the float is
struck by a column of water, the section of which is equal to the area of the
float; and as this column is confined on every side by the surrounding water,
which has equal motion, it cannot escape freely sideways; therefore more of its
force is communicated to the float than would be, in case it had free liberty
to escape sideways in every direction.

Secondly, Definite quantity applied.
The float being struck by definite quantity, with liberty to escape freely in
every side direction, it acts as the most perfect non-elastic body; therefore
(by art. 8) it communicates only a part of its force, the other part being
spent in the lateral direction. Hence it appears, that in the application of
water to act by impulse, we should draw the gate as near as possible to the
float-board, and confine it as much as possible from escaping sideways as it
strikes the float; but, taking care at the same time, that we do not bring the
principle of the Hydrostatic Paradox into action, (art 48).

What proportion of the force of the water is spent in a lateral direction is
not yet determined, but see Art. 8.

3. A perfectly definite quantity striking a plain, communicates its whole
force; because no part can escape sideways, and is equal in power to an elastic
body, Art. 59.
or the weight of the water on (...) overshot wheel, in its whole perpendicular
descent. A perfectly definite quantity applied, but cannot be applied to a
wheel in practice.
But this application of water to (...) has been hither to impracticable; for
whenever we attempt to confine the water totally from escaping sideways, we
bring the paradoxical principle into action which defeats the scheme. But this
difficulty is now overcome by the valve wheel: See annotation, art. 73.


To make this plain, let fig. 25, pl. III, be a water-wheel; and first, let us
suppose the water is be brought to it by the penstock 4. 16 to act by impulse
on the float b, and have free liberty to escape every way as it strikes; then
by art. 8 (...) will communicate but half its force. But if it be confined both
at sides and bottom and can escape only upwards, to which the gravity will make
some opposition, it will communicate perhaps more than half its force, and will
not (...) back against the float c. But if we put soali^^ to the wheel to
prevent the water from escaping upwards, then the space between the floats
(...) be filled, as soon as the wheel begins to be retarded, Paradoxical mill
that will not move empty.
and the paradoxical principle art. 48 is brought fully into action, viz. the
pressure of water is (...) way equal, and presses backwards against the bottom
of the float c, with a force equal to (...) pressure on the top of the float b,
and the wheel will immediately stop and be held in equilibrio and will not
start again although all resistance (...) removed. This we may call the
paradoxical mill. There are many mills, where this principle is, in part,
brought into action, which very much lessens their power.

Art. 60. Of the Motion of Breast and Pitch-back wheels.
MANY have been of opinion, Fig. 25.
that when water is put to act on the wheel as at a (called (...) low breast)
with 12 feet head, Art. 60.
that then the 4 feet fall below the point of impact a, is totally lost, Breast
and pitch-back wheels does not run before the gravity of the water.
because, say they, the impulse of the 12 feet head, will require the wheel to
move with such velocity to suit the motion of the water as to move before the
action of gravity, therefore the water cannot act after the stroke. But if they
will consider well the principles of gravity acting on falling bodies (art. 9)
they will find, that, if the velocity of a falling body be ever so great, the
action of gravity is still the same to cause it to move faster, so that,
although an overshot wheel may move before the power of the gravity, of the
water thereon, yet no impulse downwards can give a wheel such velocity, as that
the gravity of the water acting thereon can be lessened thereby. If gravity
could be either decreased by velocity downwards, or increased by velocity
upwards, then a virtical wheel without friction, either of gudgeons or air,
would require a great force to continue its motion; because, its velocity would
decrease the gravity of its descending side, and increase it on its ascending
side, which would immediately stop it: whereas it is known, that it requires no
power to continue its motion, but what is necessary to overcome the friction of
the gudgeons, etc.


Hence it appears, that when a greater head is used, Direct the water downwards
when there is too much head, on overshot, pitch-back, or breast wheels.
than what is necessary to shoot the water fairly into the wheel, the impulse
should be directed downward a little as at D (which is called pitch-back) and
have a circular sheeting to prevent the water from leaving the wheel, because
if it be shot horizontally on the top of the wheel, the impulse in that case
will not give the water any greater velocity downwards, then, in this case, the
fall would be lost, if the head was very great, and the wheel moved to suit the
velocity of the impulse, the water would be thrown out of the buckets by the
centrifugal force; and if we attempt to retard the wheel, so as to retain the
water the mill will be so ticklish and unsteady, that it will be almost
impossible to attend it.

Hence may appear the reason why breast-wheels generally run quicker than
overshots, although the fall after the water strikes be not so great.

1. There is generally more head allowed to breast-mills than overshots, and
the wheel will incline to move with nearly 2/3 the velocity of the water,
spouting from under the head, (art. 41).

2. If the water was permitted to fall freely after it issues from the gate, it
would be accelerated by the fall, so that its velocity at the lowest point,
would be equal to its velocity, had it spouted from under a head equal to its
whole perpendicular descent. This accelerated velocity of the water, tends to
accelerate the wheel; hence, to find the velocity of a breast-wheel, where the
water is struck on in a tangent direction as in fig. 31, 32, I deduce the
following.

THEOREM.
1. Find the difference of the velocity of the water under the head allowed to
the wheel, above the point of impact, and the velocity of a falling body,
having fell the whole perpendicular descent of the water. Call this difference
the acceleration by the fall: Then say, As the velocity of a falling body
acquired in falling through the diameter of any overshot wheel, is to the
proper velocity of that wheel by the scale, (art. 43) so is the acceleration by
the fall, to the acceleration of the wheel by the fall, after the water strikes
the wheel.

2. Find the velocity of the water issuing on the wheel; take, 577 of said
velocity, to which (...) the accelerated velocity, and that sum will be the
velocity of the breast-wheel.

This rule will hold nearly true, when the head is considerably greater than is
assigned by the scale (art. 43); but as the head approaches that assigned by
the scale, Art. 60.
this rule will give the motion too quick.

EXAMPLE.
Given, a high breast-wheel, f^ig. 25, where the water is shot on at d, the
point of impact -- 6 feet head, and 10 feet fall -- required the motion of the
circumference of the wheel, working to the best advantage, or maximum effect.

Then, the velocity of the water issuing on the wheel, 6 feet head, 19,34 feet.
The velocity of a falling body, having 16 feet fall, the whole descent, 32,4^
feet. Difference, 13,06 feet.

Then as the velocity under a 16 feet fall (32,4 feet) is to the velocity of an
overshot wheel=8,76 feet, so is 13,06 feet, to the 16 feet diameter velocity
accelerated, which is equal 3,5 feet, to which add,577 of 19,34 feet (being
11,15 feet); this amounts to 14,65 feet per second, the velocity of the
breast-wheel.

Art. 61. Rule for calculating the Power of any Mill-Seat.
THE only loss of power sustained by using too much head, in the application of
water to turn a mill-wheel, is from the head producing only half its power.
Therefore, in calculating the power of 16 cubic feet per second, on the
different applications of fig. 25, pl. III. we must add half the head to the
whole fall, and count that sum the virtual perpendicular descent. Art. 61.
Then by theorem IV. (art. 53) multiply the weight of the water per second by
its perpendicular descent, and you have the true measure of its power.

But to reduce the rule to a greater simplicity, Simple rule for calculating
the power of any miliseat.
let us call each cubic foot 1, and the rule will be simply this -- Multiply
the cubic feet expended per second, by its virtual perpendicular descent in
feet, and the product will be a true measure of the power per second. This
measure (...) have a name, which I call Cuboch; that is, (...) cubic foot of
water, multiplied by 1 foot descent, is one cuboch, or the unit of power.

EXAMPLES.
1. Given, 16 cubic feet of water per second to be applied by percussion alone,
under 16 feet head, required the power per second.

Then, half 16=8x16=128 cubochs, for the measure of the power per second.

2. Given, 16 cubic feet per second, to be applied to a half breast of 4 feet
fall and 12 (...) head, required the power.

Then, half 12=6+4=10x16=160 cubochs, (...) the power.

3. Given, 16 cubic feet per second, to be applied to a pitch-back or high
breast -- fall 10, he^ 6 feet, required the power.

Then, half 6=3+10=13x16=208 cubochs, (...) the power per second.

4. Given, 16 cubic feet of water per (...) to be applied as an overshot --
head 4, fall 12 (...) required the power.

Then, half 4=2+12=14x16=224 cubochs, (...) the power.

The powers of equal quantities of water (...) cubic feet per second, and equal
total perpendicular descents by the different applications (...)

The undershot, 16 feet head, Art. 61.
Water by percussion spends its force on the wheel in the following time, which
is in proportion to the distance of the float-board, and difference of the
velocity of the water and wheel.

If the water runs with double the velocity of the wheel, it will spend all its
force on the floats, while the water runs the distance of two floatboards, and
while the wheel runs the distance of one; therefore the water need not be kept
to act on the wheel from the point of impact further than the distance of about
two float-boards.

But if the wheel runs with two thirds of the velocity of the water, then,
while the wheel runs the distance of two floats, and while the water would have
ran the distance of three floats, it spends all its force; therefore the water
need be kept to act on the wheel only the distance of three floats past the
point of impact.

If it be continued in much longer it will fall back, and re-act against the
following bucket and retard the wheel.


0 fall, 128 cubochs power. Power of 16 cubic feet of water per second,
calculated on five different applications.

The half breast, 12 feet head, 4 feet fall, 160 cubochs of power.
The high breast 6 feet head, 10 feet fall, 208 cubochs of power.
The overshot, 4 feet head. 12 feet fall, 224 cubochs of power.
Ditto, 2,5 feet head, 13,5 feet fall, 236 cubochs of power.

The last being the head necessary to shoot the water fairly into the buckets,
may be said to be the best application. See art. 43.

On these simple rules, and the rule laid down in art. 43, for proportioning
the head and fall, I have calculated the following table or scale of the
different quantities of water expended per second, with different perpendicular
descents, to produce a certain power, in order to present at one view to the
reader the ratio of increase or decrease of quantity, as the perpendicular
descent increases or decreases.

A TABLE showing the quantity of water required with different falls, to
produce by its gravity, 112 cubochs of power, which will drive a five feet
stone about 97 revolutions in a minute, grinding wheat about 5 bushels in an
hour.
The virtual descent of the water being half the head added to all the fall
after it strikes the wheel. Cubic feet of water required per second, etc. The
virtual descent of the water being half the head added to all the fall after it
strikes the wheel. Cubic feet of water required per second. 1 112 16 7 2 56 17
6,58 3 37,3 18 6,22 4 28 19 5,99 5 22,4 20 5,6 6 18,6 21 5,33 7 16, 22 5,1 8 14
23 4,87 9 12,4 24 4,66 10 11,2 25 4,48 11 10,2 26 4,3 12 9,33 27 4,15 13 8,6 28
4, 14 8, 29 3,86 15 7,46 30 3,73

Art. 62. Theory and Practice compared.
I WILL here give a table of 18 mills in actual practice out of about 50 that I
have taken an account of, in order to compare theory with practice, and in
order to ascertain the power required on each superficial foot of the acting
parts of the stone: Art. 62.
But I must premise the following

THEOREMS.
1. To find the circumference by the diameter, Rule for finding the
circumference and diameter.
or the diameter by the circumference of a circle given; say, As 7 is to 22, so
is the diameter of the stone to the circumference, i.e. Multiply the diameter
by 22, and divide the product by 7, for the circumference; or, multiply the
circumference by 7, and divide the product by 22, for the diameter.

To find the area of circle by the diameter given: As I, squared, Rule for
finding the area of stone,
is to, 7854, so is the square of the diameter to the area; i.e. Multiply the
square of the diameter by,7854, and deduct 1 foot for the eye and you have the
area of the stone.

3. To find the quantity of surface passed by a millstone: And surface passed.
The area, squared, multiplied by the revolutions of the stone, gives the
number of superficial feet, passed in a given time.

Observations on the following Table of Experiments. Art. 62.

I have asserted in art. 44, that the head above the gate of a wheel, on which
the water acts by its gravity, should be such, as to cause the water to issue
on the wheel, with a velocity to that (...) the wheel as 3 to 2, to compare
this with the following table of experiments.

1. EXP. Overshot. Velocity of the water 12,(...) feet per second, velocity of
the wheel 8,(...) feet per second, which is a little less than (...) the
velocity of the water. This wheel received the water well. It is at Stanton, in
Delaware state.

2. Overshot. Velocity of the water 11,17 feet per second, of which is 7,44
feet, velocity (...) the wheel 8,5 feet per second. This received the water
pretty well. It is at the abovemention place.

3. Overshot. Velocity of the water 12,16 feet per second, velocity of wheel
10,2; (...) out great part of the water by the back of the buckets; strikes it
and makes a thumping (...) It is allowed to run too fast; revolves faster th^^
my theory directs. It is at Brandiwine, in Delaware state.

4. Overshot. Velocity of the water 14,4 feet per second, velocity of the wheel
9,3 feet, a little less than of the velocity of the water. It receives the
water very well; has a little (...) head than assigned by theory, and runs a
little faster; it is a very good mill, situate at Brandiwine, in the state of
Delaware.

6. Undershot. Velocity of the wheel, loaded 16, and when empty 24 revolutions
per minute which confirms the theory of motion for under shot wheels. See art.
42.

7. Overshot. Velocity of the water 15,79 feet velocity of the wheel 7,8 feet;
less than (...) the velocity of the water; motion slower and head more than
assigned by theory. Art. 62.
The miller said the wheel ran too slow, and would have her altered; and that
she worked best when the head was considerably sunk. She is at Bush, Hartford
county, Maryland.

8. Overshot. Velocity of the water 14,96 feet per second, velocity of the
wheel 8,8 feet, less than, very near the velocity assigned by the theory; but
the head is greater, and she runs best when the head is sunk a little; is
counted the best mill; and is at the same place with the last mentioned.

9,10,11,12. Undershot, open wheels. Velocity of the wheels when loaded 20 and
40, and when empty 28 and 56 revolutions per minute, which is faster than my
theory for the motion of undershot mills. Ellicott's mills, near Baltimore, in
Maryland, serves to confirm the theory.

14. Overshot. Velocity of the water 16,2 feet, velocity of the wheel 9,1 feet,
less than of the water, revolutions of the stone 114 per minute, the head near
the same as by theory, the velocity of the wheel less, stone more. This shows
her to be too high geared. She receives the water well, and is counted a very
good mill, situate at Alexandria, in Virginia.

15. Undershot. Velocity of the water 24,3 per second, velocity of the wheel
16,67 feet, more than the velocity of the water. Three of these mills are in
one house, at Richmond, Virginia -- they confirm the theory of undershots,
being very good mills.

16. Undershot. Velocity of the water 25,63 feet per second, velocity of the
wheel 19,05 feet, being more than. Three of these mills are in one house, at
Petersburg, in Virginia -- they are very good mills, and confirm the theory.
See art. 43.

18. Overshot wheel. Velocity of the water 11, (...) feet per second, velocity
of the wheel 10,96 feet, nearly as fast as the water. The backs of the buckets
strike the water, and drive great (...) over: and as the motion of the stone is
(...) right, and the motion of the wheel faster (...) assigned by the theory,
it shows the mill to be (...) low geared, all which confirms the theory. (...)
art. 43.

In the following table I have counted the diameter of the mean circle to be
two thirds of the diameter of the great circle of the stone, which is not
strictly true. The mean circle to continue half the area of any other circle
must be, 70^ parts of the diameter of the said circle, or nearly,7 or.

Hence the following theorem for finding the mean circle of any stone.

THEOREM.
Multiply the diameter of the stone by, 70^ and it produces the diameter of the
mean circle.

EXAMPLE.
Given, the diameter of the stone 5 feet, required a mean circle that shall
contain half in area.

Then, 5X,707=3,535 feet the diameter of the mean circle.

Art. 63. Further observations on the following Table.
1. The mean power used to turn the 5 feet stones in the Experiments (No. 1. 7.
14. 17.) is 87,5 cubochs of the measure established art. Experiments.
61, and the mean velocity is 104 revolutions of the stones in a minute, the
velocity of the mean circle being 18,37 feet per second, and their mean
quantity ground is 3,8lb. per minute, which is 3,8 bushels per hour, and the
mean power used to each foot of the area of the stone is 4,69 of the measure
aforesaid, done by 36582 superficial feet passing each other in a minute. Hence
we may conclude, until better informed,

1. That 87,5 cubochs of power per second will turn a 5 feet stone 104
revolutions in a minute, and grind 3,8 bushels an hour.

2. That 4,69 cubochs of power is required to every superficial foot of a
millstone, when their mean circles move with a velocity of 18,37 feet per
second. Or,

3. That for every 36582 feet of the face of stones that pass each other we may
expect 3,8lb. will be ground, when the stones, grain, etc. are in the state and
condition, as were the above stones in the experiments.

A TABLE of Experiments of
Numb. of Exp. Virtual or effective descent of the water. Head above the center
of the gate. Area of the gate, abating for contraction occasioned by friction.
Velocity of the water per second, by theory. Cubic feet expended per second,
abating for friction by conjecture. power per second, by simple theorem, Art.
61. Diameter of the wheel. No. of revolutions per minute. Velocity of the (...)
per second. feet. feet. feet. feet. cub.ft. chs. feet. 1 20, 2,67,385 12,9 3,8
76 18 8,5 8,2 2 19,2 1,9,325 11,17 3,5 67 18 9,1 8,5 3 16,2 2,2 12,16 15 13
10,2 14,4 4 16,6 3,1 15 12 9,3 5 19,25 3 13,8 17,75 105 9,8 16 loaded 6 16 24
unload 7 17,8 3,83,345 15,79 5,18 92 16,4 9,5 7,8 8 17,8 3,5,425 14,96 6,16 110
16,4 10 8,8 9 11 26,73 15 20 loaded 28 unload 10 7,5 40 loaded 56 unload 11 15
20 loaded 28 unload 12 7,5 40 loaded 56 unload 13 20,6 4 16,2 18,6 8 7,8 14
21,5 4 16,2 3,57 86 19,3 9 9,1 15 9,5 24,3 10 32 16,67 16 10 25,63 8 45,5 19,05
17 12,5 3,567 14 7,6 96 11 16 9,2 18 2 11,4 14 14 10,96

Note, the above table being large, obliged us to put it on two pages folding
of which may set it a little out of place. In the 3rd, 4th, (...) 18th
experiments, there is two pair of stones to one water-wheel, the (...) etc. of
which, are shown by the braces. If the reader will by a rule (...) small lines
between the experiments, the table will be easier read.

Eighteen Mills in Practice.
(...) Cogs in the counter cogwhipp^e. Rounds in the trundles. Revolutions of
the stones per minute. Diameter of the stones in feet and inches. Area of the
stones. Power required to each foot of face. Velocity of the mean circle.
Superficial feet passed in a minute. Quantity ground per minute in lbs. or pr
hour in bush. f. in. sup.ft. feet. (...) ^4 15 99,7 5 18,63 4,1 17,3 34594 3,5
(...) 48 14 124,8 4 3 13,13 4,34 18,5 21514 2,5 (...) 44 14 122 4 2 (...) 44 14
122 4 8 (...) 44 14 104 4 6 (...) 44 14 108 4 6 16,97 (...) 48 13 126 4 3 18,6
(...) 44 14 105 5 18,63 4,9 18,32 36435 3,75 (...) 44 14 103 5 18,63 5,9 17,97
35741 23 73 7 38,48 17,84 108091 16 105 5 18,32 36435 16 105 4 10 16 105 5
18,63 18,32 36435 ^5 44 19 71 6 10 36,63 16,92 95264 ^4 44 16 88 5 6 23,76
16,89 49678 ^5 54 16 114 5 18,63 4,67 19,89 39558 4,5 17 113 5 4 20,75 21 95 6
28,38 19,9 74850 (...) 44 14 103 5 18,63 5,15 17,97 35741 3,5 (...) 48 15 124 4
4 ^6 48 16 116 4 8

Observations continued from Page 115. Art. 63.

But as we cannot attain to a mathematical ^^actness in those cases, and as it
is evident (...) all the stones in the said experiments have been working with
too little power, because it (...) known that a pair of good bur stones of 5
(...) diameter, will grind sufficiently well about 12 bushels in 24 hours; that
is 5,2 bushels in (...) hour, which would require 6,4 power per second -- we
may say 6 cubochs per second, when (...) feet stones grind 5 bushels per hour,
for the (...) of simplicity. Hence we deduce the following simple theorem for
determining the size of (...) stones to suit the power of any given seat, or
(...) power required to any size of a stone.

THEOREM. Rule for proportioning the size of the stones to suit the power of
the seat.

Find the power by the theorem in art. 61; (...) divide the power by 6, which
is the power required, by 1 foot, and it will give you the (...) of the stone
that the power will drive, to which add 1 foot for the eye, and divide by,7854,
(...) the quotient will be the square of the diameter or, if the power be
great, divide by the product (...) the area of any size stones you choose,
multiplied by 6, and the quotient will be the number (...) stones the power
will drive: or, if the size of the stone be given, And power to the size of the
stone.
multiply the area by 6 cuboch^ and the product is the power required to drive
(...)

EXAMPLES.
1. Given, 9 cubic feet per second, 12 feet perpendicular, virtual, or
effective descent, required the diameter of the stone suitable thereto.

Then, by art. 61, 9x12=108, the power, and 1086=18, the area, and 18+1
7854=24,2 the root of which is 4,9 feet, the diameter of the stone required.

Observation 5th. Art. 63.
The velocities of the mean circles of these stones in the table are some below
and some above 18 feet per second, Proper velocity of the stone deduced from
experiments in practice.
the mean of them all being nearly 18 feet; therefore I conclude that 18 feet
per second is a good velocity in general, for the mean circle of any sized
stone.

Of the different quantity of Surfaces that are passed by Millstones of
different diameters with different velocities.
Supposing the quantity ground by millstones and power required to turn them
to be as the passing surfaces of their faces, each superficial foot that passes
over another foot requires a certain power to grind a certain quantity: Then to
explain this let us premise,

1. The circumference and diameter of circles are directly proportional. That
is, a double diameter gives a double circumference.

2. The areas of circles are as the squares of their diameters. That is, a
double diameter gives 4 times the area.

3. The square of the diameter of a circle multiplied by,7854 gives its area.

4. The square of the area of a millstone multiplied by its number of
revolutions, gives the surface passed. Consequently,

5. Stones of unequal diameters revolving in equal times. Their passing
surfaces, quantity ground, and power required to drive them, will be as the
squares of their areas, or as the biquadrate of their diameters. That is, a
double diameter will pass 16 times the surface. The diameter of a 4 feet stone
squared, multiplied by,7854 equal 12,56 its area; which squared is 157,75 feet,
the surface passed at one revolution: and 8 multiplied by 8 equal 64, which
multiplied by,7854 equal 50,24 being the area of an 8 feet stone; which squared
is 2524,04 the the surface passed, which surfaces are as 1 to 16.


6. If the velocity of their mean circles or circumferences be equal their
passing surfaces, quantity ground, Art. 63.
and power required to move then will be as the cubes of their diameters.
Because the 8 feet stone will revolve only half as often as the 4 (...)
therefore their quantity of surface passed, etc. can be only half as (...) more
as it was in the last case; that is as 8 to 1.


7. If the diameters and velocities be unequal their passing surfaces and
quantity ground, etc. will be as the squares of their areas, multiplied by
their revolutions.

8. If their diameters be equal the quantity (...) surfaces passed, etc. are as
their velocities or revolutions simply.

But we have been supposing theory and practice to agree strictly which they
will by no me^ do in this case. The quantity ground and power used by large
stones more than by small ones (...) not be in the ratio assigned by the
theory; because the meal having to pass a greater distance through the stone,
is operated upon often^^ which operations must be lighter, else it will (...)
overdone; by which means large stones may (...) equal quantities with small
ones, and with equal power, and do it with less pressure; therefore (...) flour
will be better. A French author (M. Fabre) says, that by experiments he has
^ound that to produce the best flour, a stone 5 feet diameter should revolve
between 48 and and 61 times in a minute. This is much slower than practice in
America, but we may conclude that it is best to err on the (...) slower than
faster than common practice; especially when the power is (...) small for the
size of the stone.
See art. III.

From these considerations added to experiments I conclude, that the power
required (...) quantity ground, will nearer approach to be (...) the area of
the stones, multiplied into the velocity of the mean circles; or, which is
nearly the same: As the squares of their diameters. But (...) the velocities of
their mean circles or circumferences be equal, then it will be as their area,
^^^ply.

On these principles I have calculated the following table, showing the power
required (...) quantity ground both by theory, and what I suppose to be the
nearest practice.

A TABLE of the area of MILLSTONES with their different diameters, deducting 1
foot for the eye; and of the power required to move them with a mean velocity
of 18 feet per second, etc.
Diameter of the stone in feet and parts. Area of the stone in feet and parts
deducting 1 foot for the eye. Power required to drive the stone with mean
velocity 18 ft. per second allowing 6 cubochs to each foot of its area.
Circumference of the mean circle to contain half the area of the stone.
Revolutions of the stone per minute, with 18 feet velocity of mean circle. No.
of superficial feet passed per minute, being the square of the area of the
stones multiplied by the number of revolutions. Quantity ground in lbs. per
minute, or bushels per hour, supposing it to be as the number of superficial
feet passed. Power required supposing it to be as the no. of superficial feet
passed. Quantity ground supposing it to be simply as the area of the stone with
equal velocity. Quantity ground supposing it to be as the squares of the
diameter of the stone, which appears to come nearest the true quantity. feet.
su. ft. cuhs. feet. sup. ft. lbs. cuhs. lbs. lbs. 3,5 8.62 51,72 7,777 138,8
10312 1,49 33,1 2,3 2,45 3,75 9,99 59,94 2,8 4, 11,56 69,36 8,888 121,5 16236
2,3 52 3,1 3,2 4,25 13,18 79, 3,6 4*5 14,9 89,4 9,99 108,1 23999 3,46 77 4,
4,05 4,75 16,71 100,26 4,5 5, 18,63 111,78 11,09 97,4 34804 5, 111,78 5, 5,
5,25 20,64 123,84 5,53 5,5 22,76 136,5 6,05 5,75 24,96 153,7 6,6 6, 27,27 163,6
13,37 80,7 60012 8,6 192 7,3 7,2 6,25 29,67 178, 7,8 6,5 32,18 196, 8,4 6,75
34,77 208,6 9,1 7, 37 48 255, 15,55 69,4 97499 14,06 313 10 9,8 1 2 3 4 5 6 4 8
9 10

Note -- The reason why the quantity ground in the 7th column, is not exactly
as the cubes of the diameter of the stone, and in the 9th column not exactly as
the squares of its diameter, is the deduction for the eye, being equal in each
stone, destroys the proportion.

The engine of a paper-mill, roll 2 feet diameter, 2 feet long, revolving 160
times in a minute, requires equal power with a 4 feet stone, grinding 5 bushels
an hour.

Having now laid down in art. Art. 63.
61, 62, and 63, a theory for measuring the power of any mill-seat, and for
ascertaining the quantity of that power that millstones of different diameters
will require, by which we can find the diameter of the stones to suit the power
of the seat: and, having fixed on six cubochs of that power per second to every
superficial foot of the millstone, as requisite to move the mean circle of the
stone 18 feet per second, when in the act of grinding with moderate and
sufficient feed, and having allowed the passing of 34804 feet per minute to
grind 5lb. in the same time, which is the effect of the five feet stone in the
table, by which, if right, we can calculate the quantity that a stone of any
size will grind with any velocity.

I have chosen a velocity of 18 feet per second, for the mean circle of all
stones, which is slower than common practice, but not too slow for making good
flour. See art. 111. Here will appear the advantage of large stones over small
ones; for if we will make small stones grind as fast as large ones, we must
give them such velocity as to heat the meal.

But I wish to inform the reader, that the experiments, from which I have
deduced the quantity of power to each superficial foot to be six cubochs, have
not been sufficiently accurate to be fully relied on; but it will be easy for
every ingenious mill-wright to make accurate experiments to satisfy himself as
to this.

Art. 64. Of Canals for conveying Water to Mills.
IN digging canals we must consider that water will come to a level on its
surface, be the form of the bottom as it may. If we have once determined on the
area of the section of the canal necessary to convey a sufficient quantity of
water to the mill, Art. 64.
Directions for digging canals through rocky ground.
we need only mind to keep to that area in the whole distance, and need not pay
much regard to the depth or width, if there be rocks in the way. Much expense
may be oftentimes saved, by making the canal deep where it cannot easily be
got wide enough, and wide where it cannot easily be got deep enough. Thus,
suppose we have determined it to be 4 feet deep and 6 feet wide, then the area
of its section will be 24. -- Let fig. 36, pl. IV. represent a canal, Fig. 36.
the line A B the level or surface of the water, C D the side, E F the bottom,
A C the width 6 feet, They need not be of equal width nor depth in all places;
A E the depth 4 feet. Then, if there be rocks at G, so that we cannot without
great expense obtain more than 3 feet width, but 8 feet depth at a small
expense: then 8x3=24, the section required. Again, suppose a flat rock to be at
H, so that we cannot, But the area of their section must be the same or not
less than the given size.
without great expense obtain more than 2 feet depth, but can, with small
expense obtain 12 feet width: then 2x12=24, the section required; and the water
will come on equally well, even if it were not more than, 5 of a foot deep,
provided it be proportionably wide. One disadvantage however arises in having
canals too shallow in places, because the water in very dry seasons, may be too
low to rise over them; but if the water was always to be of one height, the
disadvantage would be but little. The current will keep the deep places open;
light sand or mud will not settle in them. This will seem paradoxical to some,
but seeing the experiment may be a saving of expense, it may be worth trying.

Art. 65. Of the Size and Fall of Canals.
AS to the size and fall necessary to convey any quantity of water required, to
a mill, I do not find any rule laid down for either. But in order to establish
one let us consider, that the size depends entirely upon the quantity of water
and the velocity with which it is to pass: therefore, (...) we can determine on
the velocity, which I (...) suppose to be from 1 to 2 feet per second -- (...)
the slower the better, as there will be the less fall lost. We can find the
size of the canal by the following theorem.

THEOREM.
Divide the quantity required in cubic feet (...) second, Rule for finding the
right size to convey any quantity required.
by the velocity in feet per second, and the quotient will be the area of the
section of the canal. Divide that area by the proposed depth* and the quotient
is the width: or, divide by the width, and the quotient is the depth.

PROBLEM. I.
Given, a 5 feet mill stone to be moved (...) feet per second, velocity of its
mean circle (...) seat of 10 feet virtual or effective descent, required the
size of the canal, with a velocity of 1 (...) per second.

Then, by theorem in art. 63: The area of the stone 18,63 feet, multiplied by 6
cubochs of power, is equal 111, 78 cubochs for the power (in common practice
say 112 cubochs) which, divided by 10 the fall, quotes 11,178 cubic feet
required per second, which, divided by one, the velocity proposed per second,
Art. 65.
quotes 11,178 feet, the area of the section, which divided by the depth
proposed, two feet, quotes 5,58 feet for the width.

PROBLEM. II.
Given, a mill stone 6 feet diameter, to be moved with a velocity of 18 feet
per second of its mean circle, to be turned by an undershot wheel on a seat of
8 feet perpendicular descent, required the power necessary per second to drive
them, and the quantity of water per second, to produce said power, likewise the
size of the canal to convey the water with a velocity of 1,5 feet per second.

Then, by art. 61, 8 feet perpendicular descent, on the undershot principle, is
only=4 feet virtual or effective descent: and the area of the stone by the
table (art. 63)=27,27 feet x6 cubochs=163,62 cubochs, for the power per second,
which divided by 4, the effective descent =40,9 cubic feet, the quantity
required per second, which divided by the velocity proposed 1,5 feet per second
=20,45, for the area of the section of the canal, which divided by 2,25 feet,
the depth of the canal proposed =9,1 feet, the width. An acre of a mill-pond
contains 43560 cubic feet of water, for every foot of its depth.

Suppose your pond contains 3 acres and is 3 feet deep, then 43560, multiplied
by 3, is equal 130680, which multiplied by 3, is equal 392040 cubic feet, its
contents, which divided by the cubic feet your mill uses per second (say 10) is
equal 39204 seconds, or 10 hours, the time the pond will keep the mill going.




As to the fall necessary in the canal I may observe, Of the proper fall in
canals.
that all the fall should be in the bottom of the canal and none on the top,
which should be all the way on a level with the water in the dam, in order that
when the gate is shut down at the mill, the water will not overflow the banks,
but stand at a level with the water in the dam; that is, as much fall as there
is to be in the whole length of the canal, Art. 65.
so much deeper must the canal be at the mill than at the dam. From
observations I conclude that about 3 inches to (...) yards will be sufficient,
if the canal be long, but more will be better if it be short, and the head apt
to run down when water is scarce, for the shallower the water the greater must
be the velocity, and more fall is required. -- A French author M. Fabre, allows
1 inch to 500 feet.

Art. 66. Of Air-pipes to prevent tight Trunks from (...) when filled with
water.
WHEN water is to be conveyed under ground or in a tight trunk below the
surface of the water in the reservoir, Air-pipes necessary to prevent tight
trunks from bursting.
to any considerable length, there must be air-pipes (as they have been called
to prevent the trunk from bursting. To understand their use let us suppose a
trunk 100 feet long, 16 feet below the surface of the water, (...) fill which
we draw a gate at one end of equal size with the trunk. Then the water, in
passing to the other end acquires great velocity if it meets (...) resistance,
which velocity is suddenly to be stopped when the trunk is full. This great
column of water in motion, in this case, would strike with a force equal to a
solid body of equal weight and velocity, the shock of which would be sufficient
to burst any trunk that ever was made of wood. If they are too small they are
worse than none.
Many having thought the use of these pipes to be to let out the air, have made
then too small, so that they would vent the air fa^^ enough to let the water in
with considerable velocity, but would not vent the water fast enough when full,
to cheek its motion easily, in which case they are worse than none at all, for
if the air cannot escape freely, Art. 66.
the water cannot enter freely.

Whenever the air has been compressed in the trunk by the water coming in, Air
prevents trunks from bursting.
it has made a great blowing noise in escaping through the crevices, and
therefore has been blamed as the cause of the bursting of the trunk; whereas it
acted by its elastic principle as a great preventative against it. For I do
suppose, that if we were to pump the air all out of a trunk, 100 feet long, and
3 by 3 feet wide, and let the water in with full force, that it would burst, if
as thick as a cannon of cast metal: because in that case there would be 900
cubic feet of water, equal to 56250lbs. pressed on by the weight of the
atmosphere, with a velocity of 47 feet per second, to be suddenly stopped, the
shock would be inconceivable. To prevent ice from gathering on overshot wheels
when standing, the water is shut out of the trunk by a gate at the canal, and
what leaks through it is let through a hole in the bottom of the trunk: the water
is let in again with full force.


Therefore I do conclude it best, to make an air-pipe for every 20 or 30 feet,
of the full size of the trunk; but this will depend much on the depth of the
trunk below the surface of the reservoir, and many other circumstances.

Having now said what was necessary in order the better to understand the
theory of the power and principles of mechanical engines, and water acting on
the different principles on water-wheels, and for the establishing new and true
theories of the motion of the different kinds of water-wheels, I here quote
many of the ingenious Smeaton's experiments, that the reader may compare them
with the theories established, and judge for himself.

Art. 67. An experimental Enquiry, read in the Philosophical Society in London,
May 3rd and 10, 1759, concerning the Natural Powers of Water to (...) Mills and
other Machines, depending on a circular Motion, by James Smeaton, F.R.S.
WHAT I have to communicate on this subject was originally deduced from
experiment made on working models, which I look upon (...) the best means of
obtaining the outlines in mechanical enquiries. But in this case it is
necessary to distinguish the circumstances in which a (...) differ from a
machine in large: otherwise a ^^^del is more apt to lead us from the truth than
^^wards it. Hence the common observation, (...) a thing may do very well in a
model that (...) not do in large. And indeed though the (...) circumspection be
used in this way the best structure of machines cannot be fully ascertained,
(...) by making trials with them of their proper (...) It is for this purpose
that though the model ^^ferred to, and the greatest part of the following
experiments, were made in the year 1752 (...) 1753 yet deferred offering them
to the (...) till I had an opportunity of putting the deduction made therefrom
in real practice in a variety (...) cases and for various purposes, so as to be
able assure the society, that I have found them to ^^swer.

PART I. Concerning Undershot Water-wheels.
Plate XII is a view of the machine for experiments, on water-wheels, wherein

ABCD is the lower cistern or magazine for receiving the water after it has
left the wheel and for supplying

DE the upper cistern or head, Art. 67.
wherein the water being raised to any height by a pump, that height is shown by

FG a small rod divided into inches and parts, with a float at the bottom to
move the rod up and down, as the surface of the water rises and falls.

HI is a rod by which the sluice is drawn, and stopped at any height required,
by means of

^K a pin or peg, which fits several holes placed in the manner of a diagonal
scale upon the face of the rod HI.

GL is the upper part of the rod of the pump for drawing the water out of the
lower cistern, in order to raise and keep up the surface thereof to its desired
height in the head DE, thereby to supply the water expended by the aperture of
the sluice.

NM is the arch and handle of the pump, which is limited in its stroke by

N a piece for stopping the handle from raising the piston too high, that also
being prevented from going too low, by meeting the bottom of the barrel.

O is the cylinder upon which the cord winds, and which being conducted over
the pulleys P and Q, raises

R the scale, into which the weights are put for trying the power of the water.

W the beam, which supports the scale that is placed 15 or 16 feet higher than
the wheel.

XX is the pump-barrel 5 inches diameter and 11 inches long.

Y is the piston, and

Z is the fixed valve.

G V is a cylinder of wood fixed upon the pump-rod, and reaches above the
surface of the water, this piece of wood being of such a thickness that its
section is half the area of the pump-barrel, will cause the water to rise in
the head as much while the piston is descending as while is rising, Art. 67.
and will thereby keep the gauge F G more equally to its height.

aa shows one of the two wires that serves (...) a director to the float.

b is the aperture of the sluice.

ca is a kant-board for kanting the water down the opening cd into the lower
cistern.

ce is a sloping board for bringing back the ^^ter that is thrown up by the
wheel.

There is a contrivance for engaging and disengaging the scale and weight
instantaneously from the wheel, by means of a hollow cylinder (...) which the
cord winds by slipping it on the (...) and when it is disengaged it is held to
its place (...) a ratchet-wheel, for without this experiment could not be made
with any degree of exacted.

The apparatus being now explained I think necessary to assign the sense in
which I use (...) term Power.

The word power is used in practical mechanics I apprehend to signify the
exertion (...) strength, gravity, impulse, or pressure, so a^ (...) produce
motion.

The raising of a weight relative to the height to which it can be raised in a
given time, is (...) most proper measure of power. Or in (...) words, if the
weight raised, is multiplied by the height to which it can be raised in a given
time the product is the measure of the power raising it, and consequently all
those powers are equal. But note all this is to be understood in case of slow
or equable motion of the body raised, for in quick, accelerated, or retarded
motions, the visinertia of the matter moved will make a variation.

In comparing the effects produced by water-wheels with the powers producing
them; or in other words to know what part of the original power is necessarily
lost in the application, we must previously know how much of the power is spent
in overcoming the friction of the machinery and the resistance of the air, Art.
67.
also what is the real velocity of the water at the instant it strikes the
wheel, and the real quantity of water expended in a given time.

From the velocity of the water at the instant that it strikes the wheel,
given; the height of the head productive of such velocity can be deduced, from
acknowledged and experienced principles of hydrostatics: so that by multiplying
the quantity or weight of water really expended in a given time, by the height
of head so obtained; which must be considered as the height from which that
weight of water had descended, in that given time; we shall have a product
equal to the original power of the water, and clear of all uncertainty that
would arise from the friction of the water in passing small apertures, and from
all doubts, arising from the different measure of spouting waters, assigned by
different authors.

On the other hand the sum of the weights raised by the action of this water,
and of the weight required to overcome the friction and resistance of the
machine; multiplied by the height to which the weight can be raised in the time
given, the product will be the effect of that power; and the proportion of the
two products will be the proportion of the power to the effect: so that by
loading the wheel with different weights successively, we shall be able to
determine at what particular load and velocity of the wheel the effect is a
maximum.

To determine the Velocity of the Water striking the Wheel.
First let the wheel be put in motion by the water, but without any weight in
the scale; and let the number of turns in a minute be 60: now it is evident,
Art. 67.
that was the wheel free from friction and resistance, that 60 times the
circumference of the wheel would be the space through which the water would
have passed in a minute; with that velocity wherewith it struck the wheel: But
the wheel being incumbered with friction and resistance and yet moving 60 turns
in a minute, it is plain that the velocity of the water must have been greater
than 60 circumferences, before it met with the wheel. Let the cord now be wound
round the cylinder but contrary to the usual way, and put as much weight in the
scale as will without any water turn the wheel somewhat faster than 60 turns in
a minute, suppose 63, and call this the counter-weight, th^^ let it be tried
again with the water assisted by this counter-weight, the wheel therefore will
now make more than 60 turns in a minute, suppose 64, hence we conclude the
water still exerts some power to turn the wheel. Let the weight be increased so
as to make 64 turns in a minute without the water, then try it with the water
and the weight as before, and suppose it now makes the same number of turns
with the water, as without, viz. 64, hence it is evident, that (...) this case
the wheel makes the same number of turns as it would with the water if the
wheel had no friction or resistance at all, because the weight is equivalent
thereto, for if the counter weight was too little to overcome the friction, the
water would accelerate the wheel, and if too great it would retard it, for the
water in this case becomes a regulator of the wheel's motion, and the velocity
of its circumference becomes a measure of the velocity of the water.

In like manner in seeking the greatest product or maximum of effect; having
found by trials what weight gives the greatest product, by simply multiplying
the weight in the scale, by the number of turns of the wheel, find what weight
in the scale, Art. 67.
when the cord is on the contrary side of the cylinder, will cause the wheel to
make the same number of turns, the same way without water: it is evident that
this weight will be nearly equal to all friction and resistance taken together;
and consequently that the weight in the scale, with twice The weight of the
scale makes part of the weight both ways, viz. both of the weight and
counter-weight.
the weight of the scale, added to the back or counter-weight, will be equal to
the weight that could have been raised supposing the machine had been without
friction or resistance, and which multiplied by the height to which it was
raised, the product will be the greatest effect of that power.

The Quantity of Water expended is found thus.
The pump was so carefully made, that no water escaped back through the
leathers, it delivered the same quantity each stroke, whether quick or slow,
and by ascertaining the quantity of 12 strokes and counting the number of
strokes in a minute, that was sufficient to keep the surface of the water to
the same height, the quantity expended was found.

These things will be further illustrated by going over the calculations of one
set of experiments.

Specimen of a Set of Experiments.
The sluice drawn to the 1st hole, The water above the floor of the sluice 30
inch. Strokes of the pump in a minute, 39 The head raised by 12 strokes, 21
inch. The wheel raised the empty scale and made turns in a minute, 80 With a
counter-weight of 1lb.8 oz. Art.67.
it made 85 Ditto, tried with water, 86

No. lbs. oz. turns in a min. product. 1 4: 0 45 180 2 5: 0 42 210 3 6: 0 36
217 4 7: 0 33 236 5 8:0 30 240 m^^. 6 9: 0 26 238 7 10: 0 22 220 8 11: 0 16 1^1
9 12: 0 When the wheel moved so slow as not to rid the water so fast as (...)
by the sluice, the accumulated water falls back upon the (...) the wheel
immediately ceases moving.

Note -- This note of the author argues in favor of drawing the (...) the
floats.


ceased working.

Counter-weight for 30 turns without water oz. in the scale.

N. B. The area of the head was 105,8 (...) inches, weight of the empty scale
and pulley (...) ounces, circumference of the cylinder 9 inches and
circumference of the water-wheel 75 do.

Reduction of the above Set of Experiments.
The circumference of the wheel 75 inches multiplied by 86 turns, gives 6450
inches for (...) velocity of the water in a minute, 1/(...); of which will be
the velocity in a second, equal to (...) inches, Art. 67.
or 8,96 feet, which is due to a head of 15 inches, This is determined by the
common maxim of hydrostatics; that the velocity of spouting waters is equal to
the velocity that a heavy body would (...) in falling from the height of the
reservoir; and is proved by the (...) of jets, to the height of their
reservoirs nearly.
and this we call the virtual or effective head.

The area of the head being 105,8 inches, this multiplied by the weight of
water of one cubic inch, is equal to the decimal of,579 of the ounce
avoirdupois, gives 61,26 ounces for the weight of as much water as is contained
in the head upon one inch in depth, 1 of which is 3,83lb. this multiplied by
the depth 21 inches gives 80,43lb. for the value of 12 strokes, and by
proportion 39 (the number made in a minute) will give 264,7lb. the weight of
water expended in a minute.

Now, as 264,7lb. of water may be considered as having descended through a
space of 15 inches in a minute, the product of these two numbers 3970 will
express the power of the water to produce mechanical effects; which are as
follows.

The velocity of the wheel at the maximum as appears above, was 30 turns in a
minute; which multiplied by 9 inches, the circumference of the cylinder, makes
270 inches: but as the scale was hung by a pulley and double line, the weight
was only raised half of this, viz.135 inches.

The weight in the scale at the maximum 8lb. 0 oz. Weight of the scale and
pulley, 0lb. 10 oz. Counter-weight, scale, and pulley, 0lb. 12 oz. Sum of the
resistance 9lb. 6 oz. or 9,375lb

Now, as 9,375lb. is raised 135 inches, these two numbers being multiplied
together produces 266, which expresses the effect produced at a maximum: Art.
67.
so that the proportion of the power to the effect is as 3970:1266, or as
10:3,18.

But though this is the greatest single effect ^^^^ducible from the power
mentioned, by the (...) pulse of the water upon an undershot wheel (...) as the
whole power of the water is not extra (...) thereby, this will not be the true
ratio between the power and the sum of all the effects procurable therefrom:
for the water must necessary leave the wheel with a velocity equal to (...)
circumference, it is plain that some part of (...) power of the water must
remain after (...) the wheel.

The velocity of the wheel at a maximum (...) turns a minute, and consequently
its circumference moves at the rate of 3,123 feet per second which answers to a
head of 1,82 inches: this (...) multiplied by the expense of water in a minute,
viz. 264,7lb. produces 4^1 for the power remaining, this being deducted from
the (...) power 3970, leaves 3489 which is that (...) the power that is spent
in producing the (...) 1266, so that the power spent 3489 is (...) greatest
effect 1266, as 10:3,62, or as 11:4.

The velocity of the water striking the (...) 86 turns in a minute, is to the
velocity at a ^^^imum 30 turns a minute, as 10:3,5 or as 20 (...) so that the
velocity of the wheel is a little (...) than of the velocity of the water.

The load at a maximum has been shown (...) equal to 9lb. 6 oz. and that the
wheel ceased ^^^^ing with 12lb. in the scale: to which if the (...) of the
scale be added, viz.10 oz. The resistance of the air in this ^ase ceases, and
the friction is ^^^^ded, as 12lb. in the scale was sufficient to stop the wheel
after it (...) in full motion, and therefore somewhat more than a
counter-balance (...) impulse of the water.
the proper (...) will be nearly as 3 to 4, between the load at the maximum and
that by which the wheel is ^^^^ped. I may here observe, that it is probable,
that if the gate of the sluice (...) been drawn as near the float-boards as
possible, (as is the practice in America, where water is applied to act by
impulse alone) that the wheel would have continued to move until loaded with 1
1-2 times the weight of the maximum load, viz. 9lb.6 oz. multiplied by 1 1-2 is
equal to 14lb.1 oz. Then it would have agreed with the theory established art
41. This perhaps escaped the notice of our author.


It is somewhat remarkable, Art. 67.
that though the velocity of the wheel in relation to the water turns out
greater than 1-3 of the velocity of the water, yet the impulse of the water in
case of the maximum is more than double of what is assigned by theory; that is,
instead of 4/9 of the column it is nearly equal to the whole column. This
observation of the author I think a strong confirmation of the truths of the
theory established art. 41; where the maximum velocity is made to be, 577 parts
of the velocity of the water, and the load to be 2-3 the greatest load: For if
the gate had been drawn near the floats, the greatest load would probably have
been 14lb. 1 oz. or as 3 to 2, of the maximum load.


It must be remembered, therefore, that in the present case, the wheel was not
placed in an open river where the natural current after it has communicated its
impulse to the float, has room on all sides to escape, as the theory supposes;
but in a conduit or race, to which the float being adapted, the water cannot
otherwise escape than by moving along with the wheel. It is observable, that a
wheel working in this manner as soon as the water meets the float, it receiving
a sudden check rises up against the float, like a wave against a fixed object,
insomuch, that when the sheet of water is not a quarter of an inch thick,
before it meets the float, yet this sheet will act upon the whole surface of a
float, whose height is three inches; consequently, was the float no higher than
the thickness of the sheet of water, as the theory also supposes, a great part
of the force would be lost by the water dashing over the float.

In confirmation of what is already delivered, I have adjoined the following
table, containing the result of 27 experiments made and reduced in the manner
above specified. What remains of the theory of undershot wheels, will naturally
follow from a comparison of the different experiments together.

A TABLE of Experiments, No. 1.
Number. (...) of the water in the cistern. Turns of the wheel, unloaded.
Virtual head deduced therefrom. Turns at a maximum. Load at the equilibrium.
Load at the maximum. Water expended in a minute. Power. Effect. Ratio of the
power and effect. Ratio of the velocities of the water and wheel. (...) to the
load at the (...). in inchs. lb. oz. lb. oz. lbs. 1 33 88 15,85 30 13 10 10 9
275 4358 1411 10:3, 24 10:3,4 10:7,(...) 2 30 86 15, 30 12 10 9 6 264, 7 3970
1266 10:3,2 10:3,5 10:7,4 3 27 ^2 13, 7 28 11 2 8 6 243 3329 1044 10:3,15
10:3,4 10:7,(...) 4 ^4 78 12,3 27,7 9 10 7 5 235 2890 901,4 10:3,12 10:3,55
10:7,5 5 21 75 11,4 25,9 8 10 6 5 214 2439 735,7 10:3, 02 10:3,45 10:7,(...) 6
18 70 9,95 23,5 6 10 5 5 199 1970 561,8 10:2, 85 10:3,36 10:8,(...) 7 ^5 65
8,54 23, 4 5 2 4 4 178,5 1524 442,5 10:2,9 10:3,6 10:8,(...) 8 (...) ^0 7,29 22
3 10 3 5 161 1173 328 10:2,8 10:3, 77 10:(...),(...) 9 ^9 52 5,47 19 2 12 2 8
134 733 213,7 10:2, 9 10:3,65 10:(...),(...) 10 (...) 42 3,55 16 1 12 1 10 114
404,7 117 10:2, 82 10:3,8 10:(...),(...) 11 ^4 84 14,2 30,75 13 10 10 14 342
4890 1505 10:3,07 10:3,66 10:(...),(...) 12 21 81 13,5 29 11 10 9 6 297 4009
1223 10:3,01 10:3,6^ 10:(...),(...) 13 1^ ^2 10,5 26 9 10 8 7 285 2993 975
10:3,25 10:3,6 10:(...),(...) 14 15 ^0 9,6 25 7 10 6 14 277 2659 774 10:2,92
10:3,62 10:(...),(...) 15 12 13 8,0 25 5 10 4 14 234 1872 549 10:2,94 10:3,97
10:(...),(...) 16 (...) 16 6,37 23 4 0 3 13 201 1280 390 10:3, 05 10:4,1
10:(...),(...) 17 ^6 16 4,25 21 2 8 2 4 167,5 712 212 10:2, 98 10:4,55
10:(...),(...) 18 15 72 10 5 29 11 10 9 6 357 3748 1201 10:3,23 10:4,02
10:(...),(...) 19 12 ^6 8,75 26,75 8 10 7 6 330 2887 878 10:3,05 10:4,05
10:(...),(...) 20 9 59 6,8 24, 5 5 8 5 0 255 1734 541 10:3 01 10:4,22
10:(...),(...) 21 6 48 4,7 23,5 3 2 3 0 228 1064 317 10:2,99 10:4,9
10:(...),(...) 22 12 68 9, 3 27 9 2 8 6 359 3338 1006 10:3,02 10:3,97
10:(...),(...) 23 9 58 6,8 26,25 6 2 5 13 332 1257 686 10:3,04 10:4,52
10:(...),(...) 24 6 ^8 4,7 24,5 3 12 3 8 262 1231 385 10:3,13 10:5,1
10:(...),(...) 25 9 60 7,29 27,3 6 12 6 (...) 355 2588 783 10:3,03 10:4, 55
10:(...),(...) 26 (...) 50 5,03 24,6 4 6 (...) 307 1544 456 10:2,92 10:4,9
10:(...),(...) 27 6 50 5,03 26 4 15 4 9 360 1811 534 10:2,95 10:5,2
10:(...),(...) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13

Maxims and Observations deduced from the foregoing Table of Experiments. Art.
67.

MAX. 1. That the virtual or effective head being the same, the effect will be
nearly as the quantity of water expended.

This will appear by comparing the contents of the columns 4, 8 and 10, in the
foregoing sets of experiments, as for Example I. taken from No. 8 and 25, viz.
No. Virtual head. Water expended. Effect. 8 7, 29 161 328 25 7, 29 355 785

Now the heads being equal if the effects are proportioned to the water
expended, we shall have by maxim I. as 161:355::328:723; but 723 falls short of
785, as it turns out in experiment, according to No. 25 by 62. The effect
therefore of No. 25, compared with No. 8, is greater than according to the
present maxim, in the ratio of 14 to 13.

The foregoing example with four similar ones are seen at one view in the
following table.

If the true maximum velocity of the wheel be, 577 of the velocity of the
water, and the true maximum load be 2-3 of the whole column, as shown in
art.42; then the effect will be to the power in the ratio, of 100 to 38, or as
10 to 3,8, a little more than appears by this table of experiments, in column 9
and 10: the difference is owing to the disadvantageous application of the water
on the wheel in the model.
A TABLE of Experiments, No. 2.
Examples. No. Table 1. Virtual head, Expense of water. Effect. COMPARISON.
Variation. Proportional variation, 1st 8 7,29 161 328 161: 355:: 328: 723 624
14: 13 25 7,29 355 785 2d 13 10, 5 285 975 285: 357:: 975: 1221 11 -- 121: 122
18 10,5 357 1210 3d 22 6,8 255 541 255: 332:: 541: 704 18 -- 38: 39 23 6,8 332
686 4th 21 4,7 228 317 228: 262:: 317: 364 214 18: 17 24 4,7 262 385 5th 26
5,03 307 450 307: 360:: 450: 531 3^ 17^: 177 27 5,03 360 534

By this table of experiments it appears that some fall short, Art. 67.
and others exceed the maximum, and all agree as near as can be expected in an
affair where so many different circumstances are concerned; therefore we may
conclude the maxim to be true.

MAX. II. That the expense of the water being the same, the effect will be
nearly as the height of the virtual or effective head.

This also will appear by comparing the contents of columns 4, 8 and 10 in any
of the sets of experiments.

Example 1. of No. 2 and No. 24.
No. Virt. head. Expense. Effect. 2 15 264,7 1266 24 4,7 262 385

Now as the expenses are not quite equal, we must proportion one of the effects
accordingly, thus: By maxim I. 262:264,7:: 385:389 And by max. II. 15:
4,7::1266:397 Difference 8

The effect therefore of No. 24, compared with No. 2, is less than according to
the present maxim in the ratio of 49: 50.

MAX. III. that the quantity of water expended being the same, the effect is
nearly as the square root of its velocity.

This will appear by comparing the contents of columns 3, 8 and 10, in any set
of experiments; (...) for Example I. of No. 2 with No. 24, viz.
No. Turns in a min. Expense. Effect. 2 86 264,7 1266 24 48 262, 385

The velocity being as the number of turns, Art. 67.
(...) shall have By maxim I. 262: 264,7::385:389 And by max. III. 862
482::1266:394 7396:2304 Difference 5.

The effect of No. 24, compared with No, (...). less than by the present maxim
in the ratio (...) 78:79.

MAX. IV. The aperture being the same, (...) effect will be nearly as the cube
of the velocity of the water.

This also will appear by comparing the contents of columns 3, 8 and 10, as for
Example of No. 1 and No. 10, viz.
No. Turns. Expense. Effect. 1 88 275 1411 10 42 114 117

LEMMA. It must here be observed, that, water passes out of an aperture in the
same ^^^tion, but with different velocities, the exp^^^ will be proportional to
the velocity; and therefore conversely, if the expense is not proportional to
the velocity, the section of water is not (...) same.

Now comparing the water discharged with (...) turns of No. 1 and 10, we shall
have 88:42 (...) 131,2; but the water discharged by No. 10 (...) 114lb.
therefore, though the sluice was drawn to (...) same height in No. 10 as in No.1:
yet the ^^^tion of the water passing out, was less in No. (...) than No. 1, in
the proportion of 114 to 131 consequently had the effective aperture or section
of the water been the same in No. 10 as in No. (...) so that 131, 2lb. of water
had been discharged, instead of 114lb. the effect would have been increased in
the same proportion; that is, By lemma 88: 42::275:131, Art. 67.
2 By maxim I. 114: 131,2::117:134,5 And by max. IV. 883: 423::1411:153,5
681472: 74088 Difference 19

The effect therefore of No. 10, compared with No. 1, is less than it ought to
be, by the present maxim, in the ratio of 7:8.

OBSERVATIONS.
OBSERVE. 1st. On comparing column 2 and 4, table I, it is evident, that the
virtual head bears no certain proportion to the head of water, but that when
the aperture is greater or the velocity of the water issuing therefrom less,
they approach nearer to a coincidence: and consequently, in the large opening
of mills and sluices, where great quantities of water are discharged from
moderate ^eads, the head of water and virtual head determined from the velocity
will nearer agree, as experience confirms.

OBSERVE. 2nd. Upon comparing the several proportions between the powers and
effects in column 11th, the most general is that of 10 to 3; the streams are 10
to 3,2 and 10 to 2,8; but as it is observable, that where the quantity of water
or the velocity thereof is great, that is, where the power is greatest, the 2nd
term of the ratio is greatest also, we may therefore well allow the proportion
subsisting in large works as 3 to 1.

OBSERVE. 3rd. The proportion of velocities between the water and wheel in
column 12 are contained in the limits of 3 to 1 and 2 to 1; but as the greater
velocities approach the limits of 3 to (...), and the greater quantity of water
approach to that of 2 to 1, Art. 67.
the best general proportion will be that of 5 to 2. I may here observe, that
our friend Smeaton may be wrong in his ^^c^asion, that the best general ratio
of the velocity of the water to that of the wheel will be as 5 to 2; because,
we may observe, that in the first ^^^^ment, where the virtual head was 15,85
inches, and the gate drawn to (...) 1st hole, the ratio is as 10:3,4. But in
the last experiment, where (...) is as 5,03 inches, and gate drawn to the 6th
hole, the ratio is as 10:(...) and that the 2nd term of the ratio increases
gradually, as the head (...), and quantity of water increases: therefore we may
conclude, that the large openings of mills, that the ratio may approach to 3 to
2; which (...) agree with the practice and experiments of many able
mill-wrights of ^^^rica, and many experiments I have made on mills. And as it
is better (...) give the wheel a velocity too great than too slow, I conclude,
the (...) an undershot mill must have nearly 2-3 of the velocity of the water,
to (...) a maximum effect.


OBSERVE. 4th. On comparing the numbers (...) column 13, it appears, that there
is no certain ratio between the load that the wheel will ca^^^ (...) its
maximum, and what will totally stop it; (...) that they are contained within
the limits of (...) 19 and of 20 to 15; but as the effect approach nearest to
the ratio of 20 to 15 or of 4 to 3, (...) the power is greatest, whether by
increase of velocity or quantity of water, this seems to be (...) most
applicable to large works: but as the (...) that a wheel ought to have in order
to work the best advantage, can be assigned by knowing (...) effect it ought to
produce, and the velocity, (...) ought to have in producing it, the exact
knowledge of the greatest load that it will bear is (...) less consequence in
practice. Perhaps the author is here again deceived by the imperfection of
(...) model; for had the water been drawn close to the float, the load that
(...) totally stop the wheel would always be equal to the column of water (...)
on the wheel. See the note page 70. The friction of the shute and air (...)
^^stroyed great part of the force of his small quantity of water.


It is to be noted, that in almost all of the examples under the three last
maxims (of the four preceding) the effect of the lesser power falls short (...)
its due proportion to the greater, when comp^^^^ by its maxim. And hence, if
the experiment are taken strictly, we must infer that the (...) increase and
diminish in an higher ratio than (...) maxims suppose; but as the deviations is
not very considerable, Art. 67.
the greatest being about of the quantity in question, and as it is not easy to
make experiments of so compound a nature, with absolute precision, we may
rather suppose that the lesser power is attended with some friction, or works
under some disadvantage, not accounted for: and therefore we may conclude that
these maxims will hold very nearly, when applied to works in large.

After the experiments abovementioned were tried, the wheel which had 24 floats
was reduced to 12, which caused a diminution in the effect on account of a
greater quantity of water escaping between the floats and the floor, but a
cricular sweep being adapted thereto, of such a length that one float entered
the curve before the preceding one quitted it, the effect came so near to the
former, as not to give hopes of increasing the effect by increasing the number
of floats past 24, in this particular wheel.

PART II. Art. 68. Concerning Overshot Wheels.
IN the former part of this essay, we have considered the impulse of a confined
stream, acting on undershot wheels; we now proceed to examine the power and
application of water, when acting by its gravity on overshot wheels.

It will appear in the course of the following deductions, that the effect of
the gravity of descending bodies, is very different from the effect of the
stroke of such as are non-elastic, though generated by an equal mechanical
power.

The alterations of the machinery already described, Art. 68.
to accommodate the same for experiments on overshot wheels, were principally
as follows.

Plate XII. The sluice I b being shut down, the rod H I was taken off. The
undershot water wheel was taken off the axis, and instead thereof an overshot
wheel of the same size and diameter was put in its place. Note, this wheel was
2 inches deep in the shroud or depth of the bucket, the number of buckets was
36.

A trunk for bringing the water upon the wheel was fixed according to the
dotted lines fg, the aperture was adjusted by a shuttle, which also closed up
the outer end of the trunk, when the water was to be stopped.

Specimen of a SET of EXPERIMENTS, Art. 68.

Head 6 Inches -- 14 1-2 strokes of the Pump in a minute, 12 ditto=80 lb. The
small difference in the value of 12 strokes of the pump from the former
experiments, was owing to a small difference in the length of the stroke,
occasioned by the warping of the wood.
weight of the scale (being wet) 10 1-2 ounces.

Counter weight for 20 turns besides the Scale, 3 ounces.

No. with.in the scale. turns. product. observations. 1 0 60 -- threw most part
of the water out of the wheel. 2 1 56 -- 3 2 52 -- 4 3 49 147 received the
water more quietly. 5 4 47 188 6 5 45 225 7 6 42 255 8 7 41 287 9 8 38 308 10 9
36 328 11 10 35 355 12 11 32 360 13 12 31 375 14 13 28 370 15 14 27 385 16 15
26 390 17 16 24 392 18 17 22 386 19 18 21 391 20 19 20 394 maximum. 21 20 19
395 22 21 18 383 23 22 18 396 worked irregular. 24 23 overset by its load.

Reduction of the preceding Specimen. Art. 68.

In these experiments the head being 6 inches, and the height of the wheel 24
inches, the whole descent will be 30 inches: the expense of water was 14
strokes of the pump in a minute, where of 12 contained 80lb. therefore the
water expended in a minute, was 96lb. which multiplied by 30 inches, gives the
power =2900.

If we take the 20th experiment for the maximum, we shall have 20 turns a
minute, each of which raised the weight 4 inches, that is 93,37 inches, in a
minute. The weight in the scale was 19lb. the weight of the scale 10 oz. the
counter-weight 3 oz. in the scale, which with the weight of the scale 10 oz.
makes in the whole 20lb. which is the whole resistance or load, this multiplied
by 93,37 makes 1914 for the effect.

The ratio therefore of the power and effect will be as 2900:1914, or as 10:6,6
or as 3 to (...) nearly.

But if we compute the power from the height of the wheel only, we have
96lb.x24 inches (...) 2320 for the power, and this will be to the effect as
2320:1914 or as 10:8,2 or as 5 to 4 nearly

The reduction of this specimen is set down in No. 9 of the following table,
and the rest were deducted from a similar set of experiments, reduced in the
same manner.

TABLE III. -- Containing the result of 16 sets of Experiments on
Overshot-Wheels.
Number. Whole descent. Water expended per minute. Turns at a maximum per
minute. Weight raised at a maximum. Power of the whole descent. Power of the
Wheel. Effect. Ratio of the whole power and effect. Ratio of the power of the
wheel and effect. Mean ratio. inc. lb. lbs. 1 27 30 19 6 810 720 0556 10:6,9
10:7,7 Medium 10:8,1 2 27 56 16 14 1530 1360 1060 10:6,9 10:7,8 3 27 56 20 12
1530 1360 1167 10:7,6 10:8,4 4 27 63 20 13 1710 1524 1245 10:7,3 10:8,2 5 27 76
21 15 2070 1840 1500 10:7,3 10:8,2 6 28 73 18 17 2090 1764 1476 10:7 10:8,4
10:8,2 7 28 96 20 20 2755 2320 1868 10:6,8 10:8,1 8 30 90 20 19 2700 2160 1755
10:6,5 10:8,1 10:8,2 9 30 96 20 20 2900 2320 1914 10:6,6 10:8,2 10 30 113 21 23
3400 2720 2221 10:6,5 10:8,2 11 33 56 20 13 1870 1360 1230 10:6,6 10:9 10:8,5
12 33 106 22 21(...) 3520 256 2153 10:6,1 10:8,4 13 33 146 23 27(...) 4840 3520
2846 10:5,9 10:8,1 14 35 65 19 16(...) 2275 1560 1466 10:6,5 10:9,4 10:8,5 15
35 120 21 25 4200 2880 2467 10:5,9 10:8,6 16 35 163 1/2; 25 26 5728 3924 2981
10:5,2 10:7,6 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11

OBSERVATIONS AND DEDUCTION FROM THE FOREGOING EXPERIMENTS.
I. Concerning the Ratio between the Power and (...) of Overshot Wheels.
The effective power of the water must be reckoned upon the whole descent,
because it must be raised to that height in order to be in a condition of
producing the same effect a second time.

The ratios between the powers so estimated and the effects at the maximum,
deduced from the several sets of experiments are exhibited at (...) view in
column 9 of table III; and hence it appears, that those ratios differs from
that of 10 to 7,6 to that of 10 to 5,2; that is, nearly from (...) 3 to 4:2. In
those experiments where the head of water and quantities expended are least;
the proportion is nearly as 4 to 3, but where the head and quantities are
greatest, it approaches nearer to that of 4 to 2, and by a medium of the whole
the ratio is that of 3:2 nearly. We have seen before in our observations upon
the effects of undershot wheels, that the general ratio of the power to the
effect when greatest, was as 3:1. The effect, therefore of overshot wheels,
under the (...) circumstances of quantity and fall, is at a medium double to
that of the undershot: and a consequence thereof, that non-elastic bodies when
acting by their impulse or collision, communication only a part of their
original power; the other part being spent in changing their figure, in
consequence of the stroke. These observations of the author agree with the
theory art. 41 -- 42. In add that non-elastic bodies, when acting by impulse or
collision ^^^cate only half of their original power, by the laws of motion.


The powers of water computed from the height of the wheel only, compared with
the (...) as in column 10, Art. 68.
appear to observe a more constant ratio: for if we take the medium of each
class, which is set down in column 11. we shall find the extreme to differ no
more than from the ratio of 10:8,1 to that of 10:8,5, and as the second terms
of the ratio gradually increases from 8,1 to 8,5 by an increase of head from 3
inches to 11, the excess of 8,5 above 8,1 is to be imputed to the superior
impulse of the water, at the head of 11 inches, above that of 3 inches, so that
if we reduce 8,1 to 8, on account of the impulse of the 3 inch head, we shall
have the ratio of the power computed upon the height of the wheel only, to the
effect at a maximum, as 10:8 or as 5:4 nearly. And from the equality of the
ratio, between power and effect, subsisting where the constructions are
similar, we must infer that the effects (...) well as the powers, are as the
quantities of water and perpendicular heights, multiplied together respectively.

II. Concerning the most proper Height of the Wheel in Proportion to the whole
descent.
We have already seen in the preceding observation, that the effect of the same
quantity of water, descending through the same perpendicular space, is double,
when acting by its gravity upon an overshot wheel, to what the same produces
when acting by its impulse, upon an undershot. It also appears that by
increasing the head from 3 to 11 inches, that is, the whole descent, from 27 to
35, or in the ratio of 7 to 9 nearly, the effect is advanced no more than in
the ratio of 8,1 to 8,4; that is, as 7:7,26, and consequently the increase of
the effect is not 1/7 of the increase of the perpendicular height. Hence it
follows that the higher the wheel is in proportion to the whole descent, the
greater will be the effect; because it depends less upon the impulse of the
head, and more upon the gravity of the water, Art. 68.
in the buckets: and if we consider how obliquely the water issuing from the
head must strike the buckets, we shall not be at a loss to account for the
little advantage that arises from the impulse thereof; and shall immediately
see of how little consequence his impulse is to the effect of an overshot
wheel. However, as every thing has its limits, so has this: for thus much is
desirable, that the water should have somewhat greater velocity, than the
circumference of the wheel, in coming thereon: otherwise the wheel will not
only be retarded by the buckets striking the water, but thereby dashing a part
of it over, so much of the power is lost.

The velocity that the circumference of the wheel ought to have being known,
the head requisite to give the water its proper velocity is easily found, by
the common rules of Hydrostatics and will be found much less than what is
comm^nly practiced.

III. Concerning the Velocity of the Circumferences of the Wheel in order to
produce the greatest Effect.
If a body is let fall freely from the ^urface of the head to the bottom of the
descent, it will take a certain time in falling; and in this case the whole
action of gravity is spent in giving the body a certain velocity: But, if this
body in falling is (...) to act upon some other body, so as to produce (...)
mechanical effect, the falling body will be retarded; because, a part of the
action of gravity is the^ spent in producing the effect, and the remainder only
giving motion to the falling body: and therefore, the slower a body descends,
the greater will be the portion of the action of gravity applicable to the
producing a mechanical effect. Hence we are led to this general rule, Art. 68.
that the less the velocity of the wheel, the greater will be the effect
thereof. A confirmation of this doctrine, together with the limits it is
subject to in practice, may be deduced from the foregoing specimen of a set of
experiments.

From these experiments it appears, that when the wheel made about 20 turns in
a minute, the effect was near upon the greatest; when it made 30 turns, the
effect was diminished about 1/20; part; but, that when it made 40, it was
diminished about when it made less than 18, its motion was irregular; and when
it was loaded so as not to admit its making 18 turns, the wheel was overpowered
by its load.

It is an advantage in practice, that the velocity of the wheel should not be
diminished farther than what will procure some solid advantage in point of
power; because, as the motion is slower, the buckets must be made larger; and
the wheel being more loaded with water, the stress upon every part of the work
will be increased in proportion: the best velocity for practice therefore will
be such, as when the wheel here used made about 30 turns in a minute; that is,
when the velocity of the circumference is a little more than 3 feet in a second.

Experience confirms, that this velocity of 3 feet in a second, is applicable
to the highest overshot wheels as well as the lowest; and all other parts of
the work being properly adapted thereto, will produce very nearly the greatest
effect possible. However, this also is certain, from experience, that high
wheels may deviate further from this rule, before they will loose their power,
by a given aliquot part of the whole, than low ones can be admitted to do: for
a wheel of 24 feet high may move at the rate of 6 feet per second without
loosing any considerable part of its power: and, Art. 68.
on the other hand, I have seen a wheel of 33 feet high that has moved very
steadily and well, with a velocity but little exceeding 2 feet. Probably this
wheel was working forge of furnace bellows, which have deceived many by their
slow regular motion.


[Said Smeaton has also made a model of a windmill, and a complete set of
experiments on the power and effect of the wind, acting on windmill sails of
different constructions. But as the accounts thereof are quite too long for the
compass of my work, I therefore only extract little more than a few of the
principal maxims deduced from his experiments, which, I think, may not only be
of good service, to those who are concerned in building wind-mills, but may
serve to confirm some principles, deduced from his experiments on water-mills.]

PART III. Art. 69. On the Construction and Effects of Windmill Sails. Read
May 31st and June 14th, 1759, in the Philosophical society of London.

IN trying experiments on windmill sails, the wind itself is too uncertain to
answer the purpose: we must therefore have recourse to artificial wind.

This may be done two ways; either by causing the air to move against the
machine, or the machine to move against the air. To cause the air to move
against the machine in a sufficient column with steadiness and the requisite
velocity, is not easily put in practice: To carry the machine forward in a
right line against the air, would require a larger room than I could
conveniently meet with. Art.69.
What I found most practicable therefore was, to carry the axis whereon the
sails were to be fixed progressively round in the circumference of a large
circle. Upon this idea the machine was constructed. I decline giving any
description or draught of this machine, as I have not room; but I may say, that
it was constructed so as to wind up a weight, (as did the other model) in order
to find the effect of the power. I may also insert a specimen of a set of
experiments, which I scar will not be well understood, for want of a full
explanation of the machine.


Specimen of a Set of Experiments.
Radius of the sails 21 inches. Length of the sails in cloth, 18 Breadth of the
sails in the cloth, 5,6 In the following experiments the angle of the sail is
accounted from the plain of their motion; that is, when they stand at right
angles to the axis, their angle is denoted 0 degrees.; this notation being
agreeable to the language of practitioners, who call the angle so denoted the
weather of the sail; which they denominate greater or less, according to the
quantity of the angle.
Angle at the extremity, 10 degs. Do. at the greatest inclination, 25 20 turns
of the fails raised the weight 11,3 inch. Velocity of the center of the sails
in the circumference of the great circle in a second, in which the machine was
carried round, 6 feet. Continuance of the experiment, 52 secs. No. Weight in
the scale. Turns. Product. 1 0lb. 108 0 2 6 85 510 3 6 81 526 4 7 78 546 5 7 73
547 maxim. 6 8 65 520 7 9 0 0

The product is found by simply multiplying the weight in the scale by the
number of turns.

By this set of experiments it appears that the maximum velocity is of the
greatest velocity, and that the ratio of the greatest load to that of a maximum
is, Art. 69.
as 9 to 7,5, but by adding the weight of the scale and friction to the load
the ratio turns out to be as 10:8,4, or as 5 to 4 nearly. The following table
is the result of 19 similar sets of experiments.

By the following table it appears, that the most general ratio between the
velocity of the sails unloaded and when loaded to a maximum, is 3 to 2 nearly.

And the ratio between the greatest load and the load at a maximum (taking such
experiments where the sails answered best) is at a medium about as 6 to 5
nearly.

And that the kind of sails used in the 15th and 16th experiments is best of
all, because they produce the greatest effect or product, in proportion to
their quantity of surface, as appears in column 12.

TABLE IV. Containing Nineteen Sets of Experiments on Windmill Sails, of
various structures, positions and quantities of surface.
The kind of sails made (...) Number. Angle at the extreme^ties. Greatest
angle. Turos of the sails unloaded. Ditto at a maximum. Load at a maximum.
Greatest load. Product. Quantity of surface. Ratio of the greatest velocity to
the velocity at a maximum. Ratio of the greatest load ^o the load at maximum.
Ratio of a surface to the product. Plain sails at an angle of 55 degrees.
o o lb. lb. sq.in 1 35 35 66 42 7,56 12,59 318 404 10:7 10:6 10: 7,9 Plain
sails weathered according to common practice.
2 12 12 70 6,3 7,56 441 404 10:8,3 10:10,1 3 15 15 105 69 6,72 8,12 464 404
10:6,6 10:8,3 10:10,15 4 18 18 96 66 7,0 9,81 462 404 10:7 10:7,1 10:10,15
Weathered according to Maclaurin's theorem.
5 9 26,5 66 7,0 462 404 10:11,4 6 12 29,5 70,5 7,35 518 404 10:12,8 7 15 32,5
63,5 8,3 527 404 10:13,0 Weatherd in the Dutch manner, tried in various
positions.
8 0 15 120 93 4,75 5,31 442 404 10:7,7 10:8,9 10:11,0 9 3 18 120 79 7,0 8,12
553 404 10:6,6 10:8,6 10:13,7 10 5 20 78 7,5 8,12 585 404 10:9,2 10:14,5 11 7,5
22,5 113 77 8,3 9,81 639 404 10:6,8 10:8,5 10:15,8 12 10 25 108 73 8,69 10,37
634 404 10:6,8 10:8,4 10:15,7 13 12 27 100 66 8,41 10,94 580 404 10:6,6 10:7,7
10:14,4 Weathered in the Dutch manner, but enlarged toward the extremities.
14 7,5 22,5 123 75 10,65 12,59 799 505 10:6,1 10:8,5 10:15,8 15 10 25 117 74
11,08 13,69 820 505 10:6,3 10:8,1 10:16,2 16 12 27 114 66 12,09 14,23 799 505
10:5,8 10:8,4 10:15,8 17 15 30 96 63 12,09 14,78 762 505 10:6,6 10:8,2 10:15,1
8 Sails, being factors of elipses in their best positions.
18 12 22 105 64,5 16,42 27,87 1059 854 10:6,1 10:5,9 10:12,4 19 12 22 99 64,5
18,06 1165 1146 10:5,9 10:10,1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12

TABLE V. Containing the Result of 6 Sets of Experiments, made for determining
the Difference of Effect according to the Difference of the Wind.
Number. Angle at the extremity. Velocity of the wind in a second. Turns of the
sails, unloaded. Turns of the sails, at a maximum. Load at the maximum.
Greatest load. Product. Maximum load for the half velocity. Turns of the sails
therewith. Product of the lesser load and greater velocity. Ratio of the two
products. Ratio of the greatest velocity to the velocity at a maximum. Ratio of
the greatest load to the load at a maximum. degr ft. in. lb. lb. 1 5 4 4,5 96
66 4,47 5,37 295 10:6,9 10:8,3 2 5 8 9 207 122 16,42 18,06 2003 4,47 180 805
10:27,3 10:5,9 10:9,1 3 7,5 4 4,5 65 4,62 300 4 7,5 8 9 130 17,52 2278 4,62 180
832 10:27,8 5 10 4 4,5 91 61 5,03 5,87 307 10:6,7 10:8,5 6 10 8 9 178 110 18,61
21,34 2047 5,03 158 795 10:26 10:6,2 10:8,7 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14

N. B. The sails were of the same kind as those of Nos. 10,11 and 12, table IV.
Continuance of the experiment one minute.

Concerning the Effects of Sails according to the different Velocity of the
Wind. Art. 69.

From the foregoing table the following maxims deduced.

MAXIM I. The velocity of windmill sails, whether unloaded or loaded, so as to
produce a maximum, is nearly as the velocity of the wind, their shape and
position being the same.

This appears by comparing the respective numbers of columns 4 and 5, table V,
wherein those numbers 2,4 and 6, ought to be double of No. 1,3 and 5, and are
as nearly so as can be expected by the experiments.

MAXIM II. The load at the maximum is nearly but somewhat less than as the
square of the velocity of the wind, the shape and position of the sails being
the same.

This appears by comparing No. 2,4 and 6, in column 6, with 1, 3 and 5, wherein
the former ought to be quadruple of the latter (as the velocity is double) and
are as nearly so as can be expected.

MAXIM III. The effects of the same sails at a maximum are nearly, but somewhat
less than, as the cubes of the velocity of the wind. This confirms the 7th law
of spouting fluids.


It has been shown maxim I, that the velocity of sails at a maximum, is nearly
as the velocity of the wind; and by maxim II, that the load at the maximum is
nearly as the square of the same velocity. If those two maxims would hold
precisely, it would be a consequence that the effect would (...) in triplicate
ratio thereof. How this agrees with experiment will appear by comparing the
products in column 8, wherein those of No. 2, 4 and 6 (the velocity of the wind
being double) ought to be octuble of those of No. 1, 3 and 5, and are nearly so.

MAXIM IV. The load of the same sails at the maximum is nearly as the squares
of, Art. 69.
and their effects as the cubes, of their number of turns in a given time.

This maxim may be esteemed a consequence of the three preceding ones.

[These 4 maxims agree with and confirm the 4 maxims concerning the effects of
spouting (...) acting on undershot mills; and, I think, sufficiently confirms
as a law of motion, that the effect produced if not the instant momentum of a
body in motion, is as the square of its velocity, as asserted by the Dutch and
Italian philosophers.

Smeaton says, that by several trials in large, he has found the following
angles to answer as well as any:] The radius is supposed to be divided into 6
parts, and reckoning from the center is called 1, the extremity being denoted 6.

No. Angle with the axis. Angle with the plain of motion. 1 72 18 2 71 19 3 72
18 middle. 4 74 16 5 77 12 6 83 7 extremity.

[He seems to prefer the sails being largest at the extremities.]

END OF PART FIRST.
INTRODUCTION.
WHAT has been said in the first part, was meant to establish theories and easy
rules -- In this part I mean to bring them into practice, in as concise a
manner as possible, referring only to the articles in the first part, where the
reasons and demonstrations are given.

This part is particularly intended for the help of Young and Practical
Millwrights, whose time will not permit them fully to investigate the
principles of theories, which requires a longer series of studies than most of
them can possibly spare from their business; therefore I shall endeavor here
to reduce the substance of all that has been said, to a few tables, rules, and
short directions, which, if found to agree with practice, will be sufficient
for the practitioner.

There are but two principles by which water acts on mill-wheels, to give them
motion, viz. Percussion and Gravity.

That equal quantities of water, under equal perpendicular descents, will
produce double the power by gravity that it will by percussion, has been shown
in articles 8 and 68.

Therefore, when the water is scarce, we ought to endeavor to cause it to act
by gravity, as much as possible, paying due regard to other circumstances noted
in article 44, so as to obtain a steady motion, etc.

THE YOUNG Mill-wright's Guide. CHAPTER I. OF THE DIFFERENT KINDS OF MILLS.
Of Undershot Mills.
UNDERSHOT wheels move by the percussion or stroke of the water, and are only
half as powerful as other wheels that are moved by the gravity of the water.
See art. 8. Therefore this construction ought not to be used, except where
there is but little fall or great plenty of water. The undershot wheel, and all
others that move by percussion, should move with a velocity nearly equal to two
thirds of the velocity of the water. See art. 42. Fig. 28. plate iv. represents
this construction.

For a rule for finding the velocity of the water, under any given head, see
art. 51.

Upon which principles, Principles on which is founded the undershot table.
and by said rule, is formed the following table of the velocity of spouting
water, under different heads, from one to twenty-five feet high above the
center of the issue; to which is added the velocity of the wheel suitable
thereto, Principles on which is founded the undershot table.
and the number of revolutions a wheel of fifteen feet diameter (which I take
to be a good size) will revolve in a minute; also, the number of cogs and
rounds in the wheels, both for double and single gears, so as to produce about
ninety-seven or one hundred revolutions for a five feet stone per minute, which
I take to be a good mo^^^ and size for a millstone, grinding for merchantable
flour.

That the reader may fully understand how the following table is calculated,
let him observe,

1. That by art. 42, the velocity of the wheel must be just 577 thousandth
parts of the velocity of the water; therefore, if the velocity of the water,
per second, be multiplied by, 577 the product will be the maximum velocity of
the wheel, or velocity that will produce the greatest effect, which is the
third column in the table.

2. The velocity of the wheel per second, multiplied by 60, produces the
distance the circumference moves per minute, which, divided by 47,1 feet, the
circumference of a 15 feet wheel, quotes the number of revolutions of the wheel
per minute, which is the fourth column.

3. That by art. 20 and 74, the number of revolutions of the wheel per minute,
multiplied by the number of cogs in all the driving wheels, successively, and
that product divided by the product of the number of cogs in all the leading
wheels, multiplied successively, the quotient is the revolutions of the stones
per minute, which is the ninth and twelfth columns.

4. The cubochs of power required to drive the stone, Principles on which is
founded the undershot table.
being, by art. 61, equal to 111,78 cubochs per second, which, divided by half
the head of water, added to all the fall (if any,) being the virtual or
effective head by art. 61 quotes the quantity of water, in cubic feet, required
per second, which is the thirteenth column.

5. The quantity required, divided by the velocity with which it is to issue,
quotes the area of the aperture of the gate -- fourteenth column.

6. The quantity required, divided by the velocity of the water proper for it
to move along the canal, quotes the area of a section of the canal -- fifteenth
column.

7. Having obtained their areas, it is easy, by art. 65, to determine the width
and depth, as may suit other circumstances.

THE MILL-WRIGHT'S TABLE FOR UNDERSHOT MILLS, CALCULATED FOR A WATER-WHEEL OF
FIFTEEN FEET, AND ST^^^ OF FIVE FEET DIAMETER.
Head of water above the point of impact. Velocity of the water per second at
the point of impact. Velocity of the wheel per second, loaded at a maximum.
Number of revolutions of the wheel of 15 feet diameter, per minute. No. of cogs
in the master cog-wheel. Rounds in the wallower. Cogs in the counter cog-wheel.
Rounds in the trundle. Revolutions of the stone per minute. Cogs in the
cog-wheel for single gear. Rounds in the trundle. Revolutions of the stone per
minute. Cubic feet of water required per second to drive a 5 feet stone 97
revolutions per minute. Area of the gate to vent the water, or rather of a
section of the column of water at place of impact. Area of a section (...) to
bring on the water with 1, 5 feet velocity. feet feet feet cub.ft. sup. ft.
sup. ft. 1 8,1 4,67 5,94 112 22 54 16 101,6 223,5 27,5 149,(...) 2 11,4 6,57
8,36 96 23 54 19 99, 111,78 9,8 74,(...) 3 14, 8,07 10,28 88 25 54 19 100,5
74,52 4,6 43, 4 16,2 9,34 11,19 78 23 48 20 97, 55,89 3,45 37,26 5 18, 10,38
13,22 66 24 48 18 97, 112 15 98,66 44,7 2,48 29,8 6 19,84 11,44 14,6 66 24 48
20 96,2 112 17 96,2 37,26 1,9 24,84 7 21,43 12,36 15,74 66 25 44 19 96,2 104 17
96,2 31,9 1,48 21,26 8 22,8 13,15 16,75 66 25 44 20 97,2 96 16 100, 27,94 1,22
18,6 9 24,3 14,02 17,86 66 26 42 19 100,2 96 17 100,8 24,84 1,02 16,56 10 25,54
14,73 18,78 60 25 44 20 99, 96 18 100, 22,89,9 15,26 11 26,73 15,42 19,7 60 26
44 20 100, 96 19 99,5 20,32,76 13,54 12 28, 16,16 20,5 60 27 44 20 100, 96 20
98,4 18,63,66 12,42 13 29,16 16,82 21,42 60 27 42 20 99,8 96 21 102,6 16,27,56
10,8 14 30,2 17,42 22,19 60 28 42 20 99, 88 20 97,63 15,94,53 10,6 15 31,34
18,08 23,03 60 29 42 20 99, 88 21 96,5 14,9,47 9,93 16 32,4 18,69 23,8 88 21
99,7 13,97,43 9,31 17 33,32 19,22 24,48 84 21 97,9 13,14,39 8,76 18 34,34 19,81
25,23 80 21 96,1 12,42,36 8,(...) 19 35,18 20,29 25,82 80 21 98,3 11,76,33 7,84
20 36,2 20,88 26,6 78 21 98,3 11,17,3 7,4 21 37,11 21,41 27,26 78 22 97,
10,64,29 7,1 22 37,98 21,86 27,84 78 22 98,6 10,16,26 6,77 23 38,79 22,38 28,5
72 21 97,7 9,72,25 6,48 24 39,69 2^,9 29,17 66 20 96,2 9,32,23 6,21 25 40,5
23,36 29,75 60 18 99, 8,94,22 5,96 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Note, that five feet fall is the least that a single gear can be built on,
CHAP.1.
to keep the cog-wheel clear of the water, and give the stone sufficient motion.

Although double gear is calculated to fifteen feet fall, yet I do not
recommend them above ten feet, unless for some particular convenience, such as
two pair of stones to one wheel, etc. etc. The number of cogs in the wheels are
even, and chosen to suit eight, fix, or four arms, so as not to pass through
any of them, this being the common practice. But when the motion cannot be
obtained without a trundle that will cause the same cogs and rounds to meet too
often, such as 16 into 96, which will meet every revolution of the cog-wheel,
or 18 into 96, which will meet every third revolution -- I advise rather to put
in one more or less, as may best suit the motion, which will cause them to
change oftener. See art. 82.

Note, that the friction at the aperture of the gate will greatly diminish both
the velocity and power of the water in this application, where the head is
great, if the gate be made of the usual form, wide and shallow. Where the head
is great, the friction will be great. See art. 55. Therefore the wheel must be
narrow, and the aperture of the gate of a square form, to evade the friction
and loss that may be under a wide wheel, if it does not run close to the
sheeting.

Use of the Table.
HAVING levelled your mill-seat carefully, and finding such fall and quantity
of water as determines you to make choice of an undershot wheel; for instance,
suppose 6 feet fall, and about 45 cubic feet of water per second, which you
find as directed in art. 53; cast of about 1 foot for fall in the tale-race,
below the bottom of the wheel, if subject to backwater, leaves you 5 feet head;
look for 5 feet head in the first column of the table, and against it are all
the calculations for a 15 feet water-wheel and 5 feet stones; in the thirteenth
column you have 44,7 cubic feet of water; which shows you have enough for a 5
feet pair of stones; and the velocity of the water will be 18 feet per second,
the velocity of the wheel 10,38 feet per second, and it will revolve 13,22
times per minute. And if you choose double gear, then 66 cogs in the master
cog-wheel, 24 rounds in the wallower, 48 cogs in the counter cog-wheel, and
(...) rounds in the trundle, will give the stone (...) revolutions in a minute;
if single gear, 112 cogs and 15 rounds give 98,66 revolutions in a minute; it
will require 44,7 cubic feet of water per second; the size of the gate must be
2,48 feet, which will be about 4 feet wide and, 62 feet deep, about 7 1-4
inches deep; the size of the canal must be 29,8 feet; that is, about 3 feet
deep, and 9,93 or nearly 10 feet wide. If you choose single gear, you may make
your water-wheel much less, say 7 1-2 feet, the half of 15 feet, then the
cog-wheel must have half the number of cogs, the trundle-head the same, the
spindle will be longer, husk lower, and the mill full as good; but, in this
case, it will not do, because a cog-wheel of 66 cogs would reach the water; but
where the head is 10 or 12 feet, it will do very well.

If you choose stones, or water-wheels, of other sizes, it will be easy, by the
rules by which the table is calculated, to proportion the whole to suit, seeing
you have the velocity of the periphery of a wheel of any size. One advantage
large wheels has over small ones is, they cast off the back-water much better.
The buckets of the low wheel will lift the water much more than those of the
high wheel; because, the nearer the water rises to the center of the wheel, the
nearer the buckets approach the horizontal or lifting position.

Fig. 28 is an undershot wheel. Some prefer to slant the forebay under the
wheel, as in the figure, that the gate may be drawn near the floats; because
(say they) the water acts with more power near the gate, than at a distance;
which appears to be the case, when we consider, that the nearer we approach the
gate, the nearer the column of water approaches to be what is called a perfect
definite quantity. See art. 59.

Others again say, that it acquires equal power in descending the shute (it
will certainly acquire equal velocity, abating only for the friction of the
shute and air). When the shute has a considerable descent, the greater the
distance from the gate, the greater the velocity and power of the water; but
where the descent of the shute is not sufficient to overcome the friction of
the air, etc. then the nearer the gate, Best to carry the water down a long
shute to the wheel, in high heads.
the greater the velocity and power of the water; which argues in favor of
drawing the gate near the floats. Yet, where the fall is great, or water
plenty, and the expense of a deep penstock considerable, the small difference
of power is not worth the expense of obtaining. In these cases, it is best to
have a shallow penstock, and a long shute to convey the water down to the
wheel, drawing the gate at the top of the (...) which is frequently done, to
save expense, in building (...) mills, with flutter-wheels, which are small
undershot (...) fixed on the crank, so small as to obtain a sufficient (...) of
strokes of the saw in a minute, say about 120. (...) wheel is to be calculated
of such size as to suit the velocity (...) the water at the point of impact, so
as to make that (...) of revolutions in a minute.

For the method of shooting the water on an (...) wheel, where the fall is
great, see Thomas Ellicott's (...) part 5, plate 1, fig. 6.




Observations on the Table.
1. IT is calculated for an undershot wheel constructed, Observations.
and the water shot on, as in plate IV, fig. 28. The head is counted from the
point of impact I, and the motion of the wheel at a maximum, about,58 of the
velocity of the water; but when there is plenty of water, and great head, the
wheel will run best at about, 66 or two thirds of the velocity of the water:
therefore the stones will incline to run faster than in the table, in the ratio
of 58 to 66, nearly; for which reason, I have set the motion of 5 feet stones
under 100 revolutions in a minute, which is slower than common practice; they
will incline to run between and 110 revolutions.

2. I have taken half of the whole head above the point of impact, for the
virtual (...) effective head, by art. 53; which appears (...) me will be too
little in very low heads, (...) perhaps too much in high ones. As the principle
of non-elasticity does not appear to (...) to operate against the power so much
in (...) as in high heads, therefore if the head be (...). 1 foot, CHAP.1.
it may not require 223,5 cubic feet of water per second, and if 20 feet, may
require more than 11,17 cubic feet of water per second, as in the table. See
art. 8.

Art. 71. Of Tub Mills.
A TUB MILL has a horizontal water-wheel, Tub Mills described.
that is acted on by the percussion of the water altogether; the shaft is
verticle, carrying the stone on the top of it, and serves in place of a
spindle; the lower end of this shaft is set in a step fixed in a bridge-tree,
by which the stone is raised and lowered, as by the bridge-tree of other mills;
the water is shot on the upper side of the wheel, in a tangent direction with
its circumference. See fig. 29, plate IV, which is a top view of the tub-wheel,
and fig. 30 is a side view of it, with the stone on the top of the shaft,
bridge-tree, etc. The wheel runs in a hoop, like a millstone hoop, projecting
so far above the wheel as to prevent the water from shooting over the wheel,
and whirls it about until it strikes the buckets, because the water is shot on
in a deep narrow column, 9 inches wide and 18 inches deep, to drive a 5 feet
stone, with 8 feet head -- so that all this column cannot enter the buckets
until part has passed half way round the wheel, so (...) there are always
nearly half the buckets struck at once; the buckets are set obliquely, so that
the water may strike them at right angles. CHAP.1.
See fig. 30. As soon as it strikes it escapes under the wheel in every
direction, as in fig. 29. Note, that in fig. 30, I have allowed the gate to be
drawn inside of the penstock, and not in the shute near the wheel, as is the
common practice; because the water will leak out much along side of the gate,
if drawn in the shute. But here we must consider, that the gate must always be
full drawn, and the quantity of water regulated by a regulate in the shute near
the wheel; so that the shute will be perfectly full, and pressed with the whole
weight of the head, else a great part of the power may be lost.

To show this more plain, suppose the long shute A, from the high head (shown
by dotted lines) of the undershot mill, fig. 28, be made tight by being covered
at top, then, if we draw the gate A, but not fully, if the shute at bottom be
large enough to vent all the water that issues through the gate, when the shute
is full to A, then it cannot fill higher than A; therefore, all that part of
the head above A is lost, it being of no other service than to supply the
shute, and keep it full to A, and the head from A to the wheel is all that acts
on the wheel.

Again, when we shut the gate, the shute cannot run empty, because it would
leave a vacuum in the head of the shute at A; therefore the pressure of the
atmosphere resists the water from running out of the shute, and whatever head
of water is in the shute, when the gate is shut, will balance its weight of the
pressure of the atmosphere, and prevent it from acting on the lower side of the
gate, which will cause it to be very hard to draw -- For, suppose 11 feet head
of water to be in the shute when the gate was shut, its pressure is equal to
about 5lb. per square inch; then, if the gate be 48 by 6 inches, which is equal
to 288 inches, this multiplies by 5, is equal to 1440 lb. the additional
pressure on the gate.

Again, if the gate be full drawn, and the shute be not much larger at the
upper than lower end, all these evils (...) take place to cause the loss of
power. To remedy all this, put the gate H at the bottom of the shute to
regulate the quantity of water by, and make a valve at A to shut on the inside
of the shute, like the valve of a pair of bellows, which will shut when the
gate A is drawn, and open when the gate shuts, to let air into the shute; this
plan will do better tha^ long open shutes, for saw-mills with flutter-wheels or
tub mills, as by it we evade the friction of the shute and resistance of the
air.

The reader will with difficulty understand what is here said, unless he be
acquainted with the theory of the pressure of the atmosphere, vacuums, etc. See
these subjects, touched on in art. 56.




The disadvantages of these wheels are, CHAP.1.


1. The water does not act to advantage on them, we being obliged to make them
so small to obtain velocity to the stone (in most cases) that the buckets take
up a third part of their diameter.

2. The water acts with less power than on undershot wheels, Tub mills act with
less power than undershots.
as it is less confined at the time of striking the wheel, and its non elastic
principle takes place more fully. See art. 8.

3. It is with difficulty we can put a sufficient quantity of water to act on
them to drive them with sufficient power, if the head be low; therefore I
advise to strike the water on in two places, as in fig. 29; then the apertures
need only be about 6 by 13 inches each, instead of 9 by 18, and will act to
more advantage; and then, in this case, nearly all the buckets will be acted on
at once.

Their advantages are,

Their exceeding simplicity and cheapness, They are preferable to others, with
plenty of water.
having no cogs nor rounds to be kept in repair; their wearing parts are few,
and have but little friction; the step-gudgeon runs under water, therefore, if
well fixed, will not get out of order in a long time; and they will move with
sufficient velocity and power with 9 or 10 feet total fall, and plenty of
water; and, if they be well fixed, they will not require much more water than
undershot wheels; therefore they are vastly preferable in all seats with plenty
of water, and above 8 feet fall.

In order that the reader may fully understand how the following table is
calculated, let him consider,

1. That as the tub-wheel moves altogether by percussion, Should move 2-3 the
velocity of the water
the water flying clear of the wheel the instant it strikes, and it being
better, by art. 70, for such wheels to move faster instead of slower than the
maximum velocity; therefore, instead of,577 we will allow them to move,66
velocity of the water; Rules To find the velocity of the water.
then multiplying the velocity of the water by,66 gives the velocity of the
wheel, at the center of the buckets; which is the 3d column in the table.

2. And the velocity of the wheel per second, Its diameter
multiplied by 60, and divided by the number of revolutions the stone is to
make in a minute, gives the circumference of the wheel at the center of the
buckets; which circumference, multiplied by 7, and divided by 22, gives the
diameter from the center of the buckets, to produce the number of revolutions
required; which are the 4th, 5th, 6th and 7th columns.

3. The cubochs of power required, The quantity of water required.
by art. 63, to drive the stone, divided by half the head, gives the cubic feet
of water required to produce said power; which are the 8th and 10th columns.

4. The cubic feet of water, The size of the aperture.
divided by the velocity, will give the sum of the apertures of the gates;
which are the 9th and 11th columns.

5. The cubic feet of water, divided by 1,5 feet, And size of the canal.
the velocity of the water in the canal, gives the area of a section of the
canal; which are the 12th and 13th columns.

6. For the quantity of water, aperture of gate, and size of canal, for 5 feet
stones, see table for undershot Mills, in art. 70.

THE MILL-WRIGHT's TABLE FOR TUB MILLS.
Head of water above the point of impact or top of the wheel. Velocity of the
water per second. Velocity of the wheel, counted at the center of the buckets,
and being, 66 velocity of the water. Diameter of the wheel, to the center of
the buckets, for a stone 4 feet diameter, 122 revolutions in a minute. Ditto
for a 5 feet stone, to revolve 98 times in a minute. Ditto for a 6 feet stone,
to revolve 81 times in a minute. Ditto for a 7 feet stone, to revolve 70 times
in a minute. Cubic feet of water per second, required to drive the 4 feet
stones. Sum of the areas of the apertures of the gate for a 4 feet stone. Cubic
feet of water required, per second, for a 6 feet stone. Sum of the areas of the
apertures for a 6 feet stone. Area of a section of the canal sufficient to
bring the water to 4 feet stones, with a velocity of 1,5 feet, per second.
Ditto of a 6 feet stone. ft. feet feet feet feet feet feet cub.ft su.f cub.ft
su.ft sup.ft sup.ft 8 22,8 15,04 2,17 2,73 3,3 3,9 17,34,76 40,9 1,79 11,56
27,3 9 24,3 16,03 2,5 3,12 3,68 4,37 15,41,64 36,35 1,5 10,3 24,23 10 25,54
16,85 2,63 3,28 3,97 4,59 13,87,54 32,72 1,28 9,25 21,7 11 26,73 17,64 2,75
3,44 4,15 4,8 12,61,47 29,74 1,11 8,4 19,83 12 28, 18,48 2,9 3,6 4,34 4,9
11,56,41 27,26,97 7,7 18,17 13 29,16 19,24 3,01 3,74 4,53 5,24 10,67,36
25,17,86 7,1 16,8 14 30,2 19,93 3,12 3,9 4,7 5,43 9,9,33 23,36,77 6,6 15,56 15
31,34 20,68 3,24 4,03 4,87 5,67 9,24,29 21,93,7 6,16 14,62 16 32,4 21,38 3,34
4,12 5,01 5,83 8,67,27 20,45,6 5,71 13,6 17 33,32 21,99 3,43 4,25 5,18 5,95
8,16,24 19,24,57 5,44 12,15 18 34,34 22,66 3,54 4,41 5,32 6,18 7,7,22 18,18,52
5,13 12,12 19 35,18 23,21 3,63 4,52 5,47 6,33 7,3,2 17,,48 4,9 11,33 20 36,2
23,89 3,71 4,62 5,49 6,47 6,93,19 16,36,45 4,62 10,9 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
13

Use of the Table for Tub Mills.
HAVING levelled your seat, and finding that you have above 8 feet fall, and
plenty of water, and wish to build a mill on the simplest, cheapest, and best
construction to suit your seat; you will, of course, make choice of a tub mill.

Cast off 1 foot for fall in the tale-race below the bottom of the wheel, if it
be subject to back-water, and 9 inches for the wheel: then suppose you have 9
feet left for head above the wheel; look in the table, against 9 feet head, and
you have all the calculations necessary for 4, 5, 6 and 7 feet stones, the
quantity of water required to drive them, the sum of the areas of the
apertures, and the areas of the canals.

If you choose stones of any other size, you can easily proportion the parts to
suit, by the rules by which the table is calculated.

Art.72. Of Breast Mills.
BREAST WHEELS, which have the water shot on them in a tangent direction, On
Breast Mills the water acts both by percussion and gravity.
are acted on by the principles of both percussion and gravity; all that part
above the point of impact, called head, acts by percussion, and all that part
below said point, called fall, acts (...) gravity.

We are obliged, CHAP. I.
in this structure of breast mills, Plate IV. Fig. 31.
to use more head than will act to advantage; because we cannot strike the
water (...) the wheel, in a true tangent direction, higher than I, the point of
impact in fig. 31, which is a breast-wheel, with 12 feet perpendicular descent,
6,5 feet of which is above the point I, as head, and 5,5 feet below, as fall.
The upper end of the shute, that carries the water down to the wheel, must
project some inches above the point of the gate when full dra^^ else the water
will strike toward the center of the wheel; and it must not project too high
else the water in the penstock will not c^^^ fast enough into the shute when
the head (...) a little. The bottom of the penstock is a little below the top
end of the shute, to leave room for stones and gravel to settle, and prevent
them from getting into the gate.

We might lay the water on higher, by setting the top of the penstock close to
the whe^^ and using a sliding gate at bottom, as (...) by the dotted lines; but
this is not approved of in practice. See Ellicott's mode, part (...) plate III,
fig. 1.

But if the water in the penstock be nearly as high as the wheel, Pitchback
wheels have their motion equal to overshots
it may be carried over as by the upper dotted lines, and shot on ^^^^wards,
making that part next the wheel (...) shute to guide the water into the wheel,
(...) the gate very narrow or shallow, allowing (...) water to run over the top
of it when drawn by this method (called Pitchback) the (...) may be reduced to
the same as it is for (...) overshot wheel; and then the motion of the
circumference of the wheel will be equal the motion of an overshot wheel, CHAP.
I.
whose diameter is equal to the fall below the point of impact, and their power
will be equal.

This structure of a wheel, Fig. 31,
fig. 31, I take to be a good one, for the following reasons, viz.

1. The buckets, Wheel of new construction.
or floats, receive the percussion of the water at right angles, which is the
best direction possible.

2. It prevents the water from flying toward the center of the wheel, without
reacting against the bottom of the buckets, and retains it in the wheel, to act
by its gravity in its descent, after the stroke.

3. It admits air, and discharges the water freely, without lifting it at
bottom; and this is an important advantage, because, if the buckets of a wheel
be tight, and the wheel wades a little in back-water, they will lift the water
a considerable distance as they empty; the pressure of the atmosphere prevents
the water from leaving the buckets freely, and it requires a great force to
lift them out of the water with the velocity of wheel; which may be proved by
dipping a common water-bucket into water, and lifting it out, bottom up, with a
quick motion, you have to ^^ft not only the water in the bucket, but it appears
to suck a deal more up after it; which is the effect of the pressure of the
atmosphere, see art. 56. This shows the necessity of air-holes to let air into
the buckets, that the water may have liberty to get out freely.

Its disadvantages are,

1. It loses the water much, if it is not kept close to the sheeting. And,

2. It requires too great a part of the total fall to be used as head, which is
a loss of power, one foot fall being equal in power to two feet head, by art. 8.

Fig. 32 is a draught, Fig. 32.
showing the position of the shute for striking the water on a wheel in a
tangent direction, for all the total perpendicular descents from 6 to 15 feet;
the points of impact are numbered inside the fig. with the number of the total
fall, that each is for respectively. The top of the shute is only about 15
inches from the wheel, in order to set the point of impact as high as possible,
allowing 3 feet above the upper end of the (...) to the top of the water in the
penstock, which is little enough, when the head is often to be run down any
considerable distance; but when the stream is steady, being always nearly the
same height in the penstock, 2 feet would (...) sufficient, especially in the
greatest total (...) where the quantity is less, raising the shute foot would
raise the point of impact nearly the same, and increase the power, because I
(...) fall is equal in power to 2 feet head, by art 61.

On these principles, to suit the application of water, as represented by fig.
32, I have calculated the following table for breast mill. And, in order that
the reader may fully understand the principles on which it is calculated, let
him consider as follows:

1. That all the water above the point of impact, Principles on which the
breast mill table is founded.
called head, acts wholly by percussion and all below said point, called fall,
acts wh^^ly by gravity (see art. 60) and form the (...) and 3d columns.

2. That half the head, added to the whole fall, CHAP. I.
constitutes the virtual or effective descent, by art. 61; which is the 4th
column.

3. That if the water was permitted to descend freely down the circular
sheeting, Rules
after it passes the point of impact, To find the velocity of a breast wheel
its velocity would be accelerated, by art. 60, to be, at the lowest point,
equal to the velocity of water spouting from under a head equal to the whole
descent: therefore the maximum velocity of this wheel will be a compound of the
velocity to suit the head and the acceleration after it passes the point of
impact. Therefore, to find the velocity of this wheel, I first multiply the
velocity of the head, in column 5, by,577 (as for the undershot mills) which
gives the velocity suitable to the head; I then (by the rule for determining
the velocity of overshots) say, as the velocity of water descending 21 feet,
equal to 37,11 feet per second, is to the velocity of the wheel 10 feet per
second, so is the acceleration of velocity, after it passes the point of
impact, to the accelerated velocity of the wheel; and these two velocities
added, gives the velocity of the wheel; which is the 6th column.

4. The velocity of the wheel per second, Its number of revolutions.
multiplied by 60, and divided by the circumference of the wheel, gives the
revolutions per minute: 7th column.

5. The number of cogs in the cog-wheel, Revolutions of the stone.
multiplied by the number of revolutions of the wheel per minute, and divided
by the rounds in the trundle-head, will give the number of revolutions of the
stone per minute; and if we divide by the number of revolutions the stone is to
have, CHAP. I.
it gives the rounds in the trundle, and, when fractions arise, take the
nearest whole number; columns 8, 9, and 10.

6. The cubochs of power required to turn the stone, Power required.
by art. 63, divided by the virtual descent, gives the cubic feet of water
required per second; column II.

7. The cubic feet, Area of the canal.
divided by the velocity of water allowed in the canal, suppose 1,5 feet per
second, gives the area of the canal; column 12.

8. If the mill is to be double geared, take the revolutions of the wheel from
column 7 of this table, and look in column 4 of the undershot table, art. 70,
for the number of revolutions nearest to it, and against that number you have
the gears that will give a 5 feet stone the right motion.

THE MILL-WRIGHT's TABLE FOR BREAST MILLS, CALCULATED FOR A WATER-WHEEL FIFTEEN
FEET, AND STONES FIVE FEET DIAMETER; THE WATER BEING SHOT ON IN A TANGENT
DIRECTION TO THE CIRCUMFERENCE OF THE WHEEL.
Total perpendicular descent or fall of the water from the top of the water in
the penstock, to ditto in tale-race. Head above the point of impact. Fall below
the point of impact. Virtual or effective descent, being half the head added to
the fall. Velocity of the water per second at the point of impact. Velocity of
the circumference of the wheel per second. Number of revolutions of a wheel
fifteen feet diameter per minute. Cogs in the cog-wheel, for single gear.
Rounds in the trundle-head. Revolutions of the stone per minute. Cubic feet of
water required per second. Area of a section of the canal, allowing the
velocity of the water in it to be 1,5 feet per second. feet feet feet feet feet
feet No. No. N. No. cub.ft sup.ft 6 4,5 1,5 3,75 17,13 10,61 13,5 112 15 100,8
29,8 19,25 7 5, 2, 4,5 18, 11,3 14,4 112 16 100,8 24,83 16,55 8 5,5 2,5 5,25
18,99 12,07 15,3 104 16 99,4 21,29 14,19 9 5,9 3,1 6,05 19,48 12,53 16, 104 16
102,7 18,45 12,3 10 6,2 3,8 6,9 20,16 13,07 16,6 96 16 99,6 16,2 10,8 11 6,5
4,5 7,75 20,64 13,53 17, 96 16 102, 14,42 9,61 12 6,8 5,3 8,7 21,11 14,03 17,81
96 17 100,5 12,73 8,49 13 6,8 6,2 9,6 21,11 14,35 18,28 96 18 97,5 11,63 7,75
14 6,9 7,1 10,55 21,3 14,41 18,35 96 18 97,8 10,59 7,06 15 7, 8, 11,5 21,13
14,76 18,56 96 18 98,4 9,72 6,48 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12

Use of the Table for Breast Mills.
HAVING a seat with above 6 feet fall but not enough for an overshot mill, and
the water being scarce, so that you wish to make the best use of it, leads you
to the choice of a breast mill.

Cast off about 1 foot for fall in the tale-race below the bottom of the wheel,
if much subject to back-water; and suppose you have then 9 feet total descent;
look for it in the first column of the table, and against it you have it
divided into 5,9 feet head above, and 3,1 feet fall below the point of impact,
which is the highest point that the water can be fairly struck on the wheel,
leaving the head 3 feet deep above the shute; which is equal to 6,05 feet
virtual or effective descent: the velocity of the water striking the wheel
18,99 feet, velocity of the wheel 12,07 feet, per second, will revolve 16 times
in a minute; and, if single geared, 104 cogs, and 16 rounds, gives the stone
99,4 revolutions in a minute, requires 21,29 cubic feet of water per second;
the area of a section of the canal must be 14,19 feet, about 3 feet deep, and 5
feet wide. If the stones be of any other size, it is easy to proportion the
gears to give them any number of revolutions required.

If you wish to proportion the size of the stones to the power of your seat,
multiply the cubic feet of water your stream affords per second, by the virtual
descent in column 4, and that product is the power in cubochs; then look in the
table, in art. 63, for the size of the stone that nearest suits that power.

For instance, suppose your stream affords 14 cubic feet of water per second,
then 14 multiplied by 6,05 feet virtual descent, produces 84,7 cubochs of
power; which, in the table in art. 63, comes nearest to 4,5 feet for the
diameter of the stones; but, by the rules laid down in art. 63, the size may be
found more exactly.

Note, 6 cubochs of power are required to every superficial foot of the stones.

Art. 73. Of Overshot Mills.
FIG. 33, Fig. 33. Overshot Wheel described.
plate IV, is an Overshot Wheel; the water is laid on at the top, so that the
upper part of the column will be in a true tangent direction with the
circumference of the wheel, but so that all the water may strike within the
circle of the wheel.

The gate is drawn about 12 inches behind the perpendicular line from the
center of the wheel, Of shooting on the water
and the point of the shute ends at said perpendicular, with a direction a
little downwards, which gives the water a little velocity downwards to follow
the wheel; for if it be directed horizontally, the head will give it no
velocity downwards, and, if the head be great, the parabolic curve, which the
spouting water forms, will extend beyond the outside of the circle of the
wheel, and it will incline to (...) over. See art. 44 and 60.

The head above the wheel acts by percussion, Proper velocity of the water
spouting on the wheel.
as on an undershot wheel, and we have shown, art. 43, that the head should be
such as to give the water velocity 3 for 2 of the wheel. After the water
strikes the wheel it acts by gravity; therefore, to calculate the power, we
must take half the head and add it to the fall, for the virtual descent, as in
breast mills.

The velocity of overshot wheels are as the square roots of their diameters.
See art. 43.

On these principles, I have calculated the following table for overshot
wheels; and, in order that the reader may understand it fully, let him consider
well the following premises:

1. That the velocity of the water spouting on the wheel must be one and a half
the velocity of the wheel, Rule for proportioning the head to the wheel
by art. 43; then, to find the head that will give said velocity, say, (...)
the square of 16,2 feet per second, is to 4 feet, the head that gives that
velocity, so is the square of the velocity required, to the hea^ that will give
that velocity -- But, to this head so found, we must add a little by conjecture
to overcome the friction of the aperture. See art. 55.

In this table, I have added to the heads o^ wheels from 9 to 12 feet diameter,
1 of a foot and from 12 to 20 I have added, 1 tenth more for every foot
increase of diameter, and from 20 to 30 feet I have added,05 more to every foot
diameter's increase; which gives a 30 feet wheel 1,5 feet additional head,
while a 9 feet wheel has only, 1 tenth of a foot, to overcome the friction. The
reason of this great difference will appear when we consider that the friction
increases as the aperture decreases, and as the velocity increases -- But this
much depends on the form of the gate, for if that be nearly square, there will
be but little friction, but if very oblong, say 24 inches by half an inch, then
it will be very great.

The heads, thus found, compose the 3d column.

2. The head, added to the diameter of the wheel, Rules
makes the total descent, and is column 1.

3. The velocity of the wheel per second, For finding the number of revolutions
of the wheel.
taken from the table in art. 43, and multiplied by 60, and divided by the
circumference of the wheel, quotes the number of revolutions of the wheel per
minute, and is column 4.

4. The number of revolutions of the wheel per minute, Ditto of the stone.
multiplied by the number of cogs in all the driving wheels successively, and
that product divided by the product of all the leading wheels, quotes the
number of revolutions of the stone per minute, and is column 9, double gear,
for 5 feet stones; and column 12, single gear, for 6 feet stones.

5. The cubochs of power required to drive the stone, To find the quantity of
water required.
by table in art. 63, divided by the virtual or effective descent, which is
half the head added to the (fall or) diameter of the wheel, quotes the cubic
feet of water required per second to drive the stone, and is column 13.

6. The cubic feet required, Rule to find the size of the canal.
divided by the velocity you intend the water to have in the canal, quotes the
area of a section of the canal. The width multiplied by the depth, must always
produce this area. See art. 64.

7. The number of cogs in the wheel, multiplied by the quarter inches in the
pitch, produces the circumference of the pitch circle which, multiplied by 7,
and divided by 22, quotes the diameter in quarter inches; which, reduced to
feet and parts, is column 15. The reader may here at once observe how near the
cog wheel, in the single gear, will be to the water; that is, how near it is,
in size, equal to the water-wheel.

Use of the Table.
HAVING, with care, levelled the seat (...) which you mean to build, and found,
that after deducting 1 foot for fall below the wheel, and a sufficiency for the
sinking of the head race, according to its length and size, and having a total
descent remaining sufficient for an overshot wheel, suppose 17 feet; then (...)
in column 1 of the table, for the descent nearest to it, we find 16,74 feet,
and against it (...) wheel 14 feet diameter; head above the wheel 2,7 feet;
revolutions of the wheel per min^^^ 11,17; (and double gears, to give a 5 feet
stone 98,7 revolutions per minute; also, single gears, to give a 6 feet stone
76,6 revolutions per minute) the cubic feet of water required for (...) feet
stone 7,2 feet per second, and the area of a section of the canal 5 feet, about
2 feet deep and 2,5 feet wide.

If you choose to proportion the size of the stones exactly to suit the power
of the seat, do it as directed in art. 63. All the rest can be proportioned by
the rules by which the table is calculated.

THE MILL-WRIGHT's TABLE FOR OVERSHOT MILLS. CALCULATED FOR FIVE FEET STONES,
DOUBLE GEAR, AND SIX FEET STONES, SINGLE GEAR.
Total descent of the water, which is in Diameter of the wheel. Head above the
wheel, allowing for the friction of the aperture, so as to give the water
velocity 3 for 2 of the wheel. Number of revolutions of the wheel per minute.
Double gear, 5 feet stones. Single gear, 6 feet stones. Cubic feet of water
required per second, for 5 feet stones. Area of a section of the canal,
allowing the velocity of the water in it to be 1 foot per second. Diameter of
the pitch (...) of the (...) cog-wheels for single gear, pitch 4 1-4 inches. No
of cogs in master cog wheel. Rounds in the wallower Cogs in the counter
cog-wheel. Rounds in the trundle. Revolutions of the stone per minute. Cogs in
the cog-wheel. Rounds in the trundle. Revolutions of the stone per minute. feet
ft. feet cu.ft. sup.ft ft.inch. 10,51 9 1,51 14,3 54 21 44 16 102,9 60 11 78,
11,46 11,46 6:9(...) 11,74 10 1,74 13, 54 21 48 18 98, 60 10 78, 10,3 10,3
12,94 11 1,94 12,6 60 21 48 18 96, 66 11 75,6 9,34 9,34 7:5 14,2 12 2,2 12, 66
23 48 17 97, 66 10 79,2 8,53 8,53 15,47 13 2,47 11,54 66 21 48 17 99,3 84 12
80,7 7,92 7,92 9:5 16,74 14 2,74 11,17 72 23 48 17 98,7 96 14 76,6 7,2 7,2
10:9(...) 17,99 15 2,99 10,78 78 23 48 18 98,3 96 13 81,9 6,77 6,77 19,28 16
3,28 10,4 78 23 48 17 99,5 120 16 76, 6,4 6,4 13:6(...); 20,5 17 3,5 10,1 78 21
48 18 96,6 120 15 80,8 6, 6, 21,8 18 3,8 9,8 84 24 48 17 97, 128 16 78,4 5,56
5,56 14:5(...) 23,03 19 4,03 9,54 84 23 48 17 98,3 128 15 81,4 5,32 5,32 24,34
20 4,34 9,3 88 23 48 17 100, 128 15 79,3 5,04 5,04 25,54 21 4,54 9,1 88 23 48
17 98,3 128 15 77,6 4,81 4,81 26,86 22 4,86 8,9 96 24 48 17 100,5 128 14 81,4
4,57 4,57 27,99 23 4,99 8,7 96 25 54 18 100,2 4,34 4,34 29,27 24 5,27 8,5 96 25
54 17 103, 4,19 4,19 30,45 25 5,45 8,3 96 25 54 17 101, 4, 4, 31,57 26 5,57
8,19 96 25 54 17 99,6 3,82 3,82 32,77 27 5,77 8,03 104 25 54 18 100,2 3,7 3,7
33,96 28 5,96 7,93 104 25 54 18 99, 3,6 3,6 35,15 29 6,15 7,75 112 26 54 18
100,1 3,4 3,4 36,1 30 6,4 7,63 112 26 54 18 98,6 3,36 3,36 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
11 12 13 14 15

Observations on the Table.
1. IT appears, Single gear does not suit overshot wheels, high or low.
that single gear does not much suit this construction; because, where the
water-wheels are low, their motion is so flow that the cog-wheels (if made
large enough to give sufficient motion to the stone, without having the trundle
too small, see art. 23) will touch the water: And again, when the water-wheels
are high, above 20 feet, the cog-wheels require to be so high, in order to give
motion to the stone without having the trundle too small, that they become
unwieldy, and the ^^sk too high, spindle short, etc. so as to be inconvenient.
Therefore, single gear seems to suit overshots only where the diameter of the
water-wheel is between 12 and 18 feet; and even with them, the water-wheel will
have to run rather too fast, or the trundle be ^^ther too small, and the stones
should be 6 feet diameter at least.

2. I have, in the preceding tables, allowed the water to pass along the canal
with 1,5 feet ^er second velocity; but have since concluded that 1 foot per
second is nearer the proper motion; that is, about 20 yards per minute; then
the cubic feet required per second, will be the area of a section of the canal,
as in column 14 of this table.

3. Although I have calculated this table for the velocities of the wheels to
vary as the square roots of their diameters, which makes (...) 30 feet wheel
move 11,99 feet per second, and a 12 feet wheel ^o move 7,57 feet per second;
yet they will do to have equal velocity, and head, which is the common practice
among mill-wrights. But, for the reasons I have mentioned in art. 43, I prefer
giving them the velocity and head assigned in the table, in order to obtain
steady motion.

4. Many have been deceived, by observing the exceeding slow and steady motion
of some very high overshot wheels working forge or furnace bellows, concluding
therefrom, that they will work equally steady with a very slow as with any
quicker motion, not considering perhaps, that it is the principle of the
bellows that regulates the motion of the wheel, which is different from any
other resistance, for it soon becomes perfectly equable: therefore the motion
will be uniform, which is not the case with any kind of mills.

5. Many are of opinion, that water is not well applied by an overshot wheel;
because, say they, those buckets near above or below the center, act on too
short a lever. In endeavoring to correct this error, I have divided the fall
of the overshot wheel, fig. 33. plate IV, into feet, by dotted lines. Now, by
art. 53 and 54, every cubic foot of water on the wheel produces an equal
quantity of power in descending each foot perpendicular, called a cuboch of
power; because, where the lever is shortest, there is the greatest quantity of
water within the foot perpendicular; or, in other words, each cubic foot of
water is (...) much longer time, and passes a greater distance, in descending a
foot perpendicular, than where it is longest; which exactly compensates for the
deficiency in the length of lever. And, considering that the upper and lower
parts of the wheel does not run away from the gravity of the water, so much as
the breast of the wheel, we must conclude, that the upper and lower feet of
perpendicular descent (in theory) actually produce more power than the middle
two feet -- But (in practice) the lower foot is entirely lost, by the spilling
of the water out of the buckets. See this demonstrated, art 54.

Of Mills moved by Re-action.
WE have now treated of the four different kinds of mills that are in general
use. There are others, the invention or improvements of the late ingenious
James Rumsey, which move by the re-action of the water. One of these is said to
do well where there is much back-water; it being small, and of a true circular
form, the back-water does not resist it much. I shall say but little of these,
supposing the proprietors mean to treat of them; but may say, that there
appears to me but two principles by which water can be applied to move
mill-wheels, viz. Percussion and Gravity.

For the different effects of equal quantities of water, with equal
perpendicular descents, applied by these different principles, fee art.8 and 68.

Water may be applied, by percussion two ways, viz. by action (which is when it
strikes the floats of a wheel) and by re-action, which is when it issues from
within the wheel, and, by its re-action, moves it round; and these two are
equal, by 3d general law of motion, art. 7.

For the effects of centrifugal force, and the inertia of the water, on this
application of re-action, see axioms I and II, art. 1; and art. 13. The
principle of inertia will operate in proportion to the quantity of water used;
therefore this application will suit high heads better than low ones.

Water may be applied, by gravity, two ways, viz. either by spouting it high on
the wheel, into tight buckets, as on common over-shots, or by causing the whole
head of water to press on the floats, at the lower side of the wheel, which is
so constructed that the water cannot escape, but as the wheel moves, and at the
same time keeping clear of the paradoxical principle mentioned in arts.48 and
59; which cannot be done, unless the floats are made to move on pivots, so as
to fold in on one side of the wheel, and open out, to receive the weight of the
water, on the other. And these two applications are equal in theory, as will
appear plain by art. 54, fig. 20; yet they may differ greatly in practice. In
the year 1786, I invented and made a model of (...) wheel of this structure,
intending thereby to apply steam (...) propel land-carriages, and exhibited a
drawing thereof to the legislature of Maryland, and obtained a patent (for my
improvements in mills, and also) for applying steam to land-carriages, in that
state; but could not attend to put it in practice. Since which time, the late
ingenious James Rumsey has applied steam to a wheel of this structure, I hear,
with great success, and obtained a patent, in Europe, for the invention; which,
probably, was original with him also, as it frequently happens, that two
persons, reasoning right on a mechanical subject, think alike, and invent the
same thing, without any communication with each other. He has also applied this
wheel to water-mills, which I did not intend to do. This may properly be called
the Valve Wheel.


CHAPTER II. RULES AND CALCULATIONS.
Art. 74.
THE fundamental principle, Rules for calculating motion, etc.
on which is founded all rules for calculating the motion of wheels, produced
by a combination of wheels, and for calculating the number of cogs to be put in
wheels, to produce any motion that is required, see in art. 20; which is as
follows:

If the revolutions that the first moving wheel makes in a minute, Principles
on which they are founded.
be multiplied by the number of cogs in all the driving wheels successively,
and the product noted; and the revolutions of the last leading wheel be
multiplied by the number of cogs in all the leading wheels successively, and
the product noted; these products will be equal in all possible cases. Hence we
deduce the following simple rules:

1st. For finding the motion of the millstone; the revolutions of the
water-wheel, and cogs in the wheels, being given,

RULE. Art. 74.

Multiply the revolutions of the water-wheel per minute, To find the
revolutions of the stone.
by the number of cogs in all the driving wheels successively, and note the
product; and multiply the number of cogs or rounds in all the leading wheels
successively, and note the product; then divide the first product by the last,
and the quotient is the number of revolutions (...) the stone per minute.

EXAMPLE.
Given, the revolutions of the water-wheel per minute 10,4 No. of cogs in the
master cog-wheel 78 Drivers. No. of do. in the counter cog-wheel 48 No. of
rounds in the wallower 23 Leaders. No. of do. in the trundle 17

Then 10,4, the revolutions of the water-wheel, multiplied by 78, the cogs in
the master wheel, and 48, the cogs in the counter wheel, is equal to 38937,6;
and 23 rounds in the wallower, multiplied by 17, rounds in the trundle, is
equal to 391, by which we divide 38937,6, and it quotes 99,5, the revolutions
of the stone per minute; which are the calculations for a 16 feet wheel, in the
overshot table.

2d. For finding the number of cogs to be put in the wheels, to produce any
number of revolutions required to the millstone, or any wheel.

Take any suitable number of cogs for all the wheels, To find the proper number
of cogs, etc.
except one; Art. 74.
then multiply the revolutions of the first mover per minute, by all the
drivers, except the one wanting (if it be a driver) and the revolutions of the
wheel required, by all the leaders, and divide the greatest product by the
least, and it will quote the number of cogs required in the wheel to produce
the desired revolutions.

Note, If any of the wheels be for straps, take their diameter in inches and
parts, and multiply and divide with them, as with the cogs.

EXAMPLE.
Given, the revolutions of the water-wheel 10,4 And we choose cogs in master
wheel 78 Drivers. Ditto in the counter wheel 48 And rounds in the wallower 23

The number of the trundle is required, to give the the stone 99 revolutions.

Then 10,4 multiplied by 78, and 48, is equal to 38937,6; and 99, multiplied by
23, is equal to 2277, by which divide 38937,6, and it quotes 16,66; instead of
which, I take the nearest whole number, 17, for the rounds in the trundle, and
find, by rule 1st, that it produces 99,5 revolutions, as required.

For the exercise of the learner, I have constructed fig.7, Circle of motion.
plate XI; which I call a circle of motion, and which serves to prove the
fundamental principle on which the rules are founded; Art. 74.
the first shaft being also the last of the circle.

A is a cog-wheel of 20 cogs, and is a driver. B is a cog-wheel of 24 cogs, and
is a leader. C is a cog-wheel of 24 cogs, and is a driver. D is a cog-wheel of
30 cogs, and is a leader. E is a cog-wheel of 25 cogs, and is a driver. F is a
cog-wheel of 30 cogs, and is a leader. G is a cog-wheel of 36 cogs, and is a
driver. H is a cog-wheel of 20 cogs, and is a leader.
But if we trace the circle the backward way, the leaders become drivers.

I is a strap-wheel 14 inches diameter, driver. K is a strap-wheel 30 inches
diameter, leader. L is a cog-wheel 12 cogs, diameter, driver. M is a cog-wheel
29 cogs, diameter, leader.
MOTION OF THE SHAFTS.
The upright shaft, and first driver, -- AH 36 revs. in a min. BC 30 revs. in a
min. DE 24 revs. in a min. FG 20 revs. in a min. HA 36 revs. in a min. M 4
revs. in a min. which is the shaft of a hopperboy.
If this circle be not so formed, as to give the first and last shafts (which
are here the same) exactly the same motion, one of the shafts must break as
soon as they are put in motion.

The learner may exercise the rules on this circle, Art. 74.
until he can form a similar circle of his own; and then he need never be
afraid to undertake to calculate any motion, etc. afterward.

I omit showing the work for finding the motion of the several shafts in this
circle, and the wheels to produce said motion; but leave it for the learner to
practice the rules on.

EXAMPLES.
1st. Given, the first mover AH 36 revolutions per minute, and first driver A
20 cogs, leader B 24; required, the revolutions of shaft BC. Answer, 30
revolutions per minute.

2d. Given, first mover 36 revolutions per minute, drivers 20 -- 24 -- 25, and
leaders 24 -- 30 -- 30; required, the revolutions of the last leader. Answer,
20 revolutions per minute.

3d. Given, first mover 20 revolutions per minute, and first driver, strap
wheel, 14 inches, cog-wheel 12, and leader, strap-wheel, 30 inches, cog-wheel
29; required, the revolutions of the last leader, or last shaft. Answer, 4
revolutions.

4th. Given, first mover 36 revolutions, driver A 20, C 24, leader B 24, D 30;
required, the number of leader F, to produce 20 revolutions per minute. Answer,
30 cogs.

5th. Given, first mover 36 revolutions per minute, driver A 20, C 24, E 25,
driver pully 14 inches diameter, L 12, and leader B 24, D 30, F 30, M 29;
required, the diameter of strap-wheel K, to give shaft 4 four revolutions per
minute. Answer, 30 inches diameter.

The learner may, Art. 74.
for exercise, work the above questions, and every other that he can propose on
the circle.

Art. 75.
MATHEMATICIANS have laid down the following proportions for finding the
circumference of a circle by its diameter, or the diameter by the circumference
given, Rules
viz.

As 1 is to 3,1416, so is the diameter to the circumference; To find the
diameter and circumference of circles.
and as 3,1416 is to 1, so is the circumference to the diameter: Or, as 7 is to
22, so is the diameter to the circumference; and as 22 is to 7, so is the
circumference to the diameter. The last proportion makes the diameter a little
the largest; therefore it suits mill-wrights best for finding the pitch circle;
because the sum of the distance, from center to center, of all the cogs in a
wheel, makes the circle too short, especially where the number of cogs are few,
because the distance is taken in strait lines, instead of the circle. In a
wheel of 6 cogs only, the circle will be so much too short, as to give the
diameter 2/22 parts of the pitch or distance of the cogs too short. Hence we
deduce the following.

RULE FOR FINDING THE PITCH CIRCLE.
Multiply the number of cogs in the wheel, To find the pitch circle of wheels.
by the quarter inches in the pitch, and that product by 7, and divide by 22,
and the quotient is the diameter in quarter inches, which is to be reduced to
feet.

EXAMPLE. Art. 75.

Given, 84 cogs, 4 inches pitch; required, the diameter of the pitch circle.

Then, by the rule, 84 multiplied by 18 and 7, is equal to 10584; which,
divided by 22, is equal to 481 2/22 quarter inches, equal to 10 feet 2/22;
inches, for the diameter of the pitch circle required.

Art. 76.
A TRUE, simple, and expeditious method of finding the diameter of the pitch
circle, is to find it in measures of the pitch itself that you use.

RULE.
Multiply the number of cogs by 7, New rule for finding the pitch circle.
and divide by 22, and you have the diameter of the pitch circle, in measures of
the pitch, and 22 parts of said pitch.

EXAMPLE.
Given, 78 cogs; required, the diameter of the pitch circle. Then, by the rule,

78

Half of which diameter, Art. 76.
12 9/22 of the pitch, is the radius, or half diameter, by which the circle is
to be swept.

To use this rule, Set a pair of compasses to the pitch, and screw them fast,
not to be altered until the wheel is pitched: divide the pitch into 22 equal
parts: Then step 12 steps on a strait line with the pitch compasses, and 9 of
these equal parts of the pitch, makes the radius that is to describe the circle.

To save the trouble of dividing the pitch for every wheel, the workman may
mark the different pitch, which he commonly uses, on the edge of his two foot
rule (or make a little rule for the purpose) and carefully divide then there,
where they will be always ready for use. Fig. 35.
See plate IV, fig. 35.

By these rules, I have calculated the following table of the radius's of pitch
circles of the different wheels commonly used, from (...) to 136 cogs.

TABLE OF THE PITCH CIRCLES OF THE COG-WHEELS COMMONLY USED, FROM 6 TO 136
COGS, BOTH IN MEASURES OF THE PITCH, AND IN FEET, INCHES, AND PARTS.
Cogs in the wheel. Radius of the pitch circle in measures of the pitch and 22
parts and tenths of parts of said pitch. Radius of the pitch circle of the
wheels in column 1, taken in inches, quarters, and 22 parts of a quarter, when
the pitch is 2 1-2 inches, for bolting gears, etc. Cogs in the wheel. Radius of
the pitch circle in measurs of the pitch, and 22 parts of said pitch. Radius of
the pitch circle of the wheels in the 4th column, taken in feet, inches,
quarters, and 22 parts of a quarter, when the pitch is 4 1-4 inches, for large
gears, etc. Ditto, when the pitch is 4 1-2 inches. No. Pitch. 22 par inches
quarters^ 22 pts No. Pitch. 22 pts. feet. inches qrs. 22 pts. feet. inches.
qrs. 22 pts. 6 1 2: 2: 0 33 5 5 1: 10: 1: 5 1: 11: 2: 11 7 1 3,5 2: 3: 12 34 5
9 1: 10: 3: 21 2: 0: 1: 8 8 1 6,7 3: 1: 3 35 5 12 1: 11: 2: 14 2: 1: 0: 5 9 1
10,2 3: 2: 14 36 5 16 2: 0: 1: 8 2: 1: 3: 2 10 1 13,6 4: 0: 3 37 5 19 2: 1: 0:
1 2: 2: 1: 21 11 1 17,1 4: 1: 17 38 6 1 2: 1: 2: 17 2: 3: 0: 10 12 1 20,5 4: 3:
5 39 6 4 2: 2: 1: 10 2: 3: 3: 15 13 2 1,9 5: 0: 17 40 6 8 2: 3: 0: 4 2: 4: 2:
12 14 2 5,3 5: 2: 8 42 6 15 2: 4: 1: 13 2: 6: 0: 6 15 2 8,8 5: 3: 20 44 7 2: 5:
3: 0 2: 7: 2: 0 16 2 12,2 6: 1: 11 48 7 14 2: 8: 1: 18 2: 10: 1: 10 17 2 15,7
6: 3: 2 52 8 4 2: 11: 0: 14 3: 1: 0: 20 18 2 19,1 7: 0: 15 54 8 11 3: 0: 2: 1
3: 2: 2: 14 19 3 0,6 7: 2: 6 56 8 20 3: 1: 3: 10 3: 4: 0: 8 20 3 4,1 7: 3: 18
60 9 13 3: 4: 2: 6 3: 6: 3: 18 21 3 7,5 8: 1: 9 66 10 11 3: 8: 2: 11 3: 11: 1:
0 22 3, 11 8: 3: 0 72 11 10 4: 0: 2: 16 4: 3: 2: 4 23 3 14,5 9: 0: 13 78 12 9
4: 4: 2: 21 4: 7: 3: 8 24 3 18, 9: 2: 4 84 13 8 4: 8: 3: 4 5: 0: 0: 12 25 3
21,5 9: 3: 17 88 14 0 4: 11: 2: 0 5: 3: 0: 0 26 4 3, 10: 1: 8 90 14 7 5: 0: 3:
9 5: ^: 1: 16 27 4 6,5 10: 2: 21 96 15 6 5: 4: 3: 14 5: 8: 2: 20 28 4 10, 11:
0: 12 104 16 13 5: 10: 1: 6 6: ^: 1: 18 29 4 13,5 11: 2: 3 112 17 18 6: 3: 2:
20 6: 8: 0: 16 30 4 17, 11: 3: 16 120 19 2 6: 9: 0: 12 7: 1: 3: 14 31 4 20,5
12: 1: 7 128 20 8 7: 2: 2: 4 7: ^: ^: 12 32 5 2, 12: 2: 20 136 21 14 7: 7: 3:
1^ 8: 1: 1: 1^ 2 3 4 5 6 7

Use of the foregoing Table. Art. 76.

SUPPOSE you are making a cog-wheel with 66 cogs; look for the number in the
1st or 4th column, and against it, in the 2d or 5th column, you find 10,11;
that is, 10 steps of the pitch (you use) on a strait line, and 11 of 22 equal
parts of said pitch added, makes the radius that is to describe the pitch
circle.

The 3d, 6th and 7th columns, contain the radius in feet, inches, quarters, and
22 parts of a quarter; which may be of use in roughing out timber, and fixing
the centres that the wheels are to run in, so that they may gear to the right
depth: But, on account of the difference in the parts of the same scales or
rules, and the difficulty of setting the compasses exactly, they can never be
true enough for the pitch circles.

RULE COMMONLY PRACTICED.
Divide the pitch into 11 equal parts, and take in your compasses 7 of those
parts, Common rule not true
and step on a strait line, counting 4 cogs for every step, until you come up
to the number in your wheel; if there be an odd one at last, take 1-4 of a
step, if 2 be left, take 1-2 of a step if 3 be left, take 3-4 of a step, for
them; an^ these steps, added, makes the radius or sweep staff of the pitch
circle: But on account of the difficulty of making these divisions sufficiently
exact, there is little truth in this rule -- and where the number of cogs are
few, it w^^ make the diameter too short, for the reason mentioned before.

The following geometrical rule, Art. 76.
is more true and convenient, in some instances.

RULE.
Draw the line AB, plate IV, Fig. 34.
fig. 34, and draw the line 22,0 at random; A triangle constructed to show the
radius of the pitch circle of many wheels.
then take the pitch in your compasses, and beginning at the point 22, step 11
steps toward A, and 3 1-2 steps to point X, toward O; draw the line AC
through the point X; draw the line DC parallel to AB; and, without having
altered your compasses, begin at point O, and step both ways, as you did on AB;
then, from the respective points, draw the cross lines parallel to 0 22; and
the distance from the point, where they cross the line AC, to the line AB, will
be the radius of the pitch circles for the number of cogs respectively, as in
the figure. If the number of cogs be odd, say 21, the radius will be between 20
and 22.

This will also give the diameter of all wheels, that have few cogs, too short;
but where the number of cogs is above 20, the error is imperceptible.

All these rules are founded on the proportion, as 22 is to 7, so is the
circumference to the diameter.

Art. 77.
A TABLE OF ENGLISH DRY MEASURE.
Solid inches. 33,6 Pint. 268,8 8 Gallon. 537,6 ^6 2 Peck. 2150,4 64 8 4
Bushel.

THE bushel contains 2150,4 solid inches. Therefore to measure the contents of
any garner, take the following

RULE.
Multiply its length in inches, Rule for measuring the contents of garners.
by its breadth in inches, and that product by its height in inches, and divide
the last product by 2150,4, and it will quote the bushels it contains.

But to shorten the work, decimally; because 2150,4 solid inches are 1,244
solid feet, multiply the length, breadth, and height in feet, and decimal parts
of a foot by each other, and divide by 1,244; and it will quote the contents in
bushels.

EXAMPLE.
Given, a garner 6,25 feet long, 3,5 feet wide, 10,5 feet high; required, its
contents in bushels. Then 6,25 multiplied by 3,5 and 10,5, is equal to 229,687;
which, divided by 1,244, quotes 184 bushels and 6 tenths.

To find the contents of a hopper, take the following

RULE.
Multiply the length by the width at the top and that product by one third of
the depth, To measure the contents of a hopper.
measuring to the very point, Art. 77.
and divide by the contents of a bushel, either in inches or decimals, as you
have wrought, and the quotient will be the contents in bushels.

EXAMPLE.
Given, a hopper 42 inches square at top, and 24 inches deep; required, the
contents in bushels.

Then 42 multiplied by 42 and 8, is equal to 14112 solid inches; which, divided
by 2150,4, quotes 6,56 bushels, or a little more than 6 1-2 bushels.

To make a garner to hold any given quantity, having two of its sides given, To
make a garner to hold a given quantity.
take the following

RULE.
Multiply the contents of 1 bushel by the number of bushels the garner is to
hold; then multiply the given sides into each other, and divide the first by
the last product; and the quotient will be the side wanted, in the same measure
you have wrought in.

EXAMPLE.
Given, two sides of a garner 6,25 by 10,5 feet; required, the other side, to
hold 184,6 bushels.

Then 1,244 multiplied by 184,6, is equal to 229,642; which, divided by the
product of the two sides 65,625, the quotient is 3,5 feet for the side wanted.

To make a hopper to hold any given quantity, Ditto, (...) hopper.
having the depth given.

RULE. Art. 78.

Divide the inches contained in the bushels it is to hold, by 1-3 the depth in
inches; and the quotient will be the square of one of the sides at the top in
inches. Given, the depth 24 inches; required, the sides to hold 6,56 bushels.

Then 6,56 multiplied by 2150,4, is equal to 14107,624; which, divided by 8,
quotes 1764, the square root of which is 42 inches; which is the length of the
sides of the hopper wanted.

CHAPTER III.
Art. 78. OF THE DIFFERENT KINDS OF GEARS, AND FORCE OF COGS.
IN order to conceive a just idea of the most suitable form or shape for cogs
in cog-wheels, Of the figures described by the cogs of wheels in motion.
we must consider, that they describe, with respect to the pitch circles, a
figure called an Epicycloid.

And when one wheel works in cogs set in a strait line, such as the carriage of
a saw-mill the cogs or rounds, Fig. 37.
moving out and in, form a curve figure called a Cycloid.

To describe which, Which directs to the proper formation of their cogs.
let us suppose the large circle in plate V, fig. 37, to move on the strait
line from O to A; then the point O (...) its periphery will describe the arch O
D A, Art. 79.
called a Cycloid; and we may conceive, by the way, that the curve joins the
line, what should be the form of the point of the cog.

Again, suppose the small circle to run round the large one; then the point o
in the small circle, will describe the arch o b c, called an Epicycloid; by
which we may conceive the form the point of the cogs should be. But in common
practice we generally let the cogs extend but a short distance past the pitch
circle; so that the form of the cogs is not so particular.

Art. 79. Of Spur Gears.
THE principle of Spur Gears, Principles of Spur Gears.
is that of two cylinders rolling on each other, with their shafts or axis
truly parallel to each other. -- Here the touching parts move with equal
velocity, therefore have but little friction. And to prevent these cylinders
from slipping, we are obliged to indent them, or to set in cogs. -- And here it
appears to me, The pitch of the driver should be the largest.
that the pitch of the driving wheel should be a little larger than the leading
wheel, for the following reasons:

1. If there is to be any slipping, it will be much easier for the driver to
slip a little past the leader, than for the cogs to have to force the leader a
little before the driver; which would be very hard on them.

2. If the cogs should bend any by the stress of the work (as they surely do;
because 1lb. falling on a beam a foot square, will jar it, which cannot be done
without bending it a little) this will cause those that are coming into gear to
touch too soon, Art. 79.
and rub hard at entering.

3. It is much better for cogs to rub hard as they are going out of gear, than
as they are coming in; because then they work with the grain of the wood;
whereas at entering they work against it, and would wear much faster.

The advantage of this kind of gear is, Their advantage.
we can make the cogs as wide as we please, so that their bearing may be so
large that they will not cut each other, but only polish and wear smooth;
therefore they will last a long time.

Their disadvantages are, Their disadvantages.


1st. That if the wheels be of different sizes, and the pitch circles are not
made to meet exactly, they will not run smooth. And,

2d. We cannot change the direction of the shafts so conveniently

Fig. 38, Fig. 38.
plate IV, ^s two spur wheels working into each other; the dotted lines show
the pitch circles, which must always meet exactly. The ends of the cogs are
made circular, as is common; but if they were made of the true epicycloids that
would suit the size of the wheels, they would work smoother, with less friction.

Fig. 39 is a spur and face wheel or wallower; Fig. 39.
whose pitch circles should always mee^^ exactly also.

The rule for describing the sides of the cogs of a form near the figure of an
epicycloid, Rule for describing the sides of the cogs to the epicycloid.
is as follows, viz. Describe a circle a little inside of the pitch circle,
Art. 79.
for the point of your compasses to be set in, so as to describe the sides of
the cog as the four cogs at A, fig. 38 -- 39, as near as you can to the curve
of the epicycloid that is formed by the little wheel's moving round the great
one; the greater the difference between the great and small wheels, the greater
distance must this circle be inside of the pitch circle; of this the
practitioner is to be the judge, as no certain rule is yet formed, that I know
of.

Art. 80. Of Face Gears.
THE principle of Face Gears, Principle of Face Gears.
is that of two cylinders rolling with the side of one on the end of the other,
their axis being at right angles. Here the greater the bearing, and the less
the diameter of the wheels, They have much friction
the greater will be the friction; because the touching parts move with
different velocities, therefore the friction will be great.

The advantages of this kind of gear are, Their advantages


1st. Their cogs stand parallel to each other; therefore moving them out or in
gear a little, does not alter the pitch of the bearing parts of the cogs, and
they will run smoother when their centres are out of place, than spur gears.

2d. They serve for changing the direction of the shafts.

The disadvantages are,

1st. The smallness of the bearing, Their disadvantages.
so that they wear out very fast. For if the bearing of the cogs be small, and
the stress so great that they cut one another, they will wear exceeding fast;
but if it be so large, and the stress so light, the they only polish one
another, they will last very long.


2d. Their great friction and rubbing of parts. Art. 80.


The cogs for small wheels are generally round, and put in with round shanks.
Great care should be taken in boring the holes for the cogs, with a machine to
direct the auger strait, that the distance of the cogs may be equal, without
dressing. And all the holes of all the small wheels in a mill should be bored
with one auger, and made of one pitch; then the miller may keep by him a
quantity of cogs ready turned, to a gauge to suit the auger, and when any fail,
he can drive out the old ones, and put in a new set, without much loss of time.

Fig. 40, plate V, represents a face cog-wheel working into a trundle; showing
the necessity of having the corners of the sides of the cogs sniped off in a
cycloidical form, to give liberty for the rounds to enter between the cogs, and
pass out again freely. To describe the sides of the cogs of the right shape to
meet the rounds when they get fairly into gear, Directions for forming the cogs.
as at c, there must be a circle described on the ends of the cogs, a little
outside of the pitch circle, for the point of the compasses to be set in, to
scribe the ends of the cogs; for if the point be set in the pitch circle, it
will leave the inner corners too full, and make the outer ones too scant. The
middle of the cog is to be left strait from bottom to top, or nearly so, and
the side nearly flat at the distance (...) half the diameter of the round from
the end, the corners only being sniped off to make the ends of the shape in the
figure; Art. 80.
because when the cog comes into gear fully, as at c, there is the chief
stress, and there the bearing should be as large as possible. The smaller the
cog-wheel, the larger the trundle, and the wider the cogs, the more will the
corners require to be sniped off. Suppose the cog-wheel to turn from 40 to b,
the cog 40, as it enters, will bear on the lower corner, unless it be
sufficiently sniped off; when it comes to c, it will be fully in gear, and if
the pitch of the cog-wheel be a little larger than that of the trundle, the cog
a will bear as it goes out, and let c fairly enter before it begins to bear.

Suppose the plumb line A B to hang directly to the center of the cog-wheel,
the spindle is (by many mill-wrights) set a little before the line or center,
that the working round or stave of the trundle may be fair with said line, and
meet the cog fairly as it comes to bear; it also causes the cogs to enter with
less, and go out with more friction. Whether there be any real advantage in
thus setting the spindle foot before the center plumb line, does not seem
determined.

Art. 81. Of Bevel Gears.
THE principle of Bevel Gears, Principles of Bevel Gear.
is that of two cones rolling on the surface of each other, their vertexes
meeting in a point, as at A, fig. 41, plate V. Here the touching surfaces move
with equal velocities in every part of the cones; Art. 81.
therefore there is but little friction, These cones being indented, or fluted
with teeth diverging from the vertex to the base, Have but little friction.
to prevent them from slipping, become bevel gear; and as these teeth are very
small at the point or vertex of the cone, they may be cut off 2 or 3 inches
from the base, as 19 and 25, at B; they then have the appearance of wheels.

To make these wheels of a suitable size for any number of cogs you choose to
have to work into one another, take the following

RULE.
Draw lines to represent your shafts, Rule for proportioning the wheels.
in the direction they are to be, with respect to each other, to intersect at
A; then take from any scale of equal parts, either feet, inches, or quarters,
etc. as many as your wheels are to have cogs, and at that distance from the
respective shafts, draw the dotted lines a b, c d, for 21 and 20 cogs; and from
where they cross at e, draw e A. On this line, which makes the right bevel, the
pitch circles of the wheels will meet, to contain that proportion of cogs of
any pitch.

Then to determine the size of the wheels (...) suit any particular pitch, take
from the table of pitch circles, the radius in measures of the pitch, and apply
it to the center of the shaft and the bevel line A e, taking the distance (...)
right angles with the shaft; and it will (...) the point in which the pitch
circles will meet to suit that particular pitch.

By the same rule, the sizes of the wheels (...) B and C are found.

These kind of wheels are frequently made of cast metal, Art. 8.
and are said to do exceeding well.

The advantages of this kind of gear are, Their advantages.


1. They have very little friction, or sliding of parts.

2. We can make the cogs of any width of bearing we choose; therefore they will
wear a great while.

3. By them we can set the shafts in any direction desired, to produce the
necessary movements.

Their disadvantages are,

1. They require to be kept exactly of the right depth in gear, Disadvantages.
so that the pitch circles just meet, else they will not run smooth, as is the
case with spur gears.

2. They are expensive to make of wood; therefore few in this country use them.

The universal joint, Fig. 43.
as represented fig. 43, may be applied to communicate motion, instead of bevel
gear, Universal joint.
where the motion is to be the same, and the angle not more than 30 or 40
degrees. This joint may be constructed by a cross, as in the figure, or by 4
pins fastened at right angles on the circumference of a hoop or solid ball. It
may sometimes serve to communicate the motion, Its use.
instead of 2 or 3 face wheels. The pivots at the end of the cross play in the
ends of the semicircles. It is best to screw the semicircles to the blades,
that they may be taken apart.

Art. 82. Of matching Wheels, to make the Cogs wear Even.
GREAT care should be taken in matching or coupling the wheels of a mill, that
their number of cogs be not such that the same cogs will often meet; because if
two soft ones meet often, they will both wear away faster than the rest, and
destroy the regularity of the pitch; whereas if they are continually changing,
they will wear regular, even if they are at first a little irregular.

For finding how often they will revolve before the same cogs meet again, take
the following

RULE.
1. Divide the cogs in the greater wheel by the cogs in the lesser; and if
there be no remainder, the same cogs will meet once every revolution of the
great wheel.

2. If there be a remainder, divide the cogs in the lesser wheel by said
remainder; and if it divide them equally, the quotient shows how often the
great wheel will revolve before the same cogs meet.

3. But if it will not divide equally, the^^ the great wheel will revolve as
often as the^^ are cogs in the small wheel, and the (...) wheel as often as
there are cogs in the large wheel, before the same cogs meet; often^ they can
never be made to change.

EXAMPLES.
1. Given, wheels 13 and 17 cogs; required, how often each will revolve before
the same cogs meet again.

Then 13)17(1

Art. 83. Theory of Rolling Screens and Fans, or Wind-mills for screening and
fanning the Wheat in Mills.
LET fig. 42, plate V, Principles of Rolling Screens and Fans.
represent a Rolling Screen and Fan, fixed for cleaning wheat in a
merchant-mill. DA the screen, AF the fan, AB the wind tube, 3 feet deep from A
to b, and 4 inches wide, in order that the grain may have a good distance to
fall through the wind, to give time and opportunity for the light parts to be
carried forward before the heavy parts. Suppose the tube to be of equal depth
and width the whole of its length, except where it communicates with the tight
boxes or garners under it, viz. c for the clean wheat, S for the screenings and
light wheat, and C for the cheat, chaff, etc. Now it is evident, (...) be by
the fan drove into the tube at A, that, if it can escape no where, it will pass
on to B, with the same force as at A, let the tube be of any length or
direction; and any thing which it will move at A, it will carry out at B, if
the tube be of an equal size all the way.

It is also evident, that if we shut the holes of the fan at A and F, and let
no wind into it, none can be forced into the tube; Art. 83.
hence, the best way to regulate the blast is, to fix shutters sliding at the
air holes, to give more or less feed of air to the fan, so as to produce a
blast sufficient to clean the grain.

The grain is let into the screen at D, into the inmost cylinder, in a small
stream. The screen consists of two cylinders of sieve wire, the inmost one has
the meshes so open, as to pass all the wheat through it to the outer one,
retaining only the white caps, large garlic, and every thing larger than the
grain of the wheat, which falls out at the tail A.

The outer cylinder is so close in the mesh, as to retain all good wheat, but
sift out the cheat, cockle, small wheat, garlic, and every thing less than
good grains of wheat; the wheat is delivered out at the tail of the (...)
cylinder, which is not quite as long as the inner one, where it drops into the
wind tube (...) a, and as it falls from a to b, the wind carries off every
thing lighter than good wheat, viz. cheat, chaff, light garlic, dust, and light
rotten grains of wheat; but, in order to effect this more completely, it should
fall at least (...) feet through the current of wind.

The clean wheat falls into the funnel b, (...) thence into the garner c, over
the stones (...) light wheat, screenings, etc. fall into garner S, and the
chaff settles into the chaff room C. The current slackens passing over this
room and drops the chaff, but resumes its full forc^ as soon as it is over, and
carries out the (...) through the wall at B. To prevent the current from
slackening too much as it passes over S and c, Art. 84.
and under the screen, make the passages, where the grain comes in and goes out,
as small as possible, not more than half an inch wide, and as long as
necessary. If the wind escapes any where but at B, it defeats the scheme, and
carries out the dust into the mill. Or fix valves to shut the passages by a
weight or spring, so that the weight of the wheat, etc. falling on will open
them just enough to let it pass, without suffering any wind to escape. This I
have from Timothy Kink, being one principle of his improved fan.


Note, The fan is set to blow both the wheat and screenings, and carry the dust
out.

Note also, That the wind cannot escape into the garners or screen room, if
they are tight; for as soon as they are full, no more can enter.

By attending duly to the foregoing principle, we may fix fans to answer our
purposes.

The principal things to be observed in fixing screens and fans, are,

1. Give the screen 1 inch to the foot fall, and between 15 and 18 revolutions
in a minute.

2. To make the fan blow strong enough, let the wings be 3 feet wide, 20 inches
long, and revolve 140 times in a minute.

3. Then regulate the blast, by giving more or less feed of wind.

4. Leave no place for the wind to escape, but at the end through the wall.

5. Wherever you want it to blow hardest, there make the tube narrowest.

6. Where you want the chaff and cheat to fall, Art. 8^.
there make the tube sufficiently wider.

7. Make them blow both the wheat and screenings, and carry the dust clear out
of the mill.

8. The wind tube may be of any length and either crooked or strait, as may
best suit; but no where less than where the wheat falls.

CHAPTER IV. Art. 84. OF GUDGEONS, THE CAUSE OF THEIR HEATING AND GETTING
LOOSE, AND REMEDIES THEREFORE.
THE cause of Gudgeons heating, is the excessive friction of their rubbing
parts, which generates the heat in proportion to the weight that presses the
rubbing surfaces together, and the velocity with which they more See art. 31.

The cause of their getting loose is, then heating, and burning the wood, or
drying it so that it shrinks in the bands, and gives (...) gudgeon room to work.

To avoid the effects, we must remove the causes.

1. Increase the surface of contact or rubbing parts, and, if possible,
decrease their velocity the heat will not then be generated so much.

2. Conduct the heat away from the gudgeon as fast as generated, Art. 84.
if possible.

To increase the surface of contact^ without increasing its velocity, make the
(...) or bearing part of the gudgeon longer. (...) the length be doubled, the
weight will be sustained by a double surface, and velocity the same; there will
not then be so much heat generated: and even supposing the same quantity of
heat generated, there will be a double space of surface exposed to air, to
convey it away. To understand this subject better, let us consider, that when
we strike a flint with steel, we choose the sharpest part of the flint; then
the surface of contact is so small, that the force of the stroke creates
friction enough to strike or generate fire: But if we strike a thick smooth
part of the flint, the force will not be sufficient to strike fire, the surface
being too large. Hence we may conclude, that the smaller the r^^^ing surface,
the greater the heat; and if the surface was so small as to strike fire
continually, it would be very difficult to keep the gudgeon cool. If a gudgeon
heats at 3 inches bearing on the stone, lengthen it to 6 or 8 inches. I have
seen them in use from 2 1-2 to 10 inches bearing on the stone; and those who
had the longest (being men of the greatest experience in the milling business)
accounted their length to be a good remedy against the heating.


To convey the heat away as fast as generated cause a small quantity of water
to drop slowly on the gudgeon, to carry off the heat by evaporation. Water is a
great conductor of heat, and wonderful is the effect of the principle of
evaporation, in carrying off the heat from bodies; every particle of water that
evaporates, carries off a quantity of heat with it. Dr. Franklin asserts, that
by evaporation a man could be froze to death the warmest day ^^n summer.
A small quantity is better than a large; because it should be just sufficient
to keep up the evaporation, and not destroy the polish made by the grease;
which it will do if the quantity be too great, Art. ^4.
and will let the bare stone and gudgeon come in con^^^; which will cause both
to wear away very fast. The grease operates in lessening friction, perhaps, in
three ways. 1st. The particles of the grease, by filling (...) the pores of the
stone and gudgeon, makes the sliding surfaces more perfectly smooth. 2d. The
particles of great act as rollers between the sliding surfaces. 3d. It destroy
the co-hesion that might otherwise take place between the surfaces. See Art.
31. and 33.

Oil is said to answer best for spindle feet and step gudgeons tallow for
common gudgeons, and black lead mixed with ^llow for cogs, which forms a glossy
polish on them that will wear a long time.




The best form that I have seen for large gudgeons for heavy wheels, is made of
cast iron. Fig. 6, plate XI, is a perspective view of one; a a a a, are four
wings at right angles with each other, extending from side to side of the
shaft. These wings are larger, every way, at the end that is farthest in the
shaft, than at the outer end, for convenience in casting them, and also that
the bands may drive on tight, one over each end of the wings. Fig. 4 is an end
view of the shaft, with the gudgeon in it, and a band on the end; these bands,
being put on hot, become very tight as they cool, and if the shaft is dry will
not, get loose, but will if it is green; but by driving a few wedges along side
of each wing, it can be easily fastened, by any ordinary hand, without danger
of moving it much from the center.

One great use of these wings is, to convey away the heat from the gudgeon to
the bank, which are in contact with the air; and by thus distributing the heat
through so much metal, Art. 84.
with so large a surface exposed to the air, the heat is carried off as fast as
generated; therefore can never accumulate to a degree sufficient to burn loose,
as it will often do in common gudgeons of wrought iron. Wood will not conduct
the heat as well as the wings of metal; therefore it accumulates in the small
space of the gudgeon, to such a degree as to burn loose.

These gudgeons should be made of the best hard metal, well refined, in order
that they may wear well, and not be subject to break; but of this there is but
little danger, if the metal is good: should it prove to be the case, I propose
to have wings cast separate from the neck, as represented by fig. 4; where the
inside light square shows a mortice for the steeled gudgeon, fig. 7, to be
fitted into, with an iron key behind the wings, to draw the gudgeon in tight,
if ever it should work loose; by which means it may be taken out, at any time,
to repair.

This plan would do well for step gudgeons for heavy upright shafts, such as
tub mills, etc.

When the neck is cast with the wings, the square part in the shaft need not be
larger than the light square representing the mortice.

CHAPTER V.
Art. 85. ON BUILDING MILL-DAMS, LAYING FOUNDATIONS, AND BUILDING MILL-WALLS.
THERE are several things to be considered, and dangers to be guarded against,
in building mill-dams.

1. Construct them so, that the water tumbling over them, cannot undermine
their foundations at the lower side. If you have not a foundation of solid
rocks, or so heavy, that the water tumbling over, will never move them, there
should be such a foundation made with great stones, not lighter than millstones
(if the stream is heavy, and the tumble great) well laid, as low and close as
possible, with their upstrea^ end lowest, to prevent any thing from catching
under the^. But if the bottom is sand or clay, make a foundation of the trunks
of long trees, laid close together on the bottom of the creek, with their but
ends down stream, as low and close (...) possible, across the whole tumbling
space. On these may (...) built the dam, either of stone or wood, leaving 12 or
15 (...) below the breast or fall, for the water to fall upon. See (...) 3,
plate X, which is a front view of log dam, showing (...) position of the logs,
also of the stones in the abutments.


2. So that heavy logs, large pieces of ice, etc. floating down, cannot catch
against any part of them, but slide easily over. If the dam is built of timber
and small stones, etc. (...) the breast perpendicular of strait logs, laid
close one (...) another, putting the largest, longest, and best logs on (...)
top; make another wall of logs 12 or 15 feet upstream, laying them close
together, to prevent lamprey eels from working through them, not so high as the
other, by 3 feet; tie these walls together, at every 6 feet, with cross logs,
with the buts down stream, dovetailed and bolted strongly to the logs of the
lower wall, especially the upper log, which should be strongly bolted down to
them. The spaces between these log walls, are to be filled up with stones,
gravel, etc. Choose a dry season for this work; then the water will run through
the lower part, while you build the upper part tight.

To prevent any thing from catching against the top log, flag the top of the
dam with broad or long stones, laying the downstream end on the upstream side
of the log, to extend a little above it, the other end lowest, so that the next
tier of stones will lap a little over the first; still getting lower as you
advance upstream. This will glance logs, etc. over the dam, without catching
against any thing.andIf suitable stones cannot be had, I would recommend strong
plank, or small logs, laid close together, with both ends pinned to the top
logs of the wall, the upstream end being 3 feet lower than the other: But if
plank is to be used, there need only be a strong frame raised on the foundation
logs, to support the plank, or the timber it is pinned to. See a side view of
this frame, fig. 45. plate IV. Some plank the breast to the front posts, and
fill the hollow space with stone and gravel; but this may be omitted, if the
foundation logs are sufficiently long upstream, under the dam, to prevent the
whole from floating away. Stone first, and then gravel, sand and clay, are to
be filled in above this frame, so as to stop the water. If the abutments are
well secured, the dam will stand well.




3. So that the pressure or force of the current of the water will press their
parts more firmly together, Art. 85.
If the dam is built of stone, make it in the form of an arch or semicircle,
standing upstream and endeavor to fix strong abutments on each side, to
support the arch; then, in laying the stones, put the widest end upstream, and
the more they are drove downstream, the tighter they will press together. All
the stones of a dam should be laid with their upstream ends lowest, and the
other end lapped over the preceding, in manner of the shingles or tiles of a
house, to glance every thing smoothly over, as at the side 3, of fig. 3, plate
X. The breast may be built up with stone, either on a good rock or log
foundation putting the best in front, leaning a little upstream, and on the top
lay one good log, and another 15 feet upstream on the bottom, to tie the top
log to, by several logs, with good buts, downstream, dovetailed and bolted
strongly, both at bottom and top of the top and upstream logs; ^ill in between
them with stone and gravel, laying large stones slanting next the top log, to
glance any thing over it. This will be much better than to build all of stone;
because if one at top give way, the breach will probably increase rapidly, and
the whole go down to the bottom.


4. Give them a sufficient tumbling space to vent all the water in time of
freshes. Art. 87.
If the tumbling space is not long enough, the water will be apt to overflow
the abutments, and if they are earth or loose stones, they will be broken down,
and perhaps a very, great breach made. If the dam is of logs, the abutments had
best be made of stone, laid as at the side 3, in fig. 3; but (...) stone is not
to be had, they must be made of wood, although subject to rot soon, being above
water.


5. Make the abutments so high, that the water will not overflow them in time
of freshes.

6. Let the dam and mill be a sufficient distance apart; so that the dam will
not raise the water on the mill, in time of high floods. I have, in many
instances, seen the mill set so close in the dam, that the pierhead or forebay
was in the breast; so that in case of a leak or breach about the forebay or
(...), there is no chance of shutting off the water, or conveying it another
way; but all must be left to its fate. The mill in frequently broken down, and
carried away; even the millstones are carried a considerable distance down the
stream and sometimes buried under the sand, and never found.

The great danger of this error will appear more plain, (...) we suppose si^
mills on one stream, one above the other, each at the breast of the dam; and a
great flood to break the (...) or uppermost dam, say through the pierhead,
carrying with it the mill, stones and all; this so increases the flood, that i^
overflows the next dam, which throws the water against the mill, and it is
taken away; the water of these two dams (...) now so augmented the flood, that
it carries every mill before it, until it comes to the dam of the sixth, which
it sweep away also; but suppose this dam to be a quarter of a (...) above the
mill, which is set well into the bank, the extra water that is thrown into the
canal, runs over at the waste left in its banks for the purpose; and the water
having a free passage by the mill, does not injure it; whereas, had it been at
the breast of the dam, it must have went away with the rest. A case, similar to
this, actually happened in Virginia in 1794; all the mills and dams on Falling
creek, in Chesterfield county, were carried away at once, except the lowest,
(Mr. Ward^^^e's); whose dam, having broke the year before, was rebuilt a
quarter of a mile higher up; by which means his mill was saved.




Art. 86. On building Mill-walls.
THE principal things to be considered in building mill-walls, are,

1. To lay the foundations with good large stones, so deep as to be out of
danger of being undermined, in case of any accident of the water breaking through
at the mill. If the foundation is not good, but abounding with quicks^^ds the
wall cannot be expected to stand, unless it be made good by driving down piles
until they meet the solid ground; on the top of which may be laid large flat
pieces of timber, for the walls to be built on; they will not rot under water,
totally excluded from the air.


2. Set the center of gravity, or weight of the wall, on the center of its
foundation. It is a common practice to build walls plumb outside, and better
them all from the inside; which throws the center of their gravity to one side
of their base. See art.14. Therefore if it settles any, it will incline to fall
outward. Mill-walls should be battered as much outside, as to be equal to the
offsets inside, to cause the whole weight to stand on the center of the
foundation, unless it stand against a bank, as the wall next the wagon, in
plate VIII. The bank is very apt to press the wall inwards, unless it stands
battering. In this case, build the side against the bank plumb, even with the
ground, and then begin to batter it inwards. The plumb rules should be made a
little widest at the upper end, so as to give the wall the right inclination,
according to its height; to do which, take a line, the length equal to the
height of the wall, set one end, by a compass point, in the lower end of the
plumb rule, and strike the plumb line; then move the other end just as much as
the wall is to be battered in the whole height; and it will show the
inclination of the side of the rule that will batter the wall exactly right.
This error of building walls plumb outside, is frequently committed in building
the abutments of bridges; the consequence is, they fall down in a short time;
because the earth between the walls is expanded a little by every hard frost,
and tumbles the walls over.


3. Use good mortar, Art. 86.
and it will, in time, petrify and become as hard as stone. I have but little
experience in this; but will quote an experienced author (George Sample, on
Free Trade.) He says, Concerning Lime, Mortar and Grout.
I have, from my childhood, been well acquainted with the nature of lime and
sand made into mortar, of all sorts that have been used in buildings in these
countries, and tried numerous experiments with them. On which, together with
what I have observed and learned from old experienced workmen, during the
course of upwards of sixty years, I think I can safely affirm, that good
mortar, that is made of pure and well burnt limestone, properly made up with
sharp clean sand, free from any sort of earth, loam or mud, will, within some
considerable time, actually petrify, and, as it were, turn to the consistency
of a stone. I remember I had one of my remarks from an old Scotch mason; which
I shall give you in his own identical words: that is, When a hundred years are
past and gane,
Then good mortar is grown to a stain (or stone.)


I need not explain what I mean by sharp clean sand; but I shall give you this
one caution, that it is better to put too much sand in your mortar, than too
little. I know workmen choose to have their mortar rich, because it works
pleasanter; but rich mortar will not stand the weather so well, nor grow so
hard, as poor mortar will do. If it was all lime, it would have no more
strength, in comparison, than clay.






4. Arch over all the windows, doors, etc.

5. Tie them well together by the timbers of the floors.

PART THE THIRD -- Containing, EVANS's PATENTED IMPROVEMENTS ON THE ART OF
MANUFACTURING GRAIN INTO MEAL AND FLOUR.

INTRODUCTION
THESE improvements consist of the invention, and various applications, of the
following machines, viz.

1. The Elevator. 2. The Conveyer. 3. The Hopper-boy. 4. The Drill. 5. The
Descender.
Which five machines are variously applied, in different mills, according to
their construction, so as to perform every necessary movement of the grain and
meal, from one part of the mill to another, or from one machine to another,
through all the various operations, from the time the grain is emptied from the
waggoner's bag, or from the measure on board the (...), until it is completely
manufactured into superfine flour, and other different qualities, and
completely separated, ready for packing into barrels, for sale or ^^portation.
All which is performed by the force of (...) water, without the aid of manual
labor, except (...) set the different machines in motion, etc. Which ^^^sens
the labor and expense of attendance of flour ^ills, fully one half. See the
whole applied, plate III.

THE YOUNG Mill-Wright's Guide. PART THE THIRD. CHAPTER I. Art. 88. DESCRIPTION
OF MACHINES.
1. Of the Elevator.
THE Elevator is an endless strap, Description of the Elevator.
revolving over two pullies, one of which is set where the grain or meal, etc.
is to be hoisted from, and the other where it is to be hoisted to; to this
strap is fastened a number of small buckets, which fill themselves as they pass
under the lower pulley, and empty as they pass over the upper one. To prevent
waste of what may spill out of these buckets, the strap, buckets and pullies,
are all enclosed, and work in tight cases; so that what spills will descend to
the place from whence it was hoisted. A B, in fig. 1, plate VI, Plate VI. Fig.
1.
is an elevator for raising grain, which is let in at A, and discharged at B
into the spouts leading to the different garners. Fig.2 is a perspective view
of the strap, Fig. 2.
and different kinds of buckets, Art. 88.
and the various modes of fastening them to the strap.

2. Of the Conveyer.
The Conveyer K I, Conveyer.
fig. 1, is an endless screw of two continued spires, put in motion in a trough;
the grain is let in at one end, and the screw drives it to the other, or
collects it to the center, as at y, to run into the elevator (see plate VIII,
37 -- 36 -- 4, and 44 -- 45) or it is let in at the middle, and conveyed each
way, as 15 -- 16, plate VIII.

Fig. 3, Fig. 3.
is a top view of the lower pully of a meal elevator in its case, and a meal
conveyer in its trough, for conveying meal from the stones, as fast as ground,
into the elevator. This is an 8 sided shaft, Meal Conveyer.
set on all sides with small inclining boards, called flights, for conveying the
meal from one end of the trough to the other; these flights are set in a spiral
line, as shown by the dotted line; but being set across said line, changes the
principle of the machine from a screw to that of plows, which is found to
answer better for conveying warm meal.

Besides these conveying flights, half their number of others are sometimes
necessary; which are called lifters, and set with their broadsides foremost, to
raise the meal from one side, and let it fall on the other side of the shaft to
cool: these are only used where the meal is hot, and the conveyer short. See 21
-- 22, in plate VIII: which is a conveyer, carrying the meal from 3 pair of
stones to the elevator, 23 -- 24.

3. Of the Hopper-boy.
Fig. 12, plate VII, Fig. 12. Of the Hopper-boy
is a Hopper-boy; which consists of a perpendicular shaft, AB, put in a slow
motion, (not above 4 revolutions in a minute) carrying round with it the
horizontal piece CD, which is called the arms, and set, on the under side, full
of small inclining boards, called flights, so set as to gather the meal toward
the center, or spread it from the center to that part of the arm which passes
over the bolting hopper; at which part, one board is set broadside foremost,
as E (called a sweeper) which drives the meal before it, and drops it into the
hoppers HH, as the arms pass over them. The meal is generally let fall from the
elevator, at the extremity of the arm, at D, where there is a sweeper,
Sweepers, their use.
which drives the meal before it, trailing it in a circle the whole way round,
so as to discharge nearly the whole of its load, by the time it returns to be
loaded again: the flights then gather it toward the center, from every part of
the circle; which would not be the case, if the sweepers did not lay it round;
but the meal would be gathered from only one side of the circle. These sweepers
are screwed on the back of the arm, so that they may be raised or lowered, in
order to make them discharge sooner or later, as necessary.

The extreme flight of each end of the arms are put on with a screw passing
through its center, so that they may be turned to drive the meal outward; the
use of which is, to spread the warm meal as it falls from the elevator, in a
ring round the hopper-boy, while it at the same time gathers the cool meal into
the bolting hopper; so that the cold meal may be bolted, and the warm meal
spread to cool, by the same machine, at the same time, if the miller chooses so
to do. The foremost edge of these arms is sloped up, in order to make them rise
over the meal, and its weight is nearly balanced by the weight w, hung to one
end of a cord passing over the pulley P, and to the stay iron F. About 4 1-2
feet of the lower end of the upright shaft is made round, passing loosely
through a round hole in the flight arm, giving it liberty to rise and fall
freely, to suit any quantity of meal under it. The flight arm is led round by
the leading arm LM, by a cord passing through the holes LM, at each end, and
made fast to the flight arm DC. This cord is lengthened or shortened by a
hitch-stick N, with two holes for the cord to pass through, the end of the cord
being passed through a hole at D, and fastened to the end of the stick; this
cord must reeve freely through the holes at the ends of the arms, in order that
the ends may both be led equally. The flight arm falls behind the leader about
1-6th part of the circle. The stay-iron CFE, is a ring at F, which fits the
shaft loosely, and is for keeping the arm steady, and hanging the ends of an
equal height by the screws. CE.

Fig. 13 is a perspective view of the underside of the flight arms. The arm
a-c, with flights and sweepers complete; s s s shows the screws which fasten
the sweepers to the arms. The arm c-b, is to show the rule for laying out for
the flights. Art. 88.
When the sweeper at b, is turned in the position of the dotted line, it drives
the meal outward. Fig. 14 is a plate on the bottom of the shaft, to keep the
arm from the floor, and 15 is the step gudgeon.

4. Of the Drill.
The Drill is an endless strap revolving over two pullies, Drill.
like an elevator, but set nearly horizontal, and instead of buckets, there are
small rakes fixed to the strap, which draw the grain or meal along the bottom
of the case. See GH, in plate VI, fig. 1. The grain is let in at H, and
discharged at G. This can sometimes be applied with less expense than a
conveyer; if it is set a little descending, it will move grain or meal with
ease, and will do well even a little ascending.

5. Of the Descender.
The Descender is a broad endless strap of every thin pliant leather, Descender.
canvass, or flannel, etc. revolving over two pullies, which turn on small
pivots, in a case or trough, to prevent waste, one end of which is to be lower
than the other. Fig. 1.
See OF, fig. 1. The grain or meal falls from the elevator on the upper strap,
at E, and by its own gravity and fall, sets the machine in motion, and it
discharges the load over the lower pulley F. There are two small buckets to
bring up what may spill or fall off the strap, and lodge in the bottom of the
case.

This machine moves on the principles of an overshot water-wheel, and will
convey meal a considerable distance, Art. 88.
with a small descent. Where a motion is easily obtained from the water, it is
to be preferred to that of working itself, it being easily stopped, is apt to
be troublesome.

The Crain Spout is hung on a shaft to turn on pivots or a pin, so that it may
turn every way, like a crane; into this spout the grain^ falls from the
elevator, and, by turning, it can be directed into any garner. The spout is
made to fit close, and play under a broad board, and the grain is let into it
through the middle of this board, near the pin, so that it will always enter
the spout. See it under B fig. 1. L is a view of the under side of it, and M is
a top view of it. The pin or shaft (...) reach down so low, that a man may
stand (...) the floor and turn it by the handle x.

CHAPTER II. APPLICATION OF THE MACHINES, IN THE PROCESS OF MANUFACTURING WHEAT
INTO SUPERFINE FLOUR.
PLATE VIII, is not meant to show (...) plan of a mill; but merely the
Application and Use of the patented Machines.

Art. 89.
The grain is emptied from the wagon into the spout 1, Art. 89.
which is set in the wall, and conveys it into the scale 2, Of receiving the
wheat.
that is made to hold 10, 20, 30, or 60 bushels, at pleasure.

There should, for convenience of counting, be weights of 60lbs. each; divided
into 30, 15 and 7 1-2lbs. then each weight would show a bushel of wheat, and
the smaller ones halves, pecks, etc. which any one could count with case.

When the wheat is weighed, draw the gate at the bottom of the scale, and let
it run into the garner* 3; at the bottom of which there is a gate to let it
into the elevator 4 -- 5, which (...) it to 5, and the crane spout being turned
over the great store garner 6, which communicates from floor to floor, to
garner 7, over the stones 8, which suppose to be for ^^elling or rubbing the
wheat, before it is ground, to take off all dust that sticks to the grain, to
break smut or fly-eaten grain, lumps of dust, etc. As it is rubbed it runs, by
the dotted lines, into 3 again; in its passage it goes through a current of
wind blowing into the ^ight room 9, having only the spout a, through the lower
floor, for the wind to escape; all the chaff will settle in the room, but most
of the dust passes out with the wind at a. The wheat again runs into the
elevator at 4, and the crane spout, at 5, is turned over the screen ^^ppers 10
or 11, and the grain lodged there, ^ut of which it runs into the rolling screen
12, and descends through the current of wind made by the fan 13, the clean
heavy grain descends, by 14, into the conveyer 15 -- 16; which conveys it into
all the garners over the stones 7 -- 17 -- 18, and these regularly supply the
stones 8 -- 19 -- 20, keeping always an equal quantity in the hoppers, which
will cause them to feed regularly; as it is ground the meal falls to the
conveyer 21 -- 22, which collects it to the meal elevator, at 23, and it is
raised to 24, whence it gently runs down the spout to the hopper-boy at 25,
which spreads and cools it sufficiently, and gathers it into the bolting
hoppers, both of which it attends regularly; as it passes through the superfine
cloths 26, the superfine flour falls into the packing chest 28, which is on the
second floor: If the flour is to be loaded on wagons, it should be packed
(...) this floor, that it may conveniently be (...) into them; but if the flour
is to be put (...) board a vessel, it will be more convenience (...) pack on
the lower floor, out of chest 29, (...) roll it into the vessel at 30. The
shorts and bran should be kept on the second floor, (...) they may be conveyed
by spouts into the vessel's hold, to save labor.

The rublings which fall from the tail of the 1st reel 26, are guided into the
head of the 2d reel 27; which is in the same chest, near the floor, to save
both room and machinery. On the head of this reel is 6 or 7 feet of (...)
cloth, for tail flour, and next to it the middling stuff, etc.

The tail flour which falls from the tail (...) the 1st reel 26, and head of
the 2d reel 27, and requires to be bolted over again, is guided by a spout, as
shown by dotted lines 31 -- 2^ into the conveyer 22 -- 23, to be hoisted again
with the ground meal; Art. 89.
a little bran may be let in with it, Tail flour and middlings hoisted and
bolted over.
to keep the cloth open in warm weather -- But if there be not a fall sufficient
for the tail flour to run into the lower conveyer, there may be one set to
convey it into the elevator, as 31 -- 32. There is a little regulating board,
turning on the joint x under the tail of the first reels, to guide more or less
with the tail flour.

The middlings, Middlings ground over with the wheat.
as they fall, are conveyed into the eye of either pair of millstones by the
conveyer 31 -- 32, and ground over with the wheat; which is the best way of
grinding them, because the grain keeps them from being killed, and there is no
time lost in doing it, Which saves labor and time.
and they are regularly mixed with the flour. There is a slanting sliding board,
to guide the middlings over the conveyer, that the miller may take only such
part, for grinding over, as he shall judge fit; and a little regulating board
between the tail flour and middlings, to guide more or less into the stones or
elevator.

The light grains of wheat, screenings, etc. after being blown by the fan 13,
fall into the screenings garner 32; the chaff is driven further on, and settles
in the chaff-room 33; the greater part of the dust will be carried out with the
wind through the wall. For the theory of fauning wheat, see are. 83.

To clean the Screenings.
Draw the little gate 34, Screenings cleaned.
and let them into the elevator at 4, and be elevated into garner 10; Art. 89.
then draw gate 10, and shut 11 and 34, and let them pass through the
rolling-screen 12 and fan 13, and as they fall at 14, guide them down a spout
(shown by dotted lines) into the elevator at 4, and elevate them into the
screen-hopper 11; then draw gate 11, shut 10, and let them take the same course
over again, and return into garner 10, etc. as often as necessary, and, when
cleaned, guide them into the stones to be ground.

The screenings of the screenings are now in garner 32, which may be cleaned as
before, and an inferior quality of meal made out of them.

By these means the wheat may be so effectually separated from the seed of
weeds, etc as to leave none to be wasted, and all the chaff, cheat, etc. saved
for food for cattle.

This completes the whole process from the wagon to the wagon again, without
manual labor, except in packing the flour, and rolling it in.

Art. 90. Of elevating Grain from Ships.
IF the wheat comes to the mill by ships, Of elevating grain from ships, if
measured at the mill.
No. 35, and requires to be measured at the mill, then a conveyer, 35 -- 4, may
be set (...) motion by the great cog-wheel, and may be under or above the lower
floor, as may be suit the height of the floor above high water. This conveyer
must have a joint, as 36, in the middle, to give the end that lays on the side
of the ship, liberty to raise and lower with the tide. Art. 90.
The wheat, as measured, is poured into the hopper at 35, and is conveyed into
the elevator at 4; which conveyer will so rub the grain as to answer the end of
rubbing stones. And, in order to blow away the dust, when rubbed off, before it
enters the elevator, part of the wind (...) by fan 13 may be brought down by a
spout, ^3 -- 36, and, when it enters the case of the conveyer, will pass each
way, and blow out the dust at 37 and 4.

In some instances, a short elevator, with the center of the upper pulley, 38,
fixed immovable, the other end standing on the deck, so much aslant as to give
the vessel liberty to raise and lower, the elevator sliding a little on the
deck. The case of the lower strap of this elevator must be considerably
crooked, to prevent the points of the buckets from wearing by rubbing in the
descent. The wheat, as measured, is poured into a hopper, which lets it in at
the bottom of the pulley.

But if the grain is not to be measured at the mill, If the gain is not be
measured at the mill, it is elevated out of the vessel's hole immediately by an
elevator that raises and lowers with the tide.
then fix the elevator 35 -- 39, to take it out of the hole, and elevate it
into any door convenient. The upper pulley is fixed in a gate that plays up and
down in circular rabbits, to raise and lower to suit the tide and depth of the
hole to the wheat. 40 is a draft of the gate, and manner of hanging the
elevator in it. See a particular description in the latter part of art. 95.

This gate is hung by a strong rope passing over a strong pulley or roller 41,
By the strength of one man.
and thence round the axis of the wheel 42; round the rim of which wheel there
is a rope, which passes round the axis of wheel 43, Art. 90.
round the rim of which wheel is a small rope, leading down over the pulley P,
to the deck, and fastened to the cleet q; a man by pulling this rope can hoist
the whole elevator; because if the diameter of the axis be 1 foot and the
wheels 4 feet, the power is increased 16 fold, by art. 20. The elevator is
hoisted up, and rested against the wall, until the ship comes too, and is
fastened steady in the right place, then it is set in the hole on the top of
the wheat, Lifting the wheat up itself.
then it is set in the hole on the top of the wheat, and the bottom being open,
the buckets fill as they pass under the pulley; a man holds by the cord, and
lets the elevator settle as the wheat sinks in the hole, until the lower part
of the case rests on the bottom of the hole, it being so long as to keep the
buckets from touching the vessel; by this time it will have hoisted 1, 2 or 300
bushels, ^00 bushels per hour.
according to the size of the ship and depth of the hole, at the rate of 300
bushels per hour. When the grain ceases running in of itself, the man may
shovel it up, till the load is discharged.

The elevator discharges the wheat into the conveyer at 44, Into a conveyer
that conveys it into any garner, and at the same time rubs off the dust.
which conveys it into the screen-hoppers 10 -- 11, or into any other garner,
from which it may descend into the elevator 4 -- 5, or into the rubbing-stones
8.

This conveyer may serve instead of rubbing stones, and the dust rubbed off
thereby may be, by a wind-spout from the fan 13, into the conveyer at 45, blown
out through the wall at p. The holes at 44 and 10 -- 11 are to be small, to let
but little wind escape any where but out through the wall, where it will carry
the dust.

A small quantity of wind might be let into the conveyer 15 -- 16, Art. 90.
to blow away the dust rubbed off by it.

The fan must be made to blow very strong, to be sufficient for all these
purposes, and the strength of the blast regulated as directed by art. 83.

Art. 91. A Mill for grinding Parcels.
HERE each person's parcel is to be ^^ored in a separate garner, Application to
a mill for grinding merchant work in parcels; the grain elevated from the
wagon into any garner, and from them again, into the rolling screen, etc. by
drawing gates; and kept separate.
and kept separate through the whole process of manufacture, which occasions much
labor; almost all of which is performed by the machines. See plate VI. fig 1;
which is a view of one side of a mill containing a number of garners holding
parcels, and a side view of the wheat elevator.

The grain is emptied into the garner g, from the wagon, as shown in plate
VIII; and, by drawing the gate A, it is let into the elevator AB, and elevated
into the crane-spout B, which being turned into the mouth of the garner-spout
BC, which leads over the top of a number of garners, and has, in its bottom, a
little gate over each garner; which gates and garners are all numbered with the
same numbers respectively.

Suppose we wish to deposit the grain in the garner No. 2, draw the gate 2 out
of the bottom, and shut it in the spout, to stop the wheat from passing along
the spout past the hole, so that it must all fall into the garner; and thus for
the other garners 3-4-5-6-etc. These garners are all made like hoppers, Art. 91.
about 4 inches wide at the floor, and nearly the length of the garner; but as
it passes through the next story, it is brought to the form of a spout 4 inches
square, leading down to the general spout KA, which leads to the elevator; in
each of these spouts is a gate numbered; with the number of its garner; so that
when we want to grind the parcel in garner 2, we draw the gate 2 in the lower
spout, to let the wheat run into the elevator at A, to be elevated into the
crane-spout B, which is to be turned over the rolling-screen, as shown in plate
VIII.

Under the upper tier of garners, there is another tier in the next story, set
so that the spouts from the bottom of the upper tier pass down the partitions
of the lower tier, and the upper spouts of the lower tier pass between the
partitions of the upper tier, to the garner-spout.

These garners, and the gates leading both into and out of them, are numbered
as the others.

If it is not convenient to fix the descending spouts BC, to convey the wheat
from the elevator to the garners, and KA to convey it from the garners to the
elevator again, then the conveyers r-s and l-k may be used for said purposes.

To keep the parcels separate, Meal kept separate.
there should be a crane-spout to the meal elevator, or any other method, by
which the meal of the second parcel may be guided to fall on another part of
the floor, until the first parcel is (...) bolted, and the chests cleared out,
when the meal of the second parcel may be guided into the hopper-body. Art. 91.


I must here observe, that in mills for grinding parcels, the tail flour must
be hoisted by a separate elevator to the hopper-boy, to be bolted over, and not
run into the conveyer, as shown in plate VIII; because then the parcels could
not be kept separate.

The advantages of the machinery, Advantages gained.
applied to a mill for grinding parcels, are very great.

1. Because without them there is much labor in moving the different parcels
from place to place, all which is done by the machinery.

2. The meal, as it is ground, is cooled by the machinery, in so short a time,
and bolted, that when the grinding is done, the bolting is also nearly
finished: Therefore,

3. It saves room, because the meal need not be spread over the floor to cool,
there to lay 12 hours as usual, and none but one parcel need be on the floor at
once.

4. It gives greater dispatch, as the mill need never stop either stones or
bolts, in order to keep parcels separate. The screenings of each parcel may be
cleaned, as directed in art. 89, with very little trouble; and the flour may be
nearly packed before the grinding is finished. So that if a parcel of 60
bushels arrive at the mill in the evening, the owner may wait till morning,
when he may have it all finished; he may use the off all for feed for his team,
and proceed with his load to market.

Art. 92. A Grist-mill for grinding very small Parcels.
FIG. 16, plate VII, is a representation of a grist-mill, Application to a
grist-mill.
so constructed that the grist being put into the hopper, it will be ground and
bolted, and return into the bags again.

The grain is emptied into the hopper at A, and as it is ground it runs into
the elevator at B, and is elevated and let run into the bolting hopper down a
broad spout at C, and as bolted, it falls into the bags at d. The chef is made
to come to a point like a funnel, and a division made to separate the fine and
coarse, if wanted, and a bag put under each part; (...) the top of this
division is set a regulating board on a joint, as x, by which the fine and
coarse can be regulated at pleasure.

If the bran requires to be ground over ((...) it often does) it is made to
fall into a box over the hopper, and by drawing the little gate (...) it may be
let into the hopper, as soon as the grain is all ground, and as it is bolted
the second time, it is let run into the bag by shutting the gate b, and drawing
the gate c.

If the grain is put into the hopper F, then as it is ground it falls into the
drill, which draws it into the elevator at B, and it asce^^ as before.

To keep the different grists separate -- Who the miller sees the first grist
fall into the elevator, Way to keep the grists separate.
he shuts the gate B or d, and gives (...) for it to get all into the bolting
reel; he (...) stops the knocking of the shoe by pulling (...) shoe line, which
hangs over the pullies pp, from the shoe to near his hand, making it fast (...)
peg; he then draws the gate B or d, Art. 92.
and lets the second grist into the elevator, to fall into the shoe or bolting
hopper, giving time for the first grist to be all into the bags, and the bags
of the second grist put in their places; he then unhitches the line from the
peg, and lets the shoe knock again, and begin to bolt the second grist.

If he does not choose to let the meal run immediately into the bags, he may
have a box made with feet to stand in the place of the bags, for the meal to
fall in, out of which it may be taken, and put into the bags, by the miller or
the owner, as fast as it is bolted, and mixed as desired; and as soon as the
first parcel is bolted, the little gates at the mouth of the bags may be shut,
while the meal is filled out of the box, and the second grist may be bolting.

The advantages of this improvement on a grist-mill are, Advantages.


1. It saves the labor of hoisting, spreading, and cooling the meal, and
carrying up the ran to be ground over, sweeping the chest, and filling the bags.

2. It does all with greater dispatch, and (...) waste, without having to stop
the stones or ^^lting-reel, to keep the grists separate, and he bolting is
finished almost as soon as the ^^inding; therefore the owner will be the less
(...) detained.

The chest and spouts should be made steep prevent the meal from lodging in
them, Form of the chest.
so (...) the miller, by striking the bottom of the (...), will shake out all
the meal.

The elevator and drill should be so made as to clean out at one revolution.
Art. 92.
The drill might have a brush or two, instead of rakes, which would sweep the
case clean at a revolution; and the shoe of the bolting-hopper should be short
and steep, so that it will clean out soon.

The same machinery may be used for merchant-work, by having a cranespout at C,
or a small gate, to turn the meal into the hopper-boy that tends the merchant
bolt.

A mill thus constructed, might grind grists in the daytime, and merchant-work
at night.

A drill is preferable to a conveyer for grist-mills, because they will clean
out much sooner and better. The lower pulley of the elevator is twice as large
in diameter as the pullies of the drill; the lower pulley of the elevator, and
one pulley of the drill, are on the same shaft, close together, the elevator
moves the drill, and the pulley of the drill being smallest, gives room for the
meal to fall into the buckets of the elevator.

Art. 93. Of elevating Grain, Salt, or any granulous Substance, from Ships into
Storehouses, by the Strength of a Horse.
FIG. 17 represents the elevator, and the manner of giving it motion; the horse
is hitched to the end of the sweep-beam A, by which he turns the upright shaft,
on the top of which is the driving cog-wheel, of 96 cogs, 2 1-2 inches pitch,
Art. 93.
to gear into the leading wheel of 20 cogs, on the same shaft with which is
another driving wheel of 40 cogs, to gear into another leading wheel of 19
cogs, which is on the same shaft with the elevator pulley; then if the horse
makes about 3 revolutions in a minute (which he will do if he walk in a circle
of 20 feet diameter) the elevator pulley will make about 30 revolutions in a
minute; and if the pulley is 2 feet in diameter, and a bucket be put on every
foot of the strap, to hold a quart each, the elevator will hoist about 187
quarts per minute, Quantity a horse can hoist.
or 320 bushels in an hour, 3840 bushels in 12 hours; and for every foot the
elevator is high, the horse will have to sustain the weight of a quart of
wheat; say 48 feet, which is the height of the highest storehouses, then the
horse would have to move 1 1-2 bushels of wheat upwards, with a velocity equal
to his own walk; which I presume he can do with ease, and overcome the friction
of the machinery: By which will appear the great advantages of this application.

The lower end of the elevator should stand near the side of the ship, and the
grain, salt, etc etc. be emptied into a hopper; the upper end may pass through
a door or window, as may be most convenient; the lower case should be a little
crooked to prevent the buckets from rubbing in their descent.

Art. 94. Of an Elevator applied to elevate Grain, etc. wrought by a Man.
FIG. 18, AB, are two Ratchet Wheels, Elevator to be wrought by a man.
with two deep grooves in each of them, for ropes to run in; they are fixed
close together, on the same shaft with the upper pulley of the elevator, so
that they will turn easily on the shaft the backward way, but a click falls
into the ratchet, and prevents them from turning forwards. Fig. 19 is a side
view of the wheel, ratchet and click. C D are two levers, like weavers
treadles, and from lever C there is a light staff passes to the foreside of the
groove wheel B, and made fast by a rope half way round the wheel; and from said
lever C there is a rope passing to the backside of the wheel A; and from lever
D there is a light staff passing to the foreside of the groove wheel A, and a
rope to the backside of the groove wheel B.

The man, Applying his weight to turn the machine.
who is to work this machine, stands on the treadles, and holds by the staffs
with his hands; and as he treads on D it descends, and the staff pulls forward
the wheel A, and the rope pulls backwards the wheel B, and as he treads on C
the staff pulls forward the wheel B, and the rope pulls backward the wheel A;
but as the click falls into the ratchet so that the wheels cannot move forward
without turning the elevator pulley, thus it is moved one way by the treadles;
and in order to keep up a regular motion, F is a heavy fly-wheel, which should
be of cast metal, to prevent much obstruction from the air.

To calculate what quantity a man can raise (...) any height, Art. 94.
let us suppose his weight to be 150lbs. which is the power to be applied,
Quantity he can hoist, at the rate of 200 bushels per hour.
and suppose he is able to walk about 70 feet (...) stairs in a minute, by the
strength of both (...) legs and arms, or, which is the same thing, (...) move
his weight on the treadles 70 steps (...) a minute; then suppose we allow, as
by (...). 29 -- 42, to lose 1-3 of the power to gain velocity and overcome
friction (which will be a (...) plenty in this case, because in the experiment
in the table in art. 37, when 7lbs were charged with 6lbs. they moved with a
velocity of 2 feet in half a second) then there (...) remain 100lbs. raised 70
feet in a minute, (...) to 200lbs. raised 35 feet to the top of the (...) story
per minute, equal to 200 bushels (...) hour, 2400 bushels in 12 hours.

The great advantages of this application of (...) elevator, The advantages of
this application of man's strength.
and of this mode of applying (...) strength, will appear from these
considerations, viz. he uses the strength of both (...) legs and arms, to move
his weight only, (...) one treadle to the other, which weight (...) the work;
whereas in carrying bags on a back, he uses the strength of his legs only,
(...) raise both the weight of his body and the (...), add to this that he
generally tak^s a (...) circuitous rout to the place where he is (...) empty
the bag, and returns empty: where^^ the elevator takes the shortest direction
to (...) place of emptying, and is always steadily (...) work.

The man must sit on a high bench, as a ^eaver does, on which he can rest part
of his weight, Art. 74.
and rest himself occasionally, when the machine moves lightly, and have a
(...) above his head, that he may push his head against, to overcome
extraordinary resistance. This is probably the best means of applying man's
strength to produce rotary motions.

DESCRIPTION OF PLATE IX.
THE grain is emptied into the spout A, (...) which it descends into the garner
B; which by drawing the gate at C, it passes into (...) elevator C D, which
raises it to D, and empties it into the Crane-spout E, which is so (...) on
gudgeons that it may be turned to (...) surrounding granaries, into the
Screen-^^^per F, for instance, (which has two parts and G) out of which it is
let into the Roll Screen, at H, by drawing the small gate. It passes through
the F an I, and falls into (...) little Sliding-Hopper K, which may be ^^^ed,
so as to guide it into either of the (...)-Garners, over the stones, L or M,
and is let into the Stone-Hoppers by the little (...) bb, as fast as it can be
ground. When (...) it falls into the Conveyor N N, which (...) it into the
Elevator at O O, this raises (...) empties it into the Hopper-Boy at P, who is
so constructed as to carry it round in a (...) gathering it gradually toward
the center, (...) it sweeps it into the Boulting-Hoppers Q Q.

The tail flour, as it falls, is guided into Elevator, to ascend with the meal,
and, (...) a proper quantity may be elevated, there (...) regulating board R,
set under the super^^^ cloths, on a joint x, so that it will turn (...) the
head or tail of the Reel, Art. 94.
and send more or less into the Elevator, as may be re^^^ed.

There may be a piece of coarse cloth or ^ire put on the tails of the superfine
reels, ^^at will let all pass through except the bran, which falls out at the
tail, and a part of which (...) guided into the elevator with the tail flour,
(...) assist the boulting in warm weather; the quantity is regulated by a small
board r, set (...) a joint under the ends of the reels. Beans may be used to
keep the cloths open, and still (...) returned into the elevator to ascend
again. That passes through the course cloth, or wire, (...) the remainder of
the bran, are guided in^^ the reel S, to be boulted.

To clean Wheat several Times.
Suppose the grain to be in the screen-hopper (...) Draw the gate a; shut the
gate e; move (...) ^^iding hopper K over the spout K c d; and (...) it run into
the elevator to be raised again. (...) the crane spout over the empty hopper
(...) and the wheat will be all deposited there early as soon as it is out of
the hopper F. (...) draw the gate e, shut the gate a, and in the crane spout
over F; and so on alternately, as often as necessary. When the grain
sufficiently cleaned, slide the hopper K over (...) hole that lead into the
stones.

The screenings fall into a garner, hopper-^^se, to clean them draw the gate f,
and let ^^em run into the elevator, to be elevated to the screen hopper F. Then
proceed with (...) as with the wheat, till sufficiently clean. To clean the
fannings, Art. 94.
draw the little gate a, and let them into the elevator, etc. as before.

Fig. II. is a perspective view of the Conveyer, as it lies in its trough, at
work; and shows the manner in which it is joined to the pulleys, at each side
of the elevator.

Fig. III. exhibits a view of the pulley of the meal elevator, as it is
supported on each side, with the strap and buckets descending (...) be filled.

Fig. IV. is a perspective view of the under side of the arms of the
hopper-boy, with flights complete. The dotted lines show the tra^^ of the
flights of one arm; those of the other following, and tracking between them.
All are the sweepers. These carry the meal (...) in a ring, trailing it
regularly all the way, (...) flights drawing it to the center, as already
mentioned. B B are the sweepers that dri^^^ it into the boulting hoppers.

Fig. V. is a perspective view of the (...) of the wheat-elevator; and shows
the (...) in which it is fastened, by a broad piece (...) leather, which passes
through and under the ^^^vator-strap, and is nailed to the sides with (...)
tacks.

CHAPTER III. OF THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE SEVERAL MACHINES.
Art. 95. Of the Wheat-Elevator.
FIRST determine how many bushels it should hoist in an hour, Construction of
the wheat-elevator.
and where it shall be set, so as to answer all the following purposes if
possible.

1. To elevate the grain from a wagon or (...)

2. From the different garners into which it ^ay be stored.

3. If it be a two story mill, to hoist the wheat from the tail of the fan, as
it is cleaned, to a garner over the stones.

4. To hoist the screenings to clean them several times.

5. To hoist the wheat from a shelling-mill, if there be one.

One elevator may do all this in a mill rightly planned, and most of it can be
done in mills ready built.

Then if you wish it to hoist about 300 bushels in an hour, Strap.
make the strap 4 1-2 inches wide, Art. 95.
of good, strong, white harness-leather, only one thickness. It must be cut and
joined together in a straight line, with the thickest and consequently the
thinnest ends together, so that if they be too thin they may be lapped over and
doubled, until they are thick enough singly. -- Then, To make Buckets for wheat
of wood.
to make wooden buckets, take the but of a willow or water-birch, that will
split freely, cut it in bolts 15 inches long, and rive and shave it into staves
5 1-2 inches wide, and three eigths of an inch thick; these will make one
bucket each. Set a pair of compassses to the width of the strap, and make the
sides and middle of the bucket equal thereto at the mouth, but let the sides be
only two third of that width at the bottom, which will make it of the form of
fig. 9. plate 6; the ends being cut a little circular to make the buckets by
closer to the strap and wheel. Fig. 9.
As it passes over, make a pattern of the form of fig. 9 to describe all the
rest by. This makes a bucket of a neat form, to hold about 75 solid inches, or
somewhat more than a quart. Then (...) make them bend to a square at the
corners (...) cut a mitre square across where they are to bend, about 2-3
through; boil them and be^^ them hot, tacking a strip of leather acros^ them,
to hold them in that form until they (...) cold, and then put bottoms to them
of the (...) skirts of the harness-leather. These botto^^ are to extend from
the lower end to the (...) that binds it on. Then, to fasten them on (...) and
with dispatch, prepare a number of first 1 3-4 inches wide, of the best
cuttings of (...) harness-leather, wet them and stretch them hard as possible,
which reduces their width about 1 1-2 inches. Art. 95.
Nail one of these straps to the side of a bucket, with 5 or 6 strong tacks
that will reach through the bucket and clinch inside. Then take a 1 1-2 inch
chisel, and strike it through the main strap about a quarter of an inch from
each edge, and put one end of the binding-strap through the slits, draw the
bucket very closely to the strap, and nail it on the other side of the bucket,
which will finish it. See B in fig. 2, plate 6. Fig. 2
C is a meal-bucket fastened in the same manner, Meal-buckets of wood.
but is bottomed only with leather at the lower end, the main strap making the
bottom side of it. This is the best way I have yet discovered to make wooden
buckets. The scraps of the harness-leather, out of which the elevator-straps
are (...), are generally about enough to complete the buckets, which works it
all up.

To make Sheet-Iron Buckets.
CUT the sheet in the form of fig. 8, Fig. 9
plate VI. Sheet-iron buckets.
making the middle part c, and the sides (...) and b nearly equal to the width
of the strap, and nearly 5 1-2 inches long, as before. Bend them to a right
angle at every dotted line, and (...) bucket will be formed. c will be the
bottom side next to the strap; and the little holes (...) and b b will meet,
and must be rivetted a hold it together. The two holes c are for ^^stening it
to the straps by rivets. The part (...) is the part that dips up the wheat, and
the (...) being doubled back strengthens it, and (...) to make it wear well.
The bucket being completely formed, and the rivet-holes (...), spread one out
again as fig. 8, to describe all the rest by, Art. 95.
and to mark for the holes, which will meet again when folded up. They are
fastened to the strap by two rivets with thin heads put inside the bucket, and
a double bur of sheet-iron put on the under side of the strap, which fastens
them on very tightly. See A fig. 2. These buckets will hold about 1,3 quarts,
or 88 cubic inches. This is the best way I have found to make sheet-iron
buckets. Meal Buckets of sheet iron.
D is a meal-bucket of sheet-iron, rivetted on by two rivets, with their heads
inside the strap; the sides of the buckets are turned a little out, and holes
made in them for the rivets to pass through. Fig. 11 is the form of one spread
out, and the dotted lines show where they are bent to right angles to form
them. The strap forms the bottom (...) of these buckets.

Make the pulleys 24 inches diameter, Size and motion of pulleys,
as thick as the strap is wide, and half an inch higher in the middle than at
the sides, to make the strap keep on; give them a motion of 25 revolutions in a
minute, and put on a sheet-iron bucket for every 15 inches; then 12 buckets
will pass per minute, which will carry 162 quarts, To hoist 300 bush. an hour.
and hoist 300 bushels in an hour, and 3600 bushels in 12 hours. If you wish it
to hoist faster make the strap wider, the buckets larger in proportion, and
increase the velocity of the pulley, but not above 35 revolutions in a minute,
nor more buckets than one for every 12 inches, otherwise they will not empty
well. A strap of 5 inches, with buckets 6 inches long, and of a width and
proportion suiting the strap (4 1-2 inches wide) (...) hold 1, 8 quarts each;
and 35 revolutions of (...) pulley will pass 175 buckets, Art. 95.
which will carry 315 quarts in a minute, 590 bushels.
and 590 bushels in an hour. If the strap be 4 inches wide, and the wooden
buckets 5 inches deep, and in proportion to the strap, they will hold, 8 of a
quart: then, if there be one for every 15 inches, and the pulley revolves 27
revolutions in a minute, it will hoist 200 bushels in an hour, 200 bushels.
where there is a good garner to empty the wheat into. This is sufficient for
unloading wagons, and the size they are commonly made.

Fig. 6 represents the gudgeon of the lower pulley; fig. 7 the gudgeon for the
shaft, on which the upper pulley is fixed. Fix both the pulleys in their
places, but not firmly, so that a line stretched from one pulley to the other,
will cross the shafts or gudgeons at right angles. This must always be the case
to make the straps work fairly. Put on the strap with the buckets; draw it
tightly and buckle it; put it in motion, and if it does not keep fairly (...)
the pulleys their position may be altered a little. Observe how much the
descending strap swags by the weight of the buckets, Make the lower case
crooked to suit the swag of the strap.
and make the case round it so crooked, that the points of the buckets will not
rub in their descent, which will cause them to wear much longer and work
easier. The side boards need not be made crooked in dressing out, but may be
bent sufficiently by sawing them half way or two thirds through, beginning at
the upper edge, holding the saw very much aslant, the point downwards and
inwards, so that in bending the parts will slip past each other. The (...) case
must be nearly straight; for if it (...) much crooked, the buckets will incline
to turn under the strap. Art. 95.
Make the cases 3-4 of an inch wider than the strap and buckets inside, and 1
1-2 inch deeper, that they may play freely; but do not give them room to turn
upside down. If the strap and buckets be 4 inches, Dimensions of the
ease-boards.
then make the side boards 5 1-2, and the top and bottom boards 6 3-4 inches
wide, of inch boards. Be careful that no shoulders nor nail-points be left
inside of the cases, for the buckets to catch in. Make the ends of each case,
where the buckets enter as they pass over the pulleys, a little wider than the
rest of the case. Both the pulleys are to be nicely cased round to prevent
waste, not leaving room for a grain to escape, continuing the case of the same
width round the (...) of the upper, and bottom of the lower pulley, then if any
of the buckets should ever get loose and stand askew, they will be kept right
by the case; whereas, if there were any ends of boards or shoulders, they would
catch against them. See A B, Fig. 1.
plate VI. fig. 1. The bottom of the case of the upper pulley must be
descending, Of casing the pulleys.
so that what grain may be falling out of the buckets in passing over the
pulleys, may be guided into the descending case. The shaft passing through this
pulley is made round where the case fits to it: half circles are cut out of two
boards, so that they meet and embrace it closely. The undermost board, where it
meets the shaft, is ciphered off inside next the pulley, to guide the grain
inward. But it is full as good a way to have a strong gudgeon to pass through
the upper pulley, with a tenon at one end, to enter a socket, (...) may be in
the shaft, that is to give it (...). This will best suit where the shaft is
short, Art. 95.
and has to be moved to put the elevator out, and in gear.

The way that I have generally cased the pulleys is as follows, Common way of
casing them.
viz. The top board of the upper strap-case, and the bottom board of the lower
strap-case are extended past the lower pulley to rest on the floor; and the
lower ends of these boards are made two inches narrower, as far as the
pulley-case extends; the side board of the pulley is nailed, or rather screwed,
to them with wooden screws. The rest of the case boards join to the top of the
pulley-case, both being of one width. The blocks which the gudgeons of (...)
pulley run in, are screwed fast to the outside of the case boards; the gudgeons
do not pass quite through, but reach to the bottom of the hole, which keeps the
pulley in its place.

The said top and bottom boards, and also the side boards of the strap-cases,
are extended; past the upper pulley, and the side boards of the pulley-case are
screwed to them; but this leaves a vacancy between the top of the side boards
of the strap-cases, and shoulders for the buckets to catch against. This
vacancy is to be filled up by a short board, guiding the buckets safely over
the upper pulley. The case must be as close to the points of the buckets, where
they empty, as is safe, that as little as possible may fall down again. There
is to be a long hole cut into the case at B, for the wheat to fall out at, Fig.
1. pl. VI.
and a short spout guiding it into the crane-spout. The top of the short spout
next B, should be loosely fastened in with a button, that it may be taken off,
Art. 95.
to examine if the buckets empty well, etc. Some neat workmen have a much
better way of casing the pulleys, that I cannot here describe; what I have
described is the cheapest, and does very well.

The wheat should be let in at the bottom, Let the wheat in at the bottom to
prevent its choking.
as meet the buckets, and a gate to shut as near the point of them as possible,
as at A, fig. 1. Then if the gate be drawn sufficiently to fill the buckets,
and the elevator be stopped, the wheat will stop running in, and the elevator
will be free to start again; but if it had been let in any distance up, then,
when the elevator stopped, it would fill from the gate to the bottom of the
pulley, and the elevator could not start again. If it be in any case let in
(...) distance up, the gate should be so fixed, (...) it cannot be drawn so
far, as to let in the (...) faster than the buckets can take it, else (...)
case will fill and stop the buckets. If it be (...) in faster at the hindmost
side of the pulley, (...) the buckets will carry it, the same evil (...) occur;
because the buckets will push (...) wheat before them, being more than they
(...) hold, and give room for too much to come (...) therefore there should be
a relief-gate at (...) bottom to let the wheat out, if ever it happen to get
too much of it in.

The motion is to be given to the upper pulley of all elevators, Give the upper
pulley motion, and it will carry most.
if it can be done, (...) the weight in the buckets, causes the strap (...)
hang tighter on the upper, and slacker on (...) lower pulley; therefore the
upper pulley (...) carry the greatest quantity without slipp^^^. All elevators
should stand a little (...) because they will discharge the better. (...)
boards for the cases should be of any unequal lengths, Art. 95.
so that two joints will never come close together, which makes the case
strong. Some have joined the cases at every floor, which is a great error.
There must be a door in the ascending case, at the most convenient place, to
buckle the strap, etc. etc.

Of the Crane-Spout.
TO make a Crane-Spout, Construction of crane-spouts.
fix a board 18 or 20 inches broad truly horizontal or level, as a under B, in
plate VI. fig. 1. Through the middle of this board the wheat is conveyed, by a
short spout from the elevator. Then make the spout of 4 boards, 12 inches wide
(...) the upper, and about 4 or 5 inches at the (...) end. Cut the upper end
off aslant, so (...) to fit nicely to the bottom of the board; (...) it to a
strong pin, passing through the (...) board near the hole through which the
wheat passes, so that the spout may be turned in any direction and still cover
the hole, at the some time it is receiving the wheat, and guiding it into any
garner, at pleasure. In order that the pin may have a strong hold of the board
and spout, there must be a piece of can^ling, 4 inches thick, nailed on the top
of the board, for the pin to pass through; and (...) to the bottom, for the
head of the pin (...) rest on. But if the spout be long and heavy, (...) is
best to hang it on a shaft, that may ex^^^d down to the floor, or below the
collar-beams, with a pin through it, as x, to turn the spout by. In
crane-spouts for meal it is sometimes best to let the lower board reach to,
Art. 95.
and rest of the floor. If the elevator cases and crane-spout be well fixed,
there (...) neither grain nor meal escape or be washed that enters the
elevator, until it comes out at the end of the crane-spout again.

Of an Elevator to elevate Wheat from a Ship's Hold. See the description of
this Elevator in art. 90.

MAKE the Elevator complete (as it appears 35-39 plate 8) on the ground,
Construction of an elevator for taking the wheat out of a ship's hold.
((...) raise it afterward.) The pulleys are to (...) both fixed in their
places and cased; and (...) blocks that the gudgeon of the upper (...) is to
run in, are to be rivetted fast to the (...) boards of the pulley, and these
case (...) screwed to the strap-cases by long screw reaching through the case
boards edge (...) Both sides of the pulley-case are fastened one set of screws.
On the outside of the blocks, round the center of the gudgeons, (...) circular
knobs, 6 inches diameter, and 3 inches long, strongly rivetted to keep them
(...) splitting off, because by these knobs the (...) weight of the elevator is
to hang. In (...) moveable frame 40. 00, 00, are these (...) with their knobs,
let into the pieces of (...) frame BC rs. The gudgeons of the (...) pulley p
pass through these knobs, and (...) them. Their use is to bear the weight of
(...) elevator that hangs by them; the gudgeons by this means, bear only the
weight of (...) strap and its load, as is the case with out elevators. Art. 95.
Their being circular gives the elevator liberty to swing out from the wall to
the ^old of the ship.

The frame 40 is made as follows: The top ^iece A B is 9 by 8, strongly tenoned
into the (...) pieces A D and B C with double tenons, which side pieces are 8
by 6. The piece r s (...) put in with a tenon, 3 inches thick, which (...)
dovetailed, keyed, and drawpinned, with (...) iron pin, so that it can easily
be taken out. In each side piece A D and B C there is a row (...) cogs, set in
a circle, that are to play in circular rabbits in the posts p 41. These circles
(...) to be described with a radius, whose length (...) the center of the joint
gudgeon G, to (...) center of the pulley 39; and the posts must (...) up, so
that the center of the circle, will (...) the center of the gudgeon G; then the
(...) will be always right, although the elevator rise and fall to suit the
ship or tide. The (...) of these circular rabbits ought to be so fixing that
the lower end of the elevator may (...) near the wall. This may be regulating
by fixing the center of gudgeon G. The (...) of these rabbits is regulated by
the (...) the vessel is to rise and fall, to allow the elevator to swing clear
of the vessel light at (...) water. The best way to make the circular rabbits
is, to dress two pieces of 2 inch (...) for each rabbit, of the right-circle,
and (...) them to the posts, at such a distance, leav^^^ the rabbit between
them.

When the gate and elevator are completed, (...) tried together; the gate hung
in its rabbits and played up and down, then the elevator may be raised by the
same power; that is, to raise and lower it as described, art. 4.

Art. 96. Of the Meal-Elevator.
LITTLE may be said of the manner of constructing the Meal-Elevator,
Construction of a meal elevator.
after what has been said in art. 90, except giving the ^^mensions. Make the
pulleys 3 1-2 inches thick, and 18 inches diameter. Give them no (...) than 20
revolutions in a minute. Make the strap 3 1-2 inches wide, of good, pliant,
white harness-leather; make the buckets either of wood or sheet-iron, to hold
about half a (...) each; put one for every foot of the strap; make the cases
tight, especially round the upper pulley, slanting much at bottom, so that the
meal which falls out of the buckets, may be guided into the descending case.
(...) lean a little, that it may discharge the better. The spout that conveys
the meal from the elevator to the hopper-boy, should not (...) much more than
45 degrees descent, that (...) meal may run easily down, and not cause dust;
fix it so that the meal will spread (...) over its bottom: in its descent it
will (...) the better. Cover the top of the spout (...) way down, and hang a
thin, light cloth at (...) end of this cover, to check all the dust (...) may
raise, by the fall of the meal from the buckets. Remember to take a large (...)
off the inside of the board, where it fits to (...) undermost side of the shaft
of the upper pulley else the meal will work out along the (...). Make all
tight, as directed, and it will effecttually prevent waste.

In letting meal into an elevator, Art. 96.
it must be let in some distance above the center of the pulley, Meal must be
let in some distance up.
that it may fall clear from the spout that conveys it in; otherwise it will
clog and ^hoke. Fig. 4 is the double socket gudgeon of the lower pulley, to
which the Conveyer joins. Fig. 3, ab cd is a top view of the case that the
pulley runs in, which is constructed (...): a b is a strong plank, 14 by 3
inches, steped i^ the fill, dovetailed and keyed in the meal^^am, Frame for the
lower pulley.
and is called the main bearer. In this, at the determined height, is framed
the gudgeon bearers ac bd, which are planks 15 by 1 1-2 inches, set 7 1-2
inches apart, the pulley running between, and resting on them. The end piece c
d 7 inches wide and 2 thick, (...) in the direction of the strap-case, and
(...) 5 inches above the top of the pulley; to this the bearers are nailed. On
the top of the bearers, above the gudgeons, are set two (...) planks 13 by 1
1-2 inches, rabitted into the main bearer, and screwed fast to the end piece c
d; these are 4 inches above the pulley. The bottom piece of this case slides in
between the bearers, resting on two cleets, so that it (...) be drawn out to
empty the case, if it should ever by any means be overcharged with meal: this
completes the case. In the gudgeon bearer under the gudgeons are mor^^^, made
about 12 by 2 inches, for the meal (...) pass from the conveyer into the
elevator; the bottom board of the conveyer trough rests as the bearer in these
mortises. The strap cases joins to the top of the pulley case, but is not made
fast, but the back board of the descending case is steped into the inside of
the top of the end piece c d. Art. 96.
The bottom of the ascending case is to be supported steady to its place, and
the board at the bottom must be ciphered off at the inside, with long and large
ciphers, making them at the point only (...) inch thick; this to make the
bottom of the case wide, for the buckets to enter, if any of them should be a
little askew, because the pulley-case is wider than the strap-cases, to give
room for the meal from the conveyer to (...) into the buckets; and in order to
keep the passage open, There must be barges on the lower pulley.
there is a piece 3 inches wide, and 1-3-4 inch thick, put on each side of the
pulley, to stand at right angles with each other extending 3 1-2 inches at each
end past (...) pulley, and are cyphered off, so as to clear the strap, and draw
the meal under the bucket^ these are called Bangers.

Art. 97. Of the Meal-Conveyer.
SEE it described, Plate 6, fig. 3.
art. 88. Fig. 3, a Conveyer joined to the pulley of the Elevator. Fig. 4 is
the gudgeon that is put (...) the lower pulley, to which the conveyer (...)
joined by a socket, as represented. Fig 5 (...) view of said socket and the
band, as it appears on the end of the shaft. The tenon of the gudgeon is
square, that the socket may fit to every way alike. Make the shaft 5 1-2 inches
diameter, of eight equal sides, and put on the socket and the gudgeon: To lay
out a meal conveyer.
then, to lay it (...) for the flights, begin at the pulley, mark near the end
as possible, on the one side, Art. 97.
and turning the shaft the way it is to work, at the distance of 1 1-2 inch
toward the other end, set a flight on the next side; and thus go on to mark
for a flight on every side, still advancing 1 1-2 inchs to the other end, which
will form the dotted spiral line, which would drive the meal the wrong way; but
the flights are to be set across this spiral line, at an angle of about 30
degrees, with a line square across the left; and then they will drive the meal
the right way, the flights operating like plows.

To make the flights, take good maple, To make the flights.
or other smooth hard wood; saw it in 6 inch lengths; split it always from the
sap to the (...); make pieces 2 1-2 inches wide, and 3-4 (...) inch thick;
plane them smooth on one (...), and make a pattern to describe them by, and
make a tenon 2 1-2 inches long, to suit a (...) inch augre. When they are
perfectly by, having the shaft bored, and the inclination of the flights marked
by a scribe, drive them in and cut them off 2 1-2 inches from the shaft, dress
them with their foremost edge sharp, taking all off from the back side, leaving
the face smooth and straight, to push forward the meal; make their ends nearly
circular. If the conveyer be short, Lifting flights.
put in lifting flights, with their broad side foremost, half the (...)of the
others, between the spires of them; they cool the meal by lifting and letting
it fall over the shaft.

To make the trough for it to run in, take 3 wards, the bottom one 11, back 15,
and (...) ^3 inches. Fix the block for the gudgeon to run in at one end, and
fill the comers with cleets, Art. 97.
to make the bottom nearly circular, that but little meal may lay in it; join
it neatly to the pulley-case, resting the bottom on the bottom of the hole cut
for the meal to enter, and the other end on a supporter, that it can be removed
and put to its place again with ease, without stopping the elevator.

A meal-elevator and conveyer thus made of good materials, will last 50 years,
with very little repair, and save more meal fresh waste, than will pay for
building and repairing them for ever. The top of the trough must be left open,
to let the steam of the meal out; and a door may be made in the ascending case
of the elevator, about 4 feet long to buckle the strap tighter, etc. The
stra^^^ the elevator turns the conveyer, so that it (...) be easily stopped if
any thing should be ca^^^ in it, being dangerous to turn it by ca^^. This
machine is often applied to cool the (...) without the hopper-boy, Conveyer
applied to cool the meal.
and attend the b^^ing-hopper, by extending it to a great length and conveying
the meal immediately into (...) hopper, which does very well, and some prefer
it; but a hopper-boy is preferable with there is room for one.

Art. 98. Of a Grain-Conveyer.
THIS machine has been constructed in variety of ways, Construction of a grain
conveyer.
the best I take to be as follows, viz. Make a round shaft, 9 inches diameter.
Then, to make the spire, take strong sheet-iron, Art. 98.
make a pattern 3 inches broad and of the true arch of a circle; With a
sheet-iron spite
the diameter of which (being the inside of the pattern) is to be 12 inches;
this will give it room to stretch along a 9 inch shaft, so as to make a hasty
spire, that will advance about 21 inches along the shaft every revolution. By
this pattern cut the sheet-iron into circular pieces, and join the ends
together by riveting, lapping them so as to let the grain run freely over the
joints; then they are joined together they will form several circles, one above
the other, ^lip it on the shaft, and stretch it along as far as you can, till
it comes tight to the shaft, and faster it to its place, by pins, set in the
shaft at the back side of the spire, and nail it to the (...): it will now form
a beautiful spire 21 inches apart, which is too great a distance; therefore
there should be two or three of these fires made, and wound into each other,
and all be put on together, because if one be put on first, the others cannot
be got on so well afterward; they will then be 7 inches apart, and will convey
wheat very fast. If these spires (...) punched full of holes like a grater, and
the ^^ough lined with sheet-iron punched full of small holes, it will be an
excellent rubber; will clean the wheat of the dust and down, that adheres to
it, and supersede the necessity of any other rubbing-machine.

The spires may also be formed with either wooden or iron flights, With a
wooden spire.
set so near to each other in the spiral lines, as to convey the wheat from one
to another.

Art. 99. Of the Hopper-Boy
THIS machine has appeared in various constructions, the best of which is
represented by fig. 12: Construction of the hopper-boy.
see the description art. 88. Fig. 12.


To make the flight-arms C D, take a piece of dry poplar, or other soft
scantling 14 feet long, 8 by 2 1-2 inches in the middle, 5 by 1 1-2 inches at
the end, and straight at the bottom; Fig. 13.
on this strike the middle line a b, fig. 13. Consider which way it is to
revolve, and ^^pher off the under side of the foremost edge from the middle
line, leaving the edge 3-4 of an inch thick, as appears by the shaded part.
Then, to lay out the flights, take the following

RULE.
Set your compasses at 4 1-2 distance, To distance the flights.
and beginning with one foot in the center c, (...) toward the end b, observing
to lessen the distance one sixteenth part of an inch every feet this will set
the flights closer together at the end than at the center. To make them tract
truly
Then, to set the flights of one arm to track truly between (...) of the other,
and to find their inclination with one point in the center c, sweep the ^^^ted
circles across every point in one arm, (...) without altering the center or
distance, into the little dotted marks on the other arm, (...) between them the
circles are to be swept (...) the flights in it. To give them the right
inclination.
Then, to vary their inclination regularly from the end to the center strike
the dotted line c d half an inch from the center c, and 2 1-2 inches from the
middle. line at d. Then with the compasses set to half an inch, Art. 99.
set off the inclination from the dotted circles on the line c d. Then, because
the line c d approaches the middle line, the inclination is greater near the
center than at the end, and vary regularly. Dovetail the flights into the arm,
To put them in.
observing to put the side that is to drive the meal to the line of
inclination. The bottoms of them should not extend past the middle line, the
ends being all rounded and dressed off at the back side to make the point
sharp, leaving the driving side quite straight like the (...) r. See them
complete in the end c a. The sweepers should be 5 or 6 inches long, Sweepers.
(...) on behind the flights, at the back side of the arms, one at each end of
the arm, and (...) at the part that passes over the hopper: (...) use is
described art. 88.

The upright shaft should be 4 by 4 inches, Upright shaft
and (...) round for about 4 1-2 feet at the lower end to pass lightly through
the center of the (...). To keep the arm steady, there is a (...) iron 15
inches high, its legs 1-2 inch by (...) to stride 2 feet: The ring at the top
should fit the shaft neatly, and be smooth and ^^^ded inside, that it may slide
easily up and down: by this the arm hangs to the rope that fits over a pulley
at the top of the shaft 8 (...) diameter, with a deep groove for the (...) or
cord to run in. Make the leading (...) 6 by 1 1-4 inches in the middle, 2 by
inch at the end, and 8 feet long. This arm (...) be braced to the cog-wheel
above, to ^^ep it from splitting the shaft by any extra (...).

The weight of the balance w must be so near equal to the weight of the arm,
Art. 99.
that when is raised to the top it will descend quietly.

In the bottom of the upright shaft is the step-gudgeon (fig. 15) which passes
through the square plate 4 by 4 inches, (fig. 14) on this plate the arm rests,
before the flight touch the floor. The ring on the lower end of the shaft is
less than the shaft, that it may pass through the arm: this gudgeon (...) out
every time the shaft is taken out of the arm.

If the machine is to attend but one boulting hopper, For attending one
boulting-hopper.
it need not be above 12 or 13 feet long. Set the upright shaft close to the
hopper, and the flights all gather as the end the fig. 13. Two hoppers.
But if it is to attend for the grind of two pair of stones, and two hoppers,
(...) it 15 feet long, and set it between them a little to one side of both, so
that the two (...) may not both be over the hoppers at the same time, which
would make it run unsteady then the flights between the hoppers and the center
must drive the meal outward to the sweepers, as the end c a, fig. 13.

If it is to attend two hoppers, and (...) be set between them for want of
room, (...) set the shaft near to one of them; make (...) flights that they all
gather to the center, (...) put sweepers over the outer hopper which (...) be
first supplied, and the surplus carried to other. The machine will regulate
itself attend both, although one should feed the times as fast as the other.

If it be to attend three hoppers, Three hoppers.
set the near the middle one, and put sweepers to the other two, the surplus
will come to the center one, Art. 99.
and it will regulate to feed all three; but should the center hopper ever
stand while the others are going (of either these last applications) the
flights next the center must be moveable that they may be turned, and set to
drive the meal out, from the center; hopper-boys should be moved by a strap in
some part of their movement, Should be moved by a strap.
that they may easily stop if any thing catch in them; but several ingenious
mill-wrights do prefer cogs; they should not revolve more than 4 times in a
minute.

This machine may be made of a great many different forms and constructions on
the same principles, to answer the same end, in lesser degree of perfection.

Art. 100. Of the Drill.
SEE the description art. 1. The pulleys should not be less than 10 inches
diameter for meal, and more for wheat. The case they run in is a deep narrow
trough, say 16 inches deep, 4 wide, pulleys and strap 3 inches. The rakes are
little square blocks of willow or popular, or any soft wood, that will not
split with the nails, all of one size that each may take an equal quantity,
nailed to the strap with long, small nails, with broad heads, which are inside
the strap: the meal should be let into them always above the center of the
pulley, or at the top of it, to prevent its choking, which it is apt to do,
Art. 100.
if let in low. The motion should be slow for meal; but may be more lively for
wheat.

Directions for using a Hopper-Boy.
1. When the meal-elevator is set in motion to elevate the meal, the hopper-boy
must be set in motion also, to spread and cool it; and as soon as the circle is
full, the boults may be started; the grinding and boulting may likewise be
carried on together regularly, which is the best way of working.

2. But if you do not choose to boult as you grind, turn up the feeding
sweepers, and let the hopper-boy spread and cool the meal, and rise over it;
and when you begin to boult turn them down again.

3. If you choose to keep the warm meal separate from the cool, shovel about 18
inches of the outside of the circle in toward the center, and turn the end
flights, to drive the meal outward, it will spread the warm meal outward, and
gather the cool meal in the boulting-hopper. As soon as the ring is full with
warm meal, rake it out of the reach of the hopper-boy, and let it fill again.

4. To mix tail-flour or bran, etc. with a quantity of meal that is under the
hopper-boy, make a hole for it in the meal quite to the floor, and put it in;
and the hopper-boy will mix it regularly with the whole.

5. If it does not keep the hopper full, turn the feeding sweeper a little
lower, and throw a little meal on the top of the arm, to make it sink deeper
into the meal. If the spreading sweepers discharge their loads too soon, Art.
100.
and do not trail the meal all around the circle, turn them a little lower; if
they do not discharge, but keep too full raise them a little.

CHAPTER IV. Art. 101. OF THE UTILITY OF THESE INVENTIONS AND IMPROVEMENTS.
DR. Wistar, Late philosophical discoveries, showing why meal is so soon made
fit for boulting by the machines.
of Philadelphia, had discovered and proved by many experiments (which he
communicated to the American philosophical society, and which they have
published in the 3rd volume of their transactions) that cold is (...) principal
agent in causing moisture to evaporate from bodies; and the fact is evident
from daily observation, viz. that it is the different degrees of heat and cold,
between the air and bodies, that causes them to cast off or contract moisture.

1st. We see in all sudden transitions from an extreme cold air to a warm, that
the walls of houses, stones, ground, and every thing that retains cold,
contracts moisture; and it certainly has the same effect on meal.

2. In all sudden changes from warm to cold, (...) thing casts off its
moisture; for instance, what great quantities of water will disappear from the
ground, Art. 121.
in one cold night: this is the reason why meal being warm gets so dry in cold
weather, and bolts so free; whereas it is always harder to bolt when there is a
change from cold to warm.

3. If you warm a razor, or a glass, warmer than your breath, neither of them
will be sullied by it.

4. Fill a glass-bottle with cold water in a warm day, and wipe it dry, and
there will be presently seen on its outside large drops, collected from the
moisture of the air, though the bottle still continues full.

From these instances, Meal should be spread thin while hot, and it will cast
out the moisture, and will not breed worms.
it is evident, that the meal should be spread as thin as possible, and be kept
in motion from the moment it leaves the stones, until it is cold, that it may
have a fair opportunity of casting off its moisture, which will be done more
effectually in that time, that can possibly be effected in warm weather, in any
reasonable time, after it has grown out in a heap and retained its moisture;
and there is no time for insects to deposit their eggs that may in time breed
the worms, that are often found in the heart of barrels of flour are packed,
Boults better,
and by the moisture being cast and more effectually, it will not be so apt to
found. And does the work to geeater perfection.
Therefore one great advantage is that the meal is better prepared for
boulting, packing and keeping in much less time.

2. They do the work to much greater perfection by cleaning the grain and
screenings more effectually, hoisting and bolting over great parts of the
flour, and grinding and boulting (...) the middlings, all at one operation,
mixing those parts that are to be mixed, and separating such as are to be
separated more effectually. Art. 101.


3. They save much meal from being wasted, With less waste.
if they be well constructed, because there is no necessity of trampling in it,
which trails it wherever we walk, **nor shoveling it about to raise a dust that
flies away, etc. This article of saving will soon pay the first cost of
building, and keep them in repair afterward.

4. They afford more room than they take up, Afford more room.
because the whole of the meal-loft that heretofore was little enough to cool
the meal on, may now be spared for other uses, except the circle described by
the hopper-boy; and the wheat-garners may be filled from one story to another,
up to the crane-spout, above the collar-beams; so that a small part of the
house will hold a great quantity of wheat, and it may be drawn from the bottom
into the elevator as wanted.

5. They tend to dispatch business by finishing as they go; Dispatch more work.
so that there is not as much time ^^ended in grinding over middlings, which
will not employ the power of the mill, nor in cleaning and grinding the
screenings, they being cleaned every few days, and mixed with the wheat; and as
the labor is easier the miller can keep the stones in better order, and more
regularly and steady at work, especially in the night time, when they
frequently stop for want of help, whereas one (...), for a time, would be
sufficient to attend (...) pair of stones running (in one house) well attended
by machinery.

6. Art. 101.
They last a long time with but little expense of repair, Will last a long time.
because their motions are slow and easy.

7. They hoist the grain and meal with less power, Require less power.
and disturb the motion of the mill much less than the old way, because the
descending strap balances the ascending one, so that there is no more power
used, than to hoist the grain or meal itself; whereas in the old way for every
3 bushels of wheat, which fills a 4 bushel tub with meal, the tub has to be
hoisted, the weight of which is equal to a bushel of wheat, consequently the
power used, is as 3 for the elevator to 4 for the tubs, which is one fourth
less with elevators than tubs: besides, the weight of 4 bushels of wheat,
thrown at once on the wheel, always checks the motion, before the tub is up;
the stone sinks a little, and the mill is put out of tune every tub-full, which
makes a great difference in a year's grinding; this is worthy of notice when
water is scarce.

8. They save a great expense of attendance. Save a great expense.
One half of the hands that were formerly required are now sufficient, and
their labor is easier. Formerly one hand was required for every 10 barrels of
flour that the mill made daily; now one for every 20 barrels is sufficient. A
mill that made 40 barrels a day, required four men and a boy; two men are now
sufficient.

Two men's wages, 289 dollors a year in board and wages, in a double mill.
at 7 dolls. each, per month, 168 dolls. Boarding etc. for do. at 15l. per
year, 80 One boy's board, clothing, etc. 50 208

There appears a saving of 298 dollars a year, Art. 101.
in the article of wages and board, in one double mill.

In support of what is here said, I add the following certificates.

I.
WE do certify that we have erected Oliver Evans's new-invented mode of
elevating, Certificates confirming the above.
conveying, and cooling meal, etc. As far as we have experienced, we have found
them to answer a valuable purpose, well worthy the attention of any person
concerned in merchant, or even extensive country mills, who wishes to lessen
the labor and expense of manufacturing wheat into flour.

JOHN ELLICOTT, JONATHAN ELLICOTT, GEORGE ELLICOTT, NATHANIEL ELLICOTT.

Ellicott's mills, Baltimore county, state of Maryland, Aug. 4, 1790.
II.
WE the subscribers do hereby certify, that we have introduced Oliver Evans's
improvements into our mills at Brandiwine, and have found them to answer, as
represented to us by a plate and description: also to be a great saving of
waste, labor and expense, and not subject to get out of order. We therefore
recommend them as well worthy the attention of those concerned in manufacturing
grain into flour. Art. 101.


JOSEPH TATNALL, THOMAS LEA, SAMUEL HOLLINGSWORTH, THOMAS SHALLCROSS, CYRUS
NEWLIN.

Brandywine mills, 3rd month, 28th, 1791.
III.
WE do certify, that we have used Oliver Evans's machinery, for the space of
two years, in our mills, at Petersburg, in Virginia, consisting of three
water-wheels, and three pair of stones: and we judge that they have been, and
will continue to be, a saving of 300 dollars per year.

N. ELLICOTT, and Co.
Feb. 20, 1794.
IV.
WE do certify, that we have used Oliver Evans's patent machinery in our mills,
at Manchester, in the state of Virginia, consisting of three water-wheels, and
three pair of stones, for the space of one year, and we judge upon fair
calculations, that they are saving to us of 300 dollars per annum.

NICHOLSON and TAILOR.

Many more to the same purpose might be added, but these may suffice.

Supposing the reader is now fully convinced of the utility of these
improvements, Art. 101.
I proceed to give the following bills of materials.

CHAPTER V. BILLS OF MATERIALS TO BE PROVIDED FOR BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTING THE
MACHINERY.
Art. 102. For a Wheat-Elevator 43 Feet high, with a Strap 4 inches wide.
THREE sides of good, Bill of materials for the wheat-elevator.
firm white harness leather.

^20 feet of inch pine, or other boards, that are dry, of about 12 1-2 inches
wide, for the cases: these are to be dressed, as follows: ^6 feet in length, 7
inches wide, for the top and bottom.

^6 feet in length, 5 inches wide, with the edges truly squared, for the side
boards.

A quantity of inch boards for the garners, as they may be wanted.

A good but of willow or sheet-iron, for the buckets.

^000 tacks, 14 and 16 ounce size, the largest about half an inch long, for the
buckets. 3lb. Art. 102.
of 8d. and 1lb. of 10d. nails, for (...) cases.

2 dozen of large wood screws (but nails (...) do) for pulley-cases.

16 feet of 2 inch plank for pulleys.

16 feet of ditto, for cog-wheels, and dry pi^ scantling 4 1-2 by 4 1-2, or 5
by 5 inche to give it motion.

Smith's Bill of Iron.
1 double gudgeon 3-4 inch, Bill of iron.
(such as fig. 6. pl. VI) 5 inches between the shoulders, 3 3-4 inches between
the holes, the necks, or gudgeon-part, 3 inches.

1 small gudgeon, of the common size, 3-^ inch thick.

1 gudgeon an inch thick, (fig. 7) neck 3 1-4 tang 10 inches, to be next the
upper pulley.

2 small bands, 4 1-4 inches from the outsides.

1 harness-buckle, 4 inches from the outsides with 2 tongues, of the form of
fig. 12.

Add whatever more may be wanting for the gears, that are for giving it motion.

For a Meal-Elevator 43 Feet high, strap 3 1-^ Inches wide, and a Conveyer for
two pair (...) Stones.

270 feet of dry pine, For a Meal elevator.
or other inch board most of them 11 1-2 or 12 inches width of any length, that
they may suit to be dressed for the case-boards, as follows:

^6 feet in length, 6 1-2 inches wide, Art. 102.
for tops and bottoms of the cases.

^6 feet in length, 4 1-2 inches wide, for the side boards, truly squared at
the edges.

The back board of the conveyer trough 15 inches, bottom do. 11 inches, and
front 13 inches wide.

Some two inch plank for the pulleys and cog-wheels.

Scantling for conveyers 6 by 6, or 5 1-2 by 5 1-2 inches, of dry pine or
yellow poplar; (prefer light wood) pine for shafts, 4 1-2 by 4 1-2 or 5 by 5
inches.

2 1-2 sides of good, pliant harness-leather. 1500 of 14 ounce tacks.

A good, clean but of willow for buckets, unless the pieces that are left, that
are too small for the wheat-buckets, will make the meal-buckets.

(...) of 8d. and 1lb. of 10d. nails.

(...) dozen of large wooden screws (nails will do) for the pulley-cases.

Smith's Bill of Iron.
double gudgeon, Bill of iron.
(such as fig. 4.pl. VI.) 1 1-2 inch thick, 7 1-2 inches between the necks, 3
1-4 between the key-holes, the necks 1 1-2 inch long, and the tenons at each
end of the same length, exactly square, that the socket may fit every way alike.

sockets, one for each tenon, such as appears on one end of fig. 4. The
distance between the outside of the straps with the nails in, must be 5 1-4
inches: fig. 5 is an end view of it, and the band that drives over it at the
end of the shaft, Art. 102.
as they appear on the end of the conveyer.

2 small 3-4 inch gudgeons for the other end of the conveyers.

4 thin bands 5 1-2 inches from the outsides, for the conveyers.

1 gudgeon an inch thick, neck 3 1-4 inches, and tang. 10 inches, for the shaft
in the upper pulley and next to it; but if a gudgeon be put through the pulley,
let it be of the form of fig. 6, with a tenon and socket at one end, like fig.
4.

1 harness-buckle, 3 1-2 inches from the outsides, with two tongues: such as
fix. 12, pl. 6.

Add whatever more small gudgeons and bands may be necessary for giving motion.

For a Hopper-Boy.
1 piece of dry, For a hopper-boy.
hard, clean pine scantling 4 1-2 by 4 1-2 inches, and 10 feet long, for the
upright shaft.

1 piece of dry poplar, soft pine, or other for light wood, not subject to
crack and split i^ working, 8 by 2 1-2 inches, 15 or 16 feet long, for the
flight arms.

Some 2 inch plank for wheels to give it motion, and scantling 4 1-2 by 4 1-2
inches for the shafts.

60 flights 6 inches long, 3 inches wide, and 1-2 inch at one, and 1-4 at the
other edge thinner at the fore than hind end, that they may drive in tight like
a dovetail wedge. These may be made out of green hard maple, split from sap to
heart, and set to dry Half a common bed-cord, Art. 1^2.
for a leading line, and balance rope.

Smith's Bill of Iron.
1 stay-iron, C F E, plate VII, fig. 12. The height from the top of the ring F,
to the bottom of the feet C E, is 15 inches: distance of the points of the feet
C E 24 inches; size of the legs 1-2 by 3-4 inch; size of the ring F 1 by 1-4
inches, round and smooth inside; 4 inches diameter, the inside corners rounded
off, to keep it from cutting the shaft; there must be two little loops or eyes,
one in each quarter, for the balance-rope to be hung to either, that may suit
best.

2 screws (with thumb-burs that are turned by the thumb and fingers) 1-4 of an
inch thick, and 3 inches long, for the feet of the stay-iron.

2 do. for the end flights, 3 1-2 inches long, rounded 1 1-2 inch next the
head, and square 1 1-4 inch next the screw, the round part thickest.

2 do. for the end sweepers, 6 1-4 inches long, rounded 1 inch next the head,
1-4 inch thick.

2 do. for the hopper sweepers, 8 1-2 inches long and 1-4 inch thick, (long
nails with rivet heads will do.)

1 step-gudgeon (fig. 15) 2 1-2 inches long below the ring, and tang 9 inches,
3-4 inch thick.

1 plate 4 by 4, and 1-8 inch thick, for the step-gudgeon to pass through (fig.
14.)

1 band for the step-gudgeon, Art. 102.
3 3-4 inches diameter; from the outsides it has to pass through the stay-iron.

1 gudgeon and band, for the top of the shaft, gudgeon 3-4 inch, band 4 inches
diameter from the outsides.

The smith can, by the book, easily understand how to make these irons: and the
reader may, from these bills of materials, make a rough estimate of the whole
expense, which he will find very low compared with their utility.

Art. 103. A Mill for hulling and cleaning Rice.
PLATE X. fig. 2. The rice brought to the mill in boats, is to be emptied into
the hopper 1, out of which it is conveyed, by the conveyer, into the elevator
at 2, which elevates it into the garner 3; on the third floor it descends into
the garner 4, that hangs over the stones 5, and supplies them regularly. The
stones are to be dressed with a few deep furrows, with out little draught, and
picked full of large holes; they must be set more than the length of the grain
apart. The hoop should be lined inside with strong sheet-iron, and if punched
full of holes it will do better. The grain is kept under the stone as long as
necessary, by causing it to rise some distance up the hoop, to get out through
a hole, which is to be made higher or lower by a gate, sliding in the bottom of
it.

The principle by which the grain is hulled, Art. 103.
is that of rubbing them against one another with great force, between the
stones, by which means they hull one another, without being broke by the
stones, near as much as by the usual way. By trying many experiments, and with
much labor, striving to invent a new machine for rubbing the dust off the
grains of wheat, and breaking the ^eaps of dust mixed with wheat that is tread
on the ground; and for shelling of the white caps, breaking the rotten,
fly-eaten, and smut grains, and to break the garlic, etc. I discovered this
principle; which I afterward used with a common pair of bur millstones,
properly dressed for grinding wheat, and always found it to succeed well,
without breaking any good grains, (...) the white caps to fine dust.
As it passes through the stones 5, it should fall into a rolling-screen or
shaking-sieve 6, made of wire, with such mashes as will let out, at the head,
all the sand and dust, which may be let run through the floor into the water,
if convenient: and to let the rice and most of the heavy chaff fall through
into the conveyer, which will convey it into the elevator at 2. The light
chaff, etc. that does not pass through the sieve, will fall out at the tail,
and if useless may also run into the water, and float away. There may be a fan
put on the spindle, above the trundle, to make a light blast, to blow out the
light chaff and dust, which should be conveyed out through the wall: and this
fan may supersede the necessity of the shaking-sieve. The grain and heavy chaff
are elevated into garner 7, thence it descends into garner 8, and passes
through the stones 9, which are to be fixed and dressed the same way as the
others, and are only to rub the grain harder: the sharpness on the outside of
the chaff (which nature seems to have provided for the pupose) will cut off all
the inside hull from the grain, and leave it perfectly clean; then, as it falls
from these stones it passes through the wind of the fan 10, Art. 103.
fixed on the spindle of the stones 9, which will blow ^ut the chaff and dust,
and drop them in the room 21: the wind should escape through the wall. There is
a regulating board that moves on a joint at 21, so as to take all the grain
into the conveyer, which will convey it into the elevator at 11, which elevates
it into the garner 12, to pass through the rolling-screen 13, which should have
wire of 3 sized mashes: first, to take out the dust, to fall into a part 17, by
itself; second, the small rice into an apartment 16; the whole grains fall into
garner 14, perfectly clean, and are drawn into barrels at 15. The fan 18 blows
out the dust, and lodges it in the room 19, and the wind passes out at 20; the
head rice falls at the tail of the screen, and runs into the hopper of the
stones 5, to go through the whole operation again. Thus the whole is completely
done by the water, by the help of the machinery from the boat, until ready to
put into the barrel, without the least manual labor.

Perhaps it may be necessary to make a few furrows in the edge of the stone,
slanting, at an angle of about 30 degrees with a perpendicular line, these
furrows will throw up the grain next the stone, on the top of that in the hoop
which will change its position continually, by which means it will be better
cleaned: but this may probably be done without.

END OF PART THIRD
PART THE FOURTH.
THE Young Miller's Guide: CONTAINING, THE WHOLE PROCESS OF THE ART OF
MANUFACTURING GRAIN INTO FLOUR: EXPLAINED IN ALL ITS BRANCHES, ACCORDING TO THE
MOST IMPROVED PLANS PRACTICED IN THE BEST MERCHANT AND FLOUR MILLS, IN AMERICA.

CONTENTS OF PART THE FOURTH.
CHAP. I. The principles of grinding, and rules for draughting the furrows of
Millstones. CHAP. II. Directions for furrowing and hanging ready for grinding
a new pair of bur-stones, and keeping them in good face, for sharpening them
and grinding to the right fineness; so as to clean the bran well, and make but
little coarse flour. CHAP. III. Of Garlic -- with directions for grinding
wheat mixed with it, and dressing the stones suitable thereto. CHAP. IV. Of
grinding the Middlings, and other coarse flour over again, to make the best
profit of them. CHAP. V. Of the quality of stones to suit the quality of the
wheat. CHAP. VI. Of bolting-reels and cloths, with directions for bolting and
inspecting flour. CHAP. VII. Of the duty of the miller, in keeping the business
in order. Peculiar accidents by which Mills are subject to take fire. Of
improving Mill-feats.
THE Young Miller's Guide. CHAPTER I. THE PRINCIPLES OF GRINDING EXPLAINED,
WITH SOME OBSERVATIONS ON LAYING OUT THE FURROWS IN THE STONES, WITH A PROPER
DRAUGHT.
Art. 104.
THE end we have in view, in grinding the grain, is, to reduce it to such a
degree of fineness, as is found by experience to make the best bread, and to
put it in such a state, that the flour may be most effectually separated from
the bran or skin of the grain, by means of sifting or bolting: and it has been
proved by experience, that to grind the grain fine with dull millstones, will
not answer said purpose well, because it kills or destroys that lively quality
of the grain, that causes it to ferment and raise in the baking: Art. 104.
it also makes the meal so clammy, that it sticks to the cloth, and chokes up
the mashes in bolting. Hence it appears, that it should be made fine with as
little pressure as possible; and it is evident, that this cannot be done
without sharp instruments. Let us suppose we undertake to operate on one single
grain, I think it seems reasonable, that we should first cut it into several
pieces, with a sharp instrument, to put it in a state, suitable for being
passed between two plains, in order to be reduced to one regular fineness. The
planes should have on their faces a number of little sharp edges, to-scrape off
the meal from the bran, and be set at such a distance, as to reduce the meal to
the required fineness, and no finer, so that no part can escape unground. The
same rules or principles will serve for a quantity, that will serve for one
grain.

Therefore, to prepare the stones for grinding to the greatest perfection, we
may conclude that their faces must be put in such order, that they will first
cut the grain into several pieces, and then pass it between them, in such a
manner, that none can escape without being ground to a certain degree of
fineness, and at the same time scrape the meal off clean from the bran or skin.

1. The best way that I have yet found to effect this is, The best way of
facing and sharpening stones.
(after the stones are faced with the staff and the pick) to grind a few quarts
of sharp fine sand; this will face them to fit each other so exactly, that no
meal can pass between them, without being ground: it is also the best way of
sharpening all the little edges on the face, Art. 104.
that are formed by the pores of the stone, (but instead of sand, water may be
used, the stones then face each other) so that they will scrape the meal off of
the bran, without too much pressure being applied. But as the meal will not
pass from the center to the periphery or verge of the stones, soon enough,
without some assistance, there must be a number of furrows, There must be
furrows in the stone.
to assist it in its egress; and these furrows must be set with such a draught,
that the meal will not pass too far along them at once, without passing over
the land or plain, le^t it should get out unground. They should also be of
sufficient depths, to admit air enough to pass though the stones to carry out
the heat generated by the friction of grinding; Their use.
but if they have too much draught, they will not bear to be deep, for the meal
will escape along them unground. These furrows ought to be made sharp at the
feather edge (which is the hinder edge of the furrow, and the foremost edge of
the land) which serves the purpose of cutting down the (...); they should be
more numerous near the center, because there the office of the stone is to cut
the grain, and near the periphery their office is (that of the two plains) to
reduce the flour to its required fineness, and scrape the bran clean by the
edges, formed by the numerous little pores with which the burr stone abounds.
Should be very hard near the eye.
However, we must consider, (...) it is not best to have the stones too sharp
near the eye, because they then cut the bran (...) fine. The stones incline to
keep open near the eye, unless they are too close. If they are porous (near the
eye) and will keep open without picking, Art. 104.
they will always be a little dull, which will flatten the bran, without
cutting it too much. Again, if they be soft next the eye, they will keep too
open, and that part of the stone will be nearly useless. Therefore they should
be very hard and porous.

It is also necessary, that we dress the (...) of the stone in such a form, as
to allow (...) for the grain or meal, in every stage of its passage between the
stones. In order to understand this, let us conceive the stream^^^ wheat,
entering the eye of the stone, to (...) about the thickness of a man's finger,
but instantly spreading every way over the (...) face of the stone; therefore
this stream (...) get thinner, as it approaches the periph^^^ (where it would
be thinner than a fine hair, Their faces should touch only 10 inches from the
skirts.
(...) it did not pass slower as it becomes finer, (...) if the stones were not
kept apart by the (...) for this reason the stones must be dressed (...) that
they will not touch at the center, (...) about a 16th or 20th part of an inch,
but to (...) closer gradually, till within about 10 or (...) inches from the
verge of the stone, proportioned to the diameter, and from that part (...) they
must fit nicely together. This close part is called the flouring of the stone.
The (...) rows should be deep near the center, to admit the wheat in its chopped
state, and the air, which tends to keep the stones cool. It is asserted by some
(and I believe, The bridge should be elastic.
not without reason) that it is ^^^lute^y necessary to have a bridge-tree that
shall have a degree of elastic (...) which gives the stone a tremulous motion
up and down, and therefore (...) a trituration more completely, making more
lively flour than it would (...) supposing the bridge-tree to be a solid
immovable rock. But what is (...) proper degree of elasticity, or size of a
bridge-tree, suitable to the weight (...) the stone, I know not; not having
experienced this matter sufficiently, to give an opinion on it: but I am
inclined to think that this is an error.

One disadvantage in having a very elastic bridge-tree, is, when the (...) run
empty, they come together with more force, and heat quicker; and if once made
red hot, it totally destroys the good sharp quality of the (...) far as the
heat penetrates.




Art. 105. Of the Draught necessary to be given to the Furrows of Millstones.
FROM these principles and ideas, Of the draught of the furrows.
and the (...) of central forces, explained art. 13, I (...) my judgment of the
proper draught of (...) furrows, and the manner of dress, in which I find but
few of the best millers to agree; (...) prefer one kind, and some another, with
shows that this necessary part of the (...) art, is not yet generally well
understood. In order that this matter may be more (...) discussed and better
understood, I have ^^^^ructed fig. 3, plate XI. A B represents (...) eight
quarter, C D the twelve quarter, (...) E A the central dress. Now we observe
(...) in the eight quarter dress, the short fur^^^ at F have about five times
as much draught (...) long ones, and cross one another like a (...) of sheers,
opened so wide that they will (...) all before them, and cut nothing; and (...)
these furrows be deep they will drive out the (...) as soon as it gets into
them, and thereby (...) much coarse meal, such as middlings and (...)-stuff or
carnell; the twelve quarter dress appears to be better; Too much draught makes
much coarse meal.
but the short furrows at ^^ve about four times as much draught as (...) long
ones, the advantage of which I cannot yet see, because if we have once found
the (...) that is right for one furrow, so as to (...) the meal to pass through
the stone in a ^^^per time, it apppears reasonable that the draught of every
other furrow should be equal to it.

In the central dress E A the furrows have all one draught, Art. 105.
and if we could once determine how much is necessary exactly, then we might
expect to be right, and I presume we will find it to be in a certain proportion
to the size and velocity of the stone; because, the centrifugal force that the
circular motion of the stone gives the meal, has a tendency to move it outward,
and this force will be in inverse proportion to the diameter of the stones;
their velocities being the same by the 4th law of circular motion. E e is a
furrow of the running stone, and we may see by the figure, that the furrows
cross one another at the center in a (...) greater angle than near the
periphery, (...) I conceive to be right, because the centrifugal force is much
less nearer the center than the periphery. But we must also consider, that the
grain, whole or but little broken, requires less draught and central force to
send it out, than it does when ground fine; which shows, that we must here
differ in practice from the theories laid down in art. 13, founded on the laws
of circular motion and central forces (...) because, the grain as it is ground
into meal, is (...) effected by the central force to drive it out, therefore
the angles with which the furrows cross each other must be greater near the
verge or skirt of the stone, and less near its center than assigned by theory,
and this variation from theory can be formed only by conjecture, and
ascertained by practice.

From the whole of my speculations on the difficult subject, added to my
observations on my own and others practice and experience. I attempt to form
the following rule for laying out a 5 foot millstone. See fig. 1. PI. XI.

1 Describe a circle with 3 inches, Art. 105.
and another with 6 inches radius, round the center of the stone.

2 Divide the 3 inch space between these two circles, into 4 spaces, by 3
circles equi-distant, call these 5 circles, draught circles.

3 Divide the stone into 5 parts, by describing 4 circles equi-distant between
the eye and verge.

4 Divide the circumference of the stone into 18 equal parts, called quarters.

5 Then take a straight edged rule, lay one end at one of the quarters at 6, at
the verge of the stone, and the other end at the outside draught circle, 6
inches from the center of the stone, and draw a line for the furrow (...) the
verge of the stone to the circle 5. Then shift the rule from draught circle 6,
in the draught circle 5, and continue the furrow line toward the center, from
circle (...) to 4: then shift in the rule to draught circle 4, and continue to
3; shift to 3 and continue to 2; shift to 2 and continue to 1, and the curve of
the furrow is formed, as 1 -- 6 in the figure.

To this curve form a pattern to lay out all the rest by.

The furrows with this curve will cross each other with the following angles,
shown fig. I, (...) circle 1, which is the eye (...) -- (...) of the stone at
75 degrees angle. (...) -- 2 45 -- (...) -- 3 35 -- (...) -- 4 31 -- (...) -- 5
27 -- (...) -- 6 23 --

These angles, Art. 105.
I think, will do well in practice, will grind smooth, and make but little
coarse meal, etc. as shown by the lines (...), Hr, Gs, Hs, etc. etc.

Supposing the greatest draught circle to be 6 inches radius, then by theory
the angles would have been at circle 1 138 degrees angles -- 2 69 -- -- 3 46 --
-- 4 34,5 -- -- 5 27,5 -- -- 6 23 --

If the draught circle had been 5 inches radius, and the furrows straight, the
angles would then have been at circle degrees 1 about 180 And 6 inches from
center, as shown by lines G 1, H 1. -- 110 2 -- 60 3 -- 38 4 -- 29 5 -- 2^ 6 --
18

The angles near the center here, are (...) too great to grind, they will push
the (...) before them; therefore, to remedy all (...) disadvantages, take the
aforesaid rule, (...) forms the furrows, as shown at 6 -- 7, fig. (...) which
is 4 of 18 qrs. H 8 represents a furrow (...) the runner, showing the angles
where (...) cross those of the bed-stone, in every (...). Here I have supposed
the extremes of the draught to be 6 inches for the verge, and (...) inches for
the eye of the stone, to be right for ^^^one 5 feet diameter, Art. 105.
revolving 100 times in a minute; but of this we cannot be certain. Yet by
experience and practice the extremes may be ascertained in time for all sizes
of stones, with different velocities, no kind of dress that (...) conceive,
appearing to me likely to be brought to a truth except this, and it certainly
appears both by inspecting the figure, and reason, that it will grind the
smoothest of all the different kinds exhibited in the plate.

The principle of grinding is partly that of ^ears clipping. The plains of the
face of the stones serving as guides to keep the grain, etc. (...) the edge of
the shears, the furrows and (...), forming the edges; if the shears cross one
another too short, they cannot cut; this shows (...) all strokes of the pick
should be parallel to the furrows.

To give two stones of different diameters the same draught, we must make their
draught (...) in direct proportion to their diameters; (...) the furrows of the
upper and lower stones ^^ch size, will cross each other with equal (...) in all
proportional distances, from their ^^res, to their periphery: See art. 13. But
(...) we come to consider that the mean circle of all stones are to have nearly
equal velocity and that their central forces will be in in^^^ proportion to the
diameters; Small stones should have less draught in proportion than large ones.
we must (...), that small stones must have much less (...), than large ones,
in proportion to their (...) ^^^ters. See the proportion for determining the
draught, art. 13.

It is very necessary that the true draught of (...) furrows, should be
determined to suit the velocity of the stone; Art. 105.
because the centrifugal force of the meal will vary, as the squares of the
velocity of the stone, by the 5th law of circular motion. But the error of the
draught may be corrected, in some measure, by the depth of the furrows. The
less the draught, the deeper the furrow; and the greater the draught, the
shallower must the furrow be to prevent the meal from escaping unground. But if
the furrows be too shallow, there will not (...) sufficient quantity of air
pass through the stones to keep them cool. But in the central dress the furrows
meet so near together that they cut the stone too much away at the center,
Quarter dress with many quarters to be prefered.
unless they are made too narrow; therefore, I prefer what is called the
quarter dress; but divided into so many quarters, that there will be little
difference between the draught of the furrows; suppose about 18 quarters in a 5
foot stone; then each quarter takes up about (...) 1-2 inches of the
circumference of the stone; which suits to be divided into about 4 furrows and
4 lands, if the stone be close; but if (...) open, 2 or 3 furrows to each
quarter will (...) enough. This rule will give 4 feet 6 inch stones, 16; and 5
feet 6 inch stones, 21; and 6 feet stones, 23 quarters. But the number of
quarters is not so particular, but better more than less. If the quarters be
few, the disadvantage of the short furrows crossing at (...) great an angle,
and throwing out the meal (...) coarse, may be remedied; by making the (...)
widest next the verge, thereby turning (...) furrows toward the center, when
they (...) have less draught, as in the quarter H I, fig. (...).

CHAPTER II. DIRECTIONS FOR FACING A PAIR OF NEW BUR STONES, LAYING OUT THE
FURROWS, HANGING THEM FOR GRINDING, AND FOR KEEPING THEM IN GOOD FACE; PICKING
AND SHARPENING THEM; FOR GRINDING TO THE RIGHT FINENESS, SO AS TO CLEAN THE
BRAN WELL, AND MAKE BUT LITTLE MIDDLINGS, etc.
Art. 106. Of facing Millstones.
THE bur millstones are generally left in (...) such face by the maker, Of
facing new stones with sand and picks.
that the miller (...) not spend much labor and time on (...) with picks,
before he may hang, and (...) water or dry sand, with them, because (...) can
make much better speed by this me^^^. After they have ground a quantity, (...)
may be judged sufficient, they must be (...) up, and the red staff tried over
their (...), (...) red staff is longer than the diameter of the stones, and
three inches (...) the edge, which is made perfectly straight, on which is
rubbed red (...) with water; which shows the highest parts of the faces of the
(...), when rubbed over them, by leaving the red on those high parts.
and if it touches in circles, the red (...) should be well cracked with picks,
then put them to grind a small quantity of water or sand again; Art 106.
after this take them up, and try the staff on them, picking off the red parts
as before, and repeat this operation, until the staff will touch nearly alike
all the way across, and until the stone comes to a face in every part, that the
quality thereof may plainly appear: then, with a red or black line proceed to
lay out the furrows, in the manner determined upon, from the observations
already laid down in chap. I. But here we must observe that the edges does the
grinding, Of laying out the furrows, to suit the quality of the stone
and that the quantity ground will be in proportion to the number of edges that
are to do it. After having a fair view of the face and quality of the stone, we
can judge of the number of furrows most suitable, observing, that where the
stone is most open and porous, few furrows will be wanted; but where it is
close and smooth, the furrows ought to be more numerous, and both they and the
lands narrow, (about 1 and 1-8 of an inch wide) that they may form the more
edges, Depth of the furrows.
to perform the grinding. The furrows, at the back, should be made nearly the
depth of the thickness of a grain of wheat, but sloped up to a feather edge,
not deeper than the thickness of a finger-nail; For the form of the bottom of
the furrow, see plate XI, fig. 5. The curve line e b shows the bottom, b the
feather edge, and e the back (...) If the bottom had been made square at the
back as at e, the grain would (...) in the corner, and by the centrifugal
force, would work out along the furrows without passing over the lands, and
part would escape unground. The back edge must be sloped for two reasons: 1st,
that the meal may be pushed (...) the feather edge: 2nd, that the furrow may
grow narrower, as the face of the stones wears away, to give liberty to sharpen
the feather edge, without making the furrows too wide. Fig. 5 represents the
face of two (...), working together, the runner moving from a to d. When the
furrows (...) right over one another as at a, there is room for a grain of
wheat; (...) they move to the position of b, it is flattened, and at c, is
clipped in two by the feather edges, and the lands or plains operate on it as
at d.
this edge is to be made as sharp as possible, Art. 106.
which cannot be done without a very sharp, hard pick. When the furrows are all
made, try the red staff over them, and if it touches near the center, Of
opening the stones near the center.
the marks must be quite taken off about a foot next to it, but observing to
crack lighter the farther from it, so that when the stones are laid together,
they will not touch at the center, by about one twentieth part of an inch, and
close gradually, so as to touch and fit exactly, for about 10 or 12 inches from
the verge. Stones in the best order.
If the stones be now well hung, having the facing and furrowing neatly done,
they will be found in the most excellent order for grinding wheat, that they
can possibly be put in, because they are in good (...), fitting so neatly
together, that the wheat cannot escape unground, and all the edges being at
their sharpest, so that the grain can of ground into flour, with the least
pressure possible.

Art. 107. Of hanging Millstones.
IF the stone have a balance-ryne it is an easy matter to hang it, Of hanging
the stone with a balance-ryne.
for we have only to (...) the spindle perpendicular to the face of the
(...)-stone; which is done by fastening a staff on (...) cock-head of the
spindle, so that the end may reach to the edge of the stone, and be near the
face. In this end we put a piece of a whale-bone or quill, so as to touch the
(...), that, when one turns the trundle-head, the quill will move round the
edge of the stone, Art. 107.
and when it is made to touch alike all the way round, by altering the wedges
of the bridge: the stone may be laid down and it will be ready hung: But here
we must observe, Of balancing the stone.
whether the stone be of a true balance, (...) hangs on the cock head, and if
not, it must be truly balanced, by running lead into the lightest side. This
ought to be carefully attended to by the maker, because the stone may be made
to balance truly when at rest; yet, if every opposite part does not balance
each other truly, the stone may be greatly out of balance when in motion,
although truly balanced at rest: and this is the reason why the bush of some
stones cannot be kept tight but a few hours, while others will keep tight
several months, the spindles being good, and stones balanced when at rest. The
reason why a stone that is balanced at rest, will sometimes not be balanced in
motion, is, that if (...) upper side be heaviest on one side, and the lowest
side be heaviest on the other side of the center, the stone may balance at
rest, yet, when set in motion the heaviest parts draw outward more by the
centrifugal force, which will put the stone out of balance while in motion: and
this argues in favor of a stiff ryne. The best method that I have heard of for
hanging stones with stiff horned rynes, appears to be as follows: Fix a screw
to each (...) regulate by, which is done thus -- after the horns are beded,
sink under (...) horn a strong bur, through which the screw is to pass from the
back of the stone, and fasten them in with lead; then, after the stone is laid
down, (...) the screws from the top of the stone, screwing them till the points
bear (...) on the horn: then proceed to hang the stone, which is very easily
done, by turning the screws.
but if we have a stiff-ryne, it will be much more difficult, because we have
not only to fix the spindle perpendicular to the face of the bed-stone, but we
must set the face of the runner perpendicular to the spindle, and all this must
be done to the greatest exactness, Stiff ryne.
because the ryne being still, will not give way to suffer the runner to form
itself to the bed-stone, as will the balance-ryne.

The bed of the ryne being first carefully cleaned out, Directions for hanging
a stone with a stiff ryne.
the ryne is put into it and tied, until the stone is laid down on the
cock-head; then we find the part that hangs lowest, and by putting the hand
thereon, we press the stone down a little, turning it about at the same time,
and observing, whether that lowest part touches the bed-stone equally all the
way round; Art. 107.
if it does not, it is adjusted by altering the wedges of the bridge-tree,
until it touches equally, and then the spindle will stand perpendicular to the
face of the bed-stone. Then, to set the face of the runner perpendicular or
square to the spindle, we stand in one place, turning the stone, and pressing
on it at every horn of the ryne, as it passes, and observing whether the runner
will touch the bed-stone equally, at every horn, which, if it does not, we
strike with an iron bar on the horn, that bears the stone highest, which, by
its jaring, will settle itself better (...) its bed, and thereby let the stone
down a little in that part; but if this be not sufficient there must be paper
put on the top of the horn, that lets the stone too low; observing to mark the
high horns, that when the (...) is taken up, a little may be taken off (...)
the bed, and the ryne will soon become (...) neatly beded, that the stone will
hang very easily. But I have ever found the bridge (...) a little out of place,
or in other words, (...) spindle moved a little from its true perpendicular
position, with respect to the face of the bed-stone, at every time the stone is
taken (...) which is a great objection to the stiff horn (...); for if the
spindle be but very little out (...), the stones cannot come together (...);
whereas, if it be considerably out of (...) with a balance ryne, it will be
little or (...) injury to the grinding, because the running (...) has liberty
to form itself to the bed-stone.

Art. 108. Of regulating the Feed and Water in Grinding.
The stone being well hung, Directions for regulating the grinding.
proceed to grind, and when all things are ready, draw as much water as is
judged to be sufficient; then observe the motion of the stone, by the noise of
the damsel, and feel the meal; and if it be too coarse, and the motion too
slow, give less feed, and she will grind finer, and the motion will be quicker;
if it grind too coarse yet, lower the stone, then if the motion be too slow
draw a little more water; but if the meal feel to be too low ground, and the
motion right, raise the stone a little, and give a little more feed. If the
motion and feed be too great, and the meal be ground too low, shut off part of
the water.

But if the motion be too slow, and feed be too small, draw more water.

To regulate the grinding to suit the quantity of water, the following rule is
set in verse; that it may be more easily remembered. The miller should by many
experiments, find the quantity of water that best suits his mill, and have a
mark made on the staff by which he draws the gate, that he may draw a suitable
quantity at once.


RULE.
If the motion be too great,
Then add a little feed and weight:
But if the motion be too slow,
Less feed and weight will let her go.
But here the miller must remember, that there is a certain portion of feed
that the stones will bear and grind it well; Art. 108.
which will be in proportion to the size, velocity and sharpness of them, and
if this be exceeded, there will be a loss by not having the grinding well done.
But no rule can be laid down, to ascertain this portion of feed; it must be
attained by practice: If the stones be over-fed, it is not possible that the
bran should be well (...), because the sharp edges on the face of the stone,
that is made for the purpose of scraping the bran clean, is kept from it by the
quantity of (...) that is between the stones.
as must also the art of judging of the right fineness. I may, however, lay
down such rules and directions as may be of some assistance to the young
beginner.

Art. 109. Rules for judging of good Grinding.
CATCH your hand full of the meal as it falls from the stones, Directions for
judging of the grinding by feeling the Meal.
and feel it lightly between your fingers and thumb; and if it feels smooth and
not oily or clammy, and will not stick much (...) the hand, it shows it to be
fine enough, (...) the stones to be sharp. If there be no (...) to be felt
larger than the rest, but all of (...) fineness, it shows the stones to be well
(...), and the furrows to have not too much ^^^ught, as none has escaped
unground.

But if the meal feels very smooth and oily, and sticks much to the hand, it
shows it to be ^^low ground, hard pressed and the stones dull. But if it feels
part oily, and part coarse and (...), and will stick much to the hand, it shows
that the stones has too much feed; Art. 109.
or, that they are dull, and badly faced, or have some furrows that has too
much draught; or are too deep, or perhaps too steep at the back edge, as part
has escaped unground, and part too much pressed and low.

Catch your hand full, and holding the palm up, shut it briskly, if the
greatest quantity of the meal fly out and escape between your fingers, it shows
it to be in a fine and lively state, the stones sharp, the bran thin, and will
bolt well: But the greater the quantity that stays in the hand, the more it
shows the reverse.

Catch a hand full of meal in a sieve, and (...) the meal clean out of the
bran; then feel it, and if it feels soft and springing, or elastic, and also
feels thin, with but little sticking to the inside of the bran, and no pieces
found much thicker than the rest, will show the stones (...) be sharp, and the
grinding well done. Instead of a sieve, you may take a shovel and hold the
point (...) stream of meal, and it will catch part of the bran, with but little
meal (...) with it; which may be separated by tossing it from one hand to the
(...) wiping the hand at each toss.


But if it is broad and stiff, and the (...) white, it is a sure sign that the
stones are (...) or overfed. If you find some parts that are much thicker and
harder than the rest, such (...) almost half or quarter grains, it shows (...)
there are some furrows that have too much draught, or are too deep or steep, at
the (...) edge; else, that you are grinding with less fee^ than the depth of
the furrows, and velocity of the stone will bear.

Art. 110. Of Dressing and Sharpening the Stones when Dull.
WHEN the stones get dull they must be taken up, Directions for sharpening the
the stones with picks.
that they may be sharpened; to do this in the best manner, we must be provided
with sharp hard picks, with which the feather edge of the furrows are to be
dressed as sharp as possible; which cannot be done with soft or dull picks. The
bottoms of the furrows are likewise to be dressed, to keep them of the proper
depth; For keeping them in good face.
but here the dull picks may be (...). To prevent the steel from striking your
fingers, To guard the fingers from the steel.
take a piece of leather but 5 by 6 inches square, make a hole through the
middle, and put the (...) of the pick through it, keeping it between your hands
and the pick, (...) a loop in the lower edge, through which put one of your
fingers, (...) the lower part from the stone.
The straight staff must now also be (...) over the face carefully, and if
there be any (...) harder or higher than the rest, the red will be left on
them; which must be cracked (...), with many cracks, to make them wear (...)
fast as the softer parts, in order to keep the (...) good. These cracks do also
form edges (...) help to clean the bran; and the harder and (...) the stone,
the more numerous are they (...) be. They are to be made with a very sharp
pick, parallel to the furrows; and the ^^per the grain, the more the stone is
to be ^^ked, and the drier and harder, the smoother (...) the face be. The
stone will never be in the (...) order for cleaning the bran, without first
^inding a little sand, to sharpen all the little edges formed by the pores of
the stone: the (...) sand may be used several times. The (...) may be sharpened
without being taken (...) or even stopped, viz. take a half a pint of sand,
Art. 110.
and hold the shoe from knocking, to (...) them run empty; then pour in the
sand, (...) this will take the glaze off of the face, (...) whet up the edges
so that they will grind considerably better: (...) sharpen (...) without
stopping them.
this ought to be often done. But care should be taken to prevent the sand from
getting mixed (...) the meal: it should be catched in some vessel, the ston^^
being suffered (...) quite empty, the small quantity that will remain in the
stone will (...) the flour. But I do not wish to encourage a lazy miller, to
neglecting up the stone.

When stones are first set to grind, they incline to raise, and grind (...) for
a considerable time, the true reason of which is difficult to assign. (...)
attribute it to the expansion of the metal in the spindle: it has been (...) to
me, that it is the steam, or the rarifaction of the air, by the heat produced
by the action of the stones, which, not having a perfectly free (...) to
escape, bears up a part of the weight of the stone; and this cause (...)
^^crease, until the stones are heated to the greatest degree.




Some are in the practice of letting stones run for months, without being
dressed; but I am well convinced that, those who dress them well twice a week,
are well paid for their trouble.

Art.111. Of the Most proper Degree of Fineness for Flour.
AS to the most proper degree of fineness for flour, Of the most (...) fineness
of flour.
millers differ in their opinion; but a great majority, and many of the longest
experience, and best judgment, agree in this; that, if (...) flour be made very
fine, it will be killed; (...) it is termed) so that it will not raise, or
^^^ment so well in baking; but I have heard several millers of good judgment,
give it as (...) opinion, that flour cannot be made too fine (...) ground with
sharp clean stones; provided th^^ are not suffered to rub against each other:
(...) (...) of those millers do actually reduce almost all the meal they get
out of the wheat into superfine flour; Art. III.
by which means they have but (...) kinds, viz. superfine flour, and
horse-feed, which is what is left after the flour is made, and is not fit to
make even the coarsest kind of (...)-bread.

I have tried the following experiment, Experiment made thereon.
viz. I contrived to catch as much of the dust of flour that was floating about
in the mill, as made a large loaf of bread, which was raised with the same
yeast, and baked in the same oven, with other loaves, that were made out of the
most ^^vely meal; when the loaf made of the dust of the flour was equally
light, and as good, if not better than any of the others; it being the
^^^stest, pleasantest tasted, though made of (...) that felt like oil, it being
so very fine.

I therefore conclude, that it is not the de^^ of fineness that destroys the
life of the (...), but the degree of pressure applied on it (...) grinding; and
that flour may be reduced to (...) greatest degree of fineness, without
injuring the quality; provided, it be done with (...) clean stones, and little
pressure. (...) might be difficult to assign the true reason why pressure or
heat has (...) an effect on flour, The vegetative quality must not be destroyed.
as to destroy that life or principle, that causes it to (...) and raise in the
baking -- But we may form a few conjectures.

(...), May not this life be that vegetative quality that causes the grain
(...), seeing it is a fact known by experience, that if the grain be damaged,
either by wet or heating in a heap so as to destroy its vegetation, that (...)
that is made thereof will not bake well? And I presume, that if (...) heated by
any means, so as to destroy its vegetative quality, it will (...) flour that
will have an easy fermentation; and it is probable, that (...) of heat is
generated by the act of grinding when great pressure (...), which cannot be
avoided if the stones be dull.

(...), If we consider that most bodies are in part composed of air, which
(...) solid and fixed state, and constitutes a proportional part of their
(...), and this proportion is different in different species of matter, from
(...) to 1-2, and in one species of wheat has been found, by experiments, to
(...) of its whole weight; that is, 12lb. of fixed air in 60lb. or one bushel
(...). Now this air is roused into action two ways, viz. by fermentation and by
heat, and as fast as it is roused, it instantly leaves the body, (...) expands
itself into about a million times more space than it filled (...) in the form
of a dense body. See Martin's Philosophy. New cider (...) a large portion of
this fixed air, which flys off by fermentation, leaving (...) cask considerably
emptied; and as soon as the fixed air is all gone, the fermentation ceases.

Query, Is not this fixed air the very soul of vegetation and fermentation and
may not the degree of heat generated by grinding with great (...) set it in
motion and cause it to leave the flour, thereby not only destroying its life,
but greatly lessening its weight, to the great loss of the miller; (...)
although he expects by hard squeezing to reap profit, reaps loss? As a
^^^firmation of this hypothesis, we may observe, that many experiments have
been made, by weighing a quantity of wheat carefully, before it was (...) and
then weighing every thing that it made in manufacturing, and (...) found it to
be lacking in weight from 1 to 5lb. per bushel; which could (...) be accounted
for any way better, than supposing the loss to be (...) the escape of the fixed
air. Therefore, I conclude, that stones (...) revolve slow and be kept sharp;
and the larger they are, the slower will (...) require to go, and the lighter
may they press the grain, and yet grind a (...) sufficient quantity, and make
the best flour.




CHAPTER. III. Art. 112. OF GARLIC, WITH DIRECTIONS FOR GRINDING WHEAT MIXED
THEREWITH; AND FOR DRESSING THE STONE SUITABLE THERETO.
IN many parts of America there is a species of onion called garlic, Of Garlic.
that grows spontaneously with the wheat. It bears a head resembling a seed
onion, which contains a number of grains about the size of a grain of wheat,
nearly as heavy, but somewhat lighter. The complete separation of this garlic
from the wheat, is so (...) that it has hitherto ba^fled all our art. Of
separating it from the wheat.
Those grains that are (...) those that are smaller, can be separated by
screens; and those that are (...) lighter, may be blown out by fans: but those
that are of the same size, (...) nearly of the same weight, cannot be separated
without putting the (...) water, where the wheat will sink, and the garlic
swim. But this method (...) too tedious for the miller to practice, except it
be once a year, to clean up (...) headings, or the like, rather than loose the
wheat that is mixed with (...) cannot be otherwise sufficiently separated.
Great care should (...) farmers to prevent this troublesome thing from getting
root (...), which, if it does, it will be almost impossible ever to root it
(...) because it propagates by both seed and root, and is very hardy.
It is of a ^^tinous substance, Art. 112.
which very soon adheres (...) stone (in grinding) in such a manner, as (...)
the edges, that they will not grind to (...) degree of perfection. Therefore,
as often at the stones become dull, we are obliged to (...) the runner up, and
wash the glaze off (...) water, scrubbing the faces with stiff brushe^ and
drying up the water with cloths or ^^nges; this laborious operation must be
^^^eated twice, or perhaps four times, in 24 hours; if there be about 10 grains
of garlic (...) a handful of wheat.

To put the stones in the best order to grind ^^^cky wheat, they must be
cracked roughly (...) the face; and dressed more open about (...) eye, that
they may not break the grains (...) garlic too suddenly, but gradually giving
(...) glutinous substance of the garlic more (...) to incorporate itself with
the meal, that (...) not adhere to the stone. Of dressing stones to suit the
garlic.
The rougher (...), the longer will the stones grind, be^^^ the longer will the
garlic be in filling all ^^^ges.

(...) best method that I have yet discover^^ manufacturing garlicky wheat, The
best method of managing garlicky wheat.
is as (...) viz.

(...), clean it over several times, in order (...) out all the garlic that can
be got out of the machinery, (which is easily done if you (...) a wheat
elevator well fixed, as directed (...). 94. pl. IX.) then chop or half grind
it, (...) will break the garlic, (it being softer (...) the wheat) the moisture
of which, will so diffuse itself through the chopped wheat, Art. 112.
that it will not injure the stones so much, in the (...) grinding. Of chopping
wheat to dry the garlic.
By this means a considerable quantity can be ground, without taking up the
stones. The chopping may be done at the rate of 15 or 20 bushels in an hour;
and with (...) little trouble or loss of time; provided the^ (...) a
meal-elevator that will hoist it up to the me^^loft, from whence it may descend
to the hopper by spouts, to be ground a second time, (...) it will grind foster
than if it had not been chopped. Great care should be taken, that it is not
chopped so fine that it will not feed by the knocking of the shoe; Must not be
chopped too fine.
(which would make (...) very troublesome) as likewise, that it be not too
coarse, left the garlic be not sufficiently broken. If the chopped grain could
lay a considerable time, that the garlic may dry, (...) would grind much better.

But although every precaution be tak^ if there be much garlic in the wheat,
the (...) will not be well cleaned; besides, there (...) be much coarse meal
made: such as (...) and stuff; which will require to be (...) over again, in
order to make the most (...) of the grain: this I shall treat of in the (...)
chapter. Timothy Kirk of York-Town (Pennsylvania) has communicated by an
invention of his, an improved fan, for cleaning wheat, the (...) which, is, to
blow the grain twice with one blast of wind; which, (...) further improvements,
appears to offer fair to effect a complete (...) of the garlic from the wheat,
and every other substance that is (...) the grain.


CHAPTER IV. Art. 113. GRINDING OVER THE MIDDLINGS, STUFF and BRAN, (...)
SHORTS, IF NECESSARY; TO MAKE THE MOST (...) THEM.
ALTHOUGH we grind the grain in the best (...) manner we possibly can, so as to
make a^^ reasonable dispatch; yet there will appear (...) the bolting, a
species of coarse meal, called ^^^ings; and stuff, a quality between super^^^
and shorts; which will contain a portion of the best part of the grain: but in
(...) coarse state they will make very coarse (...) consequently, will command
but a low (...). For which reason it is oftentimes more (...) ^^^ble to the
miller to grind and bolt such (...) ^gain, and make them into superfine flour,
(...) middlings; this may easily be done by (...) management.

(...) middlings is generally hoisted by tubs, Of preparing middlings to be
ground over.
said in a convenient place on the floor, in meal-loft, near the hopper-boy,
until there (...) large quantity gathered: when the first (...) opportunity
offers it is bolted over, with^^ any bran or shorts, mixed with it: in order
(...) take out all that is already fine enough; which will pass through the
superfine cloth. (...) middlings will pass through the middlings' (...) and
will then be round and lively, and in a state ^it for grinding; Art. 113
being freed from the fine part that would have prevented it from seeding
freely. The small specks of bran that were before mixed with it, being lighter
than the rich round part, will not pass through the middlings' cloth, but will
pass on to the stuff's cloth. The middlings will, by this means, be richer than
before; and when made fine, may be mixed with the ground meal, and bolted into
superfine flour.

The middlings may now be put into the hanging garner, Of grinding middlings.
over the hopper of the stones; out of which it will run into the hopper, and
keep it full, as does the wheat; provided the garner be rightly constructed,
and a hole, about 6 by 6 inches made for it to issue out at. There must be a
rod put through the bar that supports the upper end of the damsel, the lower
end of which must reach into the eye of the stone, near to the bottom, and on
one side thereof, to prevent the meal from sticking in the eye, which if it
does it will not feed. The hole in the bottom of the hopper must not be less
than four inches square. Things being thus prepared, and the stones being sharp
and clean, and nicely hung; draw a small quantity of water, (for meal does not
require above one tenth part that grain does) taking great care to avoid
pressure, because the bran is not between the stones now to prevent their
coming too close together. If you lay on as much weight, as when grinding
grain, the flour will be killed. But if the stones be well hung, and it be
pressed lightly, the flour will be lively, and will make much better bread,
without being bolted, than it would before it was ground. Art. 113.
As fast as it is ground, it may be elevated and bolted; but a little bran will
now be necessary to keep the cloth open; and all that passes through the
superfine cloth in this operation, may be mixed with what passed through in the
first bolting of the middlings; and be hoisted up and mixed (by the hopper-boy)
regularly with the ground meal, and bolted into superfine flour; as directed,
art. 89. (...) all this trouble and loss of time may be saved by a little
simple (...) of late invention, that will cost but a few dollars, viz. As the
(...) by the first bolting, let them be conveyed into the eye of the stone,
(...) with the whea^, as directed a^^. 89, plate 8: by which means, the (...)
thereof may be made into superfine flour, without any loss of time or (...), of
being too hard pressed for want of the bran to keep the stones (...). This mode
I first introduced, and several others has (...) it (...) approbation.


The stuff, Of bolting and grinding over ship-stuff, etc.
which is a degree coarser than middlings, if it be too poor for ship bread,
and (...) rich to feed cattle on, is to be ground over, i^ the same manner as
the middlings. But if it be mixed with fine flour, (as it sometimes is) so that
it will not feed freely, it must be bolted over first, this will take out the
(...) flour; and also the fine specks of bran, which being lightest, will come
through the (...) last. When it is bolted, the part that (...) through the
middlings' and stuff's parts of the cloth, are to be mixed and ground together;
by which means, the rich particles will (...) reduced to flour; and when
bolted, will pass ^^ough the finer cloths, and will make tolerable good bread.
What passes through the middlings' cloth, will make but indifferent ship^^^^,
and what passes through the ship-stuff's (...) will be what is called
brown-stuff, roug^^, or horse-feed.

The bran and shorts seldom are worth the trouble of grinding over, Art. 113.
unless the stones have been very dull; Of grinding shorts or bran over.
or the grinding been but slightly performed; or the wheat very garlicky. For
this purpose, the stones are to be very sharp; and more water and pressure is
here required, than in grinding grain. The flour that is made thereof, is
generally of an indifferent quality, being made of that part of the grain that
lies next the skin, and great part thereof being the skin itself, cut fine.

But the merchant miller is to consider, Of the degree of perfection most
possible.
that there is a certain degree (...) closeness or perfection that he is to aim
at, in manufacturing which wi^^ yield him the maximum, or greatest profit
possible, in a given time. And this degree of care and perfection will vary
with the prices of wheat a^^ flour, so that what would yield the greatest
profit at one time, would (...) money at another; because, if the difference of
the prices of wheat and (...) be but little, then we must make the grain yield
the most possible, to obtain any profit. But if the price of flour be much
above that of the wheat, the^ we had best make the greater dispatch, even if we
should not do it so well, (...) order that the greater quantity may be done
while those prices lasts: wher^as, if we were to make such dispatch when the
price of flour was but little above that of wheat, we would sink money.
CHAPTER V. Art. 114. Of the Quality of Millstones, to Suit the Quality of the
Wheat.
IT has been found by experience, Of the different qualities of wheat.
that different qualities of wheat, require different qualities of stones, to
grind it to the best perfection.

Although there be several species of wheat of different qualities; yet with
respect to the grinding, Art. 114.
we may take notice of but the three following qualities, viz.

1. The dry and hard. 2. The damp and soft. 3. Wheat that is mixed with garlic.
Of the quality of stones to suit hard dry wheat.

When the grain that is to be ground be dry and hard, such as is raised on
high, and clay lands; threshed in barns, and kept dry; Such wheat as is
produced by the mountainous and clay lands, of the (...) distant from the sea
and tide waters, is generally of a brownish co^^^, the grain appearing flinty,
and sometimes the inside a little transparent, (...) cut by a sharp knife. This
transparent kind of wheat is generally (...), and of a thin skin, and will make
as white flour, and as much of it, as the whitest grain.
the stones for grinding such wheat, should be of that quality of the bur, that
is called close and hard, with few large pores; in order that they may have
more face. The grain being brittle and easy broken into pieces, requires more
face or plain parts (spoken of in art. 104.) to reduce it to the required
fineness.

When the grain that is to be ground is a little damp and soft; such as is
raised on a light, sandy soil; tread out on the ground, and carried in the hold
of ships to market, And damp soft wheat.
which tends to increase the dampness, the stones is required to be more open,
porous and sharp; because the grain is tough, difficult to be broke into
pieces, and requires more sharpness, and less face (or plain surface) to reduce
it to the required fineness: Such is the wheat that is raised in all the low,
level, and sandy lands, of countries near the sea and tide waters of America,
where it is customary to (...) out their wheat on the ground by horses, and it
sometimes gets wet by (...) and dew, and the dampness of the ground. This grain
is naturally of (...) fairer color, and softer; and when broken, the inside is
white, which shows it to be nearer a state of pulverization, and is more easily
reduced to flour, and will not bear as much pressure as the grain that is
raised on (...) and clay lands, or such, that when broken, appear solid and
transparent.
See art. 104.

When there is more or less of the garlic, Art. 114.
or wild onion, Also garlicky wheat.
(mentioned Art. III;) mixed with the wheat; the stones will require to be
open, porous, and sharp: because the glutinous substance of the garlic adheres
to the face of the stones, and blunts the edges; by which means little can be
ground, before the stones get so dull that they will require to be taken up,
and sharpened: and the more porous and sharp the stones are, the longer will
they run, and the more will they grind, without getting dull: It is very
difficult to convey my ideas of the quality of the stones to the reader, for
want of something to measure or compare their degree of p^rosity or closeness,
hardness or softness with. The knowledge of these different qualities is only
to be attained by practice and experience; but I may observe, that there is no
need of any pores in the stone to be larger in diameter than the length of a
grain of wheat, for whatever they are larger, is so much loss of the face,
because it is the edges that does the grinding; therefore all large pores in
stones are a disadvantage. The greater the number of pores in the stone, (so as
to leave a sufficient quantity of touching surfaces, to reduce the flour to a
sufficient degree of fineness) the better.

Millstone makers ought to be acquainted with the true principles (...) which
grinding is performed, Of making Millstones.
and with the art of manufacturing grain into flour, that they may be judges of
the quality of the stones suitable to the quality of the wheat, of different
parts of the country; also, of the best manner of disposing of the different
pieces of stone, of different qualities, in the same millstone, according to
the office of the several parts, from the center to the verge of the stone. See
art. 104.

Millstones are generally but very carelessly and slightly made, where^^, they
should be made with the greatest care and to the greatest nicety. The runner
must be balanced exactly on its center, and every corresponding opposite part
of it should be of equal weight, or else the spindle will not keep tight in the
bush: (see art. 107.) and if it is to be hung on a balance ryne, it should be
put in at the formation of the stone, which should be nicely balanced thereon.

But above all, the quality of the stone should be most attended to, that (...)
piece of an unsuitable quality for the rest, be put in; it being known to most
experienced millers, that they had better give a high price for an
extraordinary good pair, than to have an indifferent pair for nothing.


See Art. 111.

CHAPTER VI. Art. 115. OF BOLTING-REELS, AND CLOTHS; WITH DIRECTIONS FOR
BOLTING AND INSPECTING THE FLOUR.
Principles of bolting.
THE effect we wish to produce by sifting, or bolting, is to separate the
different (...) of flour from each other; and from (...) skin, shorts, or bran.
For this reason let (...) consider the most rational means, that we (...) use
to attain this end.

Queries concerning Bolting.
1. Suppose that we try a sieve; the mash^^ of which are so large, as to let
all the bran (...) meal through: now it is evident, that we (...) never attain
to the end, proposed by the (...) thereof.

2. Suppose we try a finer sieve, that will let the meal through, but none of
the bran: (...) by this we cannot separate the different ^^^lities of flour.

3. We provide as many sieves of the different degrees of fineness, as we
intend to make different qualities of flour; and which for dis^^^tion, we name
-- Superfine, Middlings, and Carnell.

The superfine sieve, Art. 115.
of mashes, so fine (...) to let through the superfine flour, but none of the
middlings: the middling's sieve, so fine as to let the middlings pass through,
but none of the carnell: the carnell sieve, so fine as to let none of the
shorts or bran pass through.

Now it is evident, that if we would continue the operation long enough, with
each sieve, beginning with the superfine, that we (...) effect a complete
separation. This method I have been informed is practiced in England: English
mode of bolting.
they several bolting cloths of different degrees of fineness for the same
reel. (...) first put on the fine one, and pass the meal through, which takes
out (...) superfine flour; they then take off the superfine cloth, and put on
the (...) ^^gree of fineness, which takes out the common fine flour; and so on
(...) the different degrees, the cloths having drawing strings at each (...)
drawing the ends close.
But if we (...) not continue the operation a sufficient length of time, with
each sieve, the separation will (...) be complete. For part of the superfine
will (...) left, and will pass through with the middlings and part of the
middlings with the carnell, (...) part of the carnell with the shorts; and
(...) would be a laborious and tedious work, if performed by the hand.

To facilitate this business, many has been (...) improvements; amongst which,
the circ^^ sieve or bolting-reel, is one of the fore^^^^ and which was, at
first, turned and (...) hand; though afterward contrived to be (...) by water.

But many have been the errors in the application of this machine; either by
having (...) cloths too coarse, by which means the middlings and small pieces
of bran will pass through (...) the superfine flour, and part of the carnell
(...) the middlings: Art. 115.
or by having the cloths too h^rt, when they are fine enough; so that the
operation cannot be continued a sufficient time (...) take all the superfine
out, before it reaches (...) middlings' cloth, and all the middlings, before it
reaches the carnell cloth.

The late improvements made on bolting, (...) to be wholly as follows, viz.

1. By using finer cloths -- but they were (...) to clog, Late improvements
made in bolting.
or choke up, when put on small (...) of 22 inches diameter.

2. By enlarging the diameter of the reels (...) 1-2 inches, which gives the
meal greater (...) to fall, and causes it to strike harder (...) the cloth,
which keeps it open.

3. By lengthening the cloths, that the ope^^^ may be continued a sufficient
length of (...).

4. By bolting a greater part of the flour over (...) than was done formerly.

(...) meal, as it is ground, must be hoisted to ^eal-loft, where it is spread
thin, and of^^ (...), that it may cool and dry, to pre^^ it for bolting. After
it is bolted, the ^^our, Of bolting over.
or that part of the superfine that falls and which is too full of specks of
bran to for superfine flour, is to be hoisted up a^^^ and mixed with the ground
meal, to be (...) over again. This hoisting, spreading, (...), and attending
the bolting hoppers, in ^^^chant-mills, creates a great deal of hard (...), if
done by hand; and never complete^^^ at last: But all this, and much more (...)
labor of mills, can now de done by ma^^ery, moved by water: See part 3.

Of Inspecting Flour. Art. 115.

THE miller must by some means attain a knowledge of the standard quality,
passable in the markets --

He holds a clean piece of board under the bolt, moving it from head to tail,
so as to catch a proportional quantity all the way, as far as is taken for
superfine: then, having smoothed it well, by pressing an even surface on it, to
make the specks and color more plainly appear; if it be not good enough, turn
a little more of the tail to be bolted over.

If the flour appears darker than expected from the quality of the grain, it
shows the grinding to be high, and bolting too near; because the finer the
flour, the whiter its color. This appears reasonable, when we consider, that
many dark (...) and transparent substances (while in a solid state) when (...),
(...) white, and their whiteness is proportionate to their degree of pulver^^^
(...) for instance, salt, alum, and many kinds of stone, and particularly
(...) -- Ice pulverized is as white as snow -- transparent wheat (...) flour.


But this mode requires good light; therefore, the best way, is for the miller
to observe to what degree of poorness he may reduce his tail flour, or
middlings, so as to be safe; by which he may judge with much more safety in
(...) night. But the quality of the tale flour, middlings, etc. will greatly
vary in different (...) for those that have the late improvements (...) bolting
over the tale flour, grinding over (...) middlings, etc. can make nearly all
into ^^perfine.

Whereas those that have them not -- the qua^^ty that remains next to
superfine, Art. 115.
is common, (...) fine flour; then rich middlings, ship-stuff, etc. Those who
have experience will conceive the difference in the profits. If the flour feel
soft, (...), and oily, yet white; it shows the stones (...) have been dull, and
too much pressure used.

If it appear lively, yet dark colored, and (...) full of very fine specks;
this shows the stones (...) have been too rough, sharp, and that it (...)
ground and bolted too close.

CHAPTER VII. DIRECTIONS FOR KEEPING THE MILL; AND THE BUSINESS OF IT IN GOOD
ORDER.
Art. 116. The Duty of the Miller.
THE mill is supposed to be completely finished for merchant work, on the new
plan; (...) with a stock of grain flour casks, nails, (...), picks, shovels,
scales, weights, etc. (...) the millers enters on their duty -- If there be two
of them capable of standing (...), or taking charge of the mill, the time
^^^erally divided as follows: In the day time (...) ^oth attend to business,
but one of them (...) the chief direction: The night is divided (...) two
watches, the first of which ends at ^'clock in the morning; when the master
(...) should enter on his watch, and continue till morning; Art. 116.
that he may be ready to direct other hands to their business early. The first
thing he should do, when his watch begins, is to see whether the stones are
grinding, and the cloths bolting well.

And 2ndly, to review all the moving gudgeons of the mill, to see whether any
of them want grease, etc. that he may know what care may be necessary for them
during his watch; for want of this the gudgeons often run dry, and heat, which
brings on heavy losses of time and repairs; for when they heat, they get a
little loose, and the stones they run on crack; after which they cannot be kept
cool. He should also see what quantity of grain is over the stones, and if
there be not enough to supply them till morning, set the cleaning machines in
motion.

All things being set right, his duty is very easy -- he has only to see the
machinery, the grinding, and bolting, once in an hour; he has therefore plenty
of time to amuse himself in reading, etc. rather than going to sleep, which is
not safe.

Early in the morning, all the floors should be swept, and the flour dust
collected. The cas^^^ nailed, weighed, marked and branded, and the packing
began, that it may be completed in the forepart of the day; by this means,
should any unforeseen thing occur, there will be spare time. Besides, to leave
the packing till the afternoon, is a lazy practice, and keeps the business out
of order.

When the stones are to be sharpened, every thing necessary should be prepared,
before the mill is stopped, (especially if there be but one pair of stones to a
water wheel) that as little (...) as possible may be lost: Art. 116.
the picks made right sharp, not less than 12 in number. Things being ready,
take up the stone; set one hand to each, and dress them as soon as possible,
that they may be set to work again; not forgetting to grease the gears, and
spindle foot.

In the after part of the day, a sufficient quantity of grain is cleaned down,
to supply the (...) the whole night; because it is best to have nothing to do
in the night, more than attend to the grinding, bolting, gudgeons, etc.

Art. 117. Peculiar Accidents by which Mills are subject to Catch Fire.
1. THERE being many moving parts in a (...), if any piece of timber fall, and
lay on (...) moving wheel, or shaft, and the velocity (...) pressure be great,
it will generate fire, and ^^^haps consume the mill.

2. Many people use wooden candlesticks, that (...) be set on a cask, bench, or
the floor, and ^^getting them, the candle burns down, sets ^^stick, cask, etc.
on fire, which, perhaps (...) not be seen until the mill is in a flame.

3. Careless millers, sometimes, stick a candle to a cask, or post, and forget
it, until it (...) a hole in the post, or sets the cask on (...).

4. Great quantities of grain sometimes bend the floor so as to press the head
blocks, Art. 117.
against the top of the upright shafts, and generate fire: (unless the head
blocks have room to rise as the floor settles) mill-rights should consider
this, and be careful to guard against it as they build.

5. Branding irons, carelessly laid down, when hot, and left; might set
something on fire.

6. I have heard of bran falling from the tail of a bolt, round a shaft, the
friction of which burnt the shaft off.

7. The foot of the millstone spindle, and gudgeons, frequently heat, and set
the bridge-tree or shaft on fire. It is probable, that from such causes mills
have taken fire, when no person could discover how.

Art. 118. Observations on improving of Mill-Scats.
I MAY end this Part with a few observations on improving mill-seats. The
improving of a mill-seat at 1000l. expense, is an undertaking worthy of mature
deliberation, as wro^^ steps may increase it to 1100l. and the improvement be
incomplete: whereas, right steps man reduce it to 900l. and perfect them.

Strange as it may appear, yet it is a rea^^ fact, that those who have least
experience (...) the milling-business, generally build the (...) and completest
mills. -- The reasons are evident --

The experienced man is bound to old sys^^^s; Art. 118.
he relies on his own judgment in laying all his plans: whereas,

The unexperienced man, being conscious of his deficiency, is at liberty;
perfectly free from (...) prejudice, to call on all his experienced ^^^ads, and
to collect all the improvements (...) are extant.

A merchant who knows but little of the millers (...), or of the structure or
mechanism of mills, (...) naturally led to the following steps, viz.

He calls several of the most experienced ^^ers and mill-wrights, to view the
seat separately, and point out the spot for the mill-house, dam, etc. and notes
their reasonings in (...) of their opinion. The first perhaps (...) on a pretty
level spot for the mill-house, (...) a certain rock, that nature seems to have
^^pared, to support the breast of the dam, and (...) easy piace to dig the
race, mill-seat, etc.

The second passes by these places without ^^icing them; explores the stream to
the secondary line; fixes on another place, the on^^ one he thinks appointed by
nature for building a lasting dam, the foundation a solid rock, (...) cannot be
undermined by the tumbling ^^^ter; fixing on a rugged spot for the seat of
(...) house: assigning for his reasons, that the (...) fall must be taken in,
that all may be (...) in a future day. He is then informed of (...) opinion of
the other, against which he gives ^^stantial reasons.

The mill-wright, carpenter and mason, that (...) to undertake the building,
are now called ^^ther, to view the seat, fix on the spot for (...) house, dam,
etc. After their opinion and

4. Great quantities of grain sometimes bend the floor so as to press the head
blocks, Art. 117.
against the top of the upright shafts, and generate fire: (unless the head
blocks have room to rise as the floor settles) mill-rights should consider
this, and be careful to guard against it as they build.

5. Branding irons, carelessly laid down, when hot, and left; might set
something on fire.

6. I have heard of bran falling from the tail of a bolt, round a shaft, the
friction of which burnt the shaft off.

7. The foot of the millstone spindle, and gudgeons, frequently heat, and set
the bridge-tree or shaft on fire. It is probable, that from such causes mills
have taken fire, when no person could discover how.

Observations on improving of Mill-Scats. Art. 118.

I MAY end this Part with a few observations on improving mill-seats. The
improving of a mill-seat at 1000l. expense, is an undertaking worthy of mature
deliberation, as wrong steps may increase it to 1100l. and the improvement be
incomplete: whereas, right steps may reduce it to 900l. and perfect them.

Strange as it may appear, yet it is a real fact, that those who have least
experience (...) the milling-business, generally build the (...) and completest
mills. -- The reasons are evident --

The experienced man is bound to old systems; Art. 118.
he relies on his own judgment in laying all his plans: whereas,

The unexperienced man, being conscious of his deficiency, is at liberty;
perfectly free from all prejudice, to call on all his experienced friends, and
to collect all the improvements that are extant.

A merchant who knows but little of the millers art, or of the structure or
mechanism of mills, is naturally led to the following steps, viz.

He calls several of the most experienced millers and mill-wrights, to view the
seat separately, and point out the spot for the mill-house, dam, etc. and notes
their reasonings in favor of their opinion. The first perhaps (...) on a
pretty level spot for the mill-house, and a certain rock, that nature seems to
have prepared, to support the breast of the dam, and as easy place to dig the
race, mill-seat, etc.

The second passes by these places without noticing them; explores the stream
to the secondary line; fixes on another place, the only one he thinks appointed
by nature for building a lasting dam, the foundation a solid rock, (...) cannot
be undermined by the tumbling ^^ter; fixing on a rugged spot for the seat of
(...) house: assigning for his reasons, that the ^hole fall must be taken in,
that all may be (...) in a future day. He is then informed of (...) opinion of
the other, against which he gives ^^^stantial reasons.

The mill-wright, carpenter and mason, that (...) to undertake the building,
are now called ^^^ether, to view the seat, fix on the spot for (...) house,
dam, etc. After their opinion and reasons are heard, Art. 118.
they are informed of the opinion and reasons of the others, all are joined
together, and the places are fixed on. They are then desired to make out a
complete draught of the plan for the house, etc. and to spare no pains to plan
all for the best; but alter and improve on paper, (...) all appear to meet
right, in the simplest and most convenient manner; (a week may be thus well
spent) making out complete bills of every piece of timber, quantity of boards,
stone, lime, etc. Bill of iron work, number of wheels, their diameters, number
of cogs, etc. etc. in the whole work. Each person can then make out his charge,
and the costs can be counted nearly. Every species of materials may be
contracted for, to be delivered in due time: then the work goes on regularly
without disappointment, and when done, the improvements are complete, and 100l.
out of 1000l. at least saved by such steps.

END OF PART FOURTH.
Plate I


II


III


Plate IV




VI


VII


Plate VIII


IX


X.


Plate XI


XII


PART THE FIFTH.

THE Practical Mill-wright: CONTAINING, INSTRUCTIONS FOR BUILDING MILLS, WITH
ALL THEIR PROPORTIONS; SUITABLE TO ALL FALLS FROM 3 TO 36 FEET.

RECEIVED FROM THOMAS ELLICOTT, Mill-wright.

CONTENTS.
THE Preface explains the Plate containing the new Improvements.
ART. 1. Of undershot mills -- directions for laying on the water. Art. 2.
Draught of a forebay, with directions for making them durable. Art. 3.
Principles and practical experiments, to determine the proper motion for
undershot wheels. (...) table for gearing undershot wheels, suited to all
falls, from 3 to 20 feet. Art.4. Of breast mills, with directions for
proportioning and gearing them, to give the stone the right motion. Art. 5. Of
pitch-back mills, with directions for proportioning and gearing them, to give
the stone the right motion. Art 6. Of overshot mills, and their dimensions. Art
7. Of the proper motion for overshot mills. Art 8. Of gearing the water-wheel
to the millstones, to give them the proper motion. Art 9. Rules for finding
the diameter of the pitch circles. ^able of all the proportions for overshot
mills, suitable for all falls, from 15 to 36 feet; for 4 and 4 feet 6 inches,
and 5 and 5 feet 6 inch stones, diameter. Art 10. Directions for constructing
undershot wheels. Art 11. do. for dressing shafts. Art 12. do. for laying out
mortises for arms. Art 13. do. for putting in gudgeons. Art 14. do. for
constructing cog-wheels. Art 15. do. for making spurs and head blocks. Art. 16.
Of the best time for cutting cogs, and method of seasoning them. Art. 17. Of
shanking, putting in, and dressing off the cogs. Art. 18. Of the little
cog-wheel and shaft. Art. 19. Directions for making wallowers and trundles.
Art. 20. do. for fixing the head blocks, and hanging the wheels. Art. 21. do,
for sinking the balance ryne. Art. 22. do. for bridging he spindle. Art. 23.
do. for making the crain and lighter staff. Art. 24. do. for making a hoop for
the millstones. Art. 25. do. for grinding sand to face the stones. Art. 26.
do. for laying out the furrows in new stones. Art. 27. do. for making a hopper,
shoe, and feeder. Art. 28. do. for making bolting chests and reels. Art. 29.
do. for setting bolts to go by water. Art. 30. do. for making bolting wheels.
Art. 31. Of rolling screens. Art. 32. Of fans. Art. 33. Of the shaking sieve.
Art. 34. Of the use of draughting to build mills by. Art. 35. Directions for
draughting and planning mills. Art. 36. Bills of scantling for a mill. Art. 37.
Bills of iron work for a mill. Art. 38. Explanation of the plates. Art. 39. Of
saw mills, with a table of the dimensions of flutter wheels, to suit all heads
from 6 to 30 feet. Art. 40. Of fulling mills.
TO THE READER.
I BEING requested by Oliver Evans, to assist him in completeing his book,
entitled, The Young Mill-wright and Miller's Guide -- have thought proper to
give (...) reader a short history of the rise and progress of merchant mills,
toward their present state of perfection, ^^ce the beginning of my time.

It is now upwards of 38 years since I first began mill-wrighting: I followed
it very constant for about ten years, ^^^king it my particular study. Several
of my brothers (...) also mill-wrights, we kept in company; and were (...)
called to different parts of this, and the adjacent ^^^^es, to build mills of
the first rates, in their day. Some of them entered into the manufacturing
line, but I con^^^ed at mill-wrighting, and other business connected ^herewith;
such as rolling screens, and fans, and making them to go by water, in merchant
and grist mills; (...) farmers fans, for cleaning grain; being the first, I
^^^eve that made these things in America: but for several years past, have done
but little else, than build (...), or draught to build by.

When I first began the business, mills were at a low (...) in this country;
neither burr-stones, nor rolling screens being used; and but few of the best
merchant mills had a fan. Many carried the meal on their backs, and bolted it
by hand, even for merchant work; and I have frequently heard, that a little
before my beginning the business, it had been customary, in many instances, to
have the bolting mill some distance from the grinding mill, and there bolted by
hand. It was counted extraordinary when they got their bolting to go by water:
after this, fans by hand, and standing screens took place; then bur-stones,
rolling-screens, and superfine bolting cloths, with a number of other
improvements. Some of the latest are, the Elevators, hopper-boys, etc. --
Invented by Oliver Evans, late of Delaware, though now of Philadelphia.

Being very desirous to improve in the art of building mills, and manufacturing
grain into flour, I have fr^ frequently went a considerable distance to see new
improvements, and have often searched the book-stores (...) expectation of
finding books that might instruct me, but never found any which was of use to
me in that respect more than to learn the ancient names of some parts of the
mills; for although they had been wrote by men of considerable learning, in
other respects; yet, as they had never been mill-wrights themselves, they had
neither practical, nor experimental knowledge to direct (...) in the work. For
instance, see the mill-wrights table, in Ferguson's lectures, page 79.; where
the cog-wheel is to have 127 cogs, about 15 feet diameter; trundle 6 staves,
and stones 6 feet: And in Imison's introduction to useful knowledge, page 31,
the water-wheel is to be 18 feet, cog-wheel 254 cogs, about 31 feet diameter,
much higher than the water-wheel; -- staves in the trundle 6, and stones 4 2/1;
feet. Besides, some have asserted, that water applied on an undershot wheel,
will do 6 times as much as if applied on an overshot; others, that if applied
on an overshot it will do 10 times as much as an undershot, the quantity and
falls being equal: many other parts of their theories are equally wrong, in
practice. So that what knowledge I have gained, has been by steady attention to
the improvements of our own country; I have wondered, that no person of
practical knowledge in the art, has yet attempted to write a treatise on it,
seeing it is a subject worthy attention, and such a book so much wanted. The
manufacturing of our own country produce, in the most saving, expeditious, and
best manner, I have thought, is a sub^^^t worthy the attention of the
legislatures. Mills are often laid under heavy taxes, being supposed to be very
suitable; but if all the spare wheat was to be shipped, where would the
miller's profit be. But to return to the subject -- I have often thought, that
if I could spare time would write a small treatise on mill-wrighting myself,
^^^king it would be of much use to young mill-wrights) (...) fearing I was not
equal to the task, I was ready to (...) it up, but on further consideration, I
called on Tho^^^ Dobson, printer of the Encyclopedia; and asked (...) if he
would accept of a small treatise on mill-wright^^: he said Oliver Evans had
been there a few days (...), and proposed such a work, which I thought (...)
save me the trouble. But some time afterward, (...) said Evans, applied to me,
requesting my assistance (...) undertaking; this I was the more willing to do,
ha^^^ built several mills with his additional improvements; (...) draughted
several others -- and without which improvements, I think a mill cannot now be
said to be com^^^. By them the manufacture of grain into flour, carried on by
water, with very little hand labor, (...) much less waste, either in small or
large busi^^^. And I do believe, that taking a large quantity of ^eat together,
that we can make 2 or 3lbs. more (...) of a bushel by the new, than by the old
way, though it be equally well ground; because it is so (...) more completely
bolted, and with less waste. In (...) old way, the wheat is weighed and carried
up (...) or two pair of stairs, and thrown into garners; the (...) often having
holes in, it is spilt and trampled un^^^^ foot; several lbs. being frequently
lost in receiving a small quantity; and when it is taken from these ^^^ers, and
carried to the rolling screens, some is again ^^^ed, and as it is ground, it is
shoveled into tubs, a dust is raised, and some spilt and trampled on; it is
there hoisted, and spread, and tossed about with shovels, over a large floor,
raked and turned to cool, and shoveled up again, and put into the bolting
hopper; all which occasions great labor, besides being spilt and trampled over
the mill, which occasions a considerable waste. (...) these disadvantages,
there are others in attending the bolting hoppers; being often let run empty,
then (...) too hard, so that they choke, which occasions the (...) to be very
unevenly bolted; sometimes too poor, and at other times too rich, which is a
considerable loss; (...) when the flour is bolted, it is much finer at the head
that the tail of the cloths: the fine goes through first, and has to be mixed
by hand, with shovels or rakes; and (...) labor is often neglected or only
half done; by (...) means; part of the flour will be condemned for being (...)
poor, and the rest be above the standard quality. (...) hoisting of the tail
flour, mixing it with bran, by (...) and bolting it over, is attended with so
much labor, (...) it is seldom done to perfection.

In the new way, all these inconveniences and disadvantages are completely
provided against: See plate (...) which is a representation of the machinery,
as they (...) applied in the whole process of the manufacture, (...) the grain
from the ship or wagon, and passing it (...) the whole process by water, until
it is completely manufactured into superfine flour. As they are applied in mill
of my planning and draughting, now in actual practice, built on Occoquam river,
in Virginia, with 3 water wheels, and 6 pair of stones.

If the wheat comes by water to the mill in the ship (...) it is measured and
poured into the hopper A, and (...) conveyed into the elevator at B, which
elevates it, (...) drops it into the conveyer C D, which conveys it along under
the joists of the second floor, and drops it into the hopper garner at D, out
of which it is conveyed into the main wheat elevator at E, which carries it up
into the ^peak of the roof, and delivers it into the rolling screen at F, which
(in this plan) is above the colar beams, out if which it falls into the hopper
G, thence into the short ^^vator at H, which conveys it up into the fan I, from
whence it runs down slanting into the middle of the long conveyer at j that
runs toward both ends of the mill, and conveys the grain as cleaned into any
garner K K K K K K, over all the stones, which is done by shifting a (...)
under the fan, to guide the grain to either side of the cog-wheel j, and
although each of these garners ^^^uld contain 2000 bushels of wheat, over each
pair of (...), 12000 bushels in 6 garners, yet nearly all may (...) ground out
without handling it, and feed the stones (...) even and regular than it is
possible to do in the old (...). As it is ground by the several pair of stones,
the (...) falls into the meal conveyer at M M M, and is con^^^ into the common
meal elevator at N, which raises (...) O, from thence runs down into the
hopper-boy at which spreads and cools it over a circle of 10 or 15 (...)
diameter, and (if thought best) will raise over it, (...) form a heap two or
three feet high, perhaps thirty ^^^els of flour or more at a time, which may be
bolted (...) at pleasure. When it is bolting the hopper-boy ^^^ers it into the
bolting hoppers at Q* and attends them are regularly than is ever done by hand.
As it is bolt^^^ the conveyer R in the bottom of the superfine chest, conveys
the superfine flour to a hole through the floor (...), into the packing chest,
which mixes it completely. (...) of the packing chest it is filled into the
barrel at T, ^^ighed in the scale U, packed at W by water, headed (...) X, and
rolled to the door Y, then lowered down by (...) and windlass into the ship
again at Z.

If the wheat comes to the mill by land, in the wagon it is emptied from the
bags into a spout that is in the all, and it runs in the scale 8, which is
large enough hold a wagon load, and as it is weighed it is (by drawing a gate
at bottom) let run into the garner D, out of which it is conveyed into the
elevator at E, and so through the same process as before.

As much of the tail of the superfine reels 37 as we think will not pass
inspection, we suffer to pass on into the short elevator. (by shutting the
gates at the bottom of the conveyer next the elevator, and opening one further
toward the other end) The rubblings, which falls at the tail of said reels, is
also hoisted into the bolting hoppers of the sifting reel 39, which is covered
with a fine cloth, to take out all the fine flour dust, which will stick to the
bran, in warm damp weather, and all that passes through it is conveyed by the
conveyer 40, into the elevator 41, which elevates it so high that it will run
freely into the hopper-boy at O, and is bolted over again with the ground meal.
The rubblings that falls at the tail of the sifting reel 39, falls into the
hopper of the middlings' reel 42; and the bran falls at the tail into the lower
story. Thus you have it in your power either by day or night, without any hand
labor except to shift the sliders, or some such trifle, to make your flour to
suit the standard quality; and the most superfine possible made out of the
grain, and finished complete at one operation.

These improvements are a curiosity worthy the notice of the philosopher and
statesman, to see with what harmony the whole machinery works in all their
different operations.

But to conclude, agreeable to request I attempt to show the method of making
and putting water on the several kinds of water-wheels commonly used, with
their dimensions etc. suited to falls and heads from 3 to 36 feet; and have
calculated tables for gearing them to millstones; and made draughts (...) of 8
feet to an inch, except pl. V. which is 4 feet
of several water-wheels with their forebays and manner of putting on the
water, etc.

THOMAS ELLICOTT.

THE Practical Mill-wright. Art. 1. OF UNDERSHOT MILLS.
FIG. 1, plate I, represents an undershot wheel 18 feet diameter, with 3 feet
total head and fall. It should be 2 feet wide for every foot the millstones
are in diameter; that is, 8 feet between the shrouds for a 4 feet, and 10 feet
wide for a 5 feet stone. It should have three sets of arms and shrouds, on
account of its great width. Its shaft should be at least 26 inches diameter. It
requires 12 arms, 18 feet long, 3 1-2 inches thick, by 9 wide; and 24 shrouds 7
1-2 feet long, 10 inches deep, by 3 thick, and 32 floats 15 inches wide. Note,
it may be geared the same as an overshot wheel, of equal diameter. Fig. 2
represents the forebay, with its ^ills, posts sluice and fall: I have in this
case allowed 1 foot fall and 2 feet head.

Fig. 3 represents an undershot wheel 18 feet diameter, with 7 feet head and
fall. It should be as wide between the shrouds as the stone is in diameter. Its
shaft should be 2 feet diameter. Requires 8 arms 18 feet long, 3 1-4 of an inch
thick, Art. 1.
by 9 wide. And 16 shrouds, 7 1-2 feet long, 10 inches deep, by 3 thick. Note,
it may be geared the same as an overshot wheel 13 feet diameter, because their
revolutions per minute will be nearly equal.

Fig. 4 represents the forebay, sluice, and fall, the head and fall about equal.

Fig. 5 represents an undershot wheel 12 feet diameter, with 15 feet total head
and fall. It should be 6 inches wide for every foot the stone is in diameter.
Its shaft 20 inches diameter. Requires 6 arms 12 feet long, 3 by 8 inches; and
12 shrouds, 6 1-2 feet long, 2 1-2 inches thick, and 8 deep. It suits well to
be geared to a 5 feet stone with single gears, 60 cogs in the cog-wheel, and 16
rounds in the trundle; to a 4 1-2 feet stone, with 62 cogs and 15 rounds; and,
to a 4 feet stone, with 64 cogs and 14 rounds. These gears will do well till
the fall is reduced to 12 feet, only the wheel must be less as the falls are
less, so as to make the same number of revolutions in a minute: but this wheel
requires more water than a breast mill, with the same fall.

Fig. 6 is the forebay, gate, shute and fall. Forebays should be wide
proportionable to the quantity of water they are to convey to the wheels; and
should stand 8 or 10 feet in the bank, and be firmly joined, to prevent the
water from breaking through; which it will certainly do, unless they be well
secured.

Art. 2. Directions for making Forebays.
THE best way that I know for making these kind of forebays, is shown in plate
V, fig. 7. Make a number of solid frames, consisting of a fill, two posts, and
a cap each; set them cross-wise, (as shown in the figure) 2 1-2 or 3 feet
apart; to these the plank are to be spiked, for there should be no sills
lengthwise, as the water is apt to find its way along them. The frame at the
head next the water, and one 6 or 8 feet downwards in the bank, should extend 4
or 5 feet on each side of the forebay in the bank; and be planked in front to
prevent the water and vermin from working round. Both of the fills of these
long frames should be well secured, by driving down plank edge to edge, like
piles, along the upperside, from end to end.

The sills being settled on good foundations, the earth or gravel must be
rammed well on all sides, full to the top of the sills. Then lay the bottom
with good sound plank, well jointed and spiked to the sills. Lay your shute,
extending the upper end a little above the point of the gate when full drawn,
to guide the water in a right direction to the wheel. Plank the head to its
proper height, minding to leave a suitable sluice, to guide the water smoothly
down. Fix the gate in an upright position -- ^^ang and wheel and finish it off
ready for letting on the water.

A rack must be made to keep off the floating trash that would break the floats
and buckets of undershot, breast, and pitch-back wheels, and injure the gates.
Art. 2.
See it at the head of forebay, fig. 7, plate V. This is done by setting a
frame 3 feet in front of the forebay, and laying a sill 2 feet in front of it,
for the bottom of the rack: in it the staves are put, made of laths, set
edgewise with the stream, 2 inches apart, their upper ends nailed to the cap of
the last frame, which causes them to lean down steam. The bottom of the race
must be planked between the forebay and rack, to prevent the water from making
a hole by tumbling through the rack when choked; and the sides be planked
outside the posts to keep up the banks. This rack must be double as long as the
forebay is wide, or else the water will not come fast enough through it to keep
the head up; for the head is the spring of motion of an undershot mill.

Art. 3. Of the Principle of Undershot Mills.
THEY differ from all others in principle, because the water looses all its
force by the first stroke against the floats; and the time this force is
spending, is in proportion to the difference of the velocities of the wheel and
water, and the distance of the floats. Other mills have the weight of the water
after the force of the head is spent, and will continue to move; but an
undershot will stop as soon as the head is spent, as they depend not on the
weight. They should be geared so, that when the stone goes with a proper
motion, they will not run too fast with the water, so as not to receive its
force; Art. 3.
nor too slow, so as to loose its power by rebounding and dashing over the
buckets. This matter requires very close attention, and has puzzled our
mechanical philosophers to find it out by theory. They give us for a rule, that
the wheel must move just 1-3 the velocity of the water; -- perhaps this may
suit where the head is not much higher than the float boards, but I am fully
convinced it will not suit high heads.

Experiments for determining the proper Motion for Undershot Wheels.
I drew a full sluice of water on an undershot wheel with 15 feet head and
fall, and counted its revolutions per minute; then geared it to a millstone,
set it to work properly, and again counted its revolutions, and the difference
was not more than one fourth slower. I believe, that if I had checked the
motion of the wheel to be equal 1-3 the motion of the water, that the water
would have rebounded the flew up to the shaft. Hence I conclude, that the
motion of the water must not be checked by the wheel more than 1-3, nor less
than 1-4; else it will loose in power: for although the wheel will carry a
greater load with a slow, than swift motion, yet it will not produce so great
effect, its motion being too slow. And again, if the motion be too swift, the
load or resistance it will overcome will be so much less, that its effect will
be lessened also. I conclude, that about 2-3 the velocity of the water is the
proper motion for undershot wheels, the water will then spend all its force in
the distance of 2 float boards; Art. 3.
notwithstanding, the learned authors have asserted it to be but 1-3. To
confute them, suppose the floats 12 inches, and the column of water striking
them, 8 inches deep; then, if 2-3 of the motion of this column be checked, it
must instantly become 24 inches deep, and rebound against the backs of the
floats, and the wheel would be wallowing in this dead water: whereas, when 1-3
of its motion is checked, it becomes only 12 inches deep, and runs off from the
wheel smooth and lively.

Directions for gearing Undershot Wheels, 18 feet Diameter, where the Head is
above 3 and under 8 feet, with double Gears; counting the Head from the Point
where the Water strikes the Floats.
1. For 3 feet head and 18 feet wheel, see 18 feet wheel in the overshot table.

2. For 3 feet 8 inches head, see 17 feet wheel in said table.

3. For 4 feet 4 inches head, see 16 feet wheel in said table.

4. For 5 feet head, see 15 feet wheel in said table.

5. For 5 feet 8 inches head, see 14 feet wheel in said table.

6. For 6 feet 4 inches head, see 13 feet wheel in said table.

7. For 7 feet head, see 12 feet wheel in said table.

The revolutions of the wheels ^ill be nearly equal; therefore the gears may be
the same.

The following table is calculated to suit for any sized stone, from 4 to 6
feet diameter; different sized water-wheels from 12 to 18 feet diameter, Art. 3.
and different heads from 8 to 20 feet above the point it strikes the floats.
And to make 5 feet stones revolve 88 times; 4 feet 6 inch stones 97 times; and
4 feet stones 106 times in a minute, when the water wheel moves 2-3 the
velocity of the striking water.

Mill-wrights Table for Undershot-mills -- Single Geared.
Height of the ^ead of wat. in f. Diameter of the water-wheel in feet. Velocity
of the water per minute in feet. Velocity of the water-wheel per minute in
feet. Revolutions of the water-wheel per minute. Revolutions of the stone per
minute. No. cogs in the cog-wheel. Number of rounds in the trundle head.
Revolutions of the millstone for one of the water-wheel. Diameter of the
stones in feet. 8 12 1360 9^6 24 88 56 15 3 5 9 13 1448 965 23 88 58 15 36/7; 5
10 14 1521 1014 231/7; 88 58 15 36/7; 5 11 15 1595 1061 22 88 58 15 3 5 12 16
1666 1111 22 88 58 15 37/8; 5 13 16 1735 1157 231/7; 88 60 16 3 5 14 16 1800
1200 24 88 59 16 3 5 15 16 1863 1242 24 88 60 17 3 5 16 16 1924 1283 25 88 59
17 33/8 5 17 17 1983 1322 25 88 62 17 3 5 18 17 2041 1361 25 88 62 17 3 5 19 18
2097 1398 25 88 62 17 3 5 20 18 2152 1435 25 88 60 17 3(...) 5 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
9 10

Note that there is nearly 60 cogs in the cog-wheel, in the foregoing table,
and 60 inches is the diameter of a 5 feet stone; therefore, it will do without
sensible error, to put 1 cog more in the wheel for every inch that the stone is
less than 60 inches diameter, down to 4 feet; the trundle head and water-wheel
the same.

And for every 3 inches that the stone in larger than 60 inches in diameter,
put 1 round more in the trundle, and the motion of the stone will be nearly
right up to 6 feet diameter.

Art. 4. Of Breast-Wheels.
BREAST wheels differ but little in their structure or motion from overshots,
excepting only, the water passes under instead of over them, and they must be
wider in proportion as their fall is less.

Fig. 1, plate II, represents a low breast with 8 feet head and fall. It should
be 9 inches wide for every foot of the diameter of the stone. Such wheels are
generally 18 feet diameter; the number and dimensions of their parts being as
follows: 8 arms 18 feet long, 3 1-4 by 9 inches; 16 shrouds 8 feet long, 2 1-2
by 9 inches; 56 buckets; and shaft, 2 feet diameter.

Fig. 2 shows the forebay, water gate, and fall, and manner of striking on the
water.

Fig. 3 is a middling breast-wheel 18 feet diameter. with 12 feet head and
fall. It should be 8 inches wide for every foot the stone is in diameter. Art.
4.


Fig. 4 shows the forebay, gate and fall, and manner of striking on the water.

Fig. 5 and 6 is a high breast-wheel, 16 feet diameter, with 3 feet head in the
forebay, and 10 feet fall. It should be 7 inches wide for every foot the stone
is in diameter. The number and dimensions of its parts are, 6 arms 16 feet
long, 3 1-4 by 9 inches; 12 shrouds 8 feet ^6 inches long, 2 1-2 by 8 or 9
inches deep, and 48 buckets.

Art. 5. Of Pitch-back Wheels.
PITCH-BACK wheels are constructed exactly similar to breast-wheels, only the
water is struck on them higher. Fig. 1, plate III, is a wheel 18 feet diameter,
with 3 feet head in the penstock, and 16 feet fall below it. It should be 6
inches wide for every foot of the diameter of the stone.

Fig. 2 shows the trunk, penstock, gate and fall, the gate sliding on the
bottom of the penstock, and drawn by the lever A, turning on a roller. This
wheel is much recommended by some mechanical philosophers, for the saving of
water; but I do not join them in opinion, but think that an overshot with equal
head and fall, is fully equal in power: besides, the saving the expense of so
high a wheel and fall, that are difficult to be kept in order.

Art. 6. Of Overshot Wheels.
OVERSHOT wheels receive their water on the top, being moved by its weight; and
are much to be recommended where there is fall enough for them. Fig. 3
represents one 18 feet diameter, which should be about 6 inches wide for every
foot the stone is in diameter. It should hang 8 or 9 inches clear of the tail
water, because they draw it under them. The head in the penstock should be
generally about 3 feet, which will spout the water about 1-3 faster than the
wheel moves. Let the shute have about 3 inches fall, and direct the water into
the wheel at the center of its top.

I have calculated a table for gearing overshot wheels, which will equally well
suit any of the others of equal diameter, that have equal heads above the point
where the water strikes the wheel.

Dimensions of this wheel, 8 arms 18 feet long, 3 by 9 inches; 16 shrouds 7
feet 9 inches long, 2 1-2 by 7, or 8 inches; 56 buckets, and shaft, 24 inches
diameter.

Fig. 4 represents the penstock and trunk, etc. the water being let on the
wheel by drawing the gate G.

Fig. 1 and 2, plate IV, represents a low overshot 12 feet diameter, which
should be in width equal to the diameter of the stone. Its parts and dimensions
are, 6 arms 12 feet long, 3 1-2 by 9 inches; 12 shrouds, 6 1-2 feet long, 2 1-2
by 8 inches; shaft 22 inches diameter, and 30 buckets.

Fig. 3 represents a very high overshot 30 feet diameter, Art. 6.
which should be 3 1-2 inches wide for every foot of the diameter of the stone.
Its parts and dimensions are, 6 main arms, 30 feet long, 3 1-4 inches thick, 10
inches wide at the shaft, and 6 at the end; 12 short arms 14 feet long, of
equal dimensions; which are framed into the main arms near the shaft, as in the
figure; for if they were all put through the shaft, they would make it too
weak. The shaft should be 27 inches diameter, the wheel being very heavy and
bearing a great load. Such high wheels require but little water.

Art. 7. Of the Motion of Overshot Wheels.
AFTER trying many experiments, I concluded that the circumference of overshot
wheels geared to millstones, grinding to the best advantage, should move 550
feet in a minute; and that of the stones 1375 feet in the same time; that is,
while the wheel moves 12, the stone moves 30 inches, in the proportion of 2 to
5.

Then, to find how often the wheel we propose to make will revolve in a minute,
take the following steps: 1st, Find the circumference of the wheel by
multiplying the diameter by 22, and dividing by 7, thus:

Suppose the diameter to be 16 feet, then 16 multiplied by 22, produces 352;
which, divided by 7, quotes 50 2/^; for the circumference.

16

By which we divide 550, Art. 7.
the distance the wheel moves in a minute, and it quotes 11, for the
revolutions of the wheel per minute, casting off the fraction 2/7, it being
small.

50)550

To find the revolutions of the stone per minute, 4 feet 6 inches (or 54
inches) diameter, multiply 54 inches by 22, and divide by 7, and it quotes
1695/7; (say 170) inches, the circumference of the stone.

54

By which divide 1375 feet, or 16500 inches, the distance the skirt of the
stone should move in a minute, and it quotes 97; the revolutions of a stone per
minute, 4 feet diameter.

1375

To find how often the stone revolves for once of the water wheel, divide 97,
the revolutions of the stone, by 10, the revolutions of the wheel, and it
quotes 89/11, (say 9 times).

11)97(8 9/11

Art. 8. Of Gearing.
Now, if the mill was to be single geared, 99 cogs and 11 rounds, would give
the stone ^he right motion, Art. 8.
but the cog-wheel would be too large, and trundle too small, therefore it must
be double geared.

Suppose we choose 66 cogs in the big cog-wheel and 48 in the little one, and 5
rounds in the wallower, and 15 in the trundle.

Then, to find the revolutions of the stone for one of the water-wheel,
multiply the cog-wheel, together, and the wallower and trundle together, and
divide one product by the other, and it will quote be answer, 8 168/375, not
quite (...) revolutions instead of 9.

25

Therefore we must make another proposition *Considering which of the wheels we
had ^^est alter, and wishing not to alter the big cog-wheel nor trundle, we put
one round less ^^n the wallower, and 2 cogs more in the little cog-wheel, and
multiplying and dividing as before, we find the stone will turn 9 times for
once of the water-wheel, which is as near as we can get. The mill now stands
thus, a 16 foot overshot wheel, that will revolve 11 times in a minute, geared
to a stone 4 1-2 feet diameter; the big cog-wheel 66 cogs, 4 1-2 inches from
center to center of the cogs; (which we call the pitch of the gear) little
cog-wheel 50 cogs 4 1-4 pitch; wallower 24 rounds, 4 1-2 pitch, and trundle 15
rounds, 4 1-4 inches pitch.

Art. 9. Rules for finding the Diameter of the Pitch Circles.
To find the diameter of the pitch circle, that the cogs stand in, multiply the
number of cogs by the pitch, which gives the circumference; which, multiplied
by 7, and divided by 22, gives the diameter in inches; which, divided by 12,
reduces it to feet and inches thus:

66

For the cog-wheel of 66 cogs, 4 1-2 pitch, we find to be 7 feet 10 11/22
inches, the diameter of pitch circle; to which I add 8 inches, for the outside
of the cogs, makes 8 feet 6 1-2 inches, the diameter from out to out.

By the same rules I find the diameters of the pitch circles of the other
wheels, to be as follows, viz.

ft. in. Little cog-wheel 50 cogs, 4 1-4 inches pitch, 5 7 110/222 p. circ. I
add for the outside of the circle, 7 Total diamet. from out to out 6 3 Wallower
24 rounds 4 1-2 inches pitch. 2 11 4/22 Add for outsides, 0 3 13/22; do. Total
diameter from the outsides. 3 3 Trundle head 15 rounds, Art. 9.
4 1-4 inch pitch, 1 8 3/22 p.circ. Add for outsides 2 19/22 Total diameter for
the outsides, 1 11

Thus we have completed the calculations for one mill, with a 16 feet overshot
water-wheel, and stones 4 1-2 feet diameter. By the same rules we may calculate
for wheels of all sizes from 12 to 30 feet, and stones from 4 to 6 feet
diameter, and may form tables that may be of great use to many, even to master
workmen that understand calculating well in dispatching of business, in laying
out work for their apprentices and other hands, getting out timber, etc. but
more especially (...) those who are not learned in arithmetic sufficient to
calculate, I being from long experience highly sensible of the need of such a
^^ble, have therefore undertaken the arduous (...).

MILL-WRIGHTS TABLES,
Calculated to suit overshot water-wheels with suitable heads above them, of
all sizes from 12 to 30 feet diameter, the velocity of their circumferences
being about 550 feet per minute, showing the number of cogs and rounds in all
the wheels, double gear, to give the circumference of the stone a velocity of
375 feet per minute, also the diameter of their pitch-circles, the diameter of
the outsides, and revolutions of the water-wheel and stones per minute.

For particulars see what is written over the head of each table. Table I. is
to suit a 4 feet stone, table II. a 4 1-2, table III. a 5 feet, and table IV. a
5 1-2 feet stone.

N. B. If the stones should be an inch or two bigger or less than those above
described, make use of the table that comes nearest to it, and likewise for the
water-wheels. For further particulars see draughting mills.

Use of the following Tables.
Having levelled your mill-seat and found the total fall, after making due
allowances for the fall in the races, and below the wheel, Suppose there is 21
feet 9 inches, and the millstones are 4 feet diameter, then look in table I,
(which is for 4 feet stones) column 2, for the fall that is nearest yours, and
you find it in the 7th example: and against it in column 3, is the head proper
to be above the wheel 3 feet, in column 4 is 18 feet, for the diameter of the
wheel, etc. for all the proportions of the gears to make a steady moving mill,
the stones to revolve 106 times in a minute. The following tables are
calculated to give the stones the revolutions per minute mentioned in them, a^
near as any suitable number of cogs and rounds would permit, which motion I
find is 8 or 10 revolutions per minute slower than proposed by Evans in his
table; -- his motion may do best i^ cases where there is plenty of power and
steady work on one kind of grain: but in country mills, where they are
continually changing from one kind to another, and often starting and stopping,
I presume a slow motion will work most regular. His table being calculated for
only one size of millstones, and mine for four, if any choose his motion, look
for the width of the water-wheel, number of cogs, and rounds and size of the
wheels to suit them, in the next example following, keeping to my table in
other respects, and you will have his motion nearly.


Table I. For Overshot Mills with Stones 4 feet Diameter to revolve 106 times
in a minute, Pitch of the gear of great cog wheel and wallower 4 and of lesser
cog wheel and trundle 4 inches.
No of examples. Total falls of water from the top of that in the penstock to
that in the tail-race. Different heads of water above the water wheels.
Diameters of water wheels from out to out. Width of water wheels in the clear.
No. of cogs in the great and lesser cog wheels. Diameters of pitch circles of
great and lesser wheels. Diameters of cog wheels from out to out. No. of rounds
in the wallowers and trundles. Diameters of pitch circles in wallowers and
trundles. Total diameters of wallowers and trundles. Revolutions of great wheel
per minute nearly. ft. in. f. i. feet f. i. f. i. f. i. f. i. f. i. 1 15,3 2,6
12 3,0 66 7,10(...) 8,6(...) 25 2,11 3,3 3 48 5,4(...) 6,0(...); 15 1,8(...)
1,11(...) 2 16,4 2,7 13 2,10 69 8,2(...) 8,10 25 2,11(...); 3,3 12 48 5,4(...)
6,0 15 1,8(...) 1,11 3 17,5 2,8 14 2,8 69 8,2(...) 8,10(...) 26 3, 3,5 12 48
5,4(...) 6,0 15 1,8(...) 1,11 4 18,6 2,9 15 2,6 69 8,2(...) 8,10 25 2,111/4;
3,3 11 50 5,7(...) 6,3 15 1,8(...) 1,11(...) 5 19,7 2,10 16 2,4 72 8,7(...);
9,3 26 3,1 3,5 11 52 5,10 6,6 15 1,8(...) 1,11(...) 6 20,8 2,11 17 2,3 72 8,7
9,3 25 2,11 3,3 10 52 5,10 6,6 14 1,7 1,10 7 21,9 3,0 18 2,2 72 8,7(...) 9,3 25
2,10 3,1 10 52 5,10 6,6 14 1,7 1,10 8 22,10 3,1 19 2,1 75 8,11 9,7 24 2,10 3,1
9 52 5,10 6,6 14 1,7 1,10 9 23,11 3,2 20 2,0 75 8,11 9,7 24 2,9 3,0 9 52 5,10
6,6 14 1,7 1,10 10 25,1 3,4 21 1,11 78 9,3 9,11(...) 23 2,10 3,1 87/6; 52 5,10
6,6 14 1,7 1,10 11 26,3 3,6 22 1,10 78 9,3 9,11 24 2,9 3,0 8 52 5,10 6,6 14 1,7
1,10 12 27,5 3,8 23 1,9 78 9,3 9,11 23 2,9 3,0 8 54 6,1 6,8 14 1,7 1,10 13 28,7
3,10 24 1,8 81 9,8 10,4 23 2,9 3,0 8 54 6,1 6,8 14 1,7 1,10 14 29,9 4,0 25 1,7
81 9,8 10,4 23 2,9 3,0 7 56 6,3(...) 6,11(...) 14 1,7 1,10 15 30,11 4,2 26 1,6
84 10,0(...) 10,8 23 2,9 3,0 7 56 6,3(...) 6,11 14 1,7 1,10 16 32,1 4,4 27 1,5
84 10,0 10,8(...) 23 2,9 3,0 6 6,6 7,1 14 1,7 1,10 17 33,3 4,6 28 1,4 84
10,0(...) 10,8 23 2,9 3,0 6 56 6,3 7,1 14 1,5 1,8 18 34,6 4,9 29 1,3 8(...)
10,0 10,8 22 2,7 2,10 6 56 6,3 7,1 13 1,5 1,8 19 35,9 5,9 13 1,2 37 10,5 11,1
22 2,7 2,10 6 56 6,3 7,1 13 1,6 1,8 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12

TABLE II. For Overshot Mills with Stones 4 feet 6 inches Diameter to revolve
99 times in a minute, pitch of the gears 4 and 4 inches.
No. of Examples. Total falls of water from the top of that in the Penstock to
that in the tail ra^e. Different head of water above the water wheel. Diameters
of water wheels from out to out. Widths of water wheels in the Clear. No. of
Cogs in the great and lesser Cog wheels. Diameters of Pitch Circles of great
and lesser cog wheels. Diameters of Cog wheels from out to out. No. of rounds
in wallower and trundle^. Diameters of Pitch C^^eres in wallowers and trundles.
Total diameters of wallowers and trundles. Revolutions of the great wheel per
minute nearly. ft.in. ft.in. ft.in. ft.in. ft.in. ft.in. ft.in. ft.in. 1 15,3
2,6 12 3,6 66 7,10(...) 8,(...) 20 3,(...); 3,(...) 12 48 5,4 6,0 15 1,8(...)
1,11 2 16,4 2,7 13 3,4 66 7,10 8,6 25 2,11(...) 3,3 12 48 5,4(...) 6,0 15 1,8
1,11 3 17,5 2,8 14 3,2 69 8,2 8,10(...) 26 3,1 3,4 12 48 5,4(...) 6,0 15
1,8(...) 1,11 4 13,6 2,9 15 3,0 69 8,2 8,10 25 2,11(...) 3,3 11 48 5,4 6,0 15
1,8 1,11 5 19,7 2,10 16 2,10 69 8,2(...) 8,10 25 2,11 3,3 11 50 5,7(...) 6,3 15
1,8 1,11 6 20,8 2,11 17 2,8 72 8,7(...) 9,3 26 3,1 3,4 10 52 5,10 6,6 15 1,8
1,11 7 21,9 3,0 18 2,6 72 8,7 9,3 25 2,11 3,3 10 52 5,10 6,6 14 1,8(...) 1,11 8
22,10 3,1 19 2,4 72 8,7 9,3 24 2,10 3,2 9 52 5,10(...) 6,6 14 1,8(...) (...),
11 9 23,11 3,2 20 2,3 75 8,11 9,7 24 2,10(...) 3,2 9 52 5,10 6,6 14 1,8 1,11 10
25,1 3,4 21 2,2 75 (...),11 9,7 ^3 2,9 3,0 8 52 5,10 6,6 14 1,8 1,11 11 26,3
3,6 22 2,1 78 9,3 9,11 24 2,10(...) 3,2 8 52 5,10 6,6 14 1,8 1,11 12 27,5 3,8
23 2,0 78 9,3 9,11 23 2,9 3,0 8 52 5,10 6,6 14 1,8 1,11 13 28,7 3,10 24 1,11 78
9,3 9,11 23 2,9 3,0 8 54 6,1 6,8 14 1,8 1,11 14 29,9 4,0 25 1,10 81 9,8 10,4 23
2,9 3,0 7 54 6,1 6,8 14 1,8 1,11 15 30,11 4,2 26 1,9 31 9,8 10,4 23 2,9 3,0 7
56 6,3 6,11 14 1,8 1,11 16 32,1 4,4 27 1,8 84 10,0 10,8 23 2,9 3,0 6 (...) 6,3
6,11 14 1,8 1,11 17 33,3 4,6 28 1,6 ^4 10,0 10,8 23 2,9 3,0 6 58 6,6 7,1 14 1,8
1,11 18 34,6 4,(...) 29 1,5 84 10,0 10,8 23 2,9 3,0 6 6 6,3 6,11 13 1,5 1,8 19
35,9 (...) 30 1,1 84 10,0 10,8 22 2,7 2,10 6 ^6 6,3(...) 6,11(...) 13 1,5
1,8(...) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12

TABLE III. Stones 5 feet Diameter to revolve 86 times in a minute, the pitch
of the gears 4 and 4 inches.
No. of examples. Total falls of water from the top of the Penstock to that in
the tail race Different heads of water above the water wheels. Diameters of
water wheels from out to out. Widths of water wheels in the clear. No. of Cogs
in the great and lesser cog wheels. Diameters of Pitch circles of great and
lesser cog wheels. Diameters of cog wheels from out to out, No. of rounds in
the wallower and trundle. Diameters of pitch circles in wallowers and trundles
Total Diameters of wallowers and trundles. Revolutions of the great wheel per
minute Nearly. ft.in. ft.in. feet ft.in. ft.in. ft.in. ft.in. ft.in. 1 15,3 2,6
12 4,0 63 7,6(...) 8,2 (...) 26 3,1 3,4 13 48 5,4(...) 6,0 16 1,9 2,0 2 16,4
2,7 13 3,10 66 7,10 8,6 26 3,1 3,4 12 48 5,4 6,0 16 1,9 2,4 3 17,5 2,8 14 3,8
66 7,10 8,6 25 2,11(...) 3,3 12 48 5,4(...) 6,0 15 1,8 1,11 4 18,6 2,9 15 3,6
69 8,2 8,1(...) 26 3,1 3,4 11 48 5,4 6,0 15 1,8 / 3; 1,11; 5 19,7 2,10 16 3,4
69 8,2 8,10 25 2,11 3,3 21 48 5,4(...) 6,0 15 1,8 1,11 6 20,8 2,11 17 3,2 69
8,2 8,10 25 2,11(...) 3,3 10 50 5,7 6,3 15 1,8 1,11 7 21,9 3,0 18 3,0 72 8,7
9,3 26 3,1 3,4 10 52 5,10 6,6 15 1,8 1,11 8 22,10 3,1 19 2,10 72 8,7 9,3 25
2,11 3,3 9 52 5,10(...) 6,6 14 1,8(...) 1,11 9 23,11 3,2 20 2,8 72 8,7(...) 9,3
24 2,10 3,2 9 52 5,10(...) 6,6 14 1,8 1,11 10 25,1 3,4 21 2,6 75 8,11(...) 9,7
24 2,10 3,2 8 52 5,10 6,6 14 1,8 1,11 11 26,3 3,6 22 2,5 75 8,11 9,7 23 2,9 3,0
8 52 5,10 6,6 14 1,8 1,11 12 27,5 3,8 23 2,4 78 9,3 9,11 24 2,10 3,2 8 52 5,10
6,6 14 1,8 1,11 13 28,7 3,10 24 2,3 78 9,3 9,11 23 2,9 3,0 8 52 5,10 6,6 14 1,8
1,11 14 29,9 4,0 25 2,2 78 9,3 9,11 23 2,9 3,0 7 54 6,1 6,8 14 1,8 1,11 15
30,11 4,2 26 2,0 81 9,8 10,4 23 2,9 3,0 7 54 6,1 6,8 14 1,8 1,11 16 32,1 4,4 27
1,11 81 9,8 10,4 23 2,9 3,0 6 56 6,3 6,11 14 1,8 1,11 17 33,3 4,6 28 1,9 84
10,0 10,8 23 2,9 3,0 6 56 6,3 6,11 14 1,8 1,11 18 34,6 4,9 29 1,7 84 10,0 10,8
23 2,9 3,0 6 58 6,6 7,1 14 1,8 1,11 19 15^ 5,0 30 1,6 84 10,(...) 10,8 23 2,9
3,0 6 56 6,3 6,11 13 1,5 1,8 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12

TABLE IV. For Overshot Mills with Stones 5 feet 6 inches Diameter to revolve
80 times in a minute the pitch of the gears 4 and 4 inches.
No. of examples. Total falls of water from the top of that in the penstock to
top of that in the tail race. Different heads of water above the water wheels.
Diameters of water wheels from out to out. Widths of water wheels in the clear.
No. of cogs in great and lesser cog wheels. Diameters of pitch circles of great
and lesser cog wheels. Diameters of cog wheels from out to out. No. of rounds
in the wallowers and trundles. Diameters of pitch circles in wallowers and
trundles. Total diameters of wallowers and trundles. Revolutions of the great
wheel per minute nearly. ft. in. ft.in. feet. ft. in. ft.in. ft. in. ft. in.
ft. in. 1 15,3 2,6 12 4,6 60 7,6 8,2 26 3,3(...) 3,6 13 48 5,8 6,4 16 1,11 2,2
2 16,4 2,7 13 4,4 63 7,11(...) 8,7(...) 26 3,3(...) 3,6 12 48 5,8(...) 6,4 16
1,11 3,2 3 17,5 2,8 14 4,2 66 8,3 8,11 26 3,3 3,6 12 48 5,8 6,6 16 1,11 2,2 4
18,6 2,9 15 4,0 66 8,3 8,11 26 3,3 3,6 11 48 5,8 6,4 15 1,9 2,0 5 19,7 2,10 16
3,10 69 8,8 9,4 26 3,3 3,6 11 48 5,8 6,4 15 1,9 2,0 6 20,8 2,11 17 3,8 69 8,8
9,4 25 3,1 3,4 10 48 5,8 6,4 15 1,9 2,0 7 21,9 3,0 18 3,6 69 8,8 9,4 25 3,1 3,4
9 50 5,11 6,2 15 1,9 2,0 8 22,10 3,1 19 3,9 72 9,0 9,8 26 3,3 3,6 9 52 6,2 6,10
14 1,8 1,11 9 23,11 3,2 20 3,2 72 9,0 9,8 25 3,1 3,4 9 52 6,2 6,10 14 1,8 1,11
10 25,1 3,4 21 3,0 72 9,0 9,8 24 3,0 3,3 8 52 6,2 6,10 14 1,8 1,11 11 26,3 3,6
22 2,10 75 9,5 10,1 24 3,0 3,3 3 52 6,2 6,10 14 1,8 1,11 12 27,5 3,8 23 2,8 75
9,5 10,1(...); 23 2,10 3,1 8 52 6,2 6,10 14 1,8 1,11 13 28,7 3,10 24 2,6 78
9,10 10,6 24 3,0 3,3 8 52 6,2 6,10 14 1,8 1,11 14 29,9 4,0 25 2,4 78 9,10 10,6
23 2,10 3,1 7 52 6,2(...) 6,10 14 1,8 1,11 15 30,11 4,2 26 2,2 78 9,10 10,6 23
2,10 3,1 7 54 6,5 7,1 14 1,8 1,11 16 32,(...) 4 4 27 2,0 81 10,2(...) 10,10 13
2,10(...) 3,1 6 54 6,5 7,1 14 1,8 1,11 17 33,3 4,6 28 1,11 81 10,2 10,10 23
2,10 3,1 6 56 6,8 7,3 14 1,8 1,11 18 34,6 (...) 29 1,10 84 10,7 11,3 23
2,10(...) 3,1 6 56 6,8 7,3 14 1,8 1,11 19 35,9 5,0 30 1,9 84 10,7 11,3 23 2,10
3,1 6 58 6,11 7,6 14 1,8 1,11 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12

Art. 10. Directions for constructing Undershot Wheels, such as fig. 1, plate I.
1. Dress the arms straight and square on all sides, and find the center of
each; divide each into 4 equal parts on the side square center scribe, and
gauge them from the upper side across each point, on both sides, 6 inches each
way from the center.

2. Set up a truckle or centre-post, for a center to frame the wheel on, in a
level place of ground, and set a stake to keep up each end of the arms level
with the truckle, of convenient height to work on.

3. Lay the first arm with its center on the center of the truckle, and take a
square notch out of the upper side 3-4 of its depth, wide enough to receive the
2nd arm.

4. Make a square notch in the lower edge of the 2nd arm, 1-4 of its depth, and
lay it in the other, and they will joint standing square across other.

5. Lay the 3rd arm just equi-distant between the others, and scribe the lower
arms by the side of the upper, and the lower edge of the upper by the sides of
the lower arms. Then, take the upper arm off and strike the square scribes,
taking out the lower half of the 3rd arm, and the upper half of the lower arms,
and fit and lay them together.

6. Lay the 4th arm on the others, and scribe as directed before; then take 3-4
of the lower edge of the 4th arm, and 1-4 out of the upper edge of the others,
and lay them together, and they will be locked together in the depth of one.

7. Make a sweep-staff with a gimblet hole for the center at one end, Art. 10.
which must be set by a gimblet in the center of the arms. Measure from this
hole half the diameter of the wheel, making a hole there, and another the depth
of the shrouds toward the center, making each edge of this sweep at the end
next the shrouds, straight toward the center hole, to scribe the ends of the
shrouds by.

8. Circle both edges of the shrouds by the sweep, dress them to width and
thickness, lay out the laps 5 inches long, set a gauge to a little more than
1-3 their thickness, gauge all their ends for the laps from the outsides, cut
them all out but the last, that it may be made a little longer, or shorter, as
may suit to make the wheel the right diameter; sweep a circle on the arms to
lay the shrouds to, while fitting them, put a small draw-pin in the middle of
each lap, to draw the joints close, strike a true circle for both inside and
outside the shrouds, and one 1 1-2 inch from the inside, where the arms are to
be let in.

9. Divide the circle into 8 equal parts, coming as near the middle of each
shroud as possible; strike a scribe across each to lay out the notch by, that
is to be cut 1 1-2 inch deep, to let in the arm at the bottom of where it is to
be forked to take in the remainder of the shroud. Strike a scribe on the arms
with the same sweep that the stroke on the shrouds for the notches was struck
with.

10. Scribe square down each side of the arms, at the bottom of where they are
to be forked; make a gauge to fit the arms, so wide as just to take in the
shrouds, and leave 1 1-2 inch of wood outside of the mortise; Art. 10.
bore 1 or 2 holes through each end of the arms to draw-pin the shrouds to the
arms when hung; mark all the arms and shrouds to their places, and take them
apart.

11. Fork the arms, put them together again, and put the shrouds into the arms;
drawbore them, but not too much, which would be worse than too little; take the
shrouds apart again, turn them the other side up, and draw the joints together
with the pins, and lay out the notches for 4 floats between each arm, 32 in
all, large enough for admitting keys to keep them fast, but allowing them to
drive in when any thing gets under the wheel. The ends of the floats must be
dovetailed a little into the shrouds; when one side is framed, frame the other
to fellow it. This done, the wheel is ready to hang, but remember to face the
shrouds between the arms with inch boards, nailed on with strong nails, to keep
the wheel firm together.

Art. 11. Directions for Dressing Shafts, etc.
THE shaft for a water-wheel with 8 arms should be 16 square, or 16 sided,
about two feet diameter, the tree to make it being 2 feet 3 inches at the top
end. When cut down saw it off square at each end and roll it on level kids, and
if it be not straight, lay the rounding side down and view it, to find the spot
for the center at each end. Set the big compasses to half its diameter and
sweep a circle at each end, Art. 11.
plum a line across each center, and at each side at the circle, striking chalk
lines over the plum lines at each side from end to end, and dress the sides
plum to these lines; turn it down on one side, setting it level; plum, line,
and dress off the sides to a 4 square; set it exactly on one corner, and plum,
line, and dress off the corner to 8 square. In the same manner dress it to 16
square.

To cut it square off to its exact length, stick a peg in the center of each
end, take a long square (that may be made of boards) lay it along the corner,
the short end against the end of the peg, mark on the square where the shaft is
to be cut, and mark the shaft by it at every corner line, from mark to mark;
then cut it off to the lines, and it will be truly square.

Art. 12. To lay out the Mortises for the Arms.
FIND the center of the shaft at each end, and strike a circle, plum a line
through the center at each end to be in the middle of two of the sides; make
another scribe square across it, divide the distance equally between them, so
as to divide the circle into 8 equal parts, and strike a line from each of
them, from end to end, in the middle of the sides; measure from the top end
about 3 feet, and mark for the arm of the water-wheel, and the width of the
wheel, and make another mark. Take a straight edge 10 feet pole, and put the
end even with the end of the shaft, Art. 12.
and mark on it even with the marks on the shaft, and by these marks measure
for the arm at every corner, marking and lining all the way round. Then take
the uppermost arms of each rim, and by them lay out the mortises, about half an
inch longer than they are wide, which is to leave key room; set the compasses a
little more than half the thickness of the arms, and set one foot in the center
line at the end of the mortise, striking a scribe each way for to lay out the
width by: this done, lay out 2 more on the opposite side, to complete the
mortises through the shaft. Lay out 2 more square across the first, one quarter
the width of the arm, longer inward, toward the middle of the wheel. Take
notice which way the locks of the arms wind, whether to right or left, and lay
out the third mortises to suit, else it will be a chance whether they suit or
not: these must be half the width of the arms, longer inwards.

The 4th set of mortises must be 3-4 longer inwards than the width of the arms:
the mortises should be made rather hollowing than rounding, that the arms may
slip in easily and stand fair.

If there be 3 (which are called 6) arms to the cog-wheel, but 1 of them can be
put through the sides of the shaft fairly; therefore, to lay out the mortises,
divide the end of the shaft a^ew, into but 6 equal parts, by striking a circle
and each end; and without altering the compasses, step from one of the old
lines, six steps round the circle, and from these points strike chalk lines,
and they will be the middle of the mortises, which may be laid out as before,
minding which way the arms lock, Art. 12.
and making 2 of the mortises 1-3 longer than the width of the arm, extending 1
on one side, and the other on the other side of the middle arm.

If there be but 2 (called 4) arms in the cog-wheel, (which will do where the
number of cogs do not exceed 60) they will pass fairly through the sides,
whether the shaft be 12 or 16 sided, One of these must be made one half longer
than the width of the arms, to give room to put the arm in.

Art. 13. To put in the Gudgeons.
STRIKE a circle on the ends of the shaft to let on the end bands; make a
circle all round 2 1-2 feet from each end, and saw a notch all round half an
inch deep. Lay out a square round the centres the size of the gudgeons, near
the neck; lay the gudgeons straight on the shaft, and scribe round them for
their mortises; let them down within an 1-8 of an inch of being in the center.
Dress off the ends to suit the bands; make 3 keys of good seasoned white oak,
to fill each mortise above the gudgeons, to key them in, those next to the
gudgeons to be 3 1-4 inches deep at their inner end, and 1 1-2 inch at their
outer end, the wedge or driving key 3 inches at the head, and 6 inches longer
than the mortice, that it may be cut off if it batters in driving; the piece
next the band so wide as to rise half an inch above the shaft, when all are
laid in. Then take out all the keys and put on the bands, and make 8 or 12 iron
wedges about 4 inches long by 2 wide, Art. 13.
1-3 inch thick at the end, not much tapered except half an inch at the small
end, on one side next the wood; drive them in (...) each side the gudgeon
exceeding hard at a proper distance with a set. Then put in the keys again, and
lay a piece of iron under each (...) between it and the key 6 inches long, half
an inch thick in the middle, and tapering off at the ends; then grease the keys
well with allow and drive it well with a heavy sledge: after this drive an iron
wedge half an inch from the two sides of each gudgeon 5 inches long, near half
an inch thick, and as wide as the gudgeon.

Art. 14. Of Cog-wheels.
THE great face cog-wheels require 3 (cal^^^ 6) arms, if the number of cogs
exceed 54, (...) 4 will do. We find by the table, example 43, that the
cog-wheel must have 69 cogs, with 4 1-2 inches pitch, the diameter of its pitch
circle 8 feet 2 1-3 inches, and of its outsides 8 feet 10 1-3 inches. It
requires 3 arms (...) feet long, 14 by 3 3-4 inches; 12 cants 6 1-2 feet long,
16 by 4 inches. See it represented (...) V, fig. 1.

To frame it, dress and lock the arms together (as fig. 6) as directed art. 10,
only mind (...) leave 1-3 of each arm uncut, and to lock (...) the right way to
suit the winding of the mortises in the shaft, which is best found by fitting a
strip of board in the middle mortise, and, supposing it to be the arm, mark
which way it should be cut, then apply the board to the arm and mark it, The
arms being laid on a truckle as directed art. 10, make a sweep the sides
directing to the center, 2 feet from the out end to scribe by; measure on the
sweep half the diameter of the wheel, and by it circle out the back edges of
the cants, all of one width in the middle; dress them, keeping the best faces
for the face side of the wheel; make a circle on the arms 1-2 an inch larger
than the diameter of the wheel, laying 3 of the cants with their ends on the
arms at this circle at equal distance apart. Lay the other three on the top of
them, so as to lap equally, scribe them both under and top, and gauge all for
the laps from the face side; dress them out and lay them together, and joint
them close; drawpin them by an inch pin near their inside corners: this makes
one half of the wheel shown fig. 5. Raise the center level with that half,
strike a circle near the outside, and find the center of one of the cants;
then, with the sweep that described the circle, step on the circle six steps,
beginning at the middle of the cant, and these steps will show the middle of
all the cants or places for the arms. Make a scribe from the center across
each; strike another circle exactly at the corners, to place the corners of the
next half by, and another about 2 1-2 inches farther out than the inside of the
widest part of the cant, to let the arms in by; lay on three of the upper
cants, the widest part over the narrowest part of the lower half, the inside to
be at the point where the corner circle crosses the center lines. Saw off the
ends at the center scribes, Art. 14.
and fit them down to their places, doing the same with the rest. Lay them all
on and joint their ends together; draw-pin them to the lower half by inch pins,
2 inches from their inmost edges, and 9 inches from their ends. Raise the
center level with the wheel; plane a little of the rough off the face, and
strike the pitch circle and another 4 inches inside for the width of the face;
strike another very near it, in which drive a chisel half an inch deep all
(...), and strike lines with chalk in the middle of the edge of the upper
cants, and cut out of the solid half of the upper cants, which raises the face;
divide the pitch circle into 69 equal parts, 4 1-2 inches pitch, beginning and
ending in a joint; strike two other circles each 2 1-2 inches from the pitch
circle, and strike central scribes between the cogs, and where they cross the
circles put in pins, as many as there is cogs, half on each circle; find the
lowest part on the ^^ce, and make the center level with it; look across in
another place square with the first, and make it level with the center also:
then make the face straight from these 4 places, and it will be true.

Strike the pitch circle and divide it over again, and one of each side of it,
1 inch distance for the cog mortises; sweep the outside of the wheel and inside
of the face, and two circles 3-4 of an inch from them, to dress off the
corners; strike a circle of two inches diameter on the center of each cog, and
with the sweep strike central scribes at each side of these circles for the
cog-mortises; bore and mortise half through; turn the wheel, dress and mortise
the back side, Art. 14.
leaving the arms from under it; strike a circle on the face edge of the arms,
equal in diameter to that struck on the face of the half wheel, to let them in
by; saw in square and take out 4 1-2 inches, and let them into the back of the
wheel 1 1-4 inch deep, and bore a hole 1 1-2 inch into each arm, to pin it to
the wheel.

Strike a circle on the arms one inch less than the diameter of the shaft, make
a key 8 inches long, 1 1-2 thick, 3 1-4 at the but, and 2 1-2 inches at the top
end, and by it lay out the mortises, two on each side of the shaft, in each arm
to hang the wheel by.

Art. 15. Of Sills, Spur-blocks, and Head-blocks.
SEE a side view of them in plates I, II, III, and IV, and a top view of them
with their keys at the end of the shaft, plate VI. The sills are generally 12
inches square. Lay them on the wall as firm as possible, and one 3 feet farther
out, on these lay the spurs, which are 5 feet long, 7 by 7 inches, 3 feet
apart, notched and pinned to the sills; on these are set the head-blocks, 14 by
12 inches, 5 feet long, let down with a dovetail shoulder between the spurs, to
support keys to move it endways, and let 2 inches into the spurs with room for
keys, to move it sideways, and hold it to its place; See fig. 33 and 34, plate
VI. The ends of the shaft are let 2 inches into the headblocks, to throw the
weight more on the center.

Provide two stones 5 or 6 inches square, Art. 15.
very hard and clear of grit, for the gudgeons to (...) on, let them into the
head-blocks, put the cog-wheel into its place, and then put in the shaft on the
head-blocks in its place.

Put in the cog-wheel arm, lock them together and pin the wheel to them; then
hang the wheel first by the keys, to make it truly round, and then by side
wedges, to make it true in face; turn the wheel and make two circles one on
each side of the cog-mortises, half an inch from them, so that the head of the
cogs may stand between them equally.

Art. 16. Of Cogs; the best Time for cutting and Way of seasoning them.
THEY should be cut 14 inches long, 3 1-4 inches square, when the sap runs at
its fullest, which should be done at least a year before they are used, that
they may dry without cracking. If either hickory or whiteoak is (...) when the
bark is set, they will worm-eat, and if dried hastily will crack; to prevent
which boil them and dry them slowly, or soak them in water, a year, (20 years
in mud and water would not hurt them;) when they are taken out they should be
put in a hay-mow under the hay, which, when foddered away they will dry without
cracking; but this often takes too long time. I have discovered the following
method of drying them in a few days without cracking: I have a malt-kiln With a
floor of laths two inches apart. Art. 16.
I shank the cogs, hang them shank downwards, between the laths, cover them
with the haircloth, make a wood fire and the smoke preserves them from
cracking. Some dry them in an oven which ruins them. Boards, planks, or
scantling are best dried in a kiln, covered so as to keep the smoke amongst
them.

Art. 17. Of shanking, putting in, and dressing off Cogs.
STRAIGHTEN one of the heart sides for the shank, make a pattern the head 4,
and shank 10 inches long, and 2 inches wide at the head, 1 3-4 at the point;
lay it on the cog, scribe the shank and shoulders for the head, saw in and
dress off the sides; make another pattern of the shank, without the head, to
scribe the sides and dress off the backs by, laying it even with the face,
which is to have no shoulder; take great care in dressing them off, that the
axe does not strike the shoulder, if it does it will crack there in drying (if
they be green); fit and drive them in the mortises exceeding tight, with their
shoulders foremost when at work. When the cogs are all in, ^ix two pieces of
scantling for rests, to scribe the cogs by, one across the cog-pit near the
cogs, another in front of them, fix them firm. Hold a pointed tool on the rest,
and scribe for the length of the cogs by turning the wheel, and saw them off 3
1-2 inches long; then move the rest close to them, and fix it firm; find the
pitch circle on the end of the cogs, and by turning the wheel describe it there.

Describe another 1-4 of an inch outside thereof, Art. 17.
for to set compass in to describe the face of the cogs by, and another at each
side of the cogs to dress them to their width; then pitch the cogs by dividing
them equally, (...) that in stepping round the compasses may (...) in the point
where they began; describe a circle in some particular place with the pitch
that it may not be lost; these points must be as near as possible, of a proper
distance for the center from the back of the (...); find the cog that this
point comes nearest to the back, and set the compasses from (...) point to the
back of the cog, and with (...) distance set off the backs of all the cogs
(...), on the circle 1-4 of an inch outside of (...) pitch circle, and from
these points last (...), set off the thickness of the cogs, which (...) be 2
1-8 inches in this case.

Then describe the face and back of the cogs (...) setting the compasses in the
hindmost point (...) one cog, and sweeping over the foremost (...) of another
for the face, and in the foremost point of one, sweeping over the hindmost
(...) the other, for the back part; dress them off (...) all sides, tapering
about 1-8 of an inch in an (...) distance, try them by a gauge to make (...)
all alike, take a little of the corners off, (...) they are finished.

Art. 18. Of the little Cog-wheel and Shaft.
THE process of making this is similar to (...) of the big cog-wheel. Its
dimensions we (...) by the table, and the same example 43, to be 52 cogs, Art.
18.
4 1-4 pitch. Diameter of pitch circle 5 feet 10 1-3 inches, and from out to
out 6 feet 6 inches.

It requires 2 arms 6 feet 6 inches long, 11 by 3 1-4 inches; 8 cants 5 feet 6
inches, 17 by 3 1-2 inches. See it plate V, fig. 4.

Of the Shaft.
Dress is 8 feet long, 14 by 14 square, and describe a circle on each end 14
inches diameter; strike two lines through the center parallel to the sides and
divide the quarters into 4 equal parts each; strike lines across the center at
each part at the end of these lines; strike chalk lines from end to end to hew
off the corners by, and it will be 8 square; lay out the mortises for the arms,
put on the bands, and put in the gudgeons, as with the big shaft.

Art. 19. Directions for making Wallowers and Trundles.
By example 43 in the table, the wallower is to have 26 rounds 4 1-2 pitch.
Diameter of its pitch circle is 3 feet 1 1-4 inch, and 3 feet 4 1-4 inches from
outsides: see fig. 3 plate V. Its heads should be 3 1-2 inches thick, doweled
truly together, or made double with plank crossing other. Make the bands 3
inches wide, 1-6 of an inch thick evenly drawn; the heads must be made to suit
the bands, by setting the compasses so that they will step round the inside of
the band in 6 steps; with this distance sweep the head, Art. 19.
allowing about 1/16 of an inch outside in dressing to make such a large band
tight. Make them hot alike all round with a chip fire, which swells the iron;
put them on the head while hot, and cool them with water to keep them from
burning the wood too much, but not too fast, lest they snap: the same for
hooping all kinds of heads.

Dress the head fair after banded, and strike the pitch circle and divide it by
the same pitch of the cogs; bore the holes for the rounds with a^ auger at
least 1 1-2 inch; make the rounds of the best wood 2 inches diameter, and 11
inches between the shoulders, the tenons 4 inches, to fit the holes loosely
until within one inch of the shoulder, then drive tight. Make the mortises for
the shaft in the heads, with notches for the keys to hand it by. When the
rounds are all drove in to the shoulders, observe whether they stand straight,
if not, they may be set fair by putting the wedges nearest to one side of the
tenon, so that the strongest part may incline to draw them straight: this
should be done with both heads.

Art. 20. Of fixing the Head-blocks and hanging the Wheels.
THE head-blocks for the wallower shaft, are shown in plate VI. Number 19 is
one called a spur, 6 feet long and 15 inches deep, one end of which at 19 is
let one inch into the (...) of the husk-sill, which sill is 1 1-2 inch above
(...) floor, the other end tenoned strongly into a strong post 14 by 14 inches,
Art. 20.
12 or 14 feet long, standing near the cog-wheel on a sill in the bottom of the
cog-pit; the top is tenoned into the husk-plank; these are called the tomkin
posts. The other head-blocks appears at 20 and 28. In these large head-blocks
there is small ones let in, that are 2 feet long and 6 inches square, with a
stone in each for the gudgeons to run on. That one in the spur 19 is made to
slide, to put the wallower out and in gear by a lever screwed to its side.

Lay the center of the little shaft level with the big one, so as to put the
wallower to gear 2-3 the thickness of the rounds deep into the cog-wheel; put
the shaft into its place and hang the wallower, and gauge the rounds to equal
distance where the cogs take. Hang the cog-wheel, put in the cogs, make the
trundle as directed for the wallower. See plate V fig. 4.

Art. 21. Directions for putting in the Balance-Ryne.
LAY it in the eye of the stone, and fix it truly in the center; to do which
make a sweep by putting a long pin through the end to reach into and fit the
pivot hole in the balance-ryne, by repeated trials on the opposite sides fix it
in the center; then make a particular mark on the sweep and others to suit it
on the stone, scribe round the horns, and with picks and chisels sink the
mortises to their proper depth, trying by the sweep if it be in the center, by
the particular marks made for the purpose. Art. 21.
Put in the spindle with the foot upwards and the driver on in its place, while
one holds it plum. Set the driver over two of the horns, if it has four, but
between them if it has but two. When the neck is exactly in the center of the
stone, scribe round the horns of the driver, and let it into the stone, nearly
to the balance, if it has four horns. Put the top of the spindle in the
pivot-hole to try whether the mortises lets it down freely on both sides.

Make a tram to set the spindle square by, as follows: take a piece of board,
cut a notch in one side, at one end, and hang it on the top of the spindle, by
a little peg put in the shoulder of the notch, to go in the hole in the foot to
keep it on, let the other end reach down to the edge of the stone, take another
piece, circle out one end to fit the spindle neck, and make the other end fast
to the lower end of the hanging piece near the stone, so as to play round level
with the face of the stone, resting on the centre-hole in the foot, and against
the neck, put a bit of quill through the end of the level piece, that will
touch the edge of the stone as it plays round. Make little wedge and drive them
in behind the horns of the driver, to keep both ends at once close to the sides
of the mortises they bear against when at work, keeping the pivot or cock-head
in its hole in the balance, try the tram gently round, and mark where the quill
touches the stone first, and dress off the bearing sides of the mortises for
the driver until it will touch equally all round, giving the driver liberty to
move endways and sideways to let the stone rock an inch any way. Art. 21.
The ryne and driver must be sunk 3-4 of an inch below the face of the stone.
Then hang the trundle firmly and truly on the spindle, put it in its place to
gear in the little cog-wheel.

Art. 22. To Bridge the Spindle.
MAKE a little tram of a piece of lath, 3 inches wide at one end, and 1 inch at
the other, make a mortise in the wide end, and put it on the cock-head, and a
piece of quill in the small end, to play round the face of the stone: then,
while one turns the trundle, another observes where the quill touches first,
and alters the keys of the bridge-tree, driving the spindle-foot toward the
part the quill touches, until it touches equally all round. Case the stone
neatly round within 2 inches of the face.

Art. 23. Of the Crain and Lighter-Staff.
MAKE a crain for taking up and putting down the stone, with a screw and bale.
See it represented in Evans's part, pl. XI. fig. 2 and 3. Set the post out of
the way as much as possible, let it be 9 by 6 inches in the middle, the arm 9
by 6, brace 6 by 4, make a hole plum over the spindle, for the screw, put an
iron washer on the arm under the female screw, nail it fast the screw should be
above half the diameter of the stone, in the worm, and 10 inches below it, Art.
23.
the bale to touch only at the ends to give the stone liberty to turn, the pins
to be 7 inches long, 1 1-8 thick, the able to be 2 1-2 inches wide in the
middle, (...) 1 3-4 an inch thick at the end: all of the best iron, for if
either of them break the danger would be great. The holes in the (...) should
be nearest the upper side of it. ^^ise the runner by the crane, screw and bale,
turn it and lay it down, with the horns of the living-ryne in their right
places, as marked, being down, as appears in pl. IX. fig. 9. (...) the lighter
staff C C to raise and lower (...) stone in grinding, about 6 feet long, 3 1-2
(...) 2 1-2 inches at the large end, and 2 inches (...) at the small end, with
a knob on the ^^^er side. Make a mortise through the butt (...) for the
bray-iron to pass through, which (...) into a mortise 4 inches deep in the end
of the bray at b, fastened with a pin; it may be 2 inches wide, 1-2 an inch
thick, a plain (...) with one hole at the lower end, and 5 or 6 (...) the upper
end, set in a staggering position. This lighter is fixed in front of the
meal-beam, (...) a proper height to be handy to raise or lower (...) pleasure;
a weight of 4lb. is hung to the end (...) it by a strap, that laps two or three
times (...) and the other end fastened to the post below, that keeps it in its
place. Play the lighter up and down, and observe whether the stone rises and
falls flat on the bed-stone, if it (...), draw a little water, and let the
stone ^^ve gently round, then see that all things be light, and draw a little
more water, let the one run at a middling rate, and grind the faces a few
minutes.

Art. 24. Directions for making a Hoop for the Millstone.
TAKE a white pine or poplar board, 8 inches longer than will go round the
stone, and 2 inches wider than the top of the stone is high, dress it smooth,
and gauge it one inch thick, run a gauge-mark 1-6 of an inch from the outside,
divide the length into 52 parts, and saw as many saw-gates square across the
inside to the gauge-line. Take a board of equal width, 1 foot long, nail one
half of it on the outside at one end of the hoop, lay it in (...) a day or two
to soak, or sprinkle the outside well an hour or two with hot water. Read it
round so that the ends meet, and nail the other end to the short board, put
sticks (...) inside in every direction to press out the (...) that bend least,
and make it truly round. Make a cover for the hoop such as is represented in
plate VII, fig. 23,8 square inside, and 1 inch outside the hoop. It consists of
8 pieces lapped over one another, the black lines showing the joints as they
appear when made, the dotted lines the under parts of the laps. Describe it on
the floor, and make a pattern to make all the rest by; dress all the laps, fit
and nail them together by the circle on the floor, and then nail it on the
hoop; put the hoop over the stone and scribe it to fit the floor in its place.

Art. 25. Of grinding Sand to Face the Stones.
LAY boards over the hoop to keep the dust (...) flying, and take a bushel or
two of dry, (...) sharp sand, team it gently in the eye, (...) the stones move
at a moderate rate, con^^^ing to grind for an hour or two; then take of the
stone, sweep them clean, and pick the smoothest hardest places, and lay the
stone (...) again, and grind more sand as before, (...) off the back (if it be
a bur) taking (...) care that the chisel does not catch; (...) up the stone
again, and make a red (...), in length the diameter of the stone, only 2 1-2
inches, paint it with red paint and (...), and rub it over the face of the
stones in directions, the red will be left on the highest and hardest parts,
which must be pecked down, taking the bed-stone perfectly plain, and the (...)
a little concave about 1-6 of an inch at (...) eye, and lessening gradually to
about 8 inches from the skirt. If they be close and have much face they need
not touch or flour so far, as if they are open and have but little face: those
things are left to the judgment of the mill-wright and miller.

Art. 26. Directions for laying out the Furrows in the stones, etc.
IF they be 5 feet diameter, divide the skirt into 16 equal parts, called
quarters, if 6 feet, into 18, if 7 feet, into 20 quarters. Make two strips of
board, one an inch, and the other 2 inches wide; Art. 26.
stand with your face to the eye, and if the stone turns to the right when at
work, lay the strip at one of the quarter divisions, and the other at the left
hand side close so the eye, and mark with a spike flated for a master furrow;
they all are laid out the (...) way in both stones, for when their faces are
together the furrows should cross other like (...) in the best position for
cutting cloth. The^ having not less than 6 good picks, proceed to pick out all
the master furrows, making the edge next the skirt and the other end next the
eye the deepest, the feather edge not half so deep as the back.

When all the master furrows are picked out, lay the broad strip next to the
feather edges of all the furrows, and mark the heal lands of the short furrows,
then lay the same strip next the back edges, and mark for this lands, and lay
the narrow strip, and mark for the furrows, and so on mark out all the lands
and furrows, minding not to cross the hea^^ lands, but leaving it between the
master furrows and the short ones of each quarter. But if they be close country
stones, lay out both furrows and land with the narrow strip.

The neck of the spindle must not be wedged too tight else it will burn loose;
bridge the spindle again; put a collar round the spindle neck, but under it put
a piece of an old stocking, with tallow rolled up in it, about a finger thick,
tack it close round the neck; put a piece of stiff leather about 6 inches
diameter on the cock-head under the driver, to turn with the spindle and drive
off the grain, etc. from the neck; grease the neck with tallow every time the
stone is up.

Lay the stone down and turn off the back smooth, Art. 26.
and grind more sand. Stop the mill; raise the stone a little, and balance it
truly with weight laid on the lightest side. Take (...) equal to this weight,
melt it, and run it into a hole made in the same place in the plaster, largest
at bottom to keep it in, fill the (...) with plaster: take up the runner
again, by the staff over them, and if in good face give them a nice dressing,
and lay them down to grind wheat.

Art. 27. Directions for making a Hopper, Shoe and Feeder.
THE dimension of the hopper of a common mill is 4 feet at the top, and 2 feet
deep, (...) hole in the bottom 3 inches square, with a (...) gate in the bottom
of the front, to les^^ it at pleasure: the shoe 10 inches long, and 5 wide in
the bottom, of good sound oak. The side 7 or 8 inches deep at the hinder end,
(...) inches at the foremost end, 6 inches longer (...) the bottom at the fore
end, slanting more than the hopper behind, so that it may have liberty to hang
down 3 or 4 inches at the fore end, which is hung by a strap, called the
feeding-string, passing over the fore end of the hopper-frame, and lapping
round a pin in front of the meal-beam, that will turn by the hand, called the
feeding-screw.

The feeder is a piece of wood turned in a (...), about 20 inches long, 3
inches diameter in the middle against the shoe, tapered off to 1 1-2 inches at
the top; the lower end is handed and a forked iron drove in it, that spans over
the ryne fitting into notches made on each side, Art. 27.
to receive it right above the spindle, and turns with it; the upper end
running in a hole in a piece across the hopper-frame. In the large part next
the shoe are set 6 iron knockers, 7 inches long, half an inch diameter, with a
tang at each end, turned square to drive into the wood, th^se knock against,
and shake the shoe, and there by shake in the grain regularly.

Then put grain into the hopper, draw water on the mill, regulate the feed by
turning the feed-screw, until the stream falling into the eye of the stone, is
proportioned to the size thereof, or the power of the mill. Here ends the
mill-wrights work, with respect to grinding, and the miller takes charge
thereof.

Art. 28. Of Bolting-chests and Reels.
BOLTING chests and reels are of different lengths, according to the use they
are for. Common country chests (a top view of one of which is shown pl. VII.
fig. 9.) are commonly about 10 feet long, 3 feet wide, and 7 feet 4 inches
high, with a post in each corner, the bottom 2 feet from the floor, with a
board 18 inches wide, set slanting in the back side, to cast the meal forward
in the chest, to make it easily taken up; the door of the whole length of the
chest, and two feet wide, the bottom side board below the door 16 inches wide.

The shaft of the reel equal in length with the chest, Art. 28.
4 inches diameter, 6 square, two bands (...) each end, 3 1-4 and 3 3-4
diameter, gudgeons 13 inches long, 7-8 of an inch diameter; (...) inches in the
shaft, round 2 1-2 inches at the neck, with a tenon for a socket or handle,
(...) ribs 1 1-2 inch deep, 1 1-8 inch thick, half (...) inch shorter at the
tail, and 1 1-2 inch at the head, than the shaft, to leave room for the meal to
be spouted in at the head, and the (...) to fall at the tail; four ^ets of
arms, that (...) 12 of them, 1 1-2 inch wide, and 5-8 thick. The diameter of
the reel from out to out of (...) ribs, is one third part of the double width
(...) the cloth. A round wheel of inch boards, (...) diameter equal to the
outside of the ribs, (...) 1-2 inches wide, measuring from the outside toward
the center, (which is taken out) is to (...) framed to the head of the reel, to
keep the (...) from falling out at the head unbolted. But a hoop 4 1-2 inches
wide, and 1-4 thick, (...) the tail, to fasten the cloth to. The (...) is sewed
two widths of it together, to each round the reel; putting a strip of strong
then 7 inches wide at the head, and 5 inches (...) the tail of the cloth, to
fasten it to the reel (...). Paste a strip of linen, soft paper, or sham^y
leather (which is the best) 1 1-2 inch wide (...) each rib, to keep the cloth
from freting. Then put the cloth on the reel tight, and sew a nail it to the
tail and stretch it length ways (...) hard as it will bear, nailing it to the
head. N. B. 6 yards of cloth covers a 10 feet reel. Bolting reels for merchant
are generally ^^ger than for country work, every part should be stronger in
proportion as necessary. They are best when made to suit the wide cloths. Art.
28.
The socket gudgeons at the head should be much stronger, they being apt to
wear out and troublesome to repair.

The bolting hopper is made through the floor above the chest, 12 inches square
at the upper and 10 inches at the lower end; the foremost side 5 inches and the
back side 7 inches from the top of the chest.

The shoe 2 feet long at the bottom of the side pieces, slanting to suit the
hopper at the hinder end, set 4 inches higher at the hinder than the fore end,
the bottom 17 inches long and 10 inches wide. There should be a bow of iron
riveted to the fore end to rest on the top of the knocking wheel, fixed on the
socket gudgeon at the head of the chest, which is 10 inches diameter, 2 inches
thick, with 6 half rounds cut out of its circumference by way of knockers, to
strike against the bow, and lift the shoe 3-4 of an inch every stroke to shake
in the meal.

Art. 29. Of setting Bolts to go by Water.
THE bolting reels are set to go by water as follows:

Make a bridge 6 by 4 inches, and 4 inches longer than the distance of the
tomkin posts, described art. 20; set it between them on rests fastened into
them, 10 inches below the cogs of the cog-wheel, and the center of it half the
diameter of the spur-wheel in front of them; on this bridge is set the step
gudgeon, of an upright shaft, Art. 29.
with a spur-wheel of 16 or 18 cogs to gear into the cog-wheel. Fix a
head-block to the joists of the 3rd floor for the upper and of this shaft, put
the wheel 28, plate VII on (...) hang another head-block to the joists of the
2nd floor near the corner of the mill at 6, for the step of the short upright
shaft that is to (...) fixed there, to turn the reels 1 and 9. Hang another
head-block to the joists of the 3rd (...) for the upper end of the said short
upright, (...) fix also head-blocks for the short shaft at the head of the
reels, so that the centres of all those shafts will meet. Then fix a hanging
left in the corner 5, for the gudgeon of the (...) horizontal shaft 27 -- 5 to
run in. After the head-blocks are all fixed, then measure the length of each
shaft, and make them as follows, viz.

The upright shaft 5 1-2 inches for common (...), but if for merchant work,
with Evans's elevators; etc. added, make it larger 6 or 7 inches: the
horizontal shaft 27 -- 5 and all the others 5 inches diameter. Put a
socket-gudgeon in the middle of the long shafts to keep them steady; make them
8 or 16 square, expect at the end where the wheels are hung, where they must be
4 square. Band their ends, put in the gudgeons, put them in their proper places
in the head-blocks, to mark where the wheels are to be put on them.

Art. 30. Of making Bolting Wheels.
MAKE the spur-wheel for the first upright with a 4 1-2 inch plank, the pitch
of the cogs the same as the cog-wheel, Art. 30.
into which it is to work, put two bands 3-4 of an inch wide, one on each side
of the cogs, and a rivet between each cog to keep the wheel from spliting.

To proportion the cogs in the wheels to give the bolts the right motion, the
common way is --

Hang the spur-wheel and set the stones to grind with a proper motion, and
count the revolutions of the upright shaft in a minute, and compare its
revolutions with the revolutions that a bolt should have, which is about 36
revolutions a minute. If the upright goes 1-6 more, put 1-6 less in the first
driving-wheel than in the leader, suppose 15 in the driver the 18 in the
leader: but if their difference be more (fast one half) there must be a
difference in the next two wheels; observing, that if the motion of the upright
shaft be greater than the bolt should be, then the driving-wheel must be
proportionably less than the leader; but if it be slower, then the driver must
be greater in proportion. The common size of bolting wheels is from 14 to 20
cogs; if less than 14 the head-blocks will be too near the shafts.

Common bolting wheels should be made of plank at least 3 inches thick, well
seasoned, and are best to be as wide as the diameter of the wheel, and banded
with bands near as wide as the thickness of the wheel, made generally of rolled
iron, about 1-8 of an inch thick. Some make them of 2 inch plank, crossed and
no bands: but this proves no saving, as they are apt to go to pieces in a few
years. For hooping wheels see art. 19, and for finding the diameter of the
pitch circle see art. 9. The wheels are generally 2 inches more in diameter
than the pitch circle if banded; Art. 30.
but if (...), they should be more. The pitch or distance of the cogs are
different, if to turn 1 or (...) bolts 2 1-2 inches, but if more, 2 3-4: but if
^^ch heavy work, they should be not less than 3 inches. Their cogs are half the
pitch in thickness, the shank to drive tight in an inch (...) hole.

When the mortises are made for the shafts (...) the head, and notches for the
keys to hang (...), drive the cogs in and pin their shanks at (...) side, and
cut them off half an inch from (...) wheel.

Hang the wheels on the shafts so that they will gear a proper depth, about 2-3
the thickness of the cogs; dress all the cogs to equal distance by a gauge;
then put the shafts in their places, the wheels gearing properly, and (...)
head-blocks all secure, set them in motion by water. Bolting reels should turn
to drop (...) meal on the back side of the chest, as it (...) then hold more,
and will not cast out the (...) when the door is opened.

Art. 31. Of Rolling-screens.
THESE are circular sieves moved by water, and are particularly useful in
cleaning wheat (...) merchant work. They are of different constructions.

1st. Those of one coat of wire with a screw (...) them.

2nd. Those of two coats, the inner one nail^^ to 6 ribs, the outer one having
a screw between it and the inner one.

3rd. Art. 31
Those of a single coat and no screw.

The first kind answers well in some, but not in all cases, because they must
turn a certain number of times before the wheat can get out, and the grain has
not so good an opportunity of separating, there being nothing to change its
position, it floats a considerable way with the same grains uppermost.

The double kind are better because they may be shorter and take up less room;
and worse, for being more difficult to be kept clean.

The 3rd kind has this advantage; we can keep the grain in it a longer or
shorter time at pleasure, by raising or lowering the tail end, and is also
tossed about more; but they must be longer. They are generally 9 or 10 feet,
long, 2 feet 4 inches diameter, if to clean for 2 or 3 pair of stones, but if
for more, they should be larger accordingly: will clean for from 1 to 6 pair of
stones. They are made 6 square, with 6 ribs, which lie flatwise, the outer
corners taken off to leave the edge 1-4 of an inch thick; the inner corners so
as to bring it nearly to sharp edges, the wire work nailed (...) with 14 ounce
tacks.

They are generally moved by the same upright shaft that moves the bolts, by a
wheel on its upper end with two sets of cogs: those that strike downwards
gearing into a wheel striking upwards that turns a laying shaft, with two
pulleys on the other end, one of 24 inches diameter, to turn a fan with quick
motion, the other 8 inches, over which passes a strap to a pulley 24 inches
diameter, on the gudgeon of the rolling screen, to reduce its motion to about
15 revolutions in a minute. See pl. VII. fig. 23. This may do for mills in the
small way, Art. 31.
but where they are in perfection for merchant-work, with elevators, etc. and
have to clean wheat for 2,3 or 4 pair of stones, they should be moved by cogs.

Art. 32. Of Fans.
THE Dutch fan is a machine of great use (...) blowing the dust and other light
stuff from (...) the wheat; there are various sorts of (...); those that are
only for blowing the (...), as it falls from the rolling-screen, are generally
about 15 inches long, and 14 inches (...) in the wings, and have no riddle or
then in them.

To give it motion, put a pulley 7 inches ^^eter on its axle for a band to run
on, from the pulley on the shaft that moves the screen 24 inches diameter, to
give it a swift (...), when the band is slack it slips a little the small
pulley, and the motion is slow; but (...) tight, the motion is quicker; by this
the (...) is regulated.

Some use Dutch fans complete, with riddle (...) screen under the rolling
screen for merchant-work, and again use the fan alone for ^^^try-work.

The wings of those, which are the common ^^^ers wind-mills or fans, are 18
inches long, (...) 20 inches wide, but are set in motion with pulley instead of
a cog-wheel and wallower.

Art. 33. Of the Shaking Sieve
THEY are of considerable use in country mills, to sift indian meal, separating
it into several degrees of fineness if required, and take the hulls out of
buckwheat meal, that are apt to ^ut the bolting-cloth, and the dust out of the
grain, if rubbed before ground; and are sometimes used to clean wheat or
screenings instead of rolling screens.

If they are for sifting meal they are 3 feet 6 inches long, 9 inches wide, 3
1-2 inches deep; see it pl. VI. fig. 16. The wire work is 3 feet long, 8 inches
wide; across the bottom of the tail end is a board 6 inches wide to the top of
which the wire is tacked, and then this board and wire tacked to the bottom of
the frame, leaving an opening at the tai^end for the bran to fall into the box
17, the meal falling into the meal-trough 15, the headpiece should be strong
to hold the iron bow at 15, through which passes the lever that shakes the
sieve, in the following manner. Take two pieces of hard wood 15 inches long and
as wide as the spindle, and so thick that when one is put on each side just
above the trundle, it will make it 1 1-2 inch thicker tha^ the spindle is wide.
The corners of these and taken off to a half round, and they are tied to the
spindle with a small strong cord. The^^ are for to strike against the lever
that worse on a pin neat its center, which is fastened (...) the sieve, and
shakes it as the trundle good round; see it represented pl. VI. This lever must
always be put to the contrary side of the spindle, Art. 33.
that it is of the meal-spout, else it will draw the meal to the upper end of
the (...): there must be a spring fixed to the sieve (...) draw it forward as
often as it is driven (...). It must hang on straps and be fixed so (...) to be
easily set to any descent required, by (...) of a roller in form of the feeding
screw, only longer, round which the strap winds.

Having now given directions for making and putting to work, all the machinery
of one (...) the completest of the old fashioned grist^^, that may do
merchant-work in the small (...), as represented by plates VI. VII. VIII. (...)
but not to near so much advantage as (...) the late and new improvements, which
(...) shown by plate X.

Art. 34. Of the Use of draughting Mills, etc.
PERHAPS some are of opinion that ^aughts are useless pictures of things,
serving (...) to please the fancy. This is not what ^^tend by them; but to give
the reader true (...) of the machines, etc. described, or to be (...). They are
all drawn on a small scale of (...) of an inch for a foot, in order to suit the
(...) of the book, except plate V. which is 1-4 (...) an inch for a foot, and
this scale I recommend, as most buildings will come on the size (...) a common
sheet of paper.

N. B. Plate XII. was made after the above directions, and has its explanations
to suit it. The great use of draughting mills, etc. to add by, is by conveying
our ideas more plain, Art. 34.
than is possible to be done by writing or words, which may be misconstrued or
forgotten; but a draught, well drawn, speaks for itself, when once understood
by the artist; who, by applying his dividers to the draught and to the scale,
finds the length, breadth and height of the building, or the dimensions of any
piece of timber, and its place in the building, etc.

By the draught, the bills of scantling, boards, rafters, laths, shingles, etc.
etc. are known and made out; it should show every wheel, shaft, and machine,
and their places. By it we can find whether the house is sufficient to contain
all the works that are necessary to carry on the business; the builder or owner
understands what he is about, and carries on cheerfully without error; it
directs the mason where to put the windows, doors, navel-holes, the inner
walls, etc. whereas, if there be no draught every thing goes on, as it were, in
the dark; much time is lost and errors are committed to the loss of many
pounds. I have heard a man say, he believed his mill was 500l. better, by
having employed an experienced artist, to draw him a draught to build it by.
And I know by experience the great utility of them. Every master builder ought
at least, to understand them.

Art. 35. Directions for planning and draughting Mills.
1st. If it be a new seat, view the ground where the dam is to be, and where
the mill house is to stand, and determine on the height of the top of the water
in the head-race where it is taken out of the stream; Art. 35.
and level from it for the lower side of the race down to the seat of the
mill-house, and mark the level of the water in the dam there.

2nd. Begin where the tail-race is to empty into the stream, and level from the
top of the water up to the mill-seat, noticing the depth thereof in places as
you pass along, which will be of use in digging it out.

Then find the total fall, allowing 1 inch to a rod for fall in the races, but
if they are very wide less will do. Then, supposing the fall to be 21 feet 9
inches, which is sufficient for an overshot, mill, and the stream too light for
an undershot, consider well what size stone will suit, for I do not recommend a
large stone to a weak, nor a small one to a strong stream. I have proposed
stones 4 feet diameter for light, and 4,6 for middling, and 5 or 5 feet 6
inches diameter for heavy streams. Suppose you determine on stones 4 feet, then
look in table I, (which is for stones of that size) column 2, for the fall that
is nearest 21 feet 9 inches, your fall, and you find it in the 7th example.
Column 3 contains the head of water over the wheel 3 feet; 4th, the diameter of
the wheel 18 feet; 5th, its width, 2 feet 2 inches, etc. for all the
proportions to make the stone revolve 106 times in a minute.

Having determined on the size of the wheels and size of the house, heights of
the stories to suit the wheels, and machinery it is to contain, and business to
be carried on therein, proceed to draw a ground plan of the house, such as
plate VI, which is 32 by 55 feet. See the description of the plate. Art. 35.
And for the second story, as plate VII, etc. for the 3rd, 4th and 5th floors,
if required, taking care to plan every thing for the best, and so as not to
clash one with another.

Draw an end view, as plate VIII, and a side view, as plate IX. Take the
draught to the ground and stake out the seat of the house. It is commonly best
to set that corner of an overshot mill that the water comes in at farthest in
the bank: but take great care to reconsider and examine every thing more than
once whether it be planned for the best; because, much labor is often lost for
want of due consideration, and by setting buildings in, and laying foundations
on wrong places. This done, you may from the draughts make out the bills of
scantling and iron work.

Art. 36. Bill of Scantling for a Mill, 32 by 55 Feet, 3 Stories high, such as
described Plate VI. VII. VIII. and IX. The Walls of Mason-work.
For the first Floor.
2 sills, 29 feet long, 8 by 12 inches, to lay on the walls for the joists to
lay on.

48 joists, 10 feet long, 4 by 9 inches; all of timber that will last well in
damp places.

For the second Floor. Art. 36.

2 posts, 9 feet long, 12 by 12 inches.

2 girders, 30 feet long, 14 by 16 inches.

48 joists, 10 feet long, 4 by 9 inches.

For the Floor over the Water-house.
1 cross girder, 30 feet long, 12 by 14 inches, for one end of the joists to
lay on.

2 posts to support the girder, 12 feet long, 12 by 12 inches.

16 joists, 13 feet long, 4 by 9 inches; all of good whiteoak or other timber
that will last in damp places.

For the third Floor.
4 posts, 9 feet long, 12 by 12 inches, to support the girders.

2 girder-posts, 7 feet long, 12 by 12 inches, to stand on the water-house.

2 girders, 53 feet long, 14 by 16 inches.

90 joists, 10 feet long, 4 by 9 inches.

For the fourth Floor.
6 posts, 8 feet long, 10 by 10 inches, to support the girders.

2 girders, 53 feet long, 13 by 15 inches.

30 joists, 10 feet long, 4 by 8 inches for the middle tier of the floor.

60 joists, 12 feet long, 4 by 8, for the outside tiers, which extends 12
inches over the walls, for the rafters to stand on.

2 plates, 54 feet long, 3 by 10 inches: these lay on the top of the walls, and
the joists on them.

2 raising pieces, Art. 36.
55 feet long, 3 by 5 inches: these lay on the ends of the joists for the
rafters to stand on.

For the Roof.
54 rafters, 22 feet long, 3 inches thick, 6 wide at bottom; and 4 at top end.

25 colar beams, 17 feet long, 3 by 7 inches.

2760 feet of laths, running measure.

7000 shingles.

For Doors and Window-cases.
12 pieces, 12 feet long, 6 by 6 inches, for door-cases.

36 pieces. 8 feet long, 5 by 5 inches, for window-cases.

For the Water-house.
2 sills, 27 feet long, 12 by 12 inches.

1 sills. 14 feet long, 12 by 12 inches.

2 spur-blocks, 4 feet 6 inches long, 7 by 7 inches.

2 head-blocks, 5 feet long, 12 by 14 inches.

4 posts, 10 feet long, 8 by 8, to bear up the penstock.

2 capsills, 9 feet long, 8 by 10, for the penstock to stand on.

4 corner posts, 5 feet long, 4 by 6 inches, for the corners of the penstock.

For the Husk of a Mill of one Water-wheel and two Pair of Stones.
2 sills, 24 feet long, 12 by 12 inches.

4 corner posts, 7 feet long, 12 by 14 inches.

2 front posts, 8 feet long, 8 by 12 inches.

2 back posts, 8 feet long. 10 by 12 inches, to support the back ends of the
bridge-trees.

2 other back posts, Art. 30.
8 feet long, 8 by 8 inches.

2 tomkin posts, 12 feet long, 12 by 14 inches.

2 interties, 9 feet long, 12 by 12 inches, for the outer ends of the little
cog-wheel shafts to rest on.

2 top pieces, 10 feet 6 inches long, 10 by 10 inches.

2 beams, 24 feet long, 16 by 16 inches.

2 bray-trees, 8 feet long, 6 by 12 inches.

2 bridge-trees, 9 feet long, 10 by 10 inches.

4 plank, 8 feet long, 6 by 14 inches, for the stone bearers.

20 plank. 9 feet long, 4 by about 15 inches, for the top of the husk.

1 head-blocks, 7 feet long, 12 by 15 inches, for the wallower shafts to run
on. They serve as spurs also for the head-block for the water-wheel shaft.

For the Water and big Cog-wheel.
1 shaft, 18 feet long, 2 feet diameter.

8 arms for the water-wheel, 18 feet long, 3 by 9 inches.

^6 shrouds, 8 feet long, 2 inches thick, and 8 deep.

^6 face boards, 8 feet long, 1 inch thick, and 9 deep.

^6 bucket boards, 2 feet 4 inches long, and 17 inches wide.

40 feet of boards, for foaling the wheel.

(...) arms for the cog-wheel, 9 feet long, 4 by 14 inches.

^6 cants, 6 feet long, 4 by 17 inches.

For little Cog-wheels. Art. 36.

2 shafts, 9 feet long, 14 inches diameter.

4 arms, 7 feet long, 3 by 10 inches.

16 cants, 5 feet long, 4 by 18 inches.

For Wallowers and Trundles.
60 feet of plank, 3 inches thick.

40 feet of plank, 3 inches thick, for bolting gears.

Cogs and Rounds.
200 cogs, to be split, 3 by 3, 14 inches long.

80 rounds, to be split, 3 by 3, 20 inches long.

160 cogs, for bolting works, 7 inches long, and 1 square: but if they be for a
mill with machinery complete, there must be more accordingly.

Bolting-shafts.
1 upright shaft, 14 feet long, 5 by 5 inches.

2 horizontal shafts, 17 feet long, 5 by 5 inches.

1 upright shafts, 12 feet long, 5 by 5 inches.

6 shafts, 10 feet long, 4 by 4 inches.

Art. 37. Bill of the large Irons for a Mill of two Pair of Stones.
2 gudgeons, 2 feet 2 inches long in the shaft; neck 4 inches long, 3 inches
diameter, well steeled and turned. See plate XII, fig. 16.

2 bands, 19 inches diameter inside, thick, and 3 inches wide, for the ends of
the shaft.

2 bands, 20 inches inside, an inch thick, and 2 inches wide, for shaft.

2 bands, 23 inches inside. an inch thick, and 2 inches wide, for shaft.

4 gudgeons, 16 inches in the shaft, 3 inches long, Art. 37.
and 2 inches diameter in the neck for wallower shafts: See fig. 15, plate XII.

4 bands, 10 inches diameter inside, an inch thick, and 2 wide, for do.

4 bands. 12 inches diameter inside, an inch thick and 2 wide, for plate.

4 wallower bands, 3 feet 2 inches diameter inside, 3 inches wide and of an
inch thick.

4 trundle bands, 2 feet diameter inside, 3 inches wide, and of an inch thick.

2 spindles and rynes; spindles 5 feet 3 inches long from the foot to the top
of the necks; cock-heads 7 or 8 inches long above the necks; the body of the
spindles 3 by 2 inches; the neck 3 inches long and 3 inches diameter; the
balance rynes proportional to the spindles, to suit the eye of the stone, which
is 9 inches diameter. See plate XII, fig. 1,2,3.

(...) steps for the spindles, fig. 4

2 sets of damsel-irons, 6 knockers to each set.

2 bray-irons, 3 feet long, 1 inch wide, an inch thick; being a plain bar, one
hole at the lower, and 5 or 6 at the upper end.

Bill of Iron for the Bolting and Hoisting-works in the common Way.
2 spur-wheel bands, 20 inches diameter from outsides, for the bolting
spur-wheel, of an inch wide, and thick.

2 spur-wheel 12 inches diameter from outsides, for the hoisting spur-wheel.

2 step-gudgeons and steps, 10 inches long, 1 inch thick in the tang, or square
part; neck 3 inches long, for the upright shafts. See plate XII, fig. 5 and 6.

2 bands, for steps, 5 inches diameter inside, 1 wide, and thick.

2 gudgeons, 9 inches tang; neck 3 inches long, 1 square, for the top of the
uprights.

8 bands, Art. 37.
4 inches diameter inside.

1 socket-gudgeon, 1 of an inch thick; tang 12 inches long; neck 4 inches;
tenon to go into the socket 1 inch, with a keyhole at the end. See fig. 8 and
9.

14 gudgeons, necks 2 inches, tangs 8 inches long, and 1 inch square, for small
shafts and one end of the bolting-reels.

10 bands, for necks 4 inches diameter inside, and 1 inch wide.

4 socket-gudgeons, for the 4 bolting-reels, 1 square; tangs 8 inches; necks 3
inches, and tenons 1 inch, with holes in the end of the tangs for rivets, to
keep them from turning: the sockets 1 inch thick at the mortise, and 3 inches
between the prongs. See fig. 8 and 9. Prongs 8 inches long and 1 wide.

8 bands 3 inches, and 8 bolting-reels. 4 inches diameter, for the bolting-reel
shafts.

For the Hoisting-wheels.
2 gudgeons, for the jack wheel, neck 3 inches, and tang 9 inches long, 1
square.

2 bands, for the jack wheel, neck 4 inches diameter.

2 gudgeons, for the hoisting-wheel, neck 3 inches, tang 9 inches long, and 1
inch square.

2 bands, for the hoisting-wheel, neck 7 inches diameter.

6 bands, for bolting-heads, 16 inches diameter inside, 2 wide, and of an inch
thick.

6 bands, for bolting-heads, 15 inches diameter inside, 2 wide, and 1/6 of an
inch thick.

N. B. All the gudgeons should taper a little, as the sizes given is their
largest part. The bands for shafts should be a little widest at the foremost
side to make them drive well; but those for heads should be both sides equal.
-- 6 picks for the stones, 8 inches long, and 1 wide, will be wanted.

Explanation of the Plates.
PLATE V, Art. 38.

Drawn from a scale of of an inch for a foot.

Fig. 1 a big cog-wheel, 8 feet 2 inches the diameter of its pitch circle; 8
feet 10 inches from out to out; 69 cogs, 4 inch pitch.

2 a little cog-wheel, 5 feet 10 inclies the diameter of its pitch circle, and
6 feet 6 inches from out to out, to have 52 cogs 4 pitch.

3 a wallower, 3 feet 1 inches the diameter of its pitch circle, and 3 feet 4
inches from out to out; 26 rounds 4 pitch.

4 a trundle, 1 foot 8 inches the diameter of its pitch circle, and 1 foot 11
inches from out to out; 15 rounds 4 inch pitch.

5 the back part of the big cog-wheel.

6 a model of locking 3 arms together.

7 the plan of a forebay, showing the sills, caps, and where the mortises are
made for the posts, with a rack at the upper end to keep off the trash.

PLATE VI. -- The Ground-plan of a Mill.
Fig. 1 and 8 bolting-chests and reels, top view.

2 and 4 cog-wheels that turn the reels.

3 cog-wheel on the lower end of a short upright shaft.

(...) and 7 places for the bran to fall into.

(...), 6, 6, three garners on the lower floor for bran.

(...) and 10 posts to support the girders.

11 the lower door to load wagons, horses etc. at.

12 the step-ladder, from the lower floor to the husk.

13 the place where the hoisting casks stand when filling.

14 and 15 the two meal-troughs and meal-spouts.

16 meal shaking sieve for indian and buckwheat.

17 a box for the bran to fall into from the sieve.

18 and 19 the head-block, and long spur-blocks, for the big shaft.

Fig. 20 four posts in front of the husk, Art. 38.
called bray posts.

21 the water and cog-wheel shaft.

22 the little cog-wheel and shaft, for the lower stones.

23 the trundle for the bur stones.

24 the wallower for do.

25 the spur-wheel that turns the bolts.

26 the cog-wheel.

27 the trundle, head wallower and bridge-tree, for country stones.

28 the four back posts of the husk.

29 the two posts that support the cross girder.

30 the two posts that bear up the penstocks at one side.

31 the water-wheel, 18 feet diameter.

32 the two posts that bear up the other side of the penstock.

33 the head-blocks and spur-blocks, at water end.

34 a sill to keep up the outer ends.

35 the water-house door.

36 a hole in the wall for the trunk to go through,

37 the four windows of the lower story.

PLATE VII. -- Second Floor.
Fig. 1 and 9 a top view of bolting-chests and reels,

2 and 10 places for bran to fall into.

3 and 8 the shafts that turn the reels.

4 and 7 wheels that turn the reels.

5 a wheel on the long shafts between the uprights.

6 a wheel on the upper end of the upright shaft.

11 and 12 two posts that bear up the girders of the 3rd floor.

13 the long shaft between two uprights.

14 five garners to hold tole, etc.

15 a door in the upper side of the mill-house.

16 a step-ladder from 2nd to 3rd floor.

Fig. 17 the running bur millstone laid off to be dressed. Art. 38.


18 the hatchway.

19 stair way.

20 the running country stone turned up to be dressed.

21 a small step-ladder from the husk to and floor.

22 the places where the cranes stand.

24 the pulley-wheel that turns the rolling-screen.

25 and 26, the shaft and wheel that turns the rolling-screen and fan.

27 the wheel on the horizontal shaft to turn the bolting-reels.

28 the wheel on the upper end of the first upright shaft.

29 a large pulley that turns the fan.

30 the pulley at the end of the rolling-screen.

31 the fan.

32 the rolling-screen.

33 a step-ladder from the husk to the floor over the water-house.

34 and 35 two ports that support the girders of the 3rd floor.

36 a small room for the tailings of the rolling-screen.

37 a room for the fannings.

38 do. for the screenings.

39 a small room for the dust.

40 the penstock of water.

41 a room for the miller to keep his books in.

42 a fireplace.

43 the upper end door.

44 ten windows in the 2nd story, 12 lights each.

PLATE VIII
Represents a view of the lower side of a stone mill-house 3 stories high,
which plan will suit tolerably well for a two story house, if the third story
be not wanted. Part of the wall supposed to be open, so that we have a view of
the stones, running gears, etc. Line 1 represents the lower floor, Art. 38.
and is nearly level with the top of the sills, of the husk and water-house.

2, 3 and 4 the second, third, and fourth floors.

5 and 6 are windows for admitting air under the lower floor.

7 the lower door, with steps to ascend to it, which commonly suits best to
load from.

8 the arch over the tail-race for the water to run from the wheel.

9 the water-house door, which sometimes suits better to be at the end of the
house, where it makes room to wedge the gudgeon.

10 the end of the water-wheel shaft.

11 the big cog-wheel.

12 the little cog-wheel and wallower, the trundle being seen through the
window.

13 the stones, with the hopper, shoe and feeder, as fixed for grinding.

14 the meal-trough.

We have an end view of the husk frame -- there are thirteen windows with 12
lights each.

PLATE IX
Represents an outside view of the water end of a mill-house, and is to show
the builders, both masons, carpenters and mill-wrights, the height of the
walls, floors, and timbers; places of the doors and windows, with a view of the
position of the stones and husk-timbers, supposing the wall open so that we
could see them.

Fig. 1, 2, 3 and 4 shows the joists of the floors.

5 represents a fish turning with the wind on an iron rod, which does as well
as a weathercock.

6 the end of the shaft for hoisting outside of the house, which is fixed above
the colar-beams above the doors, to suit to hoist into either of them, or
either story, at either end of the house, as may best suit.

Fig. 7 the dark squares, Art. 38.
showing the ends of the girders.

8 the joists over the water-house.

9 the millstones, with the spindles they run on, and the ends of the
bridge-trees as they rest on the brays aa. bb shows the end of the brays, that
are raised and lowered by the levers cc, called the lighter-staffs, thereby
raising and lowering the running stone.

10 the water-wheel and big cog-wheel.

11 the wall between the water and cog-wheel.

12 the end view of the two side-walls of the house.

Plate X is explained in the Preface.

Art. 39. Of Saw-mills. -- Their Utility.
THEY are for sawing timber into all kinds of scantling, boards, laths, etc.
etc. are used to great advantage where labor is dear. One mill, attended by
one man, if in good order, will saw more than 20 men with whip-saws, and much
more exactly.

Construction of their Water-wheels.
They have been variously constructed; the most simple and useful of which,
where water is plenty, and above six feet fall, is the flutter-wheel; but where
water is scarce, in some cases, and for want of sufficient head in others, to
give flutter-wheels sufficient motion, high wheels, double geared, have been
found necessary. Flutter-wheels may be made suitable for any head above six
feet, by making them low and wide, Art. 39.
for low heads; and high and narrow for high ones, so as to make about 120
revolutions, or strokes of the saw, in a minute: but rather than double gear I
would be satisfied with 100.

A TABLE of the Diameter of Flutter-wheels from out to Outsides, and their
Width in the clear, suitable to all Heads from 6 to 30 feet.
Head of water. Diameter. Width. ft. f. in. f. in. 6 2:8 5:6 7 2:10 5:0 8 2:11
4:8 9 3:0 4:3 10 3:1 4:0 11 3:2 3:9 12 3:3 3: 6 13 3:4 3:3 14 3:5 3:0 15 3:6
2:9 16 3:7 2:6 17 3:8 2:4 18 3:9 2:2 Head of water. Diameter. Width ft. f. in.
ft. in. 19 3:10 2:0 20 3:11 1:10 21 4:0 1:9 22 4:1 1:8 23 4:2 1:7 24 4:3 1:6 25
4:4 1:5 26 4:5 1:4 27 4:6 1:3 28 4:7 1:2 29 4:8 1:1 30 4:9 1:0

N. B. The above wheels are proposed as narrow as will well do on account of
saving water; but if there is very plenty of it, the wheels may be made wider
than directed in the table, and the mill will be more powerful.

Of Gearing Saw-mills. Art. 39.

Of this I shall say but little they being expensive and but little used. --
They should be geared so as to give the saw about 120 strokes in a minute, when
at work in a common log. The water-wheel is like that of another mill, whether
of the undershot, overshot, or breast kind; the cog-wheel of the spur kind, and
as large as will clear the water. The wallower commonly has 14 or 15 rounds,
but so as to produce the right motion. On the wallower shaft is a
balance-wheel, which may be of stone or wood: this is to regulate the motion.
There should be a good head above the water-wheel to give it a lively motion,
else the mill will run heavily.

The mechanism of a complete saw-mill is such as to produce the following
effects, viz.

1. To move the saw up and down, with a sufficient motion and power.

2. To move the log to meet the saw with an uniform motion.

3. To stop of itself when within 3 inches of being through the log.

4. To draw the carriage with the log back by the power of water ready to enter
again.

The mill is stopped as follows, viz. When the gate is drawn the lever is held
by a catch, and there is a trigger, one end of which is within half an inch of
the side of the carriage, on which is a piece of wood an inch and a half thick
nailed, so that it will catch against the trigger as the carriage moves, which
throws the catch off of the lever of the gate, and it ^uts down at a proper
time.

Description of a Saw-mill. Art. 39.

Plate XI. Is an elevation and perspective view of a saw-mill, showing the
foundation, walls, frame, etc. etc.

Fig. 0,1, The frame uncovered, 52 feet long, and 12 feet wide.

Fig. 2, The lever for communicating the motion from the saw-gate to the
carriage, to move the log. It is 8 feet long, 3 inches square, tenoned into a
roller 6 inches diameter, reaching from plate to plate, and working on gudgeons
in them; in its lower side is framed a block 10 inches long, with a mortise in
it 2 inches wide its whole length to receive the upper end of the hand-pole,
having in it several holes for an iron pin, to join the hand-pole to it to
regulate the feed, by setting the handpole nearer the center of the roller to
give less, and farther off, to give more feed.

Fig. 3, The hand-pole or feeder, 12 feet long, and 3 inches square where it
joins the block

Fig. 4, tapering to 2 inches at the lower end, on which is the iron hand 1
foot long, with a socket, the end of which is flattened steeled and hardened,
and turned down at each side half an inch to keep it on the rag-wheel.

Fig. 5, the rag-wheel. This has four cants 4 feet long, 17 by 3 inches in the
middle, lapped together to make the wheel 5 feet diameter, is faced between the
arms with 2 inch plank, to strengthen the laps. The cramp or ratchet-iron is
put on as a hoop near 1 inch square, with ratchet-notches cut on its outer
edge, about 3 to an inch. On one side of the wheel are put 12 strong pins, Art.
39.
9 inches long, to tread the carriage back, when the backing works are out of
order. On the other side are the cogs, about 56 in number, 3 inch pitch to gear
into the cog-wheel on the top of the tub-wheel shaft, with 15 or 16 cogs. In
the shaft of the rag-wheel are 6 or 7 rounds, 11 inches long in the round part,
let in near their whole thickness, so as to be of a pitch equal to the pitch of
the cogs of the carriage, and gear into them easily: the ends are tapered off
outside and a band drove on them at each end, to keep them in their places.

Fig. 6 the carriage. Is a frame 4 feet wide from outsides, one side 29 feet
long, 7 by 7 inches; the other 32 feet long, 8 by 7 inches, very straight and
true, the interties at each end 15 by 4 inches, strongly tenoned and braced
into the sides to keep the frame from racking. In the under side of the largest
piece are set two rows of cogs, 2 inches between the rows, and 9 inches from
the fore side of one cog to that of another; the cogs of one row between those
of the other, so as to make 4 inch pitch, to gear into the rounds of the
rag-wheel. The cogs are about 66 in number; shank 7 inches long, 1 inch square;
head 2 long, 2 inches thick at the points, and 2 inches at the shoulder.

Fig. 7 the ways for the carriage to run on. These are strips of plank 4 inches
wide, 2 inches thick, set on edge, let 1 inch into the top of the cross sills,
of the whole length of the mill, keyed fast on one side, made very straight
both side and edge, so that one of them will pass easily between the rows of
cogs in the carriage, and leave no room for it to move side ways. Art. 39.
They should be of hard wood well seasoned, and hollowed out between the sills
to keep the dust from lodging on them.

Fig. 8, the fender posts. The gate with the saw plays in rabbits, 2 deep and 4
inches wide, in the fender posts, which are 12 feet long, and 12 inches square,
hung by hooked tenons, the front side of the two large cross beams in the
middle of the frame, in mortises in their upper sides, so that they can be
moved by keys to set them plum. There are 3 mortises two inches square through
each post, within half an inch of the rabbits, through which pass hooks with
large heads, to keep the frame in the rabbits: they are keyed at the back of
the posts.

Fig. 9, the saw, which is 6 feet long, 7 or 8 inches wide when new, hung in a
frame 6 feet wide from the outsides, 6 feet 3 inches long between the end
pieces, the lowermost of which is 14 by 3 inches, the upper one 12 by 3, the
side pieces 5 by 3 inches, 10 feet long, all of the best, dry, hard wood. The
saw is fastened in the frame by two irons in form of staples, the lower one
with two screw pins passing through the lower end, screwing one leg to each
side of the end piece; the legs of the upper one are made into screws, one at
each side of the end piece, passing through a broad flat bar that rests on the
top of the end piece, with strong burs 1 inches square, to be turned by an iron
span made to fit them. These straps are made of flat bars, 3 feet 9 inches
long, 3 inches wide, thick before turned; at the turn they are 5 inches wide,
square, Art. 39.
and split, to receive the saw, and tug-pins, then brought nearer together, so
as to fit the gate. The saw is stretched tight in this frame, by the screws at
the top, exactly in the middle at each end, measuring from the outside; the top
end standing about half an inch more forward than the bottom.

Fig. 10, the forebay of water, projecting through the upper foundation wall.

Fig. 11, the flutter-wheel. Its diameter and length according to the head of
water, as shown in the table. The floats are fastened in with keys, so that
they will drive inward when any thing gets under them, and not break. These
wheels should be very heavy, that they may act as a fly or balance to regulate
the motion, and work more powerfully.

Fig. 12, the crank -- see it represented by a draught from a scale of 1 foot
to an inch -- (...) XII. fig. 17. The part in the shaft 2 feet (...) inches
long, 3 by 2 inches, neck 8 inches long thick, and 12 inches from the center of
the neck (...) the center of the wrist or handle, which is (...) inches long to
the keyhole, and 2 inches thick.

The gudgeon at the other end of the shaft (...) 18 inches in the shaft, neck 3
long, 2 diameter.

The crank is fastened in the same way as gudgeons. See art. 13.

Fig. 12 -- 13, the pitman; which is 3 inches square at the upper end, 4 in the
middle, and 4 near the lower end, but 20 inches of the lower end is 4 by 5, to
hold the boxes and key, to keep the handle of the crank light.

Pitman Irons of an improved Construction. Art. 39.

See Plate XII. fig. 10,11,12,13,14.18. Fig. 10 is a plate or bar, with a hole
in each end, through which the upper ends of the lug pins 11 -- 11 pass, with a
strong bur screwed on each, they are 17 inches long, 1 inches square, turned at
the lower end to make a round hole 1 diameter, made strong round the hole.

Fig. 12 is a large flat link, passing through a mortise near the lower side of
the end of the saw-frame. The lug pins pass one through each end of this link,
which keeps them close to the gate sides.

14. Is a bar of iron 2 feet long 3 inches wide, inch thick, at the lower end,
and 1 at the upper end. It is split at the top and turned as the fig. to pass
through the lug pins. At fig. 13 there is a notch set in the head of the pitman
bar 14, 1 inch long, nearly as deep as to be in a straight line with the lower
side of the side pins made a little hollow, steeled and made very hard.

Fig. 18, is an iron plate 1 inch wide, half an inch thick in the middle, with
2 large nail-holes in each end, and a round piece of steel welded across the
middle and hardened, made to fit the notch in the upper end of the pitman, pl.
XIV. and drawn close by the lug pins, to the under side of the saw-frame and
nailed fast. Now, if the bearing part of this joint be in a straight line, the
lower end of the pitman may play without friction in the joint, because both
the upper and lower parts will roll without sliding, Art. 39.
like the center of a scale-beam, and will not wear.

This is by far the best plan for pitman irons. The first set I ever seen or
heard of has been in my saw-mill 8 years, doing much hard work, and has not
cost 3 minutes to adjust them; whereas others are frequently very troublesome.

Fig. 14, the tub-wheel for running the carriage back. This is a very light
wheel, 4 feet diameter, and put in motion by a motion of the foot or hand, at
once throwing it in gear with the rag-wheel, lifting off the hand and clicks
from the ratchet, and hoisting a little gate to let water on the wheel. The
moment the saw stops, the carriage with the log begins to move gently back
again.

Fig. 15, the cog-wheel on the top of the tub-wheel shaft, wit 15 or 16 cogs.

Fig. 16, the log on the carriage, sawed part through.

Fig. 17, a crank and windlass to increase power, by which one man can draw
heavy logs on the mill, and turn them by a rope round the log and windlass.

Fig. 18, a cant hook for rolling logs.

Fig. 19, a double dog, fixed into the hindmost head-block, used by some to
hold the log.

Fig. 20, are smaller dogs to use occasionally at either end.

Fig. 21 -- 22, represents the manner of shooting water on a flutter-wheel by a
long open shute, which should not be more perpendicular than an angle of 45
degrees, left the water should rise from the shute and take air, which would be
a great loss of the power.

Fig. 23, Art. 39.
represents a long, perpendicular, tight shute; the gate 23 is always drawn
fully, and the quantity of water regulated at the bottom by a little gate r for
the purpose. There must be air let into this shute by a tube entering at a. The
use of this air-tube is shown art. 71, page 12, of part II
These shutes are for saving expense where the head is great, and should be
much larger at the upper than lower end, else there will be a loss of power.
Must be very strong else they will burst.
The perpendicular ones suit best where a race passes within 12 feet of the
upper side of the mill.

OPERATION.
The sluice drawn from the penstock 10, puts the wheel 11 in motion -- the
crank 12 moves the saw-gate and saw 9 up and down, and as they rise they lift
up the lever 2, which pushes forward the hand-pole 3, which moves the rag-wheel
5, which gears in the cogs of the carriage 6, and draws forward the log 16 to
meet the saw, as much as is proper to cut at a stroke. When it is within 3
inches of being through the log, the cleet C, on the side of the carriage,
arrives at a trigger and lets it fly, and the sluice-gate shuts down: the
miller instantly draws water or the wheel 14, which runs the log gently back,
etc. etc.

Art. 40. Description of a Fulling-mill.
FIG. 19 plate XII, is the penstock, watergate and spout of an overshot
fulling-mill, the whole laid down from a scale of 4 feet to an inch.

Fig. 20 one of the 3 interties, Art. 40.
that are framed one end into the front side of the top of the stock-block; the
other ends into the tops of the 3 circular pieces that guide the mallets: they
are 6 feet long, 5 inches wide, and 6 deep.

Fig. 21 are the 2 mallets; they are 4 feet 3 inches long, 21 inches wide, and
8 thick, shaped as in the figure.

Fig. 22 their handles, 8 feet long, 10 inches wide, and (...) thick. There is
a roller passes through them, 8 inches from the upper ends, and hang in the
hindermost corner of the stock-post. The other ends go through the mallets, and
have each on their under side a plate of iron faced with steel and hardened, 2
feet long, 3 inches wide, fastened by screw-bolts, for the tappet-blocks to rub
against while lifting the mallets.

Fig. 23 the stock-post, 7 feet long, 2 feet square at the bottom, 15 inches
thick at top, and shaped as in the figure.

Fig. 24 the stock where the cloth is beaten, shaped inside as in the figure,
planked each side as high as the dotted line, which planks are put in rabits in
the post, the inside of the stock, being 18 inches wide at bottom, 19 at top,
and 2 feet deep.

Fig. 25 one of the 3 circular guides for the mallets; they are 6 feet long, 7
inches deep, and 5 thick; are framed into a cross sill at bottom that joins its
lower edge to the stock-post. This sill forms part of the bottom of the stock,
and is 4 feet long, 20 inches wide, and 10 thick.

The sill under the stock-post is 6 feet long, 20 inches wide, and 18 thick.
The sill before the stock is 6 feet long and 14 inches square.

Fig. 26 the tappet-arms, Art. 40.
5 feet 6 inches long, 21 inches each side the shaft, 12 inches wide, and 4
thick. There is a mortise through each of them 4 inches wide, the length from
shaft to tappet, for the ends of the mallet handles to pass through. The
tappets are 4 pieces of hard wood, 12 inches long, 5 wide, and 4 thick, made in
the form of half circles pined to the ends of the arms.

Fig. 27 the overshot water-wheel, similar to other mills.

Fig. 28 one of the 3 sills, 16 feet long, and 12 inches square, with walls
under them as in the figure.

OPERATION.
The cloth is put in a loose heap into the stock 24; the water being drawn on
the wheel the tappet-arms lift the mallets alternately, which strike the under
part of the heap of cloth, and the upper part is continually falling over, and
thereby turning and changing its position under the mallets, which are of the
shape in the figure, to produce this effect.

Description of the Drawings of the Iron-works, Plate XII.
Fig. 1 is a spindle, 2 the balance-ryne, and 3 the driver, for a millstone.
The length of the spindle from the foot to the top of the neck is about 5 feet
3 inches; cock-head 8 or 9 inches from the top of the neck, which is 3 inches
long, and 3 diameter; blade or body 3 by 2 inches thick; foot 1 inch diameter;
both neck, foot, and top of the cock-head steeled, turned and hardened.

Fig. 2. The balance-ryne is sometimes made with 3 horns, Art. 40.
one of which is so short as only to reach to the top of the driver, which is
let into the stone right under it; the other to reach near as low as the bottom
of the driver: but of late are mostly made with 2 horns only, which may be made
sufficiently fast by making it a little wider than the eye, and let into the
stone a little on each side to keep it steady and from moving sideways. Some
choose them with 4 horns, which fills the eye too much.

Fig. 3 is the driver, about 15 inches long.

Fig. 4 the step for the spindle-foot to run in. It is a square box 6 inches
long, 4 inches wide at top, but less at bottom, and 4 inches deep outsides, the
sides and bottom half an inch thick. A piece of iron 1 inch thick is fitted to
lay tight in the bottom of this box, but not welded; in the middle of which is
welded a plug of steel 1 inch square, through which is punched a hole to fit
the spindle-foot of an inch deep. It must be tight to hold oil.

Fig. 5 a step-gudgeon for large upright-shafts, 16 inches long and 2 square,
steeled and turned at the toe.

Fig. 6 the step for it, similar to 4 but less proportionable.

Fig. 7 a gudgeon for large bolting-shafts, 13 inches long and 1 square.

Fig. 8 a large joint-gudgeon, tang 14 inches, neck 5, and tenon 2 inches long,
1 inch square.

Fig. 9 the socket part to fit the shaft, with 3 rivet holes in each.

Fig. 10 -- 14 -- 18 pitman-irons, described art. 39.

Fig. 15 the wallower-gudgeon, tang 16 inches, neck 3 inches long, and 2
diameter.

Fig. 16 the water-wheel gudgeon, tang 2 feet 2 inches long, neck 4 inches
ditto, 3 square.

Fig. 17 a saw-mill crank, described art 39.

N. B. The spindle-ryne, Art. 40.
etc. is drawn from a scale of 2 feet to an inch, and all the other irons 1
foot to an inch.

In addition to what is said of saw-mills, by Thomas Ellicott, I add the
following.

Of hanging the Saw.
First, set the fender-posts as near plum every way as possible, and the
head-blocks on which the log is to lay, level. Put the saw right in the middle
of the gate, measuring from the outsides, with the upper teeth about half an
inch farther forward than the lower ones; set it by the gate and not by a
plumline -- this is to give the saw liberty to rise without cutting, and the
log room to push forward as it rises. Run the carriage forward, so that the saw
strike the block -- stick up a nail, etc. there -- run it back again its full
length, and, standing behind the saw, set it to direct exactly to the mark.
Stretch the saw in the frame rather most at the edge, that it may be stiffest
there. Set it to go, and hold a tool close to one side, and observe whether it
touch equally the whole length of the stroke -- try if it be square with the
top of the head-blocks, else it will not make the scantling square.

Of whetting the Saw.
The edge of the teeth ought to be kept straight, and not suffered to wear
hollowing -- the teeth set a little out, equal at each side, and the outer
corners a little longest -- they will clear their way the better. Some whet the
under side of the teeth nearly level, and others a little drooping down; but
then it will never saw steady -- will be apt to wood too much; -- they should
slope a little up, but very little, to make it work steady. Try a cut through
the log, and if it comes out at the mark made to set it by, shows it to be
right hung.

Of Springing Logs Straight.
Some long small logs will spring so much in sawing as to spoil the scantling,
unless it can be held straight: to do which make a clamp to bear with one end
against the side of the carriage, the other end under the log with a post up
the side thereof -- drive a wedge between the post and log, and spring it
straight; this will bend the carriage side -- but no matter -- it is no injury.

Of moving the Logs, to the Size of Scantling, etc.
Make a sliding-block to slide in a rabbet in front of the main head-block:
fasten the log to this with a little dog on each side, one end of which being
round, is drove into a round hole, in the front side of the sliding block, the
other flatted to drive in the log, cutting across the grain, f^anting a little
out -- it will draw the log tight, and stick in the better. Set a post of hard
wood in the middle of the main block close to the sliding one, and to extend
with a shoulder over the sliding one, for a wedge to be drove under this
shoulder to keep the block tight. Make a mark on each block to measure from --
when the log is moved the key is driven out. The other end next the saw is best
held by a sliding dog, part on each side of the saw pointed like a gauge, with
two single joint dogs, one on each side of the saw.

Remedy for a long Pitman.
Make it in two parts by a joint 10 feet from the crank, and a mortise through
a fixed beam, for the lower end of the upper part to play in, the gate will
work more steady, and all may be made lighter.

The feed of a saw-mill ought to be regulated by a screw fixed to move the
hand-pole nearer or farther from the center of the roller that moves it, which
may be done as the saw arrives at a knot without stopping the mill.

END OF PART FIFTH.
APPENDIX; CONTAINING, Rules for discovering new Improvements -- exemplified in
improving the Art of thrashing and cleaning Grain, hulling Rice, warming Rooms,
and venting Smoke by Chimneys, etc.
THE TRUE PATHS TO INVENTIONS.
NECESSITY is called the mother of Inventions -- but upon enquiry we shall
find, that ^eason and Experiment brings them forth. -- For almost all
Inventions have been discovered by such steps as the following; which may be
taken as a

RULE.
STEP I. Is to investigate the fundamental principles of the theory, and
process of the (...) or manufacture we wish to improve.

II. To consider what is the best plan in theory that can be deduced from, or
founded on (...) principles to produce the effect we desire.

III. Consider whether the theory is already put in practice to the best
advantage, and what are the imperfections or disadvantages of the common
process of the art, and whether they can be evaded, and the process improved,
and what plans are most likely to succeed.

IV. Make experiments in practice to try any plans that these speculative
reasonings may ^^^pose, or lead to. -- Any ingenious artist, taking the
foregoing steps, will probably be led (...) improvements on his own art: For we
see by daily experience, that every art may be improved. It will, however, be
in vain to attempt improvements unless the mind be freed (...) prejudice, in
favor of established plans.

EXAMPLE 1. Suppose we take the Art of thrashing Grain,
THEN BY THE RULE --

STEP I. What are the principles on which this art is founded? -- The grain is
contained in a head on the top of the straw, enclosed in a husk or chaff that
requires a force to break (...) hull, and disengage it; which may be done
either on the principle of beating or rubbing.

II. What is the best plan in theory for effecting this? -- As we find that it
all requires wear^^ equal force, and is all contained in the head, which is
much less in quantity than the (...) -- Theory directs the force to be
regularly and uniformly applied to the head only, which will require but little
power, seeing we can rub it out between our hands.

III. How is this theory put in practice, and what are the imperfections and
disadvantages of the common process? -- The grain in the straw is laid on a
plank floor, and beaten by men, which flails; or on the ground, and tread out
by horses. The disadvantages are,

1st. The force is in both cases applied equally to the straw as well as the
head.

2nd. Much force is lost being unnecessarily expended in beating the straw, yet
many head; escape undone, because the force is so irregularly applied.

3rd. In treading by horses, the grain as well as the straw gets dirty.

4th. Thrashing by men is both expensive and tedious. -- Now cannot
improvements be made to overcome all these disadvantages? Such speculations
have produced several.

First, a machine on the principles of a coffee mill, which requires very
little force to rule the grain out of the heads, which are first separated from
the straw by means of a machine on the principle of a comb, cutting them off. A
machine to reap the heads without the straw is wanted to complete this theory.
For a description, see American Encyclopedia.

Second, a machine, invented, and put in practice by Coln. Alexander Anderson
of Philadelphia; the principles of which is to apply the strength of horses to
strike the straw regularly with a uniform force, which finishes as it goes, and
cleans the grain at the same time.

A cylinder 4 feet long, and 3 feet 6 inches diameter, with eight bats fastened
to its circumference parallel to its axis, and of its whole length, is made to
revolve with great rapidity; the bats strike the straw at every fourth of an
inch, it being drawn into the machine by and between two rollers that move
slowly. This machine makes great dispatch, but is expensive.

Others, attending to the principle of treading, have made a thing in the form
of the frustrum of a cone or sugar loaf, set full of cogs, to act as the horses
feet. This is drawn by horses round a circular floor adapted to it, on which
the grain is laid -- the center of the circle being the vertex of the cone.
This having considerable weight and many cogs, a horse will beat out much more
with it than with his feet, because it will strike a great many more strokes
with equal force. It has these advantages: it can be made by any ordinary
carpenter -- is cheap -- and the dirt is not mixed with the grain, straw, etc.

The following plate and description I received from the inventer.

Description of the THRASHING MACHINE, with elastic Flails; Invented by JAMES
WARDROP, of AMPTHILL, VIRGINIA.
Plate XIII.
A The floor on which tho flails are fixed. B The part of the floor on which
the grain is laid, made of wicker-work, through which the grain falls, and is
conveyed to the fan or screen below: the pivot of the fan is seen at P, and is
turned by a band from the wheel or wallower. CCC A thin board raised round the
floor to confine the wheat, and made shelving outward, to render raking off
the straw more easy. D The wallower or wheel. E Crank handle to turn the wheel.
FF Flails GGG Lifters with ropes fixed to the flails. III Catches or teeth to
raise the lifters. K Post on which the wallower is fixed. L Beam on which the
lifters rest and are fixed by an iron rod passing through the the lifters, and
let into this beam. M Check-beam to stop the end of the lifters from rising. N
Keeps in which the lifters work. O Beam in which the end of the flails are
mortised. Q Fly-ends loaded with lead, not necessary in a horse machine. R
Showing the lifters and keeps, how fixed.
THE machine, to be worked by two men, was made on a scale of a 12 foot flail,
having a spring which required a power of 20lb. to raise it three feet high at
the point: -- A spring of this power, and raised three feet high, being found
to get out wheat with great effect.

The catches or teeth are strongly mortised into the wallower-shaft, and placed
round in its circumference, so as to make an angle one with another, of 30 degrees.
These catches or teeth, take the lifters which raise the flails in an alternate
manner, that is, three of the flails are operated upon with the whole power (
viz. 20 lb.) and are on the point of striking; three of them are two thirds
raised; three of them one third raised; and three of them at rest; consequently
the whole weight to be overcome is 120lb.

The lifters should be placed so as that a perpendicular from their lifting end
be at the middle of the flail; the rope should be fixed to the flail somewhat
farther advanced to the end of the flail, that a proper tangent may be
obtained: the ends of the lifters, and the^^ teeth in the wallower, should be
rounded off to form a tangent with each other.

The rope should be fixed to the flail with a hook and eye, to take off when
not at work; for some of the flails being always in a lifting state, their
elasticity would otherwise injure.

The greater the length of the flails, and the higher they are raised, the more
powerful they become; they act upon the floor, with effect, about one third of
their length; consequently, a flail 24 feet long will act on the floor, eight
feet with force; and this in the size of flails. I would recommend in a horse
machine.

I have made the flails of white-oak and hickory poles; the elasticity wanted
was obtained by paring away the upper part of the flail, from where the string
is fastened to the end ^^ed in the mortise: in this way the strength of the
spring, and consequently the weight to be overcome, can easily be obtained
according to the intended size of the machine. I had flails made with steel
springs; the poles do better, and can easily be renewed whenever they are
wanted.

The wicker-work having some elasticity, adds to the ease in thrashing. As most
kinds of (...) cannot be got out with flails, unless frequently turned, this
becomes necessary here, but (...) take up no more time than in the common way
of hand-thrashing.

When necessary to turn the grain; or remove the straw; the end of the flails
can readily (...) from the floor, and suspended by a small cord from above, to
each flail.

The fan or screen is intended for the horse-machine only.

The wallower or wheel should have 15 revolutions in a minute; there being four
catches (...) in its circumference, causes 60 strokes of each flail in a
minute, the flail operating (...) a length of four feet on the grain. A man
thrashing in the usual manner, cannot make (...) than 40 strokes in a minute;
with a three foot flail; consequently this hand-machine, with twelve flails, by
a combination of velocity and space, is equal to 24 men thrashing, ^^^posing
the stroke of the flails equally powerful. In a large machine, worked by a
horse having 24 flails, of 24 feet in length, the execution will be much
greater.

The application of a horse requires only an upright shaft; horizontal wheel,
and trundle had fixed to the wallower; the horse going at the rate of 3600
yards in an hour; this is a (...) motion to the horse; he can work a whole day
at this speed; the frequent stops to re^^ve the straw will also give him rest:
the trundle-head can be easily proportioned to give he wallower-wheel 15
revolutions in a minute.

If applied to water, the power and execution of this machine may be raised to
a wonderful degree.

This machine can be put up in any barn already erected, the wheel and horse
path covered with a slight shade on the outside of the barn.

It is simple in all its parts, can be made by any country carpenter, and not
apt to get out (...) order: the cost of an hand machine will not exceed 50, and
of a horse one 100 dollars. ^^^THILL. Sept. 4th, 1794.

EXAMPLE II. Take the Art of cleaning Grain by Wind.
BY THE RULE --

STEP I. What are the principles on which the art is founded? -- Bodies falling
through ^^^ing mediums, their velocities are as their specific gravities;
consequently the farther (...) fall the greater will be their distance: On this
principle a separation can be effected.

II. What is the best plan in theory? -- First, make a current of air for the
grain to fall through, as deep as possible; then the lightest will be carried
farthest, and the separation be (...) complete at the end of the fall.
Secondly, cause the grain with the chaff, etc. to fall (...) a narrow line
across the current, that the light parts may meet no obstruction from the (...)
in being carried forward. Thirdly, fix a moveable board edgwise to separate
between the good clean grain, and light grain, etc. Fourthly, cause the same
blast to blow (...) grain several times, and thereby effect a complete
separation at one operation.

III. Is this theory in practice already, what are the disadvantages of the
common process? (...) find that the common farmers fans drop the grain in a
line 15 inches wide, to fall through ^^^rrent of air about 8 inches deep,
(instead of falling in a line half an inch wide, through a (...) 3 feet deep)
So that it requires a very strong blast even to blow out the chaff; but
^^^lick, light grains, etc. cannot be got out, they meet so much obstruction
from the heavy (...). It has to undergo 2 or 3 operations; so that the practice
appears no way equal to (...); and appears absurd when tried by the scale of
reason.

IV. The fourth step is to construct a fan to put the theory in practice, to
try the experiment This Timothy Kirk, carpenter of York-town is about to do,
and claims the invention of the application of the same blast several times; so
as to clean the grain completely at one operation; and if the plans are well
executed will no doubt excel all others yet made.
. See Art. 83.

EXAMPLE III. Take the Art of Distillation.
STEP I. The principles on which this art is founded are, evaporation and
condensation. The liquid being heated, the spirits it contains being most oily
and lightest, evaporates first into steam, which being condensed again into a
liquid, by cold, is the spirits.

II. The best plan in theory for effecting this, appears as follows: the fire
should be applied to the still so as to spend the greatest part of its heat
possible, to heat the liquid. Secondly, the steam should be conveyed into a
metal vessel of any form that may suit best; which is to be immersed in cold
water, to condense the steam; and in order to keep the condenser cold, there
should be a stream of water continually entering the bottom and flowing over
the top of the condensing tub, the steam should have no free passage out of the
condenser, else the strongest part of the liquor may escape.

III. Is this theory already put in practice, and what are the disadvantages of
the common process? -- 1st. Greatest part of the heat escapes up the chimney.
2nd. It is almost impossible to keep the grounds from burning in the still.
3rdly. The fire cannot be regulated to keep the still from boiling over;
therefore we are obliged to run slow: to remedy these disadvantages -- First,
to lessen the fuel, apply the fire as much to the surface of the still as
possible. Enclose the fire by a wall of clay that will not convey the heat away
so fast as stone or iron; let in as little air as possibly can be made to keep
the fire burning; for the air carries away the heat of the fire. Secondly, to
keep the grounds from burning; immerse the still with the liquor into a vessel
of water, joining their tops together, then by applying the fire to heat the
water in the outside vessel the grounds will not burn, and by regulating the
heat of the outside vessel the still may be kept from boiling over.

IV. A still of this structure was made by Col. Alexander Anderson, of
Philadelphia, and the experiment tried; but the water in the outside vessel
boiled, and being open, the heat escaped thereby, and the liquor in the still
could not be made to boil -- this appeared to defeat the scheme. But
considering that by enclosing the water in a tight vessel, so that the steam
could not escape, and that by compressure the heat might be increased, and it
passed to the liquor in the still, which now boiled as well as if the fire had
been immediately applied to the still. Again, by fixing a valve to be loaded so
as to let the steam escape, when arrived to such a degree of heat as to be near
boiling over, then the still could not be made to boil over at all.

Thus was an improvement produced by which he can dispatch business in the
ratio of 2 to 1, expending fuel in the ratio of 2 to 2 1-2, to produce equal
quantities of liquor. -- We may bring forward another improvement by
considering, that, as we know by experience that compressure above the weight
of the atmosphere, keeps the steam from rising from the water, till heated to a
certain degree above the boiling heat. We may hence conclude that a compressure
less than the atmosphere, will suffer it to rise with a degree less than
boiling heat, which suggests the expediency of taking off the pressure of the
atmosphere from the liquor in the still, by which means we shall expend less
fuel, and the heat need never be so great as to burn the grounds, which may be
done by putting the end of the worm into a tight globular vessel of metal, and
a cock between it and the condenser; then inject steam from a small boiler, and
expel all the air out of this vessel; turn the cock and it will run into the
condenser and be condensed. By repeating this a vacuum may be easily made, and
kept up in the worm and top of the still, and the spirits will probably come
off with half the heat and fuel usually expended.

This is about to be put in practice to try the experiment.

EXAMPLE IV. Take the Art of venting Smoke from Rooms by Chimneys.
STEP I. The principles are: Heat, by repelling the particles of air to a
greater distance, being lighter than cold, will rise above it, forming a
current upwards, with a velocity proportional to the degree and quantity of
heat, and size of the tube or funnel of the chimney, through which it ascends,
and with a power proportional to its perpendicular ^^ght, which power to asc^nd
will always be equal to the difference of the weight of a co^^^ of rarefied air
of the size of the smallest part of the chimney, and a column of com^^^ air of
equal size and height.

II. What is the best plan in theory for venting smoke, that can be founded on
these principles?

1st. The size of the chimney must be proportioned to the size and closeness of
the room and size of the fire; because, if the chimney be immensely large and
the fire small, there will be no current upwards. And again, if the fire be
large, and the chimney too small, (...) smoke cannot be all vented by it, more
air being necessary to supply the fire than can (...) vent up the chimney, it
must spread in the room again, which, after passing through the fire and being
burnt is suffocating.

2nd. The narrowest place in the chimney must be next the fire, and in front of
it, so (...) the smoke would have to pass under it to get into the room: the
current will there be greatest, and will draw up the smoke briskly.

3rd. The chimney must be perfectly tight, so as to admit no air but at the
bottom.

III. The errors in chimneys in common practice are,

1st. In making them widest at bottom.

2nd. Too large for the size and closeness of the room.

3rd. In not building them high enough above the wind whirling over the tops of
houses, (...) blow down them.

4th. By letting in air any where near the bottom, destroys the current of it
at bottom.

(...). The cures directed by the principles and theory are,

1st. If the chimney smoke on account of being too large for the size and
closeness of the (...), open a door or window, and make a large fire. But if
this be too expensive, make (...) chimney less at the bottom -- its size at the
top will not be much injury, but will weaken (...) power of ascent, by giving
the smoke time to cool before it leaves the chimney: the (...) may be as tight,
and the fire as small as you please, if the chimney be in proportion.

2nd. If it be small at the top and large at the bottom, there is no cure but
to lessen it (...) the bottom.

3rd. If it be too small, which is seldom the case, stop up the chimney and use
a stove -- will be large enough to vent all the air that can pass through a two
inch hole, which is (...) enough to kindle the fire in a stove. The quantity of
fuel necessary to warm a room, will ever be in proportion to the quantity of
air that ascends the chimney.
The chimneys built to put these theories in practice I believe are every where
found to answer the purpose. See Franklin's letters on they chimneys.

EXAMPLE V. Take the Art of warming Rooms by Fire.
STEP. 1. The principles of fire are too mysterious to be investigated here;
but the effects (...),

1st. The fire rarifies the air in the room, which gives us the sensation of
heat or warmth.

2nd. The warmest part being lightest, rises to the uppermost part of the room,
and will (...) through holes (if there be any) to the room above, making it
warmer than the one in which the fire is.

3rd. If the chimney be open the warm air will fly up it first, leaving the
room empty, the cold air will then rush in at all crevices to supply its place,
which keeps the rooms cold.

II. Considering these principles, what is the best plan in theory for warming
rooms?

1st. We must contrive to apply the fire to spend all its heat, to warm the air
as it comes in the room.

2nd. To retain the warm air in the room, and let the coldest out first to
obtain a ventilation.

3rd. Make the fire in a lower room, conducting the heat through the floor into
the upper one, and leaving another hole for the cold air to descend to the
lower room.

4th. Make the room perfectly tight so as to admit no cold air, but all warmed
as it comes in.

5th. By stopping up the chimney to let no warm air escape up it, but what is
absolutely necessary to kindle the fire -- a hole of 2 square inches will be
sufficient for a very large room.

6th. The fire may be kindled, by a current of air brought from without, not
(...) any of the air already warmed. If this theory, which is founded on true
principles and reason, be compared with common practice, the errors will appear
-- the disadvantages of which may be evaded.

III. I had a stove constructed to put this theory as fully in practice as
possible, and have found all to answer according to theory.

The operation and effects are as follows, viz.

1st. It applies the fire to warm the air as it enters the room, and admits a
full and fresh supply, rendering the room moderately warms throughout.

2nd. It effectually prevents the cold air from pressing in at the chinks or
crevices, but causes a small current to pass outward.

3rd. It conveys the coldest air out of the room first, consequently

4th. It is a complete ventilator, thereby rendering the room healthy.

5th. The fire may be supplied (in very cold weather) by a current of air from
without, that does not communicate with the warm air in the room.

6th. Warm air may be retained in the room any length of time, at pleasure;
circulative through the stove, the coldest entering first to be warmed over
again. This application was suggested to me by Isaac Garretson, of York-town,
on his viewing the stove and considering its principles whilst I had it making.


7th. It will bake, roast and boil equally well with the common ten plate
stove, as (...) a capacious oven.

8th. In consequence of these philosophical improvements it requires not more
than (...) the usual quantity of fuel.

Description of the philosophical and ventilating Stove.
It consists of 3 cylindric or square parts, the greatest surrounding the
least. See pl. (...). fig. 1. SF is a perspective view thereof in a square
form, supposed open at one side, the fire is put in at F, in the least part
which communicates with the space next the outside, where the smoke passes to
the pipe 1 -- 5. The middle part is about 2 inches less every (...) than the
outside part, leaving a large space between it and above the inner part for
(...) oven, in which the air is warmed, being brought in by a pipe B D between
the joists of the floor, from a hole in the wall at B, rising into the stove at
D, into the space and oven surrounding the fire, which air is again surrounded
by the smoke, giving the fire a full action to warm it, and ascending into the
room by the pipe 2. E brings air from the pipe D E to blow the fire. H is a
view of the front end plate, showing the fire and oven doors. I is a view of
the back end, the plate being off, the dark square shows the space for the
fire, and the light part the air-space surrounding the fire, the dark outside
space the (...) surrounding the air; these are drawn on a larger scale. The
stove consists of 15 plates, 1^ of which join one end against the front plate H.

To apply this stove to the best advantage, suppose fig. 1, pl. X. to represent
a 3 or 4 story house, 2 rooms on a floor -- set the stove S F in the partition
on the lower floor, half in each room; pass the smoke pipe through all the
stories; make the room very close; (...) no air enter but what comes in by the
pipes AB or GC through the wall at A and G, that it may be the more pure, and
pass through the stove and be warmed. But to convey it to any room, and take as
much heat as possible with it, there must be an air-pipe surrounding the smoke
pipe, with a valve to open at every floor. Suppose we wish to warm the rooms
No. 3 -- 6, we open the valves, and the warm air enters, ascends to the upper
(...) depresses the cold air, and if we open the holes a -- c it will descend
the pipes, and (...) the stove to be warmed again: this may be done in very
cold weather. The higher (...) room above the stove, the more powerfully will
the warm air ascend and expel the cold air. But if the room requires to be
ventilated, the air must be prevented from de^^^ing, by shutting the little
gate 2 or 5, and drawing 1 or 6, and giving it liberty to (...) and escape at A
or G -- or up the chimney, letting it in close at the hearth. If the (...) air
be conveyed under the floor, as between 5 -- 6, and let rise in several places,
with a valve at each, it would be extremely convenient and pleasant; or above
the floor (...) at 4 -- several persons might set their feet on it to warm. The
rooms will be moderately warm throughout -- a person will not be sensible of
the coldness of the weather.

One large stove of this construction may be made to warm a whole house,
ventilate the (...) at pleasure, bake bread, meat, etc.

These principles and improvements ought to be considered and provided for in
building.

EXAMPLE VI. Take the Art of hulling and cleaning Rice.
STEP 1. The principles on which this art may be founded will appear by taking
a hand^^ of rough rice, and rubbing it hard between the hands -- the hulls will
be broken off, and by continuing the operation the sharp texture of the outside
of the hull (which through a signifying glass appears like a sharp fine file,
and no doubt is designed by nature for the compose) will cut off the inside
hull, the chaff being blown out, will leave the rice perfectly (...), without
breaking any of the grains.

II. What is the best plan in theory for effecting this? -- See the plan
proposed, represent^^ pl. X. fig. 2 -- explained art. 103.

III. The disadvantages of the old process are known to those who have it to do.

EXAMPLE VII. To Save Ships from Sinking at Sea.
STEP 1. The principles on which ships float, is the difference of their
specific gravities (...) that of the water, bulk for bulk -- sinking only to
displace water equal in weight to the (...); therefore they sink deeper in
fresh than salt water. If we can calculate the cubic (...) a ship displaces
when empty it will show her weight, and subtracting that from what (...)
displaces when loaded, shows the weight of her load, each cubic foot of fresh
water being 62,5lb. If an empty ram hogshead weigh 62,5lb. and measure 15 cubic
feet, it will require (...) ^5lb. to sink it. A vessel of iron, etc. filled
with air, so large as to make its whole bulk lighter than so much water will
float, but if the air be let out and filled with water (...) sink. Hence we may
conclude that ships, loaded with any thing that will float, will (...) sink, if
filled with water; but if loaded with any thing specifically heavier than
water, (...) sink as soon as filled.

II. This appears to be the true theory -- How is it to be put in practice, in
case a ship (...) a leak, that gains on the pumps?

III. The mariner who understands well the above principles and theory, will be
led to (...) following steps.

1st. To cast overboard such things as will not float, and carefully to reserve
every thing that will float, for by them the ship may at last be buoyed up.

2nd. Empty every cask or thing that can be made water-tight, and put them in
the hold and fasten them down under the water, filling the vacancies between
them with billets of wood, even the spars and masts may be cut up for this
purpose in desperate cases, which will fill the hold with air and light matter,
and as soon as the water inside is level with that outside no more will enter.
If every hogshead buoy up 875lb. they will be a great help to buoy up the ship
(but care must be taken not to put the empty casks too low, which would overset
the ship) and she will float, although half her bottom be torn (...) Mariners,
for want of this knowledge often leave their ships too soon, taking to their
(...) although the ship is much the safest, and does not sink for a long time
after being (...) -- not considering, although the water gain on their pumps at
first, they may be able to hold way with it when risen to a certain height in
the hold, because the velocity with which it will enter, will be in proportion
to the square root of the difference between the level of the water inside and
outside -- added to this the fuller the ship, the easier the pumps will work,
therefore they ought not to be too soon discouraged.

EXAMPLE VIII. Take the Art of preserving Fruits, Liquors, etc. from
Putrefaction and Fermentation.
STEP. 1. What are the principles of putrefaction and fermentation? -- By
experiments with the air-pump it has been discovered that apples, cherries,
etc. put in a tight vessel, having the air pumped out, will keep their natural
fresh bloom for a long time. Again, by repeated experiments it is proved things
frozen will neither putrify nor ferment while in that state. Hence we may
conclude that air and heat are the principles or moving causes of putrefaction
and fermentation.

II. What plans in theory are most likely to succeed? -- By removing the causes
we may expect to evade the effect.

1. Suppose a cistern in a cellar be made on the side of a hill, and supplied
by a spring of cold water running in at the top, that can be drawn off at the
bottom at pleasure. If apples etc. be put in tight vessels, and the air pumped
out, and beer cider, etc. be put in this cistern, and immersed in water, will
they putrify or ferment? May not the experiment succeed in an ice-house, and
fruits be conveyed from one country to another in glass or metal vessels made
for the purpose, with the air pumped out and hermetically sealed.

In support of this hypothesis, a neighbor of mine told me, he filled a rum
hogshead in the fall full of apples at the bung, bunged it tight, and in the
spring found them all sound; another, when a boy, buried a hollow gum bee-hive
full of apples, trampled the earth tight about them, opened them when the wheat
began to ripen, and found them all sound, but leaving them, returned in a day
or two, and found them all rotten Much contained in this appendix is to be
found in different authors; and several things, which I thought had originated
with myself, have been treated of by Dr Franklin.
.

For those to Read who have Leisure.
BY the right use of natural Philosophy and Reason, aided by Experiments, many
improvements might be made that would add much to the conveniences and comforts
of life -- But the great obstacle is the expense of experiments, in reducing
theory to practice, which few will risque. -- For when a man attempts to make
any improvements, he is sure to be ridiculed until he succeeds, and then the
invention is often depreciated -- Doctor Franklin said -- that "a man's useful
inventions subjects him to insult, robbery, and abuse" -- but this I have as
yet experienced only from 2 or 3 individuals from whom it was least to be
expected -- I am firmly persuaded, that if in any country the small sum of --
dollars annually, was assigned to reduce to practice probable theories, the
arts would rise in improvement beyond any precedent that history can evince;
and the power and wealth of the nation in proportion -- For a long list of
inventions in theory might be given that offer fair to be very useful in
practice, that lie dormant until the inventor can make experiments with
convenience, to reduce them to practice -- many of which no doubt will die with
the invent^rs.

Sensible of the expense, time, labor and thought, that this (though small) work
has cost me, and hoping it may be well received by, and prove serviceable to my
country -- I wait to see its fate; and feel joy at being ready to say

FINIS.
Communication. -- The following Essay on SAW-MILLS, etc. I received from
WILLIAM FRENCH, Millwright, Burlington county, (New Jersey) since I concluded,
and fearing I may not have another opportunity, I publish it.
SAW-MILLS have been much improved in this State, for low heads. Mills with two
saws (...) with not more than 7 feet head and fall, have sawed 5 and 6 hundred
thousand feet of (...), plank and scantling, in one year. If the water be put
on the wheel in a proper man^^^^, and the wheel of a proper size, (as by the
following table) the saw will strike between (...) and 130 strokes in a minute:
See fig. 1 plate XIV. The lower edge of the breast-beam (...) be 3-4 the height
of the wheel, and 1 inch to a foot, slanting up stream, fastened to the
^^ock-posts with screw-bolts, (see post A) circled out to suit the wheel C; the
fall D circled (...) ^^it the wheel and extended to E, 2 inches above the lower
edge of the breast-beam, or (...), according to the size of the throat or
sluice E, with a shuttle or gate sliding on F E, (...) against the breast-beam
B: then 4 buckets out of 9 will be acted on by the water. (...) method of
fastening the buckets or floats is, to step them in starts mortised in the
shaft -- (...) G -- 9 buckets in a wheel 4 1-2 inches wide, see them numbered
1, 2, etc.

Fig. 2 is the go-back, a tub-wheel. Its common size is from 4 1-2 to 6 feet
diameter, with buckets. The water is brought on it by the trunk H. The bucket I
is made with a long (...) so as to fasten it with a pin at the top of the wheel.

TABLE of the Dimensions of Flutter-wheels.
Head 12 ft. Bucket 5 ft. Wheel 3 ft. Throat 1 3-4 inch. 11 5 3 2 10 6 3 2(...)
9 6 2 10 inches. 2 8 7 2 9 2 7 7 2 8 3 6 8 2 7 P. 3 5 9 2 6 3(...)

N. B. The crank about 11 inches, but varies to suit the timber.

The Pile Engine.
Fig. 3 a simple machine for driving piles in soft bottoms, for setting
mill-walls or dams on. It consists of a frame 6 or 7 feet square, of scantling,
4 by 5 inches, with 2 upright posts (...) inches apart, 10 or 12 feet high, 3
by 3 inches, braced from top to bottom of the frame, with a cap on top 2 feet
long, 6 by 8 inches, with a pullie in its middle for a rope to bend over
fastened to a block I, called a tup, which has 2 pieces 4 inches wide between
the uprights, with a piece of 2 inch plank (...), 6 inches wide, framed on the
ends, so as to slide up and down the upright posts S. This machine is worked by
4 or 6 men, drawing the tup up by the sticks fastened to the end of the rope K,
and letting it fall on the pile L: they can strike 30 or 40 strokes by the
swing of their arms in a minute.

Of building Dams on soft Foundations.
The best method is, to lay 3 sills across stream, and frame cross sills in
them up and down stream, setting the main mud-sills on round piles, and pile
them with 2 inch plank, well jointed and drove close together edge to edge,
from one to the other end. By taking one corner off of the lower end of the
plank will cause it to keep a close joint at bottom, and by driving an iron dog
in the mud-sill, and a wooden wedge to keep it close at the top end will hold
it (...) its place when the tup strikes. It is necessary to pile the outside
cross sills also in some bottoms, and to have wings to run 10 or 12 feet into
the bank at each side; and the wing-posts 2 or 3 feet higher than the posts of
the dam, where the water falls over, planked to the top N N, and filled with
dirt to the plate O.

Fig. 4 is a front view of the breast of the tumbling-dam.

Fig. 5 is a side view of the frame of the tumbling-dam, on its piling a b
(...), and f g h is the end of the mud-sills. The posts k are framed into the
main mud-sills with a hook teno^, leaning down stream 6 inches in 7 feet,
supported by the braces 11, framed in the cross sills 1; the cross sills I to
run 25 feet up and down stream, and be well planked over; and the breast-posts
to be planked to the top (see P fig. 4) and filled with dirt on the upper side
within 12 or 18 inches of the plate O: (see Q fig. 5) slanting to cover the up
stream ends of the sills 3 or 4 feet deep. R represents the water.

When the heads are high it is best to plank the braces for the water to run
down, but if low, it may fall perpendicularly on the sheeting.

Plate I.


II.




IV.




VI


VII




IX.






XII


XIII


XIV


LIST OF THE SUBSCRIBERS NAMES
GEORGE WASHINGTON, President of the United States. THOMAS Jefferson, late
Secretary of State Edmund Randolph, Secretary of State
Senators.
John Langdon, New Hampshire Aaron Burr, New York John Rutherford, New Jersey
Robert Morris, Pennsylvania Benjamin Hawkins, North Carolina A. Martin,
North Carolina Ralph Izard, South Carolina James Jackson, Georgia
Representatives.
Jeremiah Smith, New Hampshire David Cobb, Massachusetts Dwight Foster, ditto
William Lyman, ditto Theodore Sedgwick, ditto Peleg Wadsworth, ditto Uriah
Tracy, Connecticut Jonathan Trumbull, ditto Jeremiah Wadsworth, ditto Israel
Smith, Vermont J. E. Van Allen, New York Theodorus Bailey, ditto Philip Van
Cort^andt, ditto Peter Van Gaasbeck, ditto Henry Glenn, ditto James Gordon,
ditto John Beaty, New Jersey William Findley, Pennsylvania Thomas Hartley,
ditto Richard Thomas, ditto Daniel Heister, ditto John W. Kittera, ditto
William Montgomerry, ditto Henry Latimer, Delaware George Dent, Maryland Samuel
Smith, ditto Thomas Sprig, ditto Thomas Claiborne, Virginia William B. Giles,
ditto Carter B. Harrison, ditto John Heath, ditto, 2 copies Richard B. Lee,
ditto, James Madison, ditto Henry Tazewell, ditto Andrew More, Virginia John
Nicholas, ditto, 2 cop. John Page, ditto Francis Preston, ditto, 2 cop. Robert
Rutherford, ditto Abraham Venable, ditto, 2 cop. Francis Walker, ditto, 3 cop.
Alexander D. Orr, Kentucky Christopher Greenup, ditto Thomas Blount,
North Carolina William J. Dawson, ditto James Gillespie, ditto William Barry
Grove, ditto Nathaniel Macon, ditto Joseph M'Dowel, ditto Lemuel Benton, South
Carolina Andrew Pickens, ditto Abraham Baldwin, Georgia James White Joseph
Wheaton, serg. at arms
Senators of Pennsylvania.
Wm. Bingham, 2 cop. Samuel Postlethwait George Wilson Thomas Jenks John Canan,
Lindsey Coats
Representatives.
George Latimer, Speaker Benj. Carpenter, Luzerne, P. Robert Waln, John
Shoemaker Jacob Morgan, 2 copies Matthias Barton William Wallace George Hughes.
James Poe John Cunningham Roger Kirk, Jonas Preston Samuel Dale, William
Sterrett Robert Frazer, Presley Nevell James M'Farlane James Martin, Sergeant
at Arms
Note. -- The following list came in too late to be alphabettically arranged.
Alexander Robinson, Frederic, V. Joseph Perkins, Robinson, ditto Henry Lee,
Governor of Virginia, Major General, etc. Moses Hunter, Colonel, V. Thomas
Mathews, Brigadier-General, Norfolk, ditto Wm. Dark, ditto, Berkley, ditto
Henry Rush, Winchester, ditto Ignatius Parry, Frederic, ditto James M'Alister,
Wilmington, N. Carolina Daniel Morgan, Major General, V. Griffin Tailor, ditto
James Lebas, Frederic, M. James Booth, George Booth F. Thornton,
Fredericksburg, V. Moses Hill, M. W. Germantown Samuel Howel, Kent, Del. James
Greenway, Denwid^e, V. Francis Epps, Chesterfield, V. Samuel Venable Joseph
Yarborough, Lunenburg, V. Thomas, Vaughen, ditto. Jacob Mayer
A
ALEXANDER Anderson, Phila. Charles Anderson, Del. 6 copies Thomas Arnold,
Rhode Island John Allen, M. W. Baltimore M. Armond, Rockingham, V. Robert
Alford, ditto Samuel Adams, Fairfax, ditto Reuben Allen, Richmond Philip Apple,
Northampton, P. Theodorick Armistead, Petersburg Ephraim Arnold, M. W. Columbia
B
Wm. Backett, Gloucester, J. James Alexander. Summerset, J. David Brandwin,
jun. Essex, ditto John Bartholomew, M. W. Summerset, ditto Hudson Burr,
Burlington, ditto Joseph Burr, ditto J. Baker, M. W. Northampton, P William
Briggs, Chester, ditto Charles Beaty, George Town, ditto D. Bartholomew,
Lancaster, ditto Samuel Bye, Bucks, ditto Nathaniel Burrus, ditto ditto John
Blair Hundington, ditto Richard Becking Joseph Becking Jacob Broom, Wilmington,
Del. James Brindley, ditto. Brynberg and Andrews, Wilmington, Del. J. Beale
Bordley, Phila. 4 cop. Owen Biddle, ditto Francis Bailey, ditto Thomas Bedwell,
ditto Benj. Franklin Bache, ditto Daniel Breautigam, ditto 6 cop. Oswald
Brook, Prince George, M. Anthony Berd, Bladensburg, ditto Jonas Bleaney,
Hartford, ditto Thomas Broom, Elkton, ditto Hugh Burns, Rockingham, V. B.
Beeler, Berkley, ditto Wm. Bell, Falmouth, ditto T. Brown, M. W. Albemarle,
ditto James, Brown, M. W. Stanton, ditto Wm. Ball, M. W. Samuel Baker, city of
Washington Those. Broom, Cambden, S. C. Adam Bostyon, Frederick, ditto Taverner
Beale, Shanadoah, ditto Marshal Booker, ditto John Brander, Chesterfield, ditto
John Baird, Petersburg, Bate, Saunders, and Co. ditto 2 cop. Wm. Bird,
Alexandria John Ball, M. W. George Battan, M. W. Brandywine Richard Baker, M.
W. P.
C
Nicholas Colin, R. S. C. Phila. Matthew Carey, 14 cop. ditto George Clymer,
ditto Joseph Cruckshank, ditto Tench Coxe, ditto Joseph Capelle., Wilmington,
D. Robert Coram, ditto Wm. Coach, New Castle, ditto Samuel Canby, Brandiwine
mills James Cloud, M. W. ditto John Clendinnin, Dauphin, P. Benj. Carpenter,
Luzerne, ditto Wm. Crook, Bucks, ditto Peter Cornelius, Hundington, ditto Jesse
Crosby, Cecil, M. Geo. Caldwell, Bladensburg, ditto R. Crompton, ditto ditto
Lewis Coircle, Rockingham, V. Hugh Cunningham, Berkley, ditto David Carlisse,
Winchester, ditto Ervin Cameron, Chesterfield, ditto John Crawford, Petersburg,
ditto Ambrose Clark, ditto John Clarke M. W. Richmond, ditto J. Cowperthwaite,
New-Egypt, J. Micajah Crew James F. Cusack I. C. Cock R. D. Conte, M.
D
Those. Dobson, Phila. 25 cop. Wm. Davidson, ditto B. Duffield, ditto John
Dunlap, ditto Benj. Davies, ditto A. I. Dallas, ditto Joseph, Dutton, M. W.
Brandywine mills Jacob Derickson, M. W. ditto George Davis, M. W. ditto John
Dickinson, Wilmington, Del. 2 cop. James Douglass, Sussex, ditto Jonathan Dorr,
Washington, N. York. Charles Dilworth, Chester, P. Solomon Drown, Fayette,
ditto John Doan, Bucks, ditto Wm. Dayley, Hundington, ditto Edward Dawes, M. W.
Easton, ditto Henry Dolerow, M. W. ditto James Dellet, M. W. S. Carolina, 6
cop. Gewis Claleron Davis, M. W. Stafford, V. Robert Dunbarr, Winchester, ditto
Joseph Dean, ditto D. Douglass, Falls of Difficult, ditto James and Leonard
Deneal, ditto, 2 cop. Solomon Dedig, ditto Lewis Dennis, M. W. Hunderton, J.
Jarus Dod, Essex, J. Philip Doran, Hartford, M. Henry S. Drinker for S. Preston
Robert Dauthat Samuel and William Davis
E
John Ewing, Phila. John Elliot, Stanton, D. George Evans, junr. Thomas
Ellicott, Bucks, P. 150c. Jacob Edinburg Charles Evans, New Castle, D. John
Evans, Lancaster, P. R. Evans, flour inspecter, Petersburg Virginia, 10 cop.
Nathaniel Ellicott, ditto Evan Evans, M. W. V. 144 cop. David Everitt, J. John
Evans, M. Elias Ellicott, ditto Joseph Eaton, Hundington,
F
Andrew Fisher, New Castle, D. Wm. Foulk, ditto Thomas Foulk, Wilmington, D.
Moses Foreman, Elk, M. Wm. Frailey, Rockingham, V. Beal Fowler M. Fackler,
Stanton, V. F. Fulk, Shanadoah, V. Michael Fackler, V. Thomas Frazer,
Petersburg, V. Theophilus Field, Brunswick, V. Adam Frailey, M. W. Enoch
Francis, M. W. Loudon, V. James Finley, Fayette, P. Hugh Forsman, Northampton,
P. David Forced, Bucks, ditto Benj. Flowers, M. W. York, P. Richard French,
Burlington, J. Wm. French, Hanover John Falkingburg, Mifflin, P.
G
Wm. Gibson, M. W. V. James Gibbons, Chesterfield, V. James M. Gibbons,
Chester, P. Wm. Gibbons, Phila. Ashbel Green, ditto Michael Gunckle, ditto
Joshua Gilpin, ditto Thomas Goucher, ditto Thomas Greeves, ditto John Gartley,
ditto Benjamin F. Garrigues, ditto John Gramer, Petersburg, V. Richard Groves,
V. John Gray, Port Royal, V. Richard Goodrich Amos Grandine, Jersey Samuel
Gordon, ditto Samuel Galbraith, New Castle, D. Israel Gilpin, Kentucky John
Gilpin, M. John Gill, Alexandria, V. 3 cop. James Galaway, Mifflin, P. Henry
Geddis, New-Port, D. Nathaniel Grubb, M. W. P. Wm. Green, New York, 6 cop.
Isaac Garritson, York-Town, P. Benjamin Tues, Gilman Marietta, on the Ohio.
H
Joseph Henry, Hydraulician, Hispaniola Joseph Harlan, M. W. M. Joseph
Hossinger, M. George Hinkson, Delaware, P. John Hayes, Wilmington, D. 5 cop.
Levi Hollingsworth, Elkton, M. Samuel Hollingsworth, Brandywine Christopher
Hope, Chester, P. Wm. Henry, Nazareth, P. Levi Hollingsworth, Phila. 12 cop.
Hall and Sellers, Phila. Edmund Hogan, ditto Richard H. Morris, Phila. Simon
Hadley, Stanton, D. 12 cop. Joseph Holland, Montgomery, P. Wm Hagy, ditto
George Hellembold, ditto Daniel Hendrickson, Shrewsberry, J. Henry Hoshall,
ditto Benjamin Hinton, Rockingham, V. John Hite, ditto Henry Hubble, M. W. P.
12 cop. Adam Hinchman, Elk, M. James Harrold, M. W. Bucks, P. Handy and
M'Cormick, V. Eli Hunt, M. W. Frederick, V. Benj. Harris Albemarle, ditto
Joseph Hunt, Winchester, ditto Cuthbert Harrison, V. Frederick Heiskel, ditto
John Hamburg, ditto George Hite, ditto Wm. Holiday, ditto Richard Harriss,
ditto Plumer Harriss, ditto James Houston, ditto Philip Haxall, ditto Benj.
Hood, M. W. ditto Thomas Hollingsworth, Baltimore, M. Wm. Hartshorne, V. 2 cop.
John Glassford, Henderson, ditto Malem Hough, ditto Joseph Hilb, George Town,
Potomack, M. Wm. Hartshorn, jun. M. W. V. Wm. Holdernesse, Phila. Samuel
Hanaway, Fayette, P. Isaac Hance, Morris, J. Ralph Hunt, Sussex, ditto Paul
Howel, Orange, ditto Isaac Hoff, Hunderton, ditto Abraham Haver, Sussex, ditto
Bazeleed Higgins, Hartford, M. Joseph Harrold, Bucks, P. Joseph Heart, ditto
Richard Harcomb, ditto
J
Samuel Jackson, Red-stone, P. Loyd Jones, Montgomery, P. Joseph -- Dinwidie
Rinaldo Johnson, M. Wm. Johnson, ditto Richard Jones, Nottaway, V. Abel Janey,
Frederic V. Richard Jones John Jackson, Fayette, P. Jonas Ingham, Bucks, ditto
Joseph --, M. W. Luzerne, P. John Jones, Montgomery, P. Abraham Jones,
Burlington, J. Wm. Irick, ditto Wm. Jenkins, Mifflin P. Jacob Eyerly, Junr.
K
Nicholas Kolph, Wissahickon Patrick Kelly, M. W. and millstone maker, Phila.
Timothy Kirk, York-town, P. Jacob Kenny, Stanton, V. John Kirchivell,
Winchester, V. John Kean, Frederick, V. Joseph Kimbro, V. Andrew Kanady, V.
Michael Kem, Fayette, P. John Kinsey, Northampton, ditto Joseph Kugler,
Hunderton, J. Jacob Knoles, Bucks, P. Joseph Kinsey, ditto Isaac Kinsey, ditto
Isaac K^y Haddenfield, J. Daniel Keller, Hundington, P.
L.
Robert, Leslie, London Thomas Lea, Brandywine mills Thomas Latimer, Newport,
D. Jacob Lobb, Montgomery, P. John Lewis, ditto Edward Lobb, ditto Ezekiel
Logan, Rockingham, V. James Larue, Frederic, V. George Lind, Shanadoah, V. John
Lesher, V. Alexander Long, ditto Elisha Leek, ditto Wm. Leiper, M. W. 2 cop. P.
LovellandClerguhart, V. Wm. Levering, M. John Lu^gren, ditto Francis Lee, ditto
John Larmore, Hundington, P. Jacob Lossey, J. Peter Ludlow, ditto Wm. Lower,
Hunderton, ditto Thomas Loyd, Bucks, P. John Levis, Delaware
M
Wm. Matthews, Cecil, M. Samuel More, New Castle Wm. Marshall, Stanton, D. John
Mitchell, James M'Kensy M. W. M. George M'Clure, Phila. Jesse Morris, ditto,
Casper Miller, Northampton, P Peter Miller, V. John M'Alister, Winchester, V
Archibald M'Gill, ditto Thomas Massy, ditto Wm. M'Guire, ditto John Moody,
Richmond Samuel Moody, ditto Abel Morgan, ditto James M'Chesney, V. John
M'Clung, ditto Henry Mitchel, Petersburg, V. David More, Baltimore, M. Jesse
Miller, Isaac M'Pherson, Alexandria James M'Cormack Robert M'Clure Jonathan
Miller John Mathewson, Port Royal, James Montgomery, Alexandria Isaac Mike,
junr. Robert M'Min, Phila. Samuel M'Harry, Lancaster, P. Wm. Moore, M. Jacob
Morgan, Phila. 2 cop. Thomas M'Kean, ditto Timothy Matlack, ditto George
M'Clanahan, Montg. Samuel Mullen; Burlington, Wm. Montgomery, Crosswix, Jacob
Mitseer, Hundington, P Samuel Marshall ditto Thomas Morgan, ditto Jonathan
Morris, ditto John M'Ramara, M. W. Dumf. V Ebenezer Maul, Richmond
N
Samuel Nicholson, Cumberland Pauney Nuckles, V. David Nivin, D. Thomas Newman,
M. W. M. (...). Nicholas John Nicholson, Philadelphia 500 cop. Andrew
Nicholson, V.
O
John Ormrod, Phila. 6 cop. Charles O'Hara, ditto ^ole Oxley, M. W. V.
P
Ignatius Pallyart, consul g. for Portugal, 12 cop. Robert Philips, New Castle,
D. ^enj. Potts, Brandywine mills Wm. Poole, ditto Samuel Potter, P. (...).
Park, for the library co. Phi. (...) Van Predelles, Baltimore Robert Paterson,
Phila. Andrew Porter, ditto ^^^ac Price, ditto Those. Phillips, D. 9 cop. Elisha
Phipps, Chester, P. ^^siah Pearson, New York Ignatius Pigman and co. G Town
John Price, Montgomery Joseph Price, ditto Joseph Pool ^^^sse Pettit Benjamin
Porter, V. ^eizin Porter, M. W. Robert W. Peacock, V. Frederick, Pennybaker,
ditto Robert Page, Frederic, V. Samuel Pleasants, V. James P. Cock ^^ldwin
Peiree, M. W. V. (...) Parker, Petersburg, V. James Parry, Chesterfield, V.
Thomas G. Peachy, Petersburg Carey Pleasants, V. Wm. Potts, M. W. Fairfax Jesse
Penable Moses Phillips, M. W. Jonathan Pickering, ditto Samuel Prigg, M.
Alexander Peacock, Burlington Wm. Pearson, Hunderton, P. Samuel Proleau, junr.
S. C. Thomas Phillips, P.
R
Thomas Robinson, P. Peter and Jonathan Robinson, do. Jehu Richards, M. W.
Delaware John Reinhart, Chester George Robinson, Pittsburg Samuel Reynolds, W.
M. 2 cop. Those. Reynolds, Brandywine John Rhoads, Montgomery, P. Wm. Ruddell,
Shanadoah, V. Charles Redifer, M. W. V. Jacob Rinker, ditto George Red, ditto
Edmond Ruffin, ditto Rogers and Owens, Baltimore John T. Rickets, Alexandri, V.
James Ramsey, P. John Richie, M. David Ross, ditto David L. Reece, Delaware B.
Reeder, P. James Rankin, ditto Thomas Reading, Hunderton, J. Ephraim Randolph,
J. John Ryerson, Northampton, P. John Roberts, M. W. Montgom. Jonathan
Robinson, ditto Jehu Richards, M. W. ditto Michael Rush, Burlington John
Reckless, J. Richard Roberts, Hundington, P. Charles Reichel, Nazareth, P. John
Ramsey, M.
S
Wm. Sherlock, Northampton, P. Isaac Swartswood, ditto George Stroud, M. W.
Delaware James Stroud, Stanton, ditto Robert Seeders, M. Alexander Smith,
Kentucky, 3 c. John Smith, Phila. Nathan and David Sellers, Phila. 2 c. Israel
Supplee, ditto Samuel H. Smith, ditto Abraham Smith, Bucks, Phila. 2 c. Henry
Scheets, ditto John Snap, V. Thomas Smith, ditto Robert Shaw, ditto Edward
Smith, V. Wm. Shields, V. John Service Phila. Samuel Slull, V. Ebenezer Stott
and co. Petersburg 2 cop. Wm. Scott Joseph Scott Aaron Schofield, M. James
Speak, P. Wm. Smith, and co. M. Isacher Schofield, ditto John Scott, Fairfax,
V. James and David Sterrett, Lancast. James Smith, M. W. Octarara Anthony
Shoemaker J. Joseph Strickland M. W. ditto John Stevenson, Hunderton, J. Thomas
Smith, M. W. M. Joseph Sherrerd, Hunderton, Jersey Aaron Stout, ditto Richard
Standefer, M. W. M. F. Shutz, Montgomery, P. Wm. Sheldon, ditto Wm. Sitgreaves,
J. Christopher Snyder, ditto Adam Sharrah, Hundington, P. Richard Smith, ditto
Joseph Smith, ditto Valentine Stroup, M. W. Reading, 24 cop. Subscription list
mislaid C. P. 2 cop. Matthias Slaymaker, D.
T
Richard S. Thomas, M. Jesse Tyson, ditto Thomas Town, M. W. Phila. 6 cop.
Benj. Tunis, M. W. P. 6 cop. Daniel Tremble, Del. works Peter Thomas, P. Benj.
Thomson, V. Henry Thring, ditto Morris Trueman, Delaware, P. Andrew Thelsa, M.
William Frazier Joseph Tidball, V. John B. Tildon, ditto William Tatham Ambrose
Timmons, V. Samuel Todd, ditto George Trotter, ditto John Tase Robert Torrance,
Brunswick Elisha Tyson, Baltimore John Tagart, ditto Joseph Timberlake, V. John
Tenbrook, J. George Teneick ditto Caleb Tailor, ditto John Toy, M. W. ditto
V
John Vaughan, Phila. Nicholas Vanstavern, M. W. Abraham Van Camp, M. W. J.
George Vickers. M.
W
Thomas Wallace, New Castle Benj. Wilson, Cecil, M. John Waln, Phila. Richard
Waters, M. W. M. William Woodhouse, Phila. Samuel Wheeler, J. Bencroft
Woodcock. Del. Warner Washington, V. Larkin Wright, Madison, V. Benj. Webb. Wm.
C. Williams, Shanadoah P. Williams. ditto Baziel Wood Thomas Whitlaw Joseph
Walker Joseph Wiweger, V. James Wardrope, Ampthillmills T. Watson, Prince
Edward C. Jesse Walker, M. W. Abner Wickersham, M. W. V. Richard Winchester, M.
Daniel Wampler, M. W. ditto Polydore, B. Wessner, J. George Waln, Bucks, P.
Paul Wooley, M W. J. Aseph Warner, Hartford, M. Deniss Wheelen, P. Chalkley
Willets John Whitehead, M. W. J.
Many subscription lists have not been returned at the time appointed, they
shall, nevertheless, if sent in soon be supplied at 50 cents less than non
subscribers, the difference at first contemplated. But as the work has exceeded
500 pages including 26 plates, instead of 350 including 20 plates, as promised;
and every way exceeded in expense the calculation -- those gentlemen, who have
subscribed largely, purely to encourage the work, are at liberty to take what
part of their subscription they please. No books will be kept longer than six
months for subscribers.

Errors that may be corrected with a Pen.
PART 1. -- In line 3 from the bottom of page 2, for art 30 -- read 13. Page ^9
line 2, for Overshot -- read undershot. 81 line 4, for equal pressures -- read
unequal. 121 lines (...) and 2, for with then -- read of. ^44 line 6 of the
note, for it is -- read was. PART I^ -- in page 25 line 20, for 12 -- read 30.
Page 162 line (...), for ^other -- read faster. PART V -- In page 5 line 18,
for being the first -- read being one of the first. Page 22 line 27, for 10 --
read 11. 49 line 5, for thick -- read wide.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE AUTHOR keeps for Sale

A good assortment of imported and American manufactured bolting cloths. He
will supply those who apply to him, with Millstones, Bolting-Cloths,
Rolling-Screens, Iron work, Stones for Gudgeons, and complete for merchant or
country mills, all warranted good and suitable for the purpose. -- He plans and
draughts for building mills containing his patented improvements, described
part IV. with all their wheels proportioned to suit the fall and quantity of
water, so as to receive the grain from the wagon or ship and pass it through
all the necessary operations by water, and completely manufacture it ready for
packing for sale -- this he finds can be done with about half the number of
wheels usually applied to produce the same effect, and the house may be more
conveniently constructed for doing the business.

It is not necessary that he should see the seat but have only a slight draught
of the situation of the stream, roads, height of the banks, etc. with the exact
fall of the water, and quantity, if scarce, as directed, art. 53. Those who
choose to adopt any part of the said improvements after this date may by
sending a line directed to him in Philadelphia receive in answer permission to
build and use them one year, at the expiration of which they may obtain a
permanent privilege by paying the sees to either of the following gentlemen,
who are legally authorized to grant the same, viz. Samuel Reynolds, Mill-wright
Albany; William Byrnes, New-Windsor, State of New York; Thomas Ellicott, Bucks,
Pennsylvania; Elias Ellicott, Baltimore; Elisha Janey, Alexandria; John Moody,
Richmond; Nathaniel Ellicott, Petersburg; Simon Hadley, North Carolina; James
Dellet, Mill-wright, Georgetown, S. C.; or Evan Evans, Mill-wright, who makes
it his particular business to introduce and build them. -- The present prices
are, for the whole of the improvements, 40 dollars for each water-wheel, to
which they are applied, grinding with but one pair of stones at once; for
parts, 30 dollars; for part, 20 dollars; the remainder of the 40 dollars to be
paid at adopting the whole: Elevating and conveying grain is, ditto of the meal
and cooling the meal and attending the bolting hoppers part.

February 23rd. 1795.
CERTIFICATE.
WHEREAS Robert Dawson has established in Wilmington a manufactory of bolting
cloths, and being desirous to have them recommended to the public, has
submitted to our examination some of each kind, (they also having been tried by
several millers at this place.) We who are subscribers are willing to certify
that those we have had experience of, or have seen tried, have answered well
all the purposes of imported cloths; and as the silk, as well as manufacture,
is of our own country, it is our opinion that they ought to obtain a decided
preference to those fabricated in any foreign country.

(Signed) "SAMUEL CANBY, "TATNALL and LEA, "SHIPLEY and POOLE."


Brandywine Mills, 12th Mo. 9th, 1794.

