Philadelphia, Feb. ^, 1795. SIR,
HAVING from early age been concerned in working mines, and smelting and
refining ores in Europe, and also several years engaged in the same line in the
United States, I wish to become useful in promoting the opening of mines in
this country; being convinced from actual observation and experiment, that the
United States contain many valuable mines of lead, copper, coal, etc. which, on
being properly worked, might perhaps be found equally productive to any in the
world.

And observing that American Gentlemen are in general but little acquainted
with Mineralogy, for their information I propose giving a short Course of
Practical Lectures on the most useful branches of Metallurgic Chemistry, on
reasonable terms.

TERMS for the whole Course, twenty dollars. -- In London such a course would
be twenty guineas.

Gentlemen who subscribe to the whole of the Lectures, to have the privilege of
consulting me free of expense, (postage excepted) on any matter relating to the
mineral business, until the first of January, 1796. And in order to save them
the trouble of making minutes, I now promise to have the lecture printed for
their use. The lectures to commence as soon as ten Gentlemen have subscribed;
and the time of the day, to be that which will best suit their own convenience.

BENJAMIN HENFREY. From the Gap-Copper-Mines, Lancaster County.

Syllabus on Mineralogy.
I. ON Minerals in general, and the nature of the soil in which they are always
found in the greatest body.

II. On the use of Boring-rods in discovering mines; in particular, stone and
coal. And to show the folly of paying any attention to the impostors who run
about the country with what they call divining-rods. In this lecture specimens
of coal will be shown, and their various properties, as relates to their use in
manufactories explained. Also some observations on the utility of turf as a
fuel.

III. How to discover water, and to avoid rocks, in sinking wells; unless the
whole country is one continued solid rock without any chasms; but if there are
any, I will show, by a certain and easy method, how to find them. With some
useful observations on pump-making.

IV. On vitriolic waters; and how to explain the common error of the supposed
transmutation of iron into copper, and how to try (by an easy method) any
waters for copper, and how to precipitate the metal from the water; (an
invaluable discovery) and to show how vitriols of iron and copper are obtained.

V. On lead, and its various ores.

VI. On gold and silver, and their ores.

VII. On copper, and its various ores.

VIII. On tin, antimony, and lapis-caliminaris.

IX. On plumbago, molibdina, marles, etc. with some useful directions for
making mortar.

X. On iron; and steel and their various ores; and how to make cast-iron very
hard or very soft; with some useful information respecting the hardening and
tempering of steel.

I engage to show how most of the above ores may be assayed in a common smith's
fire, without crucible or flux of any sort; and in so simple a manner as not to
require more than one hour to understand each process; an improvement of my own
since I came to America.

Gentlemen who wish to subscribe to the above Lectures, are requested to leave
their address with Mr. Thomas Dobson, Bookseller, No 41, South Second Street.


