THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE YEARLY MEETING FOR PENNSYLVANIA, etc. Respecting the
situation of the Indian Natives in the year 1795. And the Circular Letter of
the Committee then appointed to attend thereto, To which are subjoined,
Extracts of Speeches and Letters from some of their Chiefs earnestly requesting
the assistance of their old Friends.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY SAMUEL SANSOM, Jun. No. 27, MULBERRY STREET.

At a Yearly Meeting for Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Delaware and the Eastern
parts of Maryland and Virginia held in Philadelphia in the 9th and 10th months,
1795.
30 th of the 9 th Month.
THE interesting concern under which this meeting from time to time in years
past has been exercised, and wherewith the minds of many brethren have been so
deeply affected, in relation to the former and present condition of the Indian
Natives, and with reference to events and occurrences respecting them through a
long course of years, being now in a solid manner revived, and spread with life
over the meeting; to give the subject more fully that weight and deliberate
consideration its importance calls for, the following friends are named, and
also to report their sense, whether a fund might not be fitly appropriated for
the desirable purpose of promoting the civilization and well-being of the
Indians -- viz. --

William Savery, John Parrish, Thomas Morris, Thomas Lightfoot, John Shoemaker,
Isaac Jacobs, Hugh Foulke, Samuel Gummere, Robert Kirkbride, William Blakey,
Oliver Paxson, John Simpson, James Emlen, Josiah Bunting, Stephen Mendenhall,
Samuel Canby, Amos Harvey, Humphrey Marshall, Jacob Lindley, William Wood,
Robert Holliday, Nicholas Brown, Samuel Troth, Daniel Mifflin, Benjamin Clark,
Samuel Woolman, Peter Ellis, John Smith, William Rogers, Abraham Warrington,
Samuel Townsend, Joseph Whiteall, Mark Miller, Samuel Ogden, Edward Bradway,
Edmund Williams, Joseph Shotwell, Henry Cliffton, William Hartshorne, John
Hunt, Abraham Gibbons, Joseph Sansom, John Wistar.
2 nd of the 10 th Month.
The friends on the concern of this meeting relative to the Indian Natives,
produced their report thereon, which being read and considered is united with
being as follows:

To the Yearly Meeting now sitting.
The committee appointed on the interesting concern for promoting the welfare
of the Indian Natives -- Report, that at several meetings in which we have had
the company of diverse concerned brethren not particularly named to the service;
we have deliberately considered this important subject, which has for a series
of years deeply exercised the minds of many friends, and been latterly revived
in the yearly meeting with increasing weight -- Our minds have been measurably
drawn into sympathy with these distressed inhabitants of the wilderness, and on
comparing their situation with our own, and calling to grateful remembrance the
kindness of their predecessors to ours in the early settlement of this country;
considering also our professed principles of peace and goodwill to men, we were
in-induced with much unanimity to believe, that there are loud calls for our
benevolence and charitable exertions to promote amongst them the principles of
the Christian religion, as well as to turn their attention to school learning,
agriculture, and useful mechanic employments, especially as there appears in
some of the tribes, a willingness to unite in the exercise of endeavors of
this kind -- We believe that this end may be much promoted under the Divine
Blessing, by a recommendation from this meeting to the several quarterly
meetings, that a liberal subscription be set on foot and a fund raised, to be
under the direction of a special committee to be appointed by the yearly
meeting, in order that these pious purposes may be carried into effect as early
as practicable, and the apparent friendly disposition of government toward
this desirable object improved. -- And conceiving that this subject is of
sufficient magnitude to claim the attention of our religious society in
different parts of this continent, we think it may be useful to hint the
substance of this concern in the Epistles to the respective yearly meetings.

3 rd of the 10 th Month.
The Report on the subject relative to the Indian Natives, being again read,
the following friends are named to give solid attention to the concern at
large, also receive and appropriate such moneys as may be raised toward
effecting the beneficial pious purposes, held up to view in said Report -- viz.
--

John Parrish, John Elliott, John Spencer, jun. Anthony Johnson, John Stapler,
Oliver Paxson, Joseph Trimble, James Emlen, Isaac Coats, Amos Harvey, Warner
Misllin, Samuel Howell, John Smith, Benjamin Clark, Benjamin Swett, John Hunt
(of Evesham) James Cooper, Mark Miller, William Hartshorne, Richard Hartshorne,
Thomas Wistar, Joseph Sansom, William Savery, John Biddle, Thomas Harrison,
Henry Drinker, Joseph Sloan, John Pierce, John Hunt (of Darby)
At a meeting of the said Committee in Philadelphia, on the 3rd of the 11th
Month 1795, the following Epistle was directed to the Quarterly and Monthly
Meetings belonging to the said Yearly Meeting.
The committee appointed by the yearly meeting to attend to the growing concern
for the welfare of our Indian Brethren, have seriously considered the important
trust devolved upon them, the prosecution of which will evidently require
prudence, patience and perseverance, its ultimate object, under the Divine
Blessing being no less than the temporal and spiritual welfare of some
thousands of our fellow men, and their posterity.

Difficulties however should not discourage us from the exercise of our
christian duty toward these people, when we call to mind that they were the
original inhabitants of this land, and that they kindly received and made room
for our forefathers, when they were strangers in it; especially as we are
settled upon the sea coasts, and parts adjacent, enjoying, through the bounty
of Providence, an abundance of temporal blessings, where they once lived in
ease and plenty, but are now wandering from hill to hill, scarcely able to find
subsistence in their former way of life -- Circumstances which loudly call for
our brotherly assistance* to put them in a way to support themselves by
Agriculture and handicrafts.

It is hoped that some sober well qualified friends will be drawn to unite with
the Concern so far as to go among them for the purpose of instructing them in
husbandry, and useful trades; and teaching their children necessary learning,
that they may be acquainted with the Scriptures of truth, improve in the
principles of Christianity, and become qualified to manage temporal concerns --
and it is expected that the committee will find it expedient to erect Grist and
Saw Mills, Smith's shops and other necessary improvements in some of their
villages. For the support of those who may be disposed to undertake the
performance of these services, due provision is intended to be made; and any
proposals from concerned friends will be received by Thomas Wistar of
Philadelphia our clerk, and laid before the committee for consideration.

The present appears to us a favorable period for carrying on this good work
-- the boundaries of some of the tribes are fixed by treaty -- their lands
cannot now be so easily alienated as heretofore, and evil communication with
traders and others is intended to be prevented by Government, whose consent and
approbation of the measures proposed has been already expressed.

We have appointed John Elliott our treasurer, who is to receive the
collections that may be made in the several monthly meetings for these
benevolent purposes.

To spread before friends some information of the present opening for
usefulness, the following speeches of some of their chiefs, and extracts of
letters from others who have been taught to read and write, are selected from a
considerable number which speak the same language, from different tribes.

Signed by direction, and on behalf of the committee, by THMAS WISTAR, Clk.

The Speech of Nectwawtwillimon, a Chief of the Delawares, at Muskingum, on the
borders of Virginia, to Zebulon Heston and John Parrish, in the Year 1773,
delivered on a belt of seven rows.
Brothers.
We are glad, and rejoice in our hearts, to see our brothers the Quakers
speaking before us. We feel the grace that is in your hearts conveyed to us,
and wish to be of the same religion; but we are poor, and weak, and not capable
of judging for ourselves: we hope you will have pity upon us, and instruct us
how to gain a comfortable livelihood, and also how we may come to obtain
everlasting happiness. When we think of our poor children our hearts are
affected with sorrow: we hope you will send us teachers.

The Speech of Gayashuta an ancient Chief of the Senneca nation on the borders
of Pennsylvania as given in charge by him to one of the Sachems of that Nation,
in the Year 1790, to be delivered to the Friends of Philadelphia.
Brothers, the sons of my beloved brother Onas, Onas is the Inidian word for
^^quill, and by that name they speak of William Penn.

When I was young and strong our country was full of game, which the good
Spirit sent for us to live upon; the lands which belonged to us were extended
far beyond where we hunted; I and the people of my nation had enough to eat,
and always something to give to our friends when they entered our cabbins; and
we rejoiced when they received it from us: hunting was then not tiresome, it
was diversion, it was a pleasure.

Brothers,

When your fathers asked land from my nation; we gave it to them, for we had
more than enough: Gayashuta was amongst the first of the people to say, "Give
land to our brother Onas, for he wants it," and he has always been a friend to
Onas, and to his children.

Brothers,

Your fathers saw Gayashuta when he was young; when he had not even thought of
old age or weakness: but you are too far off to see him, now he is grown old.
He is very old and feeble and he wonders at his own shadow it is become so
little. He has no children to take care of him, and the game is driven away by
the white people, so that the young men must hunt all day long to find game for
themselves to eat; they have nothing left for Gayashuta. And it is not
Gayashuta only, who is become old and feeble, there yet remain about thirty men
of your old friends, who, unable to provide for themselves, or to help one
another, are become poor, and are hungry and naked.

Brothers,

Gayashuta sends you a belt which he received long ago from your fathers, and a
writing which he received but as yesterday, from one of you. By these you will
remember him and the old friends of your fathers in this nation: look on this
belt and this writing, and if you remember the old friends of your fathers
consider their former friendship and their present distress; and if the good
Spirit shall put it into your hearts, to comfort them in their old age, do not
disregard his counsel. -- We are men, and therefore, need only tell you, that
we are old and feeble and hungry and naked; and that we have no other friends
but you, the children of our beloved brother Onas.

An Extract of a Speech from Gayontwaghta, commonly called the Corn-planter, a
Sachem of the Six Nations, to Friends, in the Year 1791.
Brothers,
The Senneca nation see that the Great Spirit intends they should not continue
to live by hunting, and they look round on every side and enquire who it is
that shall teach them what is best for them to do.

Your fathers dealt honestly with our fathers, they have engaged us to remember
it, and we wish our children to be taught the same principles by which your
fathers were guided.

Brothers,

We have too little wisdom among us, we cannot teach our children what we
perceive their situation requires them to know. We wish them to be instructed
to read and write and such other things as you teach your children, especially
the love of peace.

An Extract of a letter from Hendrick Aupcumut a Chief of the Mohiconick Tribe
now settled upon the Oneida reservation in the State of New York to William
Savery in the Year 1794.
I and my nation are fully determined to become husbandmen -- are greatly
encouraged to go on in the way of industry that instead of depending upon the
using guns for our support we take hold the ax, hoe, plow, scythe and sickle,
that our children after us may become good farmers, and above all, number of us
both male and female are come to resolution to wait upon the great good Spirit
who will lead us in the way of everlasting life -- and I hope that number of my
friends have experienced in measure the love of Christ who died for chief of
sinners. -- And we have sent our children to school every day to learn to read
the word of God and other good books -- and endeavor to impress the things in
their minds which are profitable for body and soul.

My good friend, I have just inform you our situation; we have build a house
above one year ago, about thirty feet square, to be use as school house and a
house where we met on Lords day to wait upon God, and here is some
inconvenience in the time of cold weather without fire to warm the house, and
in considering this I come to conclude to querie with you as friend whether you
would be so kind as to help us or speak or use your influence among your
brethren and friends in your society, to help us to keep this house warm --
That our poor children may be warmed in the time of school, and our poor people
may not catch the cold in the time of waiting and worshipping God in this
house. If you would then my petition is to you and your Friends, to put stove
in this house and we will put fire on it, then the house will be warm without
getting great deal of wood. And I believe it will be agreeable to the Father of
all mercies.

From other letters from the same to the same in the Year 1795.
My friend, I feel happy to hear your kind and friendly words; that you had a
concern for your poor Indian friends and that you would help them both in body
and soul. And the token of which you have signified that you would send some
books or implements of husbandry to such place as it would be best. My friend
this is most acceptable offer, and I am requested by my people to desire you to
send some implements of husbandry to fort Schuyler on Mohawk river to John
Posts, who would take care of the same until we fetch them. The hoes are most
wanting among us, also two or three plows, chain and scythes, and axes, and
harrow tooth -- these articles are very scarce here in wilderness -- if we
could get such we can then go on with our spring work. Respecting books --
spelling books and primmers are necessary -- for there are about forty small
children who would use the small books -- but the big children have got some
books to read from other quarter.

My friend, I will acquaint you that we attempted to build saw-mill this summer
and have got all the irons ready -- we intended begin to work next month but
money being so scarce we could not purchase some necessaries on that work.

My friends have thought that if we could hire fifty dollars from our friends
we could make out -- and they desire me to mention it to you -- My friend I
only mention this to you that you may know our situation -- and if you find it
you could lent us so much without harm to your minds, we will replaced next
winter, there is annual sum come in to this nation out of which we can replace
your money. --

My People and Friends does very well this spring in their attempts to learn to
be Farmers. --

One of my Boys has been sick and died three weeks ago -- he was eight years of
age -- one week before he expired I ask him several questions -- Among other
things I ask him whether he could trust our Savior Jesus -- he said "Yes I
have often pray to him in my heart."

A Letter from Solomon Quauchmut a young man of the same Tribe written to a
friend of Philadelphia in the Year 1795.
My Friend,
By the dispensation of Providence I and my family are well. And also I would
inform you that by the help of good Spirit I have been under concern for my
poor and never dying soul as to take a full resolution to forsake the service
of the evil one. And by the help of God I endeavor to walk in newness of life
in my remnant days. I was first convinced when I hear you preaching at
Canadarquay, discoursing upon talents that however a small talent man may have,
yet he is required to improve it, on these expressions I could not contain
myself, being convicted that I am the one who bury my master's money. And just
before your departure, one of your friends came to bid us farewell, he spoke
and advised me that I should always endeavor to follow soberness, by this I
may obtain God's blessing, then I was encouraged to begin to do my duty as the
Lord gives me light.

THE END.

