MISCELLANEOUS WORKS, PROSE AND POETICAL.

BY A YOUNG GENTLEMAN OF NEW YORK.

Quesquis erit vitae scribam color --
HOR. NEW YORK PRINTED BY THOMAS GREENLEAF. 1795.

PREFACE.
THIS Volume is sent into the world without apologies, although the Author has
many to offer: That candor which the ingenuous will always bestow on the
productions of one so very young, cannot be increased by them; and that
disposition to censure, which many are fond of cherishing, much less removed. A
few of these Miscellanies have, previous to their publication here, appeared in
the New York Magazine -- The Young Compositor, which is among this number, was
written by the Author at a much earlier period of his life than any other
performance inserted in this Volume -- He has left it in its original
situation, without altering the egotisms with which it abounds -- The piece is
designed to expose the errors of youth.

CONTENTS.
THE Critic, 7 Address to Solitude -- An Ode, 9 Melancholy -- An Ode, 11 Young
Compositor, Chap. 1. 13. Young Compositor, Chap. 2. 22 On Hope and Reflection,
28 The Parson -- An Elegy, 34 On Juvenile Institutions, 39 Eliza -- A Pastoral
Song, 47 An Oration, 49 Freedom -- A Song, 58 Thoughts on France, 60 The
Effects of Moderation, 65 Life of Pegasus Helicon, 79 The Poet -- An Elegy, 96
On Poetry, 100 On Descriptive Poetry, 104 On Elegiac Poetry, 111 Leander -- An
Elegy, 125 Delia -- A Pastoral, 133 The American Captive, 135 Mary's Tomb -- A
Sonnet, 141 Chatterton -- An Elegy, 143 On History, 148 The Discovery of
Tobacco -- A Poem, 159 Address to the Nightingale, 168 Address to Adeline, 170
History of Elvira, 171 Augustus and Aurelia, 201 Genius -- A Poem, 218 David's
Elegy, 223 O^thona (from Ossian) 227 Epistle to a Friend, 244 The Death of
Cuthullin (from Ossian) 247 Pelopidas and Epaminondas, 271
SUBSCRIBERS' NAMES.
A.
DR. DAVID R. ARNELL, Ulster. Allard Anthony. John Anderson, jun. New York.
David G. Abeel, do. Garrit B. Abeel, do. Abraham Adams, Rensselaerville.
B.
Samuel Boyd, New York. Richard L. Beekman, do. John K. Beekman, do. Andrew D.
Barclay, do. Jasper D. Blagge, do. 4 Copies. Elisha Bureduk. Joel Brat,
Rensselaerville. Alexander Bryan. Rev. John Bassett, Albany. Sybrant Bleecker,
do. Garrit Bogert, do. James Bill. William Bay. John Barron, Philadelphia. John
Black, New York. Alexander Black, New York. Lancaster Bowling, jun. do. Justus
Banks. Abraham Bevier. Abraham Blauvelt, A. M. Brunswick, N. J. Thomas Biggman,
Norwich, 2 Copies
C.
James Cuyler, New York. Robert Cocks, do. James Cornwall, do. John R. Cozine,
do. Josiah Cleveland, do. Samuel Carpenter. Moses I. Cantine, Princeton. Asa
Colvard, Rensselaerville. Enoch Croiker, do. David Croiker, do. Benjamin C.
Curtis. John Citrander, Albany. Calliopean Society, Schenecta^^.
D.
James Douglass, New York. John Depeyster, do. Richard B. Davis, do. Thomas
Demitt. Robert Dill. James Dove, New-Brunswick, 2 Copies.
E.
Enoch Ely, New York. Peter Elting, jun. do. James Emott, Ballstown.
F.
John J. Faesch, jun. Booneton. Solomon Fowler, New York. John Ferguson, do.
Nicholas Fonda, Albany. Douw J. Fonda, Stillwater.
G.
Hugh Gain, New York, 6 Copies. M. Gelston, do. Levi P. Graham. T. V. W.
Graham, Albany. Mrs. Griffen, New York.
H.
Elias Hicks, New York. A. Hunt, do. Henry Hunt, do. Peter Hawes, do. Thomas
Hammersly, do. Abraham Hun, Albany. John V. Henry, do. Isaac Hutton, do.
Benjamin B. Hausbrook. Abraham Hatch, Rensselaerville.
I.
John B. Johnston, New York. John J. Johnson, do. P. Irving, do. James Inglis,
do. David S. Jones, do. Nicholas Jones, do. Robert Irwin.
K.
Oliver L. Ker, New York. Leonard Kip, jun. do.
L.
W. G. S. Lewis. Augustus H. Lawrence, New York Henry A. Livingston, do. George
Livingston, do. Israel Loring, do. Jacob Lazalere, do. John Lawrence.
M.
John M'Kesson, jun. New York. John Marschalk, do. Jasper Moreduk, do. Asaph
Morse. Ananias Mile. Charles Mile, Rensselaerville.
N.
James W. Nicholson, New York, 2 Copies. Isaac Norton, do. Robert Nichols.
O.
Benjamin Osborne, New York. Henry Oudenarde, do. Edward Ostrander. Mathias
Ogden, Fort Edward.
P.
Charles P. Poinier, New York. William Post, jun. do. Jotham Post, jun. do.
John P. Pearss, do. William Paulding, jun. do. Nathaniel Paulding, do.
Alexander Phoenix, do. Rembrandt Peale, Philadelphia. Elisha Parks, Ulster, 3
Copies. John Preston, Rensselaerville.
R.
John Reid, New York. Siah Robenson, Massachusetts. George Riker, New York. P.
Kossetie, do. John B. Romeyn, Schenectady. Benjamin Romeyn, V. D. D. do.
William Ross, Newburgh. Gideon Roos. John Roos, jun. Stephen Rea. Cornelius
Roosevelt, New York.
S.
T. and J. Swords, New York, 6 Copies. Henry Sands, do. William Scott,
New York, John B. Schuyler, Esquire. Albany. Richard Southgate, do. G. V.
Schoonhoven, Halfmoon. Jacobus Sch^onh^ven. Dirck Swart, Stillwater. Count J.
Skinner, Ulster. James Saidler, New York.
T.
Philip Ten Eyck, do. William Tracy, New York. John Troup, do. John Thompson,
Esquire. Stillwater. Dirck Ten Broeck, Albany. Richard S. Treat, do. Jacob Tallman,
A. M. Brunswick, N. J
V.
S. Van Rensselaer, Esquire. Albany. P. S. Van Rensselaer. Cornelius C. Van Allen,
New York. Daniel Van Antwerp, do. Daniel L. Van Antwerp, do. Isaac Van Doren,
Schenectady. Mynard Van Everen. Cornelius Van Denbergh, Stillwater. John Van
Derheyden, Bethlehem. P. C. Waterbury, New York. George J Warner, do. William
Wyche, do. S. T. Williams, do. W. Wentworth, dok. Abraham M. Walton. Henry
Walton, Ballstown. Nathan H. White, Ward's Bridge. Thomas Whiten. Jacob Win,
Water Vleit. John Whirry. Abraham Wood.
W.
Rensselaer (...), Albany, 3 Copies. Nathaniel Willis, Martenburgh, Vir. 13
Copies.
Y.
John Waters Yates, New York. Joseph C. Yates, Schenectady. Joseph R. Yates,
Albany.
MISCELLANEOUS WORKS, PROSE AND POETICAL.
THE CRITIC.
EXCLUDED from the sun's reviving light,
His windows closed to change the day to night,
The Critic sits within his room;
Therein he meditates his silent schemes
Of penetration, and of wisdom dreams,
And honors that will ever bloom.
Within his hand the venomed pen he holds,
The unblemished paper to his pleasure solds,
And sits in gloomy thought profound;
For minutes thus, the God-like man remains,
To exercise he calls his envious brains,
And casts his eyes in awful gaze around.
Upon his paper, then his thoughts he pens,
With pleasure grinning wide his mouth extends,
And pulls his pug and crabbed nose;
Then to the ceiling heaves his rolling eyes,
And for another sage remark he plies,
And claws his head whence satire flows.
No smile of candor dwells upon his face,
No gentle pity in the wretch we trace,
Not inexperienc'd youth he will spare;
Over excellence he throws a transient glance,
But dwells on faults and blemishes of chance,
And to a cable magnifies a hair.
Critic! in all your terrors come arrayed!
Your pen malicious, and your wit, invade!
I bid defiance to your sneers!
The candid, generous, public will excuse,
The feeble efforts of the youthful muse,
Her humble gift receive and sooth her fears.
ADDRESS TO SOLITUDE. AN ODE.
THY haunts, O Solitude! I love to rove,
Along thy lawns, beneath thy shady grove;
Among thy bowers to rear the humble cot,
And soft indulge my bosom's secret thought:
There, musing, ponder on the tale of woe,
And bid the tear of duteous sorrow flow.
As over the flowery dales I stray along
I Would catch the music of thy murmuring streams,
I Would listen to thy songster's plaintive song
Which lul's the mind in fancy's fairy dreams;
The voice of noisy man not there is found,
The clamorous discord of the town not there;
None but a rur^^ and melodious sound,
In mournful music warbles through the air.
The brownish Thrush from yonder spray
Tunes his clear melifluous lay,
While dim evening spreads her veil
Philomela resumes her tale.
Quivering flows the strain along,
Attentive ssorrow lists the song;
The sad enthusiast lends her ears,
Composed reflection calls her tears;
Dull melancholy soothes the wound
And glimmering visions hover round.
A dreary gloom surrounds the woodland plain,
Music and silence hold their tranquil reign;
A lowering darkness wraps the rural scene,
The moon from high, reflects her ray serene.
Her trembling beams break through the spreading trees,
While parting moves the ev'ning's sighing breeze.
Now let me seek O Solitude thy shade!
A son of sorrow, and a son of woe!
To mourn the ravages which death has made,
And to humanity a tear bestow. --
Delusive objects strike my sorrowing eyes,
Formed by fair Luna's clear reflective light
Behind the bushes awful forms arise,
And fleeting phantoms glide before the fight,
Come, O gloomy solitary shade!
Thy vot'ry's anguish'd breast pervade --
Where nourished reigns the weeping thought
And mourns humanity's appointed lot;
Clothe all thy scenes in sorrow's dress,
Thy murmuring streams let grief express;
Let visions through the thicket stray,
And superstition bend its way --
Let all thy plains congenially impart
And sigh responsive to a bleeding heart.
MELANCHOLY. AN ODE.
ON yonder barren isle in dreary cells,
The dread enchantress, Melancholy, dwells,
And her dark draught prepares;
Sad, hollow accents from her cave resound,
A glimmering taper throws its rays around,
And lights the frightful snares.
Within the cell a misty stream appears,
Swelled with humanity's afflicted tears,
Which murmuring seems to flow;
Over mossy rocks its trick'ling course it bends,
Ghosts stand and gaze when foaming it descends,
And raise shrill shrieks of woe.
Upon the ground, the enchantress sits reclined,
Around the cave howls the loud sighing wind,
A snake beside her lies,
Loose and disordered is her shaggy head,
A spotted mantle round her limbs is spread,
Deep stained with various dies.
Upon its hinge hoarse moves the iron door,
Sad, sullen sounds rise from the echoing floor,
Sweet music to her ear.
Sudden she starts from her dim aged seat,
Sends a shrill scream which echoes wild repeat,
Which phantoms startling hear.
Around the cell her crimson eyes she throws,
A dreary silence spreads its still repose,
No whispering zephyr blows:
Save the hard drawing of the hag's foul breath,
Bad as the vapors of destroying death;
And the slow stream which flows.
She distant, here, from human eye remains,
No moral wanders over her pensive plains,
Here dusky Raven's scream;
Here glimmering ghosts glide solemnly along,
Who pausing list the Raven's dolesome song,
And gaze on Luna's beam.
Before the cell a cypress' branches spread,
The weeping-willow hangs its sorrowing head,
Which form a dreary scene:
Behind steep rocks with towering aspect rise,
And strike an awe on the astonished eyes;
On distant shores surveyed.
When Cynthia on the plains her shadow throws,
When Luna and the twinkling planet glows,
And light the Gothic scene;
Close round her limbs the fairy wraps her robe,
She frightful wanders from her dark abode,
And dimly stalks the green.
THE YOUNG COMPOSITOR.
CHAPTER I.
WHEN the mind has fixed upon a subject as a theme for its reflections, one of
the most difficult ends is then accomplished. It is always the case with youth,
that when they have brought their minds to a mode of thinking, and sit down to
compose, their first and greatest difficulty is, on what subject they shall
write. A variety of subjects are presented to their imaginations; but the mind
singles out no one in particular before the others. Different ideas arise which
might tend to the illustration of each of them; and it often happens, that we
are longer in choosing a subject, than, when this difficulty being overcome, we
are in finishing the composition. I remember often to have set down, yet
undetermined on what subject to write, while many were presented to my view: I
have at length shown a little partiality for the pleasures of the Imagination,
and have run on within my mind, with out committing it to paper after this
manner: "To the imagination man owes some of the most pleasing moments of his
life; it wafts him to celestial regions, unseen, untrod, and brings to his
contemplative view, those beautiful and captivating scenes which none but she
herself can paint. It is she that paints the lovely grottos, the verdant
valleys and the spreading lawns, the retreats of muses, and the gentle streams
which meander through them; she brings to the view of the youthful lover, the
charming form of his Amelia, and dwells on the pleasing prospect, when she
shall be his. -- She presents to youth honor, fame, and rewards, as --." Thus
far having proceeded, I make a pause; inward dissatisfaction tells me this is
not a good subject, and points to some other. I then begin on Dancing in the
same manner: -- "Some enthusiasts have endeavored to show that dancing is a
sin; others again, not going quite so far, have exclaimed against it as a waste
of time: Against all these hypocritical gentry, I shall endeavor to defend
this valuable accomplishment." I here also pause, grow dissatisfied, and make a
third attempt; for the country with all its charms, now attracts me topaint her
in lofty strains. -- "While some delight in the tumults of a city; retirement,
ease and solitude point to the rural retreat, where rosy health sits enthroned,
and where peace and content lead on the gentle train." The wandering
imagination of youth is not yet content, and I am often forced to rise without
having determined what virtue, or what vice, or what thing shall have the honor
of claiming my august speculative attention. But the subject being chosen,
another difficulty which arises in the mind of youth, is, how they shall begin:
Shall it be by a round about way, as if stealing upon the subject, and a long
preamble? Or shall they come out open and bold and directly tell then subject.
To avoid this last, is what renders it more difficult to youth, for they look
upon it as ungraceful in writing. It is the manner which naturally occurs to
their minds and requires some study to avoid. But I think it is a mistaken
notion in us, for the chief end of writing is to be understood, and simplicity
in style must then be the best, provided it is not harsh and grating to the
ear. The former of these introductions, Dr. Johnson, in his Rambler. abounds
with: we have with him a page of reflections, and exclamations, before we know
what subject we are about to meditate upon. It is the manner generally
practiced by flowery writers, and those who delight in pleasing the ear more
than improving the mind. But Addison, who is the standard of beauty in writing,
always introduces his subject with a reflection, or strikes directly to the
point. What a simple and beautiful introduction is the following: -- "There is
nothing in which men deceive themselves more than in what the world call zeal.
There are so many passions which hide themselves under it and so many mischiefs
arising from it, that some have gone so far as to say, it would have been for
the benefit of mankind, if it had never been reckoned in the catalogue of
virtues." -- When the subject is chosen and begun, the young Compositor goes on
with a tolerable degree of briskness his heart begins now to expand with
pleasure; and I look upon the delight of the youth in the present situation of
the composition, to be greater than in any other. The greatest impediments are
now removed, and the stream flows in an uninterrupted and peaceful succession.
The last difficulty, and let me add also the smallest, to the young compositor,
is the conclusion^. He is led astray by a false idea of grandeur, in
terminating his reflection, by selecting the most sonorous and high sounding
words, and is resolved to make his piece end well, let it be of whatever merit.

This puts me in mind of a man who, having lived in the meanest and most wicked
style was resolved to die in a most magnificent one. I remember at the
conclusion of a little composition of mine on libels, I was at a stand; but
some inspiring angel overcame my difficulty, and whispered me the following: --
"The character of a man is of too serious a nature to be thus sported with: For
when robbed of it, a person is deserted by those who formerly were his friends,
and universally despised. To a feeling mind, how wretched is such a state. But
yet, O envy! short is thy triumph, for innocence will still prevail, and
triumph in her turn. -- She will unfold grim envy's gloomy haunts, and her
black form disclose. -- An observation I beg leave to make on composition in
general, is, that most youth study to write in a flowery style; this, when it
flows naturally, is an evidence of a fertile genius: -- But they ought never to
mend the language in which the idea presents itself, unless it is bad grammar,
and expressions which are harsh; for then, as an author expresses it, the
language is raised, but the strength is fallen. The fault of a young poet I
conceive to be his great delight to send invocations to the muses, and to
spread throughout the poem the name of youth. Of the invocation, the following
is an elegant example: O come, ye muses, with a laurel crown,
Pour, O Parnassus, pour your torrents down!
Blow ye poetic zephyrs gently blow,
Ye heavenly choirs, O strike in accents slow;
Ye gods immortal, swell the present lay,
O Homer, Milton, hearken when I pray.


The word more employed than any other by a young poet, and which he can hardly
write any poetry without frequently using, is soft. He makes the mind the
impression of the face, and almost every thing he describes soft, as in the
following verses: Friendship the offspring of a soul refined,
Where firm sincerity and truth reside;
And the soft virtues of a gentle mind,
With generous pity for its feeling guide;
Connects these girls in strongest softest ties,
Arrayed in all their soft interior grace;
Strong as the luster of their sparkling eyes,
Soft as expression in their lovely face.


But yet after all I have said, it is a true and common saying, that what is
taught by precept, is not shown by example; for where our inclination points,
we naturally follow, though at the expense of error. And with much propriety
might I here apply to myself these words of the poet: -- "I see the right and I
approve it too,
"Condemn the wrong, and yet the wrong pursue."


Having gone through these remarks, relative to a young compositor, let us for
a moment draw the curtain, and behold him in his meditation, with the
instrument of his profession in his hand, and Sheridan laying by his side: --
See, how with eyes steadily fixed on some object, and not even allowed to
twinkle, and with his elbow placed upon the table, and his head reclined upon
his hand, he explores the qualities and appendages of things. Sometimes he
casts his eyes up, and then down, as if in the greatest devotion. See how he
knits his brows, claps his pen in his mouth, and rubs his shins with his hands,
while the muse resuses her aid, or in other words, while the young gentleman in
unable to recall his scattered ideas, or while he has none to recall. But look at
him again: See now the pleasant smile that plays upon his countenance, and with
what rapidity he snatches his pen that he was formerly chewing; for the gods
have saved it from destruction, by inspiring its master with a thought. See how
he throws one thigh over the other, and applies his pen to paper, lest he
should lose what he has this moment found. He now reads over, in rapid accents,
his composition from the beginning, to see how the present member will suit, --
he gives the smile of approbation; -- and then, as a fowler having killed his
bird, beholds it with a smile, and as soon as he has thrown it into his wallet
thinks no more of it, but pursues his game; so does this present pupil of Clio,
after having secured his idea, throw down his head in its prior position, and
pursue his meditation. See now, how boisterously poor Sheridan is handled, for
the young gentleman has at length arrived at the conclusion. His lips are now
never still, but continually repeating parts of sentences, and musically
chiming sonorous words. See now, when he has committed his conclusion to paper,
subscribed his name, and printed a FINIS, what looks of self-approving merit
beam from his eyes! Smile now follows smile. -- Here then we must let the
curtain fall, for the young Addisonian is just rising to give his composition a
second reading, and to accompany it with gestures and emphasis, and all the
graces of delivery. It is better there should be but one mouth; let us
therefore, be only silent hearers.

THE YOUNG COMPOSITOR. CHAPTER II.
IN the first chapter, I drew from nature a few observations concerning the
Compositions of youth: I have traced some of the chief difficulties arising in
their minds throughout the writing of the composition, the faults into which
they naturally fall, and I have drawn the curtain and shown a young Addisonian
in his meditation. -- We left him with Demosthenian eloquence, speaking the
effusions of his brain; he has, no doubt, by this time stopped. The former
speaker has therefore ventured again to resume his discourse, and has presumed
that it would not be unentertaining, should he advance farther, to those who
have honored his former little production with their reading. I shall now speak
generally of Composition of its great importance, and of the beneficial effect
of societies, instituted for literary improvement. Young persons in choosing a
subject, search always for that one in which they can most indulge a favorite
inclination; that on which they can dwell in swelling language do they fail in
argument, and wish to extend the composition to a greater length; they always
have recourse to example, which every one must undoubtedly acknowledge, to be
weightier than precept, to effect both these. I remember I once singled out
patriotism as my subject: after having, with much meditation and labor,
produced a few remarks, I immediately called to my aid the shades of heroes,
and in enraptured accents exclaimed: --

How amiable must Warren appear; and how detestable on the other hand, is
Arnold; behold, the one nobly dying, etc. etc. etc. and thus enumerated
examples throughout the whole. An observation made by many writers is, that if
youth wish to write a good style, they must continually read some of the
writings of the principal authors, so that they may imbibe their easy, and
graceful expressions, and elegance of diction. Although this is the sentiment
of men remarkable for their learning and wisdom, I have yet the audacity to
possess thoughts which dissent from it. That youth ought to read authors, to
acquire a stock of ideas, I will not presume to deny; for this and practice are
the only means by which they are able to become compositors; but it is only to
style that I allude. No expressions can be simple, easy and beautiful, without
being natural. And can those be so which are formed from the writings of
another? must they not be affected, and the idea through this affectation,
stripped of its force* Similar to the affectation of manners, which diminishes
the power of form and of beauty. Is not the end of all writing to be
understood? If this is the case, simplicity, is the best of styles; and what is
simplicy but nature. Neither Addison nor any other of the writers, whom we are
told to imitate, ever pursued this method. In my opinion, he who wishes to
write in the most simple and easy style, must use expressions which nature
dictates, neither seeking ornament, nor rejecting it when it voluntarily offers
itself. These expressions which nature dictates, by often practicing ourselves
in composition, become more refined and beautiful.

Did mankind not possess the power and blessing of conversation, we could not
receive that most lasting and rational pleasure, arising from social society.
It is by this we receive knowledge and information through communication.
Besides conversation, composition is another mean, by which we make known our
sentiments on different and useful subjects. While conversation confines itself
merely to those who constitute society, composition diffuses its enlightening
rays to thousands; and while in conversation the sentiments which are advanced,
are only the impulse of the moment, those in composition are well digested, and
accompanied with easy and graceful language. Composition is justly esteemed the
most useful branch in polite learning, and with it are connected all branches
of science; ease and grace in writing have therefore been the study of many
ages.

The advantages of composition and the variety of styles have been shown by
many eminent authors, and that upon it youth cannot bestow too much labor and
attention, provided it is not at the expense of other important studies.
Composition is the most conspicuous branch of literature; by it men have risen
to same, without possessing any depth in scientific knowledge. It is by this
that persons in the lowest rank and situation of life, have claimed the
attention of a world, and acquired esteem and admiration. How could we without
it, advance, with propriety and energy our sentiments. How could we paint in
the descriptive style, the beauty or the curiosity of any object which has
struck our attention. How could we stand the champions of innocence against all
the sophistry of deceit and treachery. How could we paint in proper terms the
detestable form of slavery, and dwell on the exalted virtues of liberty.

To youth, upon contemplation, composition appears an exceeding difficult task,
and one which they shall never be able to accomplish; but upon practice, their
ideas become more refined, and their understandings enlarged: this is one of
the principal uses of society, for as in all other things, nothing can be
acquired without practice, so it is in a more particular degree with regard to
composition. Let not youth then be intimidated, for after one or two attempts,
the way is rendered more plain and easy. In society a youth has the advantage
of of many examples: he can suit more to his capacity the writings of his
equals, he can improve by the criticisms made upon the same, and he is
generally roused by the spirit of emulation. Of the importance of oratory, we
need but slightly hint, for it is daily exemplified, at the bar, in the pulpit
and in the senate. It is this which so much sways the passions of men, one
while making them feel a soldier's warmth, and now the soft emotion of
sympathy. Do any of us wish to serve our country in the cabinet, or even in the
field? this then is an essential study. By this we can enforce what proposition
we wish to be adopted, and by this we can re-animate the soldier's drooping
courage. But should any person despair of becoming an orator, because nature
has denied some of the principal ingredients, which are necessary in
constituting one, let such only call to their view, the thundering orator of
Greece, whose perseverance surmounted every difficulty.

ON HOPE AND REFLECTION.
THE anticipation of future events, which we conceive will tend to our
happiness, elates the mind with joy and pleasure. We are animated by the lively
sallies of imagination, and with anxious smiles cast forward a searching eye,
the beneficial effects arising from the desired event, appear dressed in the
most beautiful colors, and give the mind a captivating glow, which prompts the
wished embrace. But ah! how often does the long looked for period at length
arrive, but only to disappoint the unhappy being, lulled by the giddy flights
of a warm imagination, and dreaming of honor, popularity and reward. Led by the
fond deceiver Hope, the author invokes his solitary muse; with gloomy pleasure
he devises plans; alone he seeks the hoary genius of reflection, and gives to
the world the (...) of his labor. The world with frowns receives the gift; no
smile breaks through the sullen gloom, and soon a startling voice, not that of
gentle candor, blasts the nourished hope of the degraded author. Then from the
muses spreading grove he takes his lonely way to where, decaying oaks refuse a
cooling shade. No more he silent ponders on Parnassus' flowery banks, but seeks
the stagnant pool. Hope first seduced the hapless Chatterton; on her he placed
his confidence; but alas? he placed them upon a deceiver. At length wearied of
her promises, he banished her from his melancoly abode, and sought the arms of
death. Hope is one of the pleasing passions of the human breast; it furnishes
the mind with employment, beyond what the present time affords. We receive
nearly an equal pleasure in anticipating some future event, as if we realized
it. Hope presents to us, futurity, while Imagination decorates it in beautiful
robes. Without Hope man would lead a dull and unhappy life. It is her which
animates him, and calls forth his faculties to action, she gives him serenity
and good humor. Hope, says Addison, is a kind of vital heat in the soul, that
cheers and gladdens her when she does not attend to it -- it makes pain easy
and labor sweet.

How kind and indulgent does Hope lend her smiles on the youthful lover; she
conveys him to a beautiful bower, where the rose, the jessamine, and the most
odoriferous flowers lendtheir sweet perfume; she there presents to his view the
object of his affection, and dwells on the future period, when he shall lead
her blooming to the altar. When our country calls the soldier to arms, when in
sight the hostile armies approach, and martial music sounds the dreadful onset,
what is it that keeps alive the courage of the hero, and bids him undauntedly
face the cannon's bellowing mouth. It is the gentle soother Hope that glows
within his bosom. He hopes he shall be one of that happy number which shall
survive the conflict; that victory will crown his valor, and that his country
will receive him with a wreath of laurels. But it was a hope of a different
nature, which swelled the bosoms of the sons of Columbia -- it was not for
glory that they unsheathed the shining sword. It was for their injured rights,
it was for liberty. Roused by the groan^ of their country, their courage rose
to fury, which breathed vengeance on the foe, stained with the blood of their
unhappy countrymen.

There is another power bestowed upon man, from which he receives a great
source of pleasure. This power, which is reflection, though of a nature widely
different, seems to be in some instances, a little similar with Hope. Hope
anticipates things which are to come, Reflection calls to mind what is past;
the one is the offspring of that creative power the imagination, the other of
the memory; the one is elated by the expectation of future happiness, the other
looks back with a smile of exquisite pleasure, on experienced incidents; the
one takes its abode in the cheerful breast of youth, the other in the
experienced bosom of old age. We may be said to possess double pleasure from
the anticipation of the happiness which an approaching event will confer upon
us, and also, that we cannot fully enjoy one, without reflecting upon it. It is
hard to determine from which of these faculties of the mind it is, that we
receive the most pleasure. How highly gratifying to the old man, must it be to
recollect a well spent life; with what delight can he dwell on his puerile
tricks, and youthful employments, when the tinge of health glowed upon his
cheek, and when strength nerved his limbs; the many happy years he has enjoyed,
blessed with the smiles of a youthful bride. Reflecting upon past scenes
improves our minds, and our knowledge of human nature; we can recollect the
many schemes and plans which were executed to bring about desired events, and
accomplished by others to defraud us. Knox, in his Moral Essays, was so
conscious of the extreme pleasure, which attends the reflection of the virtuous
man, that he has said, To recollect a well spent life, is to anticipate a
future state of happiness. Homer, in his Iliad, had shown himself to possess a
complete knowledge of human life, in his character of Nestor; the old man can
seldom deliver an oration, in the council of princes, without informing them of
the many noble actions he has achieved, how he slew giants, tyrants, and base
men. It was from this source the venerable hero drew his greatest pleasure, and
it was by telling the seats of his youth, that he chose to entertain his
friends; who can hear the aged fire thus speak, without feeling for him a
veneration and respect -- A god-like race of heroes once I knew,
Such as no more these aged eyes shall view!
Lives there a chief, to match Penthou's fame,
Dryas the bold, or Ceneus' deathless name,
Theseus endu'd with more than mortal might
Or Polyphemus, like the gods in fight.
With these of old, to toils of battle bred,
In early youth my hardy days I led;
Fired with the thirst which virtuous envy breed.
And smit with love of honorable deeds.
Yet these with soft persuasive art I swayed;
When Nestor spoke they listened and obeyed.


Again, he says, when upbraiding the Grecians for their fear, to accept the
challenge of Hector. -- O would to all the immortal powers above,
Minerva, Phoebus and almighty Jove!
Years might again roll back, my youth renew,
And give this arm the spring which once it knew;
When fierce in war where Jordan's waters f^ll,
I led my troops to Phea's trembling wall,
And with the Arcadian spears my prowess tried
Where Caladon rolls down his rapid tide.


As it is from Reflection the old man obtains his principal pleasure, with what
respect and attention ought youth to listen to the tales of his youth. If not
entertained by them, duty ought to command their attention; we can in no
instance, more than by doing this, draw upon us the love and affection of the
aged; we can in no instance more agreeably indulge their humors, and bestow on
their wrinkled countenances, the smile of satisfaction.

THE PARSON. AN ELEGY.
CHILL blew drear autumn's sadly sighing gale,
The sun declining shed a feeble light
Over the brown landscape and the faded vale,
And shone reflective from the mountain's height.
Musing, I wandered Hudson's lofty steep,
The loud wave sent its hoarse and sullen roar;
The rapid wild-fowl skim'd the howling deep
And slung its screamings to the lonely shore.
The scene infused a melancholy glow
And lulled to sorrow every cheerful thought,
Tuned the dull passions to the tale of woe
And serious pondered Human Nature's lot.
While in this frame with folded arms I strayed
With thoughtful step and steady downcast eye,
I heard a voice flow plaintive over the glade,
Which often paused to heave a sorrowing sigh.
Listening I stood and cast my eyes around,
To where the accents of affliction rose:
There I beheld, stretched on the dewy ground,
A mourning stranger clad in raven clothes;
His aspect told the sorrows of his mind;
His cheeks were pale, in anguish rolled his eye;
His short locks trembled at the northern wind
Which wiped his tears and sorrowful flew by.
His dusty coat had seen its youthful years,
His friendly Breeks let through his pious knees,
His elbow through his reverend sleeve appears
And kissed, though coldly, autumn's searching breeze
Upon his head in majesty uprose,
A hat! which braved the fury of the storm,
His slouching boots a pai^ of legs disclose,
Useful supporters, but devoid of form.
Yet in this garb his melancholy face
Shone with a luster dignified and great;
There flowed a ray of sweet celestial grace
Which braved chill poverty and adverse fate.
Just as I turned and took this transient view
Of the appearance of this sorrowing man,
These mournful accents from his lips he threw
More sad than music his slow murmurs ran.
" Hard is the solitary parson's lot:
" Wrapped in the glooms of poverty and care:
" Soon are his labors by his flock forgot;
" No fond remembrance of his works they bear.
" Ingratitude his anxious pain repays --
" His zeal and fervor in religion's cause,
" Which warned the wanderer of his evil ways,
" And bid reflection over his errors pause.
" Reduced by sorrow and lung-breaking zeal,
" When the cold tomb receives his last remains
" Short is affliction, which their bosoms feel
" Feebly is heard their melancholy strains.
" His midnight lamp he solitary trims,
" Turns the worn leaves of John and Matthew over,
" Then gives to sleep his sedentary limbs
" And tunes the musically nasal snore.
" When sabbath day appears with lowering sky
" Around his active throat he twines his band,
" Bids to the wind his sacred mantle fly,
" And draws his glove half fingered on his hand.
" When he ascends the pulpit's holy flight
" And rears his breast above the desk to view,
" Beneath, his children meet his dolesome sight
" With sunday garments, grinning in the pew.
" Full pleased to see papa exalted high,
" His numerous cherubs with fond rapture gaze;
" He, hapless creature! heaves a deadly sigh,
" And tunes his organs to his maker's praise.
" To stop their cries, he scarce has food and meat,
" And scarce a robe to screen them from the cold,
" Yet like the great these beings still must eat,
" And still like them in some warm garb be roll'
" All this my lot! poor Classic's told his pain;
" And snatched from time a momentary ease,
" It lulls the breast to pour unheard its strain;
" Where naught responds but Hudson and the breeze.
" Where yon large city rears its lofty spires,
" There stands my church, there live my tender flocks:
" The sickening view my anguish'd bosom fires,
" And thrills my passions with electric shocks.
" More could I say, but ah! I Will not repine,
" Let poverty's keen blasts sweep sad along;
" The time will come when bright'ning beams will shine,
" When Classic shall forget his mournful song."
Here the sad stranger ceased his lonely moan,
To sympathy I gave the trembling tear;
For ah! the bard, a rueful parson's son,
Should weep for one so kindred and so dear.
Still unperceived I left the dreary scene
And sought a parent's hospitable cot,
Where the kind smiles of plenty yet are seen,
Not such like Classic yet his humble lot.
O fair divinity, celestal maid,
Once thy bright charms enrapturing struck mine eyes;
Once to my breast I pressed thy promised aid
But ah, look! yonder wret^hed Classic (...).
1 st October, 1794.
ON JUVENILE INSTITUTIONS.
I PROPOSE briefly to enquire into the benefits which youth receive from
societies established for literary purposes. There are so many institutions,
formed from this motive, now existing, that it is an enquiry of some
importance; the love of them seems to be prevalent in the breast of every
youth. The rational pleasure which we there receive, abstracting every other
benefit, deserves some attention. One of the most delightful pleasures which we
can enjoy, arises from intercourse with our fellow man; while in the presence
of lively and agreeable friends, we banish all disagreeable reflections from
our minds, which at other times would tend to interrupt our repose, and
discourse with harmony and pleasure. There are few who can say, that they
receive no pleasure from a society of favorite companions, when engaged in
some literary dispute; and such who can, are in some measure bereft of the
feeling of humanity. Such who can, have, through dissipation and vicious
pursuit, rubbed off that amiable polish which attracts human nature in the
tender ties of brotherly love. All will acknowledge the pure enjoyments which
arise from a virtuous friendship; many can judge of it from delightful
experience. It is in such societies as these that they become formed. Young
persons of the same age, members of the same literary society, and pursuing
hand in hand the same object, sympathy will be naturally excited in each bosom,
and led to form this virtuous sensation. The particular objects which these
societies pursue are composition; verbal debates and oratory. To explain the
use, and the great necessity of these branches, to render us great and
distinguished characters, is needless, and is not the subject of our
investigation.

In favor of societies one of the first arguments which strikes us is
Emulation, in a large society, where young gentlemen meet for improvement, and
have such a laudable opportunity of displaying to their comrades their good
sense and judgment, it is impossible that such a motive should not actuate the
breast, which is not callous to shame and the love of praise. The situations
and rewards which are offered to their view, must stimulate every effort to
excel. The Spartans, conscious of the emulation which will always prevail among
youth, formed their young warriors into societies, that so, striving who should
excel in the military arts, they might be trained up to all the fatigues and
hardships of war. It was this that rendered the Spartan bands invincible and
spread the terror of their name abroad. But not like them we train ourselves to
scenes of human blood; we strive not to gain the laurel from a bruised and
bleeding adversary, but we strive to obtain the fragrant myrtle by excelling in
literature, and the delight^^^ arts of peace. Though youth may be led to
practice themselves in composition, without entering societies; yet I am not
acquainted with any other manner in which they are so agreeebly incited to it.
Friendship, the love of praise, and desire of improvement, invite them to
wander in the delightful walks of the muses, where no thorns obstruct the
verdant path. The modest youth there brings forth his productions, to the
benevolent ear of friendship, and is not terrified by the expected sneers of a
morose critic; but still a fear of disapprobation, and a desire of praise,
banish carelessness and neglect, from his compositions and literary exercises.
By reading and experience persons may acquire a stock of knowledge; they may
retain in their minds, various sentiments and historical events, which they
have read; but they will never become elegant compositors, without much
practice. By this they acquire a more regular arrangement of their ideas, and a
more free and continued flow of thought and argument. A person can never
compose an essay entirely original, without much practice and investigation;
the more he practices, the more his mental faculties become enlarged and
refined.

Although a young compositor ought never to cultivate a style which is labored
and unnatural; he ought not to seek high-sounding words and the many figures of
rhetoric to decorate his composition; for these, instead of beauty, introduce
obscurity in his meaning, and display a considerable share of pedantry
unamiable in youth. Many persons, led by a false taste, consider these as
elegance; and instead of following the easy and natural path of simplicity,
copy the florid and bombastic style of Hervey, which is grating to the ear of
the true critic. But yet the harsh language of nature ought to be refined. The
language in which an idea first presents itself to our minds, the manner in
which we clothe our* observations in conversation, which arise from the impulse
of the moment, requires considerable polish; more accuracy, a more smooth flow
of our words, and a more particular arrangement of our periods ought to be
observed; we ought to adorn our style with the garb of neatness, but ought not
to deck it with too many flowers, which diminish its force, and obscure the
beauty of its texture. By practice and criticism we are led to seek this beauty
of style, and to shun this gaudy and bombastic display of expressions. When
young persons first set out in their pursuit of the Belle Lettres, they are
almost always led astray by this false idea of grandeur, but after some
practice, they despise a style so effeminate, and endeavor to cultivate a
style, which then, to their more refined taste, appears more perfect. Many
arguments might be produced in favor of Juvenile institutions, which arise
from the pleasing exercise of extemporary disputation; the truly rational and
mental pleasure which youth receive from this improving enjoyment, has often
been experienced by many to whom I now address myself. From this source we
might trace some of the most weighty arguments in support of our cause. But we
shall only generally observe, that the fluency of speech which is by this means
acquired, the readiness and quick succession of ideas, the gracefulness and
ease of extemporary delivery, operate greatly to the advantage of societies:
persons, although possessed of cultivated understandings, acquainted with the
works of the historical and sentimental writers, and although favorite sons of
the muses, if they are not accustomed to extemporary disputes, they will appear
in certain situations to much disadvantage. What is related concerning Addison,
every person is acquainted with, it is a weighty example of what I assert; that
profound classic knowledge which he had acquired, that elegance of diction, and
that delicacy of wit, which shine so conspicuous in his writings, could not in
this instance support him: "He conceived thrice, and brought forth nothing."
Thus, this great man, the ornament of British Literature, by not being
sufficiently exercised in extemporary disputation, gave occasion to a stroke of
wit, which must have hurt the tender feelings of this modest and amiable
author; for want of this, men, infinitely his inferiors, appeared with more
distinguished luster. In society, by being often the advocates of a cause, we
banish that timidity and bashfulness, which are always attendant on our first
attempts at disputation, and which occasion a perturbation of mind, which
greatly confuses the speaker.

I need not mention how exceedingly requisite fluency of speech, and promptness
of thought are to the divine, the lawyer, and the person who is called upon by
his countrymen, to represent them in legislature; they at once appear evident,
and need no illustration. Some persons have asserted, that youthful
institutions, instead of being beneficial, are disadvantageous to youth. Their
principal argument, and the one upon which they build their opposition, is,
that by extemporary disputations, youth are led into a sophistical manner of
reasoning. This I will acknowledge to be an objection of considerable import.
Formidable, however, as it may appear, it is feeble, compared with the many
benefits arising from society. To invalidate this evil, I would observe, that
it depends mostly upon the dispositions of persons, that debates are productive
of this harm; and that if youth would only allow the subject some
investigation, upon which they are to dispute; if they are not fond of speaking
very often, to display their talents, although devoid of argument and
substance, and if they will follow the advice of doctor Blair, by always
choosing that side of the question, which to them appears right, and the most
advantageous -- Juvenile Institutions would not be productive of this only
evil, which can be maintained against them.

ELIZA. A PASTORAL SONG.
WHILE his sheep play cheerful around,
And crop the fresh grass off the plain,
The notes of soft music resound,
The notes of young Marcus the swain: --
To Eliza he tunes his sweet voice,
In grace and in beauty arrayed,
The valleys responsive rejoice,
While silence and stillness pervade.
On the bank of yon smooth gliding brook,
With aspect in sweetness serene,
As she gracefully leaned on her crook,
The lovely Eliza I Have seen:
While pensive the flood she surveyed,
Which stole in soft murmurs along,
Unnotic'd I lay in the shade,
While the birds tuned their evening song.
Eliza! ah, who can describe?
Who her beauty and charms can unfold?
Who can paint great Sol in his pride,
When he mounts his bright chariot of gold?
Her curling and beautiful hair
Over her back hung gracefully down;
Like the snow her loose garments were fair --
There grace and simplicity's found.
Eliza I Have often seen before,
Though naught but our eyes have yet spoke;
Her in silence I calmly adore,
For her now the muse I revoke:
My bosom now points to the day,
When I to this maid shall be known,
When we'll pass the swift hours away,
When my passion for her I may own.
With his tinges of beautiful hue
The sun is now gilding the sky,
All nature is charming to view,
The scene draws the heart's pensive sigh. --
Come my sheep return to your fold,
While your shepherd points the known way,
Who covets no honor nor gold,
The crook, not the scepter, to sway.
Thus Marcus indulged the soft strains,
While graceful reclined in a shade,
I thoughtfully rambling the plains,
Directed my steps where he laid.
Congenial in sorrow and thought,
His musical notes struck my ear;
I pensive surveyed the fond spot,
And dropped to Eliza a tear.
AN ORATION. COMPOSED AT THE DESIRE OF THE LITERARY SOCIETY, FOR THE FOURTH OF
JULY, 1794, THE ERA OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.
IT is pleasing to retrace past scenes, to bid fond thought ponder on events
which were beneficial to us alone as individuals. If this to the rational mind
affords a source of joy, what must be the heart-exulting glow of every son of
Columbia? What pure delight must reflection kindle in their patriotic bosoms?
What must be their tender sensations of gratitude and love to an overruling
power? When, on this auspicious day, they behold their country bidding defiance
to the threats of a despot, and daring to be free; when they see her draw the
glittering sword and cut the chain of tyranny which would bind her, and
proclaiming independence through all her fertile plains -- when they find, that
the liberty and independence for which they so arduously fought still remain.
-- The hero, now, thinks upon his victorious struggles, when freedom nerved his
warlike arm, and enthusiasm in his country's cause rendered him dreadful to her
foes -- his former glorious wounds, new to his memory, bleed afresh. -- We, my
young friends, as a literary society, have convened to celebrate this ever
memorable day; a day which our youthful minds behold with transport. -- We
possess not the sensations of the venerable actors on the bloody plain -- but
we feel equal pleasure for the liberty which our country enjoys -- we
experience the delightful emotions of exultation and emulation -- we look upon
the glorious work which our fathers have performed, and pant to unsheathe the
sword in our country's defense. As yet we are wholly unacquainted with war --
Our country has not called us into the field -- Under the shadow of celestial
peace, we court the gentle muse -- we follow, uninterrupted, our studies in
pursuit of knowledge -- But ah! who knows how long this blessing will be
preserved! The bloody clouds of war begin to spread over the world: That
liberty for which Columbia's sons fought, has captivated the sons of France
with her charms -- She has awakened in their bosoms an enthusiasm which braves
the pointed steel, and bids them proclaim, "We will perish or be free." -- The
European despots oppose their glorious cause; for they behold with fear,
sentiments so derogatory to their interest. They have led their numerous armies
on the hostile plains, to stop the progress of Freedom; and the rich blood of
thousands has fertilized the fields; but the firm Tree of Liberty stands
unrooted. Britain, that haughty, imperious, and infatuated nation, seems not
yet to have been corrected sufficiently for her insolent and detestable designs
on France, but turns once more her hostile eye on Columbia's cultivated shores.
-- She has acted toward her with much indignity. -- But, beware Britain; once
you have felt what Americans, what freemen can do. America, unlike you,
delights not in the effusion of human blood, but wishes to heal the bleeding
wound -- But your insults she will brook no more! -- Draw from her borders your
hostile legions, or justice once more shall awake the long slumbering sword!
Justice will arise to demand satisfaction from the offender. Many more are the
numbers of her warlike heroes, than when you formerly felt the chastisement of
her infant arm -- Many are her gallant youths, who, when their country calls,
dauntless will oppose their patriotic breasts -- Many the sons of those brave
heroes who fell for their country by your bloody hand.

Come with me all ye emulative youth, and drop the tender tear of remembrance
over Warren's tomb -- That Warren whose blood first streamed in Freedom's
sacred cause -- That Warren, adorned by all the tender virtues, who, when his
country called, flew from the smiles of his infant children, when deprived of a
mother to nourish and soothe them, and sought the dreadful scenes of war --
Long has his ashes mouldered in the grave, but his great and warlike name shall
ever live; "the prattling boy shall lisp it, and become a soldier." Direct your
eyes to the bloody top of Bunker's Hill, where British valor paused, and fled
before those rebels whom they so much despised -- There shone this hero and
this orator; the accents which dropped from his mellifluous lips, soothed the
soldier's fears, and reanimated his drooping courage. -- Great and illustrious
shade! Many are they who have on this day proclaimed thy immortal name. But ah!
refuse not the emulous and admiring breast of a youthful student, who would
strew a laurel over thy honored ^urn. For this liberty which we enjoy, behold!
before Quebec the great Montgomery bleed; while by his side the gallant
Cheeseman lies -- while dauntless, leading on his troops to the dangerous
charge, the bullets pierced his thighs and head -- without a groan the noble
hero fell -- while sunk in death, his manly countenance still retains its
former commanding look and patriotic glow. The tears of Columbia sell with her
warlike son -- arrayed in the gloomy weeds of sorrow, she mourned the chief who
led her armies to victory, and at whose grand and martial name the haughty
Britain trembled. In grateful remembrance of him, she has raised the polished
marble, that youth may see the patriot's glory, and, gazing, say, There Is
Montgomery's urn. To close the scene, let us lift the bloody robe from Laurens'
wound -- On Carolina's plain he poured his precious blood, and sealed his
country's freedom. There, in the cause of virtue, this youthful and
accomplished warrior fell -- Ye emulative youth, imitate his virtues, and like
Laurens die.

LAURENS! thy tomb, while kindred hands adorn,
Let northern muses too inscribe thy urn:
Of all whose names on Death's black list appear,
No Chief that perished claimed more grief sincere;
Not one, Columbia, that thy bosom bore,
More tears commanded, or deserved them more!
Grief, at his tomb, shall heave the unwearied sigh,
And Honor lift the mant^^ to her eye:
Fame, through the world, his patriot name shall spread,
By heroes envied, and by monarchs read.
Just, generous, brave -- to each true heart allied,
The Briton's terror, and his country's pride:
For him the tears of war-worn Soldiers ran,
The friend of Freedom, and the friend of Man.
Then what is death, compared with such a tomb,
Where honor fades not, and fair virtues bloom?
Ah! what is death, when fame like this endears,
The brave man's favorite, and his country's tears?
America once had a venerable son, the philosophic FRANKLIN -- who shone not as
the warrior and general, but as the great and wise statesman -- who has
vindicated the cause of Freedom with his pen, and whom we ought on this day to
remember with the most lively gratitude, as one of the most active instruments
in effecting our Liberty and Independence. In the sublime walks of philosophy,
the name of Franklin will be always held in veneration. It was him who drew the
lightning from the awful clouds, and who has improved the world in the
knowledge of electric fluids. The venerable sage has now explored those unknown
realms, where we shall no more profit by his philosophical discoveries, nor by
his wholesome and wise counsel. My feeble voice would attempt to sound the
praise of Washington, but admiring silence can best unfold it.

We have now, my friends, for eighteen years enjoyed that Independence for
which these patriots fought; and O! may revolving ages retain it pure and
unspotted.

The greatness of the event which took place on this day, among the numerous
reflections which (...) to the American mind, must particularly strike the
attention.

Here to these American shores, where then none but savages and brutes held
their dreary ^eign, (...) forefathers fled, and sought this unknown clime,
where they might remain protected from that religious persecution which
prevailed in Europe; and where, in a state of Freedom, they might follow the
dictates of the^^ own consciences, and that religion which they thought proper.
When the first colonies of America were formed, she spread wide her arms, and
welcomed every person flying from the tyranny of despots to her friendly clime.
-- Thousands flocked to her extensive shores, and hailed her happy plains. Soon
the cultured fields waved in smiling bloom; the towns and villages reared their
heads, and the sound of industry was heard through the ^and: The musical notes
of the ^abor vibrated over the verdant lawns; the groves echoed responsive to
the strain of joy, and happiness and tranquillity held their gentle reign. When
England placed her rulers over America, the dream vanished; that former
unmolested reign of tranquillity was interrupted, but still Liberty remained,
until Britain's base designs, to subject us wholly under her power, were
attempted to be put in execution. It was this that roused the indignation of
the inhabitants. It was in support of their injured rights, that the first rich
blood of freemen was shed at Lexington.

But let us turn our attention to the event which we particularly celebrate
this day: It opens a scene, solemn to the tender bosom -- While Britain's
unrelentless soldiery were spilling the blood of Americans -- while the spirits
of all were damped by unsuccess, and sorrow sat drooping on each patriot cheek,
America calls together her little senate: In slow and pensive steps they move
in procession to their place of meeting -- they bring the momentous business of
Independence under their serious consideration -- they reflect on the cruelty
which is exercised toward America, and, feeling spirit and sublimity, greater
than ever entered into a Roman senate, declare the United States Free and
Independent. The h^roes of Columbia rejoiced at the decree -- they fought, and
conquered.

May that Independence and Freedom, which were, in awful solemnity, declared on
this day, be handed down to the latest posterity -- May posterity feel the true
blessing and spirit of Liberty equally with their forefathers, and may Heaven
still waft the clear and beautiful clouds of peace over these delightful
regions.

FREEDOM. A SONG.
YE statesmen and heroes, and patriot train,
Who dwell in Columbia's thrice happy plain,
Where the Goddess of Freedom her smiles sweet extends,
And peace in white vestments from Heaven descends;
O tune to fair Freedom your musical lays;
Let the valleys loud echo responsive your praise;
Let the song of the heart and of rapture arise,
And, wafted by zephyrs, ascend to the skies.
Ye youths and fair maids, who trip graceful along,
O swell with your voices Columbia's glad song,
Where genius and beauty increasing prevail,
And innocence rambles the shadowy vale.
O tune to fair Freedom, etc.
Ye groves with your songsters, O join the fond strain,
Ye slow plaintive murmurs which float over the plain,
Let Hudson majestic the bass-chord resound,
And streams of the hills throw their warblings around
O tune to fair Freedom, etc.
With pride on her brow, once Britain arose,
And sent forth her legions to damp our repose;
Unfurled her dread banners in these smiling lands,
And drew her stained sword to enforce her commands.
O tune to fair Freedom, etc.
But Liberty here erected her throne,
In garments celestial the bright Goddess shone;
From Vernon's retreat, and contemplative shade,
She led forth her hero, in terror arrayed.
O tune to fair Freedom, etc.
The warrior's presence each bosom inspired,
Lulled danger in peace, and to enterprise fired;
The blood-thirsty Britain degradingly fled,
And ever-green laurels encircled his head.
O tune to fair Freedom your musical lays;
Let the valleys loud echo responsive your praise;
Let the song of the heart and of rapture arise,
And, wafted by zephyrs, ascend to the skies.
THOUGHTS ON FRANCE.
IT is very common with some persons to conceal their enmity to the rights of
man by magnifying and decrying the extravagancies of those who are engaged in
contending for them -- they are so disingenuous as not to distinguish between a
good cause, and the evils which invariably attend the accomplishment of it --
Thus we frequently hear of the licentiousness, the division of sentiment, and
the barbarity of the French nation; these are unjustly and pompously displayed
on purpose to prejudice a righteous cause. Not to call in question, at present,
the truth of many facts which are published, or to insist on our inability at
this distance, or the information we have, to judge of them -- let me only ask,
Ought France to have patiently submitted to her former government? If not, in
what way should she have effected a Revolution? Was ever such a thing
accomplished without division and bloodshed? Who shall set bounds to a people
rising from under oppression, and feeling their own liberty and strength?
Either she must have continued under the old tyranny, or, in becoming free, she
must experience the distresses of the present day -- which of these in the end
will contribute most to the happiness of posterity, and to the happiness of
mankind? Would we rather that Caesar were living, and be all bondmen, or that
Caesar were dead, and live all freemen?

It is a pity that those who so much lament the loss of a few heads in France,
do not consider the monstrous cruelties of which kings have been guilty -- is
not the Bastile a more dreadful instrument than the Guillotine? How many have
been put to death or condemned to drag out a miserable existence, at the
captious humor of a single man? All the blood already spilled, and which may
be spilled in France, is only a drop to that which kings have shed -- the earth
has been stained with the gore, and fattened with the bodies of millions slain,
through their injustice and rapine.

What must we think of that heart which seems to feel so much for a few
outrages, which a people, insulted, betrayed, and impelled by an enthusiasm for
liberty, commit, and yet seems not to feel for the constant grinding weight of
oppression? What of the man, who can turn into ridicule a Sans Culotte, whose
constant earnings have always gone to pamper a luxuriant lord? What of the man
to whom Liberty and Equality can be terms of reproach? What of the man who has
conversed with the Greek and Roman Classics, but has imbibed no share of the
Greek and Roman principle? What of the American who can justify the Revolution
in his own country, and condemn France struggling in the same glorious cause?
All such ought to be branded with the hateful name of Aristocrats; they ought
to become the minions of some European despot, until they grow sick of those
infernal principles which they dare to advocate.

It is remarkable that Dr. Moore, in his journal, during his residence in
France (a work in which, though he studiously endeavors to represent the French
in an unfavorable light, yet is obliged often to give them credit) has these
words -- Should a band of wicked men acquire undue influence with the people of
France, by zealous pretensions to patriotism -- or should the expected National
Assembly, itself, through folly, ambition, or barbarity, or a combination of
all the three, blast the hopes of a free constitution, and ruin the happiness
of their country; still the cause for which the Revolution was undertaken,
remains the best in which men (...) engage. The folly, ambition and barbarity
of individuals, may consign their names to the execration of mankind, but
cannot diminish the intrinsic value of freedom.

Such are the words which truth extorted from ^man, who appears willing, as far
as he dared, ^o condemn a magnanimous people.

In short, the establishment of a Republican form of government in France is
ardently to be wished, is intimately connected with the freedom of America, and
with the happiness of mankind. The war of the combined army is an outrage on
human nature, and a war against Heaven. -- May the spirit which pervades
France, pervade the whole world, and prepare the way for universal
righteousness and peace!

Let us for a moment here enquire, what that desperate thing, Equality, is,
which so much alarms the minds of many amiable men.

Equality says, all men are equal -- that they were born free and independent
-- that government shall be representative -- that there shall be no king --
but rulers, such as meet the approbation of the people -- these are certainly
alarming circumstances! -- startle aristocrat! The words, that all men are
equal, very much hurt these gentlemen's finer feelings, and upon them they cast
many exceedingly satirical observations. By all men being equal, we are to
understand, that there must be no nobility -- that there must be no criterions,
but merit and virtue. It is these alone, that must exalt one man above another;
it is by these alone that we are to be led in the choice of our rulers. It does
not demand what I have heard a wise gentleman wittily say, "that if we meet our
brother in the street, without breeches, we should give him half our own," but
that the poor shall not be subservient to the rich, that the industrious clown
shall not be obliged to tremble, and how submissive to a haughty and tyrannical
lord when he approaches him, but that he shall be equal with all.

THE EFFECTS OF MODERATION, CONSIDERED IN THE LOVE OF PRAISE and POLITICS.
THERE are many useful and pleasing passions implanted in the breast, which,
when much indulged, become great blemishes in the character; the animating glow
which prompted the mind to great and glorious actions, becomes demeaned, when
it stoops to things dishonorable and degrading. From the want of paying proper
attention to the warning voice of moderation, we often render ourselves
disgustful to our fellow creatures, and involve ourselves in many troubles. The
passionate man is violent in all his proceedings; he pursues, blindfolded, the
delusive phantom in favor of which he is prejudiced, and spurns from him the
paternal voice of reason -- but the moderate man is possessed of the more
tender and softer feelings: with his moderation he connects consideration, and
walks steady and sure in all his ways -- All men, in some measure, are actuated
by prejudice, but the moderate man is not guided by the impulse of the moment,
but by mature deliberation. Zeal, in a good cause, when not carried beyond the
limits of reason, is very much to be admired; but the passionate (...) pursues
with equal ardour the good and bad. The love of praise is a necessary and
delightful passion. It is inherent in human nature. Mankind depend upon each
other for all their wants, and even for their existence; from social
intercourse they receive their most lasting and rational pleasure.

Persons unassisted by their fellow creatures, would make no progress in any
useful improvement. It is society that calls forth their faculties to action.
We see then, that for very useful ends the love of praise is a passion of the
breast, for it is her attractive power which binds men in the ties of humanity
and of friendship; no other principle of the soul would be capable of effecting
this, if we did not delight in the good opinion and esteem of each other.
Without this, the friendly intercourse between the human race, the tender
endearments of brotherly love, would shun this miserable habitation of human
nature. No more the sympathetic bosom would glow with affection, and relate its
sorrows and joys to the anxious (...) of a friend. No more would prevail the
plaintive voice of love, and the harmony of the conjugal state. Shame, which
often deters from the commission of disgraceful and wicked actions, would then
have no influence over the conduct and inclination. Emulation would cease to
exist within the youthful breast. Literature and the cultivation of the arts
and and sciences, would vanish from so discordant an habitation, and ignorance
wrap the world in gloom and darkness.

If such an awful picture would present itself to us, were not the love of
praise a principle of the human breast, to what a variety of good purposes must
it actuate us, and in how many cases must it appear to be the offspring of
virtue -- the actions to which it incites are those which all mankind admire.

The dispositions of men are generally inclined to sloth and indulgence -- the
faculties of the soul would be inactive and dormant, if the delightful love of
praise did not banish their slumbers, and point to an object which entices them
in the pursuit of literature and useful knowledge. -- The love of praise
reforms our manners, and makes us studious to please our fellow creatures. It
has been the cause of many glorious actions, and has given a spring to many
which bear the appearance of eminent virtue.

The warrior, although he feels the animating glow of patriotism, yet there
needs some other power to assist and support his drooping courage when under
distressed circumstances. The love of praise performs this useful part, she
takes the despairing hero by the hand, she soothes his bosom by her melodious
voice, she whispers in his ear, the thankfulness, the gratitude, the
exclamations of joy and the salutation of those persons whose lives and
property he has defended and protected: all which await him at his return
victorious from the bloody plain. She holds out to his view the wreaths of
laurels which his country will entwine around his brows. These reflections
kindle in his bosom a new ardour. He is now not only animated by the
instigations of duty, and the glow of patriotism, but also by the just wish to
acquire the esteem of his country, and win her praises and her gratitude. He
again resumes his waving helmet, and bids defiance to his foes.

The great Germanicus, on the eve before a bloody battle, in silent reflection,
wandered over the plain, where, freed from the fatigues of the day, his veteran
army reposed in their tents: the noise of the soldiery, the resounding of arms,
and the loud blasts of martial music, were hushed in silence. With a pensive
melancholy, he reflected on the great and dreadful scene which was shortly to
ensue on the succeeding day, the fate of his country, and the many brave men
who would shed their precious blood in their country's cause. His great soul
was filled with certain sensations, characteristic of the great warrior, and of
the feeling heart -- while thus in solitude he indulged the feelings of
humanity, he thought he heard some voices discoursing in one of the tents; he
approached toward it slowly, and without noise, until he (...) clearly
distinguish the subject of their discourse. But! who can describe his
sensations, the exquisite glow of his heroic bosom, when he discovered it was
himself -- that it was the praises of Germanicus which employed the attention
of his officers; instead of courting that rest which the fatigues of the day
required, they took more delight in speaking the dictates of their admiring
bosoms, and celebrating the glory of their beloved commander. The Roman chief
paused, to indulge his feelings, which expanded with conscious virtue: he heard
not the fawning accents of flattery, but the voice of truth, of sincerity, and
of justly acquired praise. He returned to his tent, filled with the most
delightful sensations. The next day, the voice of praise still vibrating in his
ear, and inspiring him with an elevation of soul above mortality, he led on his
soldiers, eager for battle, and fearful of no danger, when Germanicus was their
chief -- The warlike Armenius formed his German bands, and bid defiance to the
Roman power. The armies engaged; severe was the conflict; but victory at length
crowned the Roman with a wreath of laurels. His former praises increased to
adoration -- his valiant army offered him the empire, but moderation bade him
refuse it.

Thus far we have considered the Love of Praise as an incitement only to great
and noble deeds. It is equally useful when we descend from its active influence
on the mind, and consider it in a character who has already acquired it, and
who is possessed of the good opinion and esteem of his fellow creatures: In him
mankind place their confidence; his influence is extensive, and his fellow men
will always exert themselves to serve and oblige the man whom they admire --
and when old age creeps upon him, the regard which is manifested for him, the
conscious rectitude of his own conduct, illumine the smile of satisfaction on
his once animated but now wrinkled countenance. Reflection casts a soothing
view on the time when his laudable exertions extorted from his countrymen the
bursts of applause, and silent admiration. Devoid of this principle, as it has
now been considered, man wants one of the passions which most distinguishes him
from the brutes; without it, he would shun the face of his fellow man, and
become a solitary wanderer of the desert. We have now, in its proper light,
considered the Love of Praise; the happy effects which Moderation has upon the
conduct, when man listens to her instructive voice, nor tresspasses beyond her
rules. Amiable as the Love of Praise appears, it may be carried to excess,
whence injury will result. We shall now consider, though but very briefly, the
effects of the Love of Praise, when pursued beyond its proper limits. When a
man devotes himself wholly to the acquirement of praise, he must bid adieu to
all useful studies, except such as particularly answer his purposes -- he must
bid adieu to that liberty and independence of spirit, without which we can
never be great. All virtuous men agree in admiring independence of spirit,
which will follow the dictates of duty, against popular clamor. But he who
will pursue the whims and courses of public opinion to gain praise, will be
despised -- to throw aside all sense of right, and to act in conformity to the
wishes of party, betrays an ignoble soul, which is highly degrading. The Love
of Praise, in this sense* overcomes all the tender and amiable feelings of the
soul: the voice of conscience is not heard in the execution of actions, which
are conceived to be necessary in the pursuit of its favorite object: -- Virtue,
the true source of esteem and respect, is banished from its presence, and vice
and meanness are its bosom friends. The person actuated by this extravagant
thirst, will sacrifice the ties of humanity, and all the tender feelings of the
breast. The unruly Love of Praise defeats itself in its own designs; it is
unable to conceal the motive which gives rise to its many exertions, and when
the world perceives a person anxious to acquire its praises, instead of
admiration, it bestows upon him contempt and reproaches: His great labors, his
violent efforts to please, only afford mirth and amusement.

Izrael Smyly is extremely desirous of acquiring praise; he is a man endowed
with a moderate share of understanding, and is diminitive in his looks and
manners; but, possessed of human nature, he casts a smiling eye of approbation
upon himself, and thinks that he is important and consequential to his fellow
creatures. Incapable of performing any great actions, and not possessed of
discernment enough to know what a great action is, he has fallen upon a very
accommodating plan, in his pursuit; it is composed of good nature,
acquiessence, and meanness. In conversation, he never suffers himself to
contradict a person, but approves, and smilingly bows assent to all he says: if
he was to assert that blue is yellow, his refinement of manners would not allow
him to say, "that he presumed he was mistaken;" but he inclines his head,
glistening with grease, and draws his smooth face into a smile, in token of his
congeniality of sentiment -- He will bear insult without resentment -- nay! I
believe a person of that race of men denominated the great, might venture so
far as to pull the gentleman's nose, without meeting with the least
retaliation. He seeks out and follows every method, in which he can oblige
particular persons, and will run to the other end of the town with the greatest
swiftness and satisfaction, to confer the least benefit and favor.

Thus does this poor animal pay all his attention, and worry himself almost to
death, in the pursuit of an object which sneers at him, and flies him with
uncommon aversion. He gains, it must be granted, the thanks of persons for
carrying their portmanteaus, and particularly for becoming a servant without
wages. The name of Mr. Smyly is spread abroad, but it is never pronounced
unless it be to excite diversion and laughter.

At first view, mankind are led to admire actions which participate of bravery;
but when reflection and reason are allowed their proper exercise, they will
appear to be crimes which have disgraced human nature, and ought never to be
held up for admiration, but for detestation.

Such, if we examine, and are not dazzled by glitter and show, will appear to
be the actions of an Alexander and others. Led on by a thirst of fame, which
nothing could quench, he embrued his hands in the blood of thousands of his
fellow men! their streaming bodies covered over the plain! their piercing
cries, the ruins of cities which he desolated, could not touch his cruel soul!
He dropped a tear over the ruins of Thebes, but still he pursued his former
bloodshed and ravages.

This butcherer of mankind, after he had conquered most of the nations then in
the known world, who had never in the least instance offended him, sat down and
wept, that he had no more worlds to conquer.

POLITICS.
NO topic of conversation so much engages the attention of Americans, as
Politics. -- In disputations which arise from them, there is more warmth and
animosity prevailing than upon any other subject whatever. The French
politician will make bare his arm, before he will give way one inch to his
antagonist -- and the disapprover of the French proceedings will exert his
vocal powers to the highest pitch, and thunder in the Democrat's ears, the
cruelties, the bloodshed, and extravagancies of the Sans Culottes.

How much better would it be to preserve moderation, to debate concerning the
great events which are passing abroad with reason and mildness, the
characteristics of wisdon.

The Revolution in France is the source from whence at present arises almost
all political disputations -- and an event it is, truly astonishing -- The
disapprovers of it must be guided entirely by their prejudices and not by
reason -- But on the other hand, though a youthful American, a sincere friend
to the rights of man, and to the freedom of France, I must observe that there
are many who bear the name of Democrats, who are extremely far distant from the
safe and unruffled path of moderation -- Every republican, it is true, must
feel himself interested in the cause of liberty; he must wish that all his
fellow beings under the dark shadow of oppression, may become enlightened, and
experience her celestial charms. These are the effusions of the benevolent
bosom. But is he justifiable in some of his proceedings? can he possess the
true spirit of brotherly love, when his soul is agitated with the most
inveterate hatred against a fellow citizen, because he does not agree with him
in sentiment: the person whom he shuns for this fault may be the enlightened
and amiable man. That France has been the scene of much cruelty and confusion,
every considerate person must allow -- But even when these are mentioned in the
hearing of this violent politician -- anger and animosity burn within his
bosom; and he bestows the opprobious name of Aristocrat, upon persons who
possess the true spirit of Republicanism in a higher degree than himself. --
Intimately connected as we are with France, we ought to restrain our passions,
and while we ourselves justify the proceedings of France, by saying, that
bloodshed is always the natural consequence of a great and wonderful
revolution, and more so in a nation just rising from under the weight of
tyranny; let us also possess moderation, and look with an eye of sympathy and
sorrow, upon that little soul, who would wish destruction to the rights of man.
The person who will go so far as not only to condemn their proceedings, but the
sacred cause for which Frenchmen contend, ought rather to draw a tear for the
depravity of human nature, than the resentment of the friend of Freedom.

A true Account of the LIFE and WRITINGS of PEGASUS HELICON, THE POET OF THE
GARRET, AS RELATED BY JULIUS TELLWELL.
I WRITE to bring forward to public view a truly great man, one who has not met
with that encouragement, and been treated with that respect which his dignity
and eminent abilities deserve. But ah! he is not the only author who has met
with misfortunes. The mighty Homer, Otway, and Butler, were the children of
poverty. If in tracing the life and writings of this son of the Muse, though I
write not with the pen of Pathos and elegance, but with the pen of
commiseration and truth, I shall excite in the breast of the public, the
emotions of admiration, and a consciousness of their former neglect, that by
these they may become the patrons and encouragers of Pegasus Helicon, my whole
design will be answered. If my feeble pen is able to accomplish this, my
satisfaction and pleasure will be greater than that which attended Virgil and
Milton, after they had seen their poems crowned with wreaths of laurels. They
wrote one may say, to acquire literary fame, I write to excite in the breast
the most amiable sensations, and to be of assistance to the distressed. The
subjects of their writings were mostly fictitious. Pegasus Helicon demands my
pen, not as an imaginary but real being. Shakespeare, who has been pronounced
immortal, obtained his name by being an original writer. Pegasus Helicon is
entirely an original writer, and what is more extraordinary, in a period of 178
years after Shakespeare, when many more discoveries had been made. The manner
in which I came to be first acquainted with Mr. Helicon is this: As I was
reading one day a small production, on what subject I do not rightly remember,
I perceived some lines of poetry, which were an invocation to the Muse, written
in such a sublime manner, that they wonderfully excited my admiration -- the
two first lines I can only recollect. -- O come ye Muses with a laurel crown,
Pour O Parnassus, pour your torrents down.


As I was extremely pleased, I was naturally led to enquire who the author of
them was. After much trouble I found that his name was Pegasus Helicon; that
the author of the production in which they were printed, was so captivated by
their charms, that he exhibited them to the public with high encomiums. I now
knew the name of the man, but I had not yet seen him, my curiosity was now
rather more excited than appeased. I long made a fruitless search to discover a
person to introduce me to him; at length, lucky chance threw in my way, that
friend of his, who quoted his verses; he very politely offered to introduce me
to Mr. Helicon -- On our way toward the Poet's lodging, my friend informed me
of many of his peculiarities; one of which was, that he never shaved, but
suffered his beard to take its natural growth. -- We had now walked a
considerable way, when my friend at last stopped at a tall board house; he
pointed to the top of the house, and desired me to follow him. He led me
through a winding stairs which brought us to the garret of the house, where I
discovered a little room petitioned off in the west corner, which he informed
me was Mr. Helicon's study. He told me to approach without noise for fear we
might disturb his meditation; we advanced on tiptoe to the door, and was just
lifting up the latch to enter, when we heard a voice within repeat aloud,
Assist thy Helicon to sing the times.


My friend now opened the door, and addressing Mr. Helicon, introduced me to
him: He bestowed upon me a gracious smile, and friendly nod, with which I
thought myself highly honored. His beard was brown and thin; he had a long gown
rapped round him, and the sprig of some tree twined round his head: He was
sitting on a three legged stool, with a long pen in his hand, and some loose
papers lying before him; there were no chairs in the room, but a long bench,
upon which he invited us to sit down: He then threw aside his pen, carefully
put up his papers, and, taking the wreath of leaves from his head, addressed it
in these extemporary couplets, Lie there my wreath, I never thee will use,
But when I sing and court the peaceful Muse.


We now conversed about the news of the day, in the course of which, I
discovered that Mr. Helicon was a good Republican; but he said he did not
trouble himself much about things done abroad, being occupied by more important
business in his room. I then took the liberty of asking him, if his country
called upon her sons to fight her battles, if he would not then seize his
musket, and seek the hostile plain? He smiled, took up his pen, which lay upon
the table, and said, Demosthenes and Cicero, with their tongues, were said to
have done more good for their country, than ten thousand men could have
effected. They fought not themselves, but inspired the heroes with strength,
courage, and with enthusiasm, in defense of their countries -- so will I with
my pen.

I now, having thrown off that embarrassment commonly attendant on persons when
first introduced to the company of great men, ventured to compliment him
concerning his excellent poetry, some of which I mentioned I had seen, and to
humbly beg the favor, that he would gratify me with the perusal of one of his
latest poems. With pleasing smiles he returned my compliments, and with extreme
politeness told me, that it was his wish to gratify all who honored him with
their friendship. He then took up one of his papers which lay upon the table,
and told me, that the last piece he had finished was blotted and written very
badly; he, therefore, would even read it himself for us. We returned him our
thanks in the warmest manner for his great condescension; he then placed his
wreath upon his head, and read in plaintive voice as follows:

AN ELEGY ON A DROWNED CAT.
1.
I sing the Cat; do thou, O Muse, assist;
O kindle in my breast the poet's fire;
Do not Pegasus' ardent prayer resist,
But with your finger's tip, O touch his lyre.
2.
As late poor Pussy by the water strayed,
Seeking the coolness of the gales that blow,
Too near the brink approached the lovely maid,
Ye Gods she fell, and sought the waves below.
3.
Ah! now no more shall Pussy's bosom feel
The gentle pleasure which soft love bestows:
Ah! now no more the pantry fruits she will steal,
No more she will wander where the water flows.
4.
Farewell then, Pussy, peace attend thy shade;
The Muse for thee now drops the briny tear;
The mice now laugh, no more of thee afraid,
No more thy mewings strike their listening ear.
When this great man had finished, conscious of the merit of his performance,
he leisurely placed the paper where it formerly lay, and fixed his lively eye
upon us. We in sincere terms admired the excellency of his elegy, and told him,
that it would even excite the smile of approbation in the countenance of the
most morose critic. He shook his head -- no, gentlemen (says he) the world is
callous to the beauty of my muse; she has made every effort to please, but yet
the cruel public receive the lovely maid with frowns. No person is more
neglected, when living, th^n an author, but when he is dead, even cities
contend for the honor of his birth: thus it was with the divine Homer; thus it
will be with Pegasus Helicon. In a few years hence, when I have sought the
silent tomb, and the melancholy yew tree hovers over my head, the name of
Helicon will be resounded throughout the world's wide theater -- But Helicon
will not return their just applause; unstrung will be his muse, unstrung his
gentle lyre. We lamented with him this strange disposition in the world, and
enquired if he had no more pieces lately finished. He said he had long been
thinking of writing a poem on the Times, and had begun it a little before we
came in, but had not yet advanced farther than the second line; the two lines
were as follow: Arise, O Muse, and in melodious rhimes,
Assist thy Helicon to sing the Times.


We now changed the conversation, by asking him why he suffered his beard to
grow to such a length? Why, gentlemen (says he) my reasons are forcible, and
founded on the firm basis of propriety. A beard you will all allow to be a sign
of wisdom; a poet then, the greatest of terrestrial beings, ought to possess
that which gives an idea of wisdom. A beard adds a graveness to the face,
strikes an awe into the illiterate crowd, and commands from all veneration and
respect. Secondly -- A beard was bestowed upon man by nature -- ought man,
therefore, to declare war against nature, by clipping off his beard? Certainly
not; it is a crime nearly allied to suicide. Providence says, that we have no
right to dispose of that life which he has bestowed upon us -- Certainly then
we have no right to dispose of that beard which he has bestowed upon us, and
which is one of the greatest ornaments of human nature, but ought to allow
nature to take its course. Nothing is really beautiful, but what is natural,
and as Providence has formed man with nothing but what is either useful or
ornamental. The beard must belong to one of these classes. Therefore, to cut
off the beard takes away part of the august form of man* and depreciates his
beauty. But the tyrant fashion says the beard shall be cut, O tempora! O (...).
Thirdly and lastly, Horace says every poet ought to encourage a philosophic
beard. Besides, all the great men of antiquity possessed long beards, such as
Homer the prince of poets, and Socrates who was pronounced the wisest of women.
Women have got no beards, why do not women possess beards as well as men?
Because nature has implanted the greater wisdom in man, and has placed the
beard as a sign of it. It is from these weighty* considerations, gentlemen,
that I suffer my beard to grow. Swayed by the poet's reasoning, we now
perfectly coincided with him in sentiment, and lamented the prevailing custom
which obliged us to cut our beards. Animated by our applauses, he proceeded
farther in his defense of beards, and told us he had written a poem on beards
which he would do himself the pleasure of reading to us. He then, from out of a
little box which stood by him, took a paper and read as follows: I softly ask
of thee Erato to be heard,
While I who lately sang of wisdom sing the beard.
Awake! O come! thou generous, sweetly smiling maid,
Pegasus' bosom with thy flowing fire invade.
O beard, thou truly noble and majestic thing,
How many glorious, useful causes from thee spring.
A certain gravity thou addest to the face,
It Is naught but thou that constitut'st real grace,
See when the bard thy flowing foliage shakes,
The vulgar crowd stands awed or to swift flight betakes.


He thus proceeded to enumerate the many happy effects the possessor of a beard
received, and concluded the whole with these two elegant lines, O beard! let it
be thine thy poet's chin to bless,
And it be his thy charms and beauty to caress.


We paid the tribute of applause to this elegant poem, and proceeded to other
conversation; we now took the liberty to ask Mr. Helicon why he did not get
married -- he surveyed us with a smile, and exclaimed with great surprise,
Married? Why, gentlemen, am not I a poet, to whom matrimony ought to be an
entire stranger? a poet ought to have no wife but the Muse; as well might you
ask a man why he does not kiss the mouth of a serpent, as me. -- Why don't you
get married! Why, gentlemen, a woman in a little while would talk me into a
consumption, and a squalling brat would scare the Muse away from my dwelling,
so that she never dare again enter it. -- And laying aside all this, the
fatigues of the connubial state would render me an unfit champion of the Muse.
After some other conversation, I (...) to depart. I was so fortunate as to gain
the good opinion of Mr. Helicon; he invited me to visit him often, and to
become the friend of a neglected poet. Honored by the friendship of so great a
man, I sought every opportunity in my power to enjoy his agreeable and
improving conversation. One day when I was in his room long subsequent to this,
and we were talking about poetry, which was always Mr. Helicon's favorite
topic, I asked him what he thought of the poets of America -- why (returned he)
America has produced many eminent sons of the Muses, of myself I shall decline
speaking. The four first poets, in my opinion, are Barlow, Trumbull, Freneau,
and Dwight. I shall not, Sir, point out to you their beauties and defections, I
only Sir, give you my opinion of them. Barlow's vision of Columbus I esteem one
of the first productions of the age. Trumbull's M'Fingal is a species of poetry
so widely different from the vision of Columbus, that they cannot be compared
together. I think that he far surpasses Peter Pindar the great wit of
Britannia. Freneau's productions are miscellaneous, and discover a poet who
writes with the greatest ease, his lines seem to flow without any labor. He
seeks not for Metaphors, nor to give a kind of obscurity to his meaning, but he
courts simplicity. Among his many pretty performances, I think his British
Prison Ship is one of the most happy. The lines with which he concludes it are
these: The years approach which shall to ruin bring
Your lords, your chiefs, your miscreant of a king,
Whose murderous acts shall stamp his name accursed,
And his last triumphs more than damn the first.


Dwight's Conquest of Canaan discovers a genius for poetry; in it are many
beautiful, and some that I may call sublime lines; but I think there are some
lines which the poet did not understand himself; at least, I could not. He is
very fond of making every thing that shines with luster to ape and mimic day,
such as swords, armor, and vestments. But his Conquest of Canaan, although a
production of much merit, is not his most happy performance.

He then proceeded to speak of some other American poets, and I thought his
observations on all were very just and pertinent. In the course of our
conversation, at this time. I asked Mr. Helicon how old he was? I am (answered
he) about 45 years old, I was born in the year 1749, on the 14th day of May.
You may perceive by this, that nature never produces any thing remarkable
without sufficient signs and causes. The awful thunder does not send its
threatening roar, the rains do not descend in liquid floods, when the sky is
beautiful and serene, but they are foretold by dark and gloom clouds, which
obscure the face of the heavens. Thus, you see that I was not a poet without
sufficient causes -- Nature, to be sure, formed me for a poet, but she sent
also signs proclaiming me at my birth. I was born, you perceive, in the lovely
smiling month of May when the waving lawns, the verdant valleys and the
fragrant gardens, are clothed in their most beautiful dresses, and send forth
their most exquisite fragrance. It is in this month, when the poets are so much
delighted and captivated by the charms of rural and retired life; it is now
they seek the murmuring streams and cooling shades, it is now that the softer
passions pervade the bosoms of the shy and lovely maidens. -- In this month,
most favorable to poets, I was born. One of the other signs which discovered
in me the great poet, was the attachment and the great turn I had for poetry in
my young and tender years. During the late war between Britain and America, as
I was formed not for war like Virgil and Horace, I remained undisturbed,
cultivating the Muse in a little village far from the din of arms, and the
sound of the martial trumpet. After the peace, I returned to New York, where I
have ever since devoted myself to poesy, that celestial, heavenly maid, and
ever will, until I sink within the arms of death. I now took my leave of the
poet for this time -- I had not returned, and remained but a few hours at home,
before a boy came to my house, and delivered a note directed to me; I opened it
and read as follows: Surrounded by the iron fang of woe,
On thee my friend my anguish'd feelings flow.
Pegasus' bosom heaves the rattling sigh,
And softly wishes that my friend was by,
That he could listen to my streaming grief,
And squirt within my soul some kind relief.
Haste then my friend, haste on the Muses wing
What It is evident here that Mr. Helicon has imitated a line in Pope's Windsor
Forest.
What Muse for Granville will refuse to sing.

Muse for Tell well shall refuse to sing.


By this note I concluded that something had happened to my friend Helicon; I
therefore directed my steps toward his dwelling as fast as my limbs could
carry me. When I arrived there, the first objects that struck my eyes, were the
poet with his wreath of leaves on his head, standing between two constables who
had him seized by the collar. As soon as Mr. Helicon saw me, he began to
apologize for his note, and begged that I would make allowances for it, as he
was obliged to write and send it by the boy in the space of two or three
minutes, as these barbarians would not allow him more time: that he discovered
an error in it, and a very material one; it was, that he had put f^ng instead
of fangs. -- The constables then interrupted him, by telling me, that they had
orders to come and take the gentleman and conduct him to goal for debt; that he
long owed the landlord of the house for boarding and lodging, which he would
not pay. I then informed them that I would stand his bail and become answerable
for all the debts he had incurred. The constables then, with apologies, took
their departure. Mr. Helicon, with bosom overflowing with gratitude, poured
forth his thanks for my kindness in animated and elegant language.

These are the only sketches of the life and manners of Pegasus Helicon I have
been able to draw together, that I might place before the public the great and
astonishing man they have long neglected. I have declined bringing forward many
of his works, as he soon intends to publish them, but the few which are here
exhibited bear wonderful marks of genius. I have now finished my melancholy
tale. -- Do, O thou propitious genius which hovers over the heads of the
virtuous, smile upon my feeble efforts, and bless the poet, whose noble
principles and actions are the subjects of my pen.

THE POET AN ELEGY.
LATE has the bard surveyed with kindred sigh,
A solitary parson's hapless plight;
Late has the tear rolled from my trembling eye,
To mourn with me the melancholy sight.
The tale of woe shall still the strain prolong,
The voice of sorrow wake the quivering string,
A poet's woes shall be the plaintive song;
Waft them fair sorrow on your murmuring wing.
The town-clock tolls, the solemn midnight hour,
Nor moon, nor planet trembles in the sky,
The weeping clouds distill a pattering shower,
The fleeting south wind wings its pitying sigh.
The thoughtless mortal sinks in peaceful rest,
A happy stranger to the frown of woes;
The hand of Fortune lulls his quiet breast,
Her downy mantle over his slumber throws.
In yon lone chamber, where a feeble light
From the sad window's broken front appears,
Through which the tempest pours its howling flight,
And the fond shower its sympathizing tears --
A poet makes his solitary stay,
And courts the Muse's sadly pleasing smiles,
Who now at midnight tunes his gloomy lay,
Whose soothing music all his care beguiles.
Musing he sits upon a limping chair,
And on his hand reclines his thoughtful head;
His rolling eye balls on the cieling stare,
And a slow tribute to reflection shed.
His ragged floor, neglected papers spread,
Some dusty books display their grief-worn forms,
There Richard Blackmore rears his epic head,
And Richard Savage, dauntless bard of storms.
Sad Otway, Dryden, Butler, Swift, arise,
Sweet Pope, smooth Thompson, Nature's favorite son,
There youthful Chatterton salutes the eyes,
And he who Rome's Augustine laurels won.
His standish on his tottering desk remains,
Whence upward rises one sage lonely pen,
In which the Muses pour their thrilling strain^*
And move the passions of unfeeling men.
His glimmering taper casts its rays around,
And trembles on the garret's laughing walls
A crippled watch faint chimes a ticking sound
And DREAMER SCRIPTOR to his strawbed calls.
The hour of one the city-watchmen cry,
But Scriptor heedless his fond task pursues;
The roaring tempest howls along the sky,
But Scriptor heeds naught, but the whispering Muse.
Poor rhiming Scriptor's wretched lot I know,
Often have I seen him steal the street along,
His tattered garments told the man of woe,
The son of poverty, the son of song.
He moved with eye dejected on the ground,
His tuneful mouth drawn in a gloomy grin,
Not at each step the silver's jingling sound,
Sung goodly ditties from his poke within.
But singing papers peeped through spacious holes,
And caught the air and Sol's declining ray;
There elegies and songs lay snug in folds,
Heroic scraps, each species made their stay.
I marked the color of his precious coat,
Green it was once, but now it is yellow brown,
His hairs behind loose and disordered float,
And in thin locks hung sorrowfully down.
Sweet sorrow! Scriptor's woes no more repine,
Hurt not the feelings of poor virtuous men.
His fate ah! youthful bard may still be thine!
Flee the fond strain, and burn thy humble pen.
Perhaps like him unfriended and unknown,
In poverty and want, ever long thou wilt roam;
Thy sweet deluded hopes too soon be flown,
And a lone garret be thy dolesome home.
Ah! dreadful thought; thou favorite strain adieu!
All the kind pleasure which thy music lends,
Poor woeful Scriptor rises to my view,
And his lone footsteps to yon thicket bends.
ON POETRY.
FROM the plain language of instruction, the imagination of man has risen to
the lively and flowing music of poetry.

Poetry, among the polite arts, holds a distinguished rank; it is the language
of passion and fancy: At what time it was invented we know not, the Greeks
bestowed the honor of it upon Orpheus an ancient bard of theirs. Almost every
man of genius, if he was to turn his attention toward poetry might become a
poet, but yet as in oratory many of the principal ingredients which constitute
a poet, ought to be inherent: It is said concerning Cowley and some others of
the principal poets, that they were born in rhimes, which evinces, that a
natural genius toward this particular art was inherent in them. When we seek
only solid instruction, we refer to the philosophical writer, whose sentiments
are conveyed in the most plain and simple manner of prose, where there is no
flowers and delightful scenes, but the worn and rugged paths of science. But
when we seek principally amusement blended with instruction, we explore the
beautiful walks of the muses, where the senses are more captivating, and where
nature promiscuously rises to our view. Besides amusement, improvement is a
principal design of poetry, and indeed when properly conveyed in this manner,
it is more attractive to the memory of man, as it more fixes his attention, and
captivates his imagination. It harmonizes the soul, and animates it more than
sentiments produced in any other manner. The breast of sensibility is touched
by its pensive strain, and drops the tender tear of compassion, for virtue in
distress; the pathetic, therefore, when executed in this manner is generally
successful. Its musical and winning accents steal upon the heart, and lull it
into meditation. Poetry has an effect in heightening the sensibility. -- To the
poet the garden of nature appears with double charms; none relish like him
beautiful and grand prospects, and receive them with an equal impression: from
them none are equally soothed with him by the soft and trembling strains of
poetry. While some flee from the unsocial aspect of solitude, the poet delights
in her lonely and sequestered seats; he courts her as the parent of reflection,
and assistant to his strains, reclined beneath her cooling shade, where naught
can disturb his meditation: he listens to the music of the grove, and the
distant fall of some running stream. -- It is there he receives the inspiration
of the Muse; in such retired places, she chooses her abode.

More agreeable to the view of the poet is the tall tree, and the rugged
mountain top, than the populous cities, lofty spires, and the most improved
architecture: -- more pleasing the rude hand of Nature, than the polished hand
of art: -- sweeter to him is the wild note of the tuneful bird, than the organs
artificial sound. That the love of rural retreats has possessed the breast of
almost every poet, is a truth no one will doubt. It was this that made Pope
delight in his seat at Twickenham, whence flowed a stream as smooth and
majestic as his song. It was this that led Shenstone to form the Leasowes,
where he might call the most beautiful flowers to deck his pensive Pastorals.

But, besides these, which are happy effects of poetry upon the mind, it is
charged with oftentimes raising our natural sensibility to such a pitch as to
make life almost a burden to us: the mind ruffled and uneasy by the bustle and
tumult of the world, and creative of imaginary troubles. This, no doubt, may be
sometimes the case; we may find some unhappy examples of it, but we shall also
discover that these examples were entire votaries of the Muse, and confined
themselves almost wholly to the elegiac style, the effect of which on the mind,
in this respect, is greater than that of any other species of poetry. -- We
must observe a very material difference between the writer and the reader, for
it is impossible that an author can transmit to the reader, the emotion which
he himself realized, in writing some melancholy strain. Poetry, as an
accomplishment, is delightful in the female sex: it discovers their refinement
of mind, their delicacy of thought, and liveliness of expression. It would
occupy some of their most agreeable hours, and afford amusement for their
friends. It must also render them more admired by the other sex, as it adds
another charm to the number they possess, their musical notes as coming from
one of their sex, would captivate their attention and find the way to the heart.

The female sensibility being naturally more defined than the male, they ought
for the reason just mentioned, to shun the gloomy Melpomene and seek the gay,
the lively, and descriptive muse; they ought to make their strains correspond
with themselves, in diffusing joy and liveliness around them.

ON DESCRIPTIVE POETRY.
AMONG the divisions under which poetry is arranged, there is none which
appears to me more amusing and instructive than the descriptive. -- It draws
all its scenes and reflections from nature; writings of all kinds which
describe Nature, work more than others upon the imagination, and fix the
attention; and indeed, there is no kind of poetry more worthy the attention of
the poet, than the descriptive. -- He here has a wide field for the full
exercise of his muse, the country with all her charms is open to his view. The
painter with his pencil presents us with some beautiful prospect, but the poet
speaks to us in a still more moving and more pleasing, by description. He
points to us the variegated landscape and all the beauties of nature, he
carries us over the verdant valleys, to the refreshing coolness of a spreading
grove, and leads us by the side of murmuring streams; like a friend and
companion he converses with us, and from the prospects, draws pleasing and
improving reflections. The reader almost fancies himself in the situation which
the poet represents, and his breast is lulled into the pensive meditation,
which the survey of a beautiful landscape really bestows. Thompson among the
descriptive poets holds a distinguished rank; no author could ever have chosen
a more beautiful and pleasing subject than the Seasons, and no author, I make
bold to say, within the same compass, could have done the subject more justice;
he abounds with the beautiful and pathetic, and carries us through all the
delightful scenes in nature; that person who can read this author without being
greatly entertained, I should doubt his taste and sensibility. Who is not
touched with his elegance of expression and delicacy of sentiment, when he
presents his Musidora to our view, though perhaps some will condemn him for his
want of delicacy in the subject.

The following is a quotation from him, of the descriptive kind which I believe
all must admire -- Around the adjoining brook that purls along
The vocal grove, now fretting over a rock,
Now scarcely moving through a reedy pool,
Now starting to a sudden stream, and now
Gently difius'd into a limpid plain.
A various group the herds and floors compose,
(...) confusion! On the grassy bank,
Some r^^imating lie, while others stand
Half in the flood, and often bending, sip
The circling surface. -- In the midst droops
The strong laborious ox, of honest front,
Which incompos'd, he shakes, and from his ^ides
The troublous insect lashes with his tail,
Returning still, amid his subjects safe,
Slumbers the monarch swain, his careless arm,
Thrown round his head on downy moss sustained*
Here laid his scrip with wholesome viands filled,
There listening every noise his watchful dog.


Almost every person is delighted with the prospects of Nature. The sublimity
of the heavens, the towering mountain, the unfathomable and wide extended
ocean, the blooming gardens, and level valleys, inspire the mind with
elevation, and contemplative reflection. To enjoy these is the peculiar
property of the imagination. None need attempt to soar in the sweet strains of
descriptive poetry, without possessing in luxuriance this celestial gift. There
have been some authors who have condemned and satirized descriptive poetry, and
have compared it to a mingled dish of sauces. This comparison must appear to
all to be exceedingly curious and unjust. To inculcate sentiment and morality
in the mind, is the most laudable and important task both of the poet and prose
writer. But can the mind dwell with equal delight on the page of the
sentimentalist and moralist, as on that of glowing nature? Can the imagination,
particularly that of youth, be equally warned and expanded? The breast, languid
and wearied, instead of seeking Pope's Essay on Man and on Criticism, will
prefer his Windsor Forest, and his epistle from Eloisa to Abelard.

If we attend to some of the principal poets, we will discover that it is from
productions of the descriptive kind, that they have derived the most fame. Some
of Milton's most admired sentences are descriptive of nature, his L'Allegro and
Il Penseroso are both of the descriptive class. Thompson, although he has
written many other excellent poems, and one of the best tragedies in the
English language, obtains almost all his fame from his Seasons. Pope, who made
tha^ curious comparison of sauces, and who has cast upon it many satirical
reflections, little knew that it was from his masterly descriptions, he chiefly
acquired his immortal name. The celebrated Warton in his Essay on Pope, gives
it as as his opinion, that it is from these three performances Pope has
acquired principally his reputation, his Windsor Forest, Rape of the Lock, and
his Epistle of Eloisa to Abelard; and all these dwell chiefly on description.
The following extract from Pope's Eloisa to Abelard, is in my humble opinion,
some of the most beautiful and smooth poetry in the English language; I could
never read it without emotion, it is particularly calculated to soothe the
dejected bosom. Devoid of sensibility and of the least portion of poetic taste
is that breast upon which it makes no impression; but my praise only degrades
it, it is part of the description of a convent: The darksome pines that over
yon rocks reclined,
Wave high and murmur to the hollow wind,
The wandering streams that shine between the hills,
The grots that echo to the tinkling rills,
The dying gales that pant upon the trees,
The lakes that quiver to the curling breeze;
No more these scenes my meditation aid,
Or lull to rest the visionary maid.
But over the twilight groves and dusky caves,
Long sounding isles and intermingled graves,
Black Melancholy sits, and round her throws,
A death-like silence and a still repose,
Her gloomy presence saddens all the scene,
Shades every flower, and darkens every green,
Deepens the murmur of the falling floods,
And breathes a browner horror on the woods.


I might still more enforce my assertion by the names of many other
distinguished poets, and might particularly bring forward the elegant author of
the Deserted Village. But I trust I have produced sufficient examples.
Enraptured by the strains of nature, the youthful poet generally first
exercises his wild and incorrect muse in the field of description. The
delightful objects of the country, the simplicity of a shepherd's life, allure
his wandering imagination. He is fond of describing morning and evening walks,
the appearance of the fields at the setting of the sun; the murmuring and
wandering streams; the music of the feathered throng, and the soft whispering
of the spreading grove. In a juvenile poem we can always discover what the
accurate Pope asserts -- Wherever you find the cooling western breeze,
In the next line it whispers through the trees.


Unskilled in the poetic language of the muses, the destitute novice applies
the word which first offers itself and suits his idea of elegance.

ON ELEGIAC POETRY.
ALL persons possessed of refined tastes are susceptible of the charms of
poetry. Some men have indeed affected to despise it; but perhaps the fable of
the fox and the grapes may be in some measure applicable to them. The examples
are numerous, that men who have shone as statesmen and eminent literary
characters, have not had certain qualifications inherent in them, necessary to
the attainment of this sublime art. Perhaps there is no species of poetry of
which the mind is more susceptible than elegy. There is none perhaps which
meets with more agreeable reception from all classes of men. Its objects are to
excite the softer passions, to represent to us the distress of virtue, and the
many misfortunes to which human nature is liable. Connected with its principle
design to infuse into us pity and sorrow, it conveys sentiments which
experience partly dictates, and which are improving and striking. In many
instances, elegy is calculated to excite a rougher feeling than sympathy, and
to kindle in the mind indignation against some unfeeling wretch, who is
introduced in the poem as a perpetrator of the most inhuman cruelties. When
elegy causes these sensations, it must operate in forming the mind to virtue,
and in cultivating the amiable and tender feelings.

To answer these purposes elegy has chosen a strain remarkably sweet, smooth,
and pensive to the ear, the very sound is the plaintive voice of sorrow -- The
curfew tolls the knell of parting day,
The lowing herd winds slowly over the lea;
The ploughman homeward plods his weary way,
And leaves the world to darkness and to me.


I intend here (presuming it will not be unentertaining or useless) to extract
some verses from five of the most distinguished writers of elegy in the English
language.

Shenstone's genius led him to delight in Elegy; in this species of poetry he
particularly excels; possessed of sensibility disagreeably refined, he
exquisitely felt what he wrote, and he transmits to the reader, in some degree,
the same impression. He is remarkable, in many verses, for his beautiful
simplicity. In his Elegy, on the untimely death of a certain learned
acquaintance, are these verses -- He little knew the fly penurious art,
The odious art which Fortune's favorites know,
Formed to bestow, he felt the warmest heart,
But envious Fate forbade him to bestow.
He little knew to ward the secret wound;
He little knew, that mortals could ensnare;
Virtue he knew, the noblest joy he found,
To sing her glories, and to paint her fair!
Ill was he skilled to guide his wandering sheep,
And unforeseen disaster thin'd his fold;
Yet at another's loss the swain would weep,
And for his friends his very crook was sold.
Ye sons of wealth, protect the Muse's train;
From winds protect them, and with food supply:
Ah! helpless they to ward the threatened pain,
The meagre famine, and the wintery sky.
He loved a nymph, amidst his slender store;
He dared to love, and Cynthia was his theme;
He breathed his plaints along the rocky shore,
They only echoed over the winding stream.


In that justly admired Elegy of Shenstone's, where he describes the sorrow of
an ingenuous mind, on the melancholy event of a licentious amor -- when Henry
relates the speech of Jessy, what bosom can be insensible to the gentle emotion
of pity? Henry, she said, by that dear form subdued,
See the sad relics of a nymph undone:
I find, I find the rising sob renewed,
I sigh in shades, and sicken at the sun.
Amid the dreary gloom of night I cry,
When will the morn's once pleasing scene return?
Yet what can morn's returning ray supply,
But foes that triumph, or but friends that mourn?
Alas! no more that joyous morn appears,
That led the tranquil hours of spotless Fame;
For I have steeped a father's couch in tears,
And tinged a mother's glowing cheeck with shame.
The vocal birds that raise their matin strain;
The sportive lambs increase my painful moan;
All seem to chase me from the cheerful plain,
And talk of truth and innocence alone.
If through the garden's flowery tribes I stray,
Where bloom the jas'mines that could once allure,
Hope not to find delight in us, they say,
For we are spotless, Jessy we are pure.
Ye flowers that well reproach a nymph so frail,
Say, could ye with a virgin's fame compare?
The brightest bud that scents the vernal gale,
Was not so fragrant, and was not so fair.


I had almost resolved not to mention any particular beauty in these extracts,
but cannot refrain here from observing the feeling and pathetic manner in which
the poet describes the amiable sensibility and virtuous poverty of his deceased
learned acquaintance, in these two lines -- Yet at another's woe the swain
would weep,
And for his friends his very crook was sold.


In the second extract, and second verse, he nicely distinguishes between the
grief of a father, and the delicacy and shameful anguish of a mother -- For I
have steeped father's couch in tears,
And tinged a mother's glowing cheeck with shame.


In the succeeding verses, with elegant simplicity he describes the sorrowful
reflections of Jessy -- Every object, once delightful to her, seems to talk of
truth and innocence -- The flowers reproach her with her shame, and forbid her
to approach them -- Hope not to find delight in us, they say,
For we are spotless, Jessy we are pure.


The celebrated Gray has obtained more fame in the literary world, by the
production of one Elegy, than by all his other works, although a celebrated
critic has pronounced his Odes to be the most elegant poetry of that particular
species in the English language -- A striking proof of the agreeable impression
which Elegy makes upon the mind of the generality of men. The name of Gray will
never be forgotten, as the author of the Elegy in a Country Church Yard -- It
was the death of an old and intimate friend which impressed upon the mind of
Gray a gloom and melancholy, (...) gave (...) site and inimitable performance
-- to every line of it we may apply this line of Bea^^ie -- He thought as a
sage^ but he felt as a man.

Although, in my opinion, Shenstone excels Gray in the simplicity of his Elegy,
yet Gray carries with him a more solemn grandeur -- The one sooner excites the
tear of sympathy, while the other more expands the imagination, and gives the
mind the more elevated thought.

Let nor ambition mock their useful toil,
Their homely joys, and destiny obscure,
Nor grandeur hear wish a disdainful smile,
The short and simple annals of the poor.
The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power,
And all that beauty, all that wealth ever gave,
Await alike the inevitable hour:
The paths of glory lead but to the grave.
Nor you, ye proud, impute to these the fault,
If memory over their tomb no trophies raise,
Where through the long drawn aile and fretted vault,
The pealing anthem swells the note of praise.
Can storied urn, or animated bust,
Back to its mansion call its fleeting breath?
Can honor's voice provoke the silent dust,
Or flattery soothe the dull, cold ear of death?
Perhaps, in this neglected spot is laid
Some heart once pregnant with celestial fire,
Hands that the rod of empire might have swayed
Or waked to extacy the living lyre.
But knowledge to their eyes her ample page
Rich with the spoils of time did never unroll,
Chill penury repressed their noble rage
And froze the genial current of the soul.
Full many a gem of purest ray serene
The dark unfathomed caves of ocean bear,
Full many a flower is born to blush unseen
And waste its sweetness on the desert air.
Mason and Gray whom congeniality of disposition had connected in the strongest
and dearest ties, seem to partake equally of the poetic spirit. So delightful
is the contemplation of friendship in theory, that human nature is greatly
prepossessed in favor of that person who is the happy possessor of it. The
friendship which subsisted between (...) and Pelopidas, those godlike Th^bans,
has no doubt increased, in our opinion, their other virtues, and the friendship
of Gray and Mason, has in the amiable and tender bosom enhanced their poetic
talents. While we endeavor to strew a laurel over the tomb of the harmonious
Gray, the memory of his celebrated friend will always occur. Mason's elegies on
the death of Lady Coventry, and on the departure of a young nobleman are his
most elegant performances of this kind. I shall extract a few verses from each
of these.

When'er with soft serenity she smiled,
Or caught the orient blush of quick surprise*
How sweetly mutable, how brightly wild
The liquid luster darted from her eyes! --
Each look each motion waked a new born grace,
That over her form its transient glory cast:
Some lovelier wonder soon usurped the place,
Chased by a charm still lovelier than the last.
That Bell again! it tells us what she is
Or what she was no more the strain prolong,
Luxuriant fancy pause! an hour like this
Demands the tribute of a serious song.
Maria claims it from that sable bier,
Where cold and wan, the slumberer rests her head,
In still small whispers to reflection's ear
She breathes the solemn dictates of the dead.
O catch the awful notes, and lift them loud!
Proclaim the theme by sage and fool revered,
Hear it ye young, ye vain, ye great, ye proud,
It Is Nature speaks, and Nature will be heard --
LADY COVENTRY. Go then, my friend, nor let thy candid breast
Condemn me if I check the plausive string:
Go to the wayward world, complete the rest,
Be what the purest Muse would wish to sing.
Be still thyself: that open path of truth,
Which led thee here, let manhood firm pursue,
Retain the sweet simplicity of youth,
And all thy virtue dictates -- dare to do.
Still scorn with conscious pride the mask of art,
On vice's front let fearful caution lower,
And teach the diffident, discreter part,
Of knaves that plot, and fools that fawn for power.
So round thy brow, when age's honors spread,
when death's cold hand, unstrings thy Mason's lyre,
When the green turf lies lightly on his head,
Thy worth shall some superior bard inspire.
He on the amplest bounds of time's domain
On rapture's plume shall give thy name to fly,
For trust with reverence, trust this sabine strain,
The Muse forbids the virtuous man to die. --
TO A YOUNG NOBLEMAN. There have been some critics who have endeavored to
deprive Mason and Gray of some of their poetic laurels; but without success.
The understandings and the breasts of the true lovers of poetry, have ever
bestowed the highest approbation on their feeling Muse: the morose critic and
envious rival may snarl and bark, but a certain criterion inherent in the
poetic bosom will always pay the tribute of applause. Gray has found many
defenders to vindicate the injured cause of his Muse. When the plaintive bard
paid his last debt of nature, he left behind his beloved Mason to pour in
solitude his strain, and to be the champion of his friend. Mr. Temple in his
life of this poet pronounces him to be the most learned man in England, and
that without having made the least application, and without the expectation of
such an event, he was appointed professor of history in Oxford College. Nor did
Temple write with the enthusiasm of friendship, for among the numerous virtues
of Gray, he relates his blemishes and faults.

The next poet I shall mention is Mickle, the elegiac champion of the beautiful
and unfortunate Mary Queen of Scots. There appears to me a great similarity
between the strain of Mason and Mickle. How far my opinion is just, the reader
can judge. I shall content myself with taking an extract from his Pollio, an
elegy written in the wood near R -- Castle.

The bank, the river and the fanning breeze,
The dear idea of my Pollio bring:
So shone the moon through these soft nodding trees
When here we wandered in the eves of spring.
When April's smiles the flowery lawn adorn,
And modest cowslip's deck the streamlet's side;
When fragrant orchards to the roseate morn,
Unfold their bloom in heavens own color died.
So fair a blossom gentle Pollio wore,
These were the emblems of his healthful mind,
To him the lettered page displayed its lore
To him bright fancy all her wealth resigned.
Him with the purest flame the Muse endowed,
Flames never to the illiberal thought allied
The sacred sisters led where virtue glowed
In all her charms: he saw, he felt, and died.
Oh, part'ner of my infant griefs and joys!
Big with the scenes now past, my heart overflows,
Bids each endearment, fair as once, to rise
And dwells luxurious on her melting woes.
Often with the rising sun when life was new
Along the woodland have I roved with thee,
Often by the moon have brushed the evening dew,
When all was fearless, innocence and glee.
The sainted well, where yon bleak hill declines,
Has often been conscious of those happy hours;
But now the hill the river crowned (...) pines,
And sainted well, have lost their cheering power.
It is remarkable that the amiable and more tender feelings of soul,
particularly a disposition for friendship, distinguish the celebrated writers
of elegy, more than the other ranks of poets. These four whom I have mentioned
are eminent examples of it. Mickle, in these verses I have just quoted, with
all the tender glow of friendship, and the smoothness and harmony of the poet,
strikes his plaintive lyre, in honor of his deceased Pollio Pollio was
Mickle's brother, the natural affection of brotherly love was heightened in the
poet's bosom by esteem and friendship.
. He makes the groves and the lawns, the places where they had formerly roamed
together, the partakers of his sorrow.

The last Elegiac writer I shall mention, is Mr. Merry, or Della Crusca, the
delightful correspondent of Anna Matilda. He breathes in many lines the pure
strain of poetry; as does also his fair admirer Matilda. In no place do I as
much feel the pathos of his pen, as where he breaks out into the sorrowful
music of elegy. The following three verses, describing the fallen soldier, I
shall only extract from him -- Though on the plain he lies outstretch'd and pale,
Without one friend, his steadfast eyes to close;
Yet on his honored course shall many a gale
Wast the moist fragrance of the weeping rose.
Over that dread spot the melancholy moon,
Shall pause a while a sadder beam to shed,
And awful night amidst her starry noon,
Sprinkle light dews upon his hallowed head.
There too the solitary birds shall swell
With long drawn melody their plaintive throat,
While distant echo, from responsive cell,
Shall often with fading force return the note.


LEANDER, Or the Sorrows of REFLECTION, an ELEGY.
LEANDER is an old gentleman possessed of a large estate; Mira is his only
child of whom he is passionately fond; Henry a young gentleman of great beauty
and amiable disposition, falls in love with Mira; she returns his passion with
equal ardour; her father Leander discovers their fondness for each other, and
disapproves of it; he forbids Henry the house, and to think more of his
daughter. The old father, when he sees the effect which Henry's absence has
upon his daughter, repents of his conduct but too late. Mira dies; Leander is
seized with the greatest affliction; his memory recalls to his view his former
cruelty. He is here represented reclining beneath an aged oak, which grew upon
the bank of the Hudson, and retracing his sorrows.

I.
Serene the eve, the sun's withdrawn his light,
Luna has risen with her twinkling train,
The whirring bat, now wheels his rapid flight,
Hushed is the breeze that whispered over the plain.
II.
Hushed is the warblings of the tuneful grove,
The cheerful birds, have sought their downy nest,
Sad sorrow takes her lone retired rove,
To soothe the anguish of the pensive breast.
III.
Lo! from yon spacious building's porch descends
The old Leander, with his locks of snow,
His tottering steps toward yon bank he bends,
Where spacious Hudson murmuring glides below.
IV.
See now the verdant, well known bank he gains,
And slowly leans beneath an aged oak,
While heavy sighs breath forth his inward pains,
Thus the old Sire in plaintive accents spoke.
V.
Ah! poor old man, no more shall PLEASURE glow,
Or seek adobe within thy anguish'd mind,
She Will lend no smile to soothe the pangs of woe,
Still will REFLECTION cast her looks behind.
VI.
Still will she trace long past, and recent scenes,
And paint the dread events before my view,
Still will she haunt me in my midnight dreams,
And poor Leander ever will pursue.
VII.
No more shall music sound the note of joy,
No more shall rural sports their pleasure give,
No More shall Mira my pleased thoughts employ,
And bid her cruel wretched father live.
VIII.
Ceased is that voice, which once was Music's sound,
No more on me its soft vibration flows,
Closed is that eye, which shed fond joy around,
Stopped is that breath, sweet as the breeze which blows.
IX.
Yonder my Mira rests her slumbering head,
Where grow those gloomy melancholy trees,
They over her grave an awful shadow spread,
And gently quiver with the passing breeze.
X.
'Twas you my Mira soothed declining years,
'Twas you that bid joy sparkle in my eye,
That wiped the widow's and the orphan's tears,
and eased the bosom of the heaving sigh.
XI.
And O how lovely, how divinely fair
Was the soft tincture of thy charming face,
In floating ringlets waved thy auburn hair,
Thy form was beauty, polished into grace.
XII.
I thought my Mira, you these eyes would close,
And drop a tear upon my aged tomb,
That over my grave, you would lead the briery rose,
And plant the willow, with its pensive gloom.
XIII.
But ah! these hopes for ever now are fled,
And who but I, a cruel wretch to blame,
Pity no more thy gentle sorrow shed?
'Twas I that sported with the lover's flame.
XIV.
The graceful Henry in the pride of youth
Beheld my Mira, with a rising sigh,
His form was noble, and his breast was truth,
A liquid lightning darted from his eye.
XV.
The beauteous maid his tender flame returned,
Love in each breast assumed its genial reign,
Pure and sincere, their gentle passions burned,
Rambling together, often they trip'd the plain.
XVI.
Here often beneath this spreading tree they have stood,
The distant prospects all around surveyed,
They Have viewed the smoothness of the passing flood,
And sought the whispering and the cooling shade.
XVII.
Often they have listened to the joyful song,
While pleasure tinged each face with rosy hues,
Often in the Eve, the vales they have roved along
When Nature, slow distilled her moist'ning dews.
XVIII.
Devoid of art, and of deceitful guile
Of all the triflings of the haughty maid,
To each fond face they lent the pleasing smile,
No thoughts of sorrow their soothed breasts invade.
XIX.
I saw their love, with anger, and with pain,
For gold nor fortune was her Henry's lot,
He joined not in their routs, the giddy train,
But peace and plenty crowned his humble cot.
XX.
I bade the modest youth with furious voice,
To flee my house, and shun fair Mira's face;
No more within her cheering smiles rejoice,
Nor seek her blooming and her soft embrace.
XXI.
With downcast eyes he hears my dread commands,
The roses flee his round and manly cheek,
No word he says, but in sad anguish stands,
Then flow retires, but never attempts to speak.
XXII.
He casts behind a lingering parting view,
The throbbing, bursting sigh his bosom heaves,
At length his steps a winding path pursue,
He sinks from sight behind those spreading trees.
XXIII.
No gentle pity my hard bosom feels
For wretched Henry's parting pangs and grief,
No gentle wish upon my bosom steals
To ease his suffering, and afford relief.
XXIV.
But ah! how soon did I repent the deed
When past, and gone, to be recalled too late?
How did my breast for mourning Mira bleed,
How did I curse Leander's hapless fate?
XXV.
The graceful Henry now no more returned,
To cheer and bless his lovely Mira's mind,
Drooping in silence, her fond passion burned,
For her loved youth in solitude she pined.
XXVI.
No more in smiles her beauteous face she dressed,
But pensive glooms, now occupied their place,
No more when I the lively maid addressed,
Shone the soft luster of her charming face.
XXVII.
Always she strove to shun my anxious sight,
Often she wandered over the flowery vale;
Often she sought the doleful shades of night
To pour unheard, her melancholy tale.
XXVIII.
She mourns her Henry clothed in sable weeds,
Gradual the flame her lovely form consumes;
No tears from her dim languid eye proceeds,
No more sweet freshness on her aspect blooms.
XXIX.
At last she sunk within the shades of death
Which stilled the tumult of her anguish'd breast,
Her Henry, quiver'd on her dying breath,
His name flew with her to the shades of death.
XXX.
Of youthful Henry I have heard no more,
Perhaps he is also sought the silent grave,
Cease flowing Hudson! cease your murmuring roar!
Perhaps he is buried in your cruel wave.
XXXI.
There no more angry words, disdainful pride,
Will reach thy modest and attentive ear,
No more I Will snatch thee from thy blooming bride,
Or call upon thy cheek the trembling tear.
XXXII.
Leander ceased; and feebly from his seat
With faultring, and with trembling limbs arose,
Toward his dome, he bends his ploading feet,
Reflection still, re-numerates his woes.
DELIA, A PASTORAL.
WHY Delia those sorrowful tears?
Which over thy fair aspect descend --
Why joy's cheerful glow disappears?
And bestows no fond smile on a friend --
Can the fondness of friendship delight?
Thy sensible bosom no more --
Can the bloom of kind nature excite?
No more her fair scenes to explore --
Your sheep miss their sheperdess' hand,
The mourners have wandered astray;
They hear not your gentle command,
Nor sportively lift to your lay --
By the banks of the murmuring brook,
In the verdure of opening lawns
No more are they led by your crook --
When the morn in serenity dawns.
The voice of glad concord is mute,
And sunk in grief's sorrowful strain --
Unstrung is the musical lute,
Which lulled with its accents the plain.
Simplicity blended with grace
Is still my fair Delia thy guest,
But fled is the bloom of your face
Which health had so lovely impressed.
The flowers which bloomed in the field,
Around your soft bosom you spread --
But now to dull sorrow you yield,
And the cyress encircles your head. --
The vales and the shadowy grove
Were once gentle maid thy delight;
But now with sad fondness you rove
When the landscape is folded in night.
Indulge not too much gloomy thought
My Delia indulge not your sighs,
Reflect on humanity's lot,
And dry the warm tears from your eyes.
Compare with another your grief?
The children of anguish and woe,
Whom Hope even refuses relief,
And deigns not her smiles to bestow.
THE AMERICAN CAPTIVE. AN ELEGY.
WITH slow and solemn sound the tow' r-clock tolls,
Its mournful cadence strikes upon my ears,
Tells in sad murmurs, how time onward rolls,
And adds its moments to my sorrowing years.
II.
To grief and melancholy thought resigned,
Almerius courts dread midnight's horrid gloom,
He hails its shades congenial with his mind,
And mourns neglected his unhappy doom.
III.
Far from the soothing accents of a friend,
Where pity not one tear for misery sheds,
Where not humanity a smile will lend,
But grief unfolding her dark mantle spread;
IV.
Far from the voice of Julia and of love,
For me soft sympathy has ceased to flow;
No more those lips with winning accents move,
And with their sweetness sooth the pang of woe.
V.
How solemn and how grand, the midnight scene,
The moon's now hid beneath a lowering cloud;
Now glimmering from on high she shines serene,
And brightened breaks forth from the blackened shroud.
VI.
She casts her beams over Nature's silent plains,
And in this tower emits a trembling ray,
Which lights the dungeon where a wretch remains,
To drear confinement an unhappy prey.
VII.
Now through the grates soft moves a gentle breeze,
Whose fragrant coolness fans my panting breast;
Abroad I hear the rustling of the trees,
And the shrill screaming of the midnight guest.
VIII.
I hear the lonely songster of the grove
In warbling accents pour its pensive song;
The song of sorrow and the song of love,
Which floating zephyrs is gently want along.
IX.
Far distant hence I hear the waters sound,
Which foaming tumbles from the rocky hills,
Rising it throws its plaintive murmur round,
And all the air with fairy music fills.
X.
Through nights sad gloom the watchful mastiff's cries
With grating discord drown the soothing strains,
When listening every noise, he distant spies
Some awful phantom stalking over the plains.
XI.
What horrors hover in these chilly walls!
A dismal dread now damps my grief-worn heart;
Methinks some ghost with hollow screaming calls,
And groans and sighs the neighboring cells impart.
XII.
Ah! now a ghastly, frightful form appears,
And seems to whisper through the iron grates;
Slow over its haggard face roll fearful tears,
And wild despair its (...) eye dilates.
XIII.
The gri^^y hairs stand still upon its head,
(...) its hand a bloody knife it holds;
Around its limbs a filthy garb is spread,
Which, stained with gore, before the gale unfolds.
XIV.
Now with the shadows of the night it is fled,
And left a prisoner terrified with fear,
Ah! it was the spectre of some murdered dead --
A sufferer, a Columbian -- names so dear.
XV.
Hail to Columbia's happy cultured fields!
Hail to her waving and her cooling shade!
There her blessed sons enjoy what nature yields,
And freedom's charms the extended realm pervade.
XVI.
There the glad songs of peace and joy prevail;
No tyrant's hand inflicts inhuman woes;
Tranquil the swain roves through the shady vale,
And courts, fatigued, the slumbers of repose.
XVII.
Once I, Columbia, dwelt upon thy shore,
And the glad strains of joy and freedom joined,
To the rough dangers of the ocean wore,
And steered the stately ship with breast resigned.
XVIII.
There my fond father and my mother live,
And sorrowing mourn their son's unhappy lot;
Thousands for ransom cheerfully they would give --
But poverty surrounds their weeping cot.
XIX.
'Twas I supported their declining years,
Relieved their breasts of poverty and care --
That from their cheeks dispelled affliction's tears,
And raised their hopes to pleasure from despair.
XX.
There lovely Julia sorrowful remains,
Fair as the beauty of the dawning morn:
Weeping she rambles over congenial plains,
While the soft graces all her steps adorn.
XXI.
Can I forget the tender last embrace,
Those words which zephyrs on their fragrance bore;
The expressive sorrow of that charming face,
When last we parted to embrace no more?
XXII.
We haul'd the anchor from its dark abode,
Before the winds we spread the swelling sails;
We on the billows of the ocean rode,
And swiftly moved before propitious gales.
XXIII.
An Algerine corsair to our fight appeared,
Ploughing the waves, the sons of prey dre nigh;
Upon the mast the bloody flag was reared,
And death terrific glimmer'd in each eye.
XXIV.
Howling approached the hell hounds of Algiers
The dreadful falchion glittered in each hand
The horrid prow its iron grapple rears,
The thundering captain issues his command
XXV.
The vigor of a freeman's arm was vain,
In vain man's sacred rights and country plead
Around our limbs they fold the galling chain --
See O my country! your brave freemen bleed
XXVI.
Toward Algiers they bend their watery way,
Whose warlike turrets beaming from on high,
Strike in the gloomy soul a sickening ray,
And call a tear upon the sorrowing eye.
XXVII.
Ceased is the pleasure of a once gay breast,
Far fly my dungeon comfort and repose;
By labor and by torturing fiends oppressed,
I find no ease but what frail hope bestows.
XXVIII.
Ah! cruel country! can my groans and pain
Make no impression on thy callous heart?
Does not the glow of sympathy remain?
Does not humanity its sigh impart?
XXIX.
Art thou the land where freedom rears her throne,
Where conquered Washington, where Warren bled,
Where patriot virtue, and where valor shone,
And where oppression bowed her guilt stained head.
XXX.
Adieu! Columbia, to thy fertile shore --
Adieu! those joys which give to life its charm,
Within these walls Almerius must deplore
The sleeping vigor of his country's arm.
MARY's TOMB, A SONNET.
WHAT mournful noise resounds from yonder grove?
The grove where Mary slumbers in her tomb;
What sigh is that, what plaintive voice of love?
Which flings its sorrow to the midnight gloom --
II.
What figure's that, which glimmers through the trees?
And drooping bends, upon the flowery green,
Whose locks wave gently with the fanning breeze,
And anguish'd views the sad surrounding scene --
III.
It Is mourning Belville weeping over the urn
Where mouldering in the dust his Mary lies,
Whom hope had soothed with smiles at his return,
But now deluding, shuns his sorrowing eyes.
IV.
Hi^ sad remembrance paints the lovely maid,
Their former love, their happiness and joy,
When she in beauty and in health arrayed,
Was the sole object of his mind's employ.
V.
When last he parted from her soft embrace
To seek the dangers of the ocean's swell;
When the tears trickled over her gentle face
As he the beauteous mourner, bade farew
VI.
Returning; she has fled his anxious arms,
And sought the icy fetters of the tomb,
No more her Belville views her blooming charms,
But clothed in sorrow, sighs his hapless doom.
VII.
Over the fair maid, ye trees your verdure wave,
Protect her with your wide and cooling shade,
Softly ye dews distill upon her grave,
Where Belville's tears the debt of sorrow paid.
ELEGY, SUPPOSED TO HAVE BEEN DELIVERED BY CHATTERTON, JUST BEFORE HIS DEATH,
AFTER HE HAD TAKEN A POTION OF ARSENIC.
SCENE lies in his room -- Pieces of manuscripts which he had torn are
scattered about the floor, and the dreadful phial which contained the poison
standing on the table. -- After having stood for a considerable time in a very
thoughtful posture, he at length speaks --

I.
Ah! fond deceiver Hope, thy reign is over,
No more shall Chatterton be soothed by thee.
Soon will death waft him from this hated shore,
And launch a wretch in dread eternity.
II.
Eternity Eternity thou a^^ful startling thought. -- ADDISON.
! thou awful starting name!
I tremble and shrink back at inward thought,
How can I now a God's protection claim?
O hapless youth what is thy destined lot?
III.
But what is there on earth that bids me live?
Fortune on me has always looked with guile;
To Chatterton her gifts, she scorns to give
No friend but pity ever lent a smile.
IV.
On others she has poured her plenteous store,
More than is needful for frail life's support,
While I for food in silence must deplore,
Or the compassion of the haughty court.
V.
Shall Chatterton, ever thus himself demean?
One who has claimed Britannia's sons applause,
Has he not feelings both acute and keen?
Which rise repugnant, to the Almighty's laws.
VI.
Nature has called, I quickly have obeyed,
Unable to support Affliction's load,
Life's glim'ring taper now begins to fade,
Soon will I reach the awful grave's abode.
VII.
The soft poetic note will cease to flow
From Chatterton's, or Rowley's pen,
No more he will tune the youthful lyre to woe,
No more he will seek a charitable friend.
VIII.
No more he will mourn on earth his hapless fate,
No more he will claim the poet's scant reward,
No more he will be dependent on the great,
Or bow submissive to a haughty Lord.
IX.
To those who have hurt the feelings of his mind,
Poor Chatterton does now forgiveness lend,
All that he asks and all he would remind,
Let those who have injured, now lament his end.
X.
An author's lot is poverty and pain,
The son of disappointment, anguish, grief --
Hope still retaining its deceitful reign,
Soothes his sad soul with prospects of relief.
XI.
But Ah! Those prospects only but appear
And vanish from the anxious eager eye --
In vain affliction drops the briny tear,
In vain the bosom heaves the pensive sigh.
XII.
O my fond mother, how thy tender breast
Will shrink with anguish at the deed I Have done;
Often have you lulled me when by woe oppressed,
Often have you prayed for blessing on your son.
XIII.
How will you cast to Heaven your streaming eyes,
And tear your tresses and your flowing hair;
Your bursting bosom scarce will hold your sighs,
And human reason scarce support despair.
XIV.
And thou my sister, whose soft feeling glows
For Chatterton with tenderness and love,
Whose sorrow beats congenial with my woes,
How will the news thy gentle passions move.
XV.
But O! the horrid crimson deed is done,
In vain, your throbbing sighs and starting tears --
Soon will the thread of human life be spun,
Now to my view eternity appears.
XVI.
Your son, your brother, at his latest breath,
With pensive gratitude remembers you;
Fond thought retains you, as he sinks in death
And bids you both eternally adieu.
XVII.
The evening comes to close the solemn scene,
The sun now sets in awfulness and gloom;
Slow glides the deep, in blue expanse serene,
The weeping willow slumbers over my tomb.
XVIII.
The dusky raven sends its mournful cry,
The distant thunder repercussive roars,
The fading light saint glimmers on my eye,
Now sable night his frightful curtain low'rs.
XIX.
Silence now holds all nature calm and still,
Ah! there the death-bell sends its hollow toll,
Here death now stalks, to obey the sovereign will,
To him I now resign my fleeting soul.
ON HISTORY. THE PROPER STUDY OF MANKIND IS MAN -- Pope.
THERE is no subject more interesting to mankind, and from which they receive
greater improvement and pleasure, than from a survey of the transactions which
have happened in the world -- Inquiries after the events which have taken place
among our predecessors and forefathers, are natural to the human mind. They
seem to be connected with us and relative to our own state. The miseries which
have befell great and good men, although upwards of one thousand years ago,
excite in our breasts the tender emotion of distress, and we rejoice when
Fortune smiles propitious on their laudable exertions. Our bosoms glow with
hatred and disgust toward those tyrants, who have inflicted the most shocking
cruelties on their unhappy subjects. We feel our indignation roused for the
ingratitude which cities have shown toward their Generals, who have led their
armies to conquest and victory; and we shed the tears of sorrow over the ruins
of a once populous city, which war has levelled to the ground. It is a cause of
joy that the most useful study is at the same time the most entertaining; that
history, when it delights us greatly increases our knowledge. When we are
perusing a book of the dryest and most abstruse kind, if the thought occurs
that we are enlarging our mental faculties, we receive pleasure; but it is an
enjoyment of a much higher kind than this, which is derived from history. When
viewing its engaging pages, we want not the reflection of improvement, to keep
awake our attention; for keep this away entirely, the animating language of
history, the curious events and the delightful scenes with which it abounds,
will still captivate the mind. Human nature is presented to our view. Every
person is concerned in the events which happen to each other. If a friend
relate to us some remarkable occurrences which have happened in the world, or
the manners of a distant country; pleasure glows upon our countenances, we feel
interested and lend the attentive ear. Of a nature similar to this is the
pleasure which we receive from history. The transactions, the manners, and the
lives of a people, and of individuals, are there related in the elegant
language of the historian. The impressions which history makes upon the minds
of those persons, susceptible to the amiable and finer feelings, tend to refine
the manners, and to promote the cause of virtue. When we admire exalted and
noble sentiments in persons, and see their excellence, we feel a desire to
possess them, and our bosoms experience the sensations of emulation and
approbation.

The many objects which history holds up for our imitation, is one of its
principal advantages. When the life of an amiable man is presented to us, we
feel deeply interested in his welfare, our feelings flow congenial, and receive
impressions corresponding to the various circumstances and afflictions through
which he passes. In mourning for him when under a distressed situation, we
mourn for virtue.

When we admire any character, and as we are naturally led to imitate it; if we
are unable to obtain all the excellencies which constitute it, we may yet much
profit ourselves by our laudable attempts. The accomplished and virtuous Scipio
placed Cyrus as a model; as a warrior, as a statesman, and as a man, and in all
these he equalled, if not excelled him. It was by holding to his view that
Prince's virtue, that he in the bloom of youth performed that act of continence
for which he has been greatly celebrated. Does the bosom of the soldier pant to
emulate heroic virtue? Does he wish to perform valorous actions in his
country's cause? Let him turn over the pages of the Grecian and Roman history
-- There the deeds of warriors will swell his military breast, and command
wonder and admiration -- the deeds of patriots, whose thundering arms
enthusiasm nerved in their country's defense. In silent astonishment, he will
pause at the names of a Themistocles, Leonidas, and Epaminondas; a Camillus,
Cincinnatus, Regulus, and Brutus. Does the more peaceful patriot delight to
serve his country in the Cabinet? Let him view the Grecian and Roman statesman
when the governments were in their primitive situations.

Does the youthful breast glow with a desire to possess the swaying powers of
oratory; to appear as an eloquent champion in his country's interests? As an
incitement let him behold the orator of Greece, whose voice like lightning
fired the bosoms of the Athenians with an invincible ardour in their country's
cause; and the Roman orator, whose more soft and melodious accents, almost
imperceptible stole upon the mind, and swayed the gentle and milder passions.
Let him imitate these, if a Philip leads on his troops to destroy the freedom
of his country; and if a Cataline lifts his traitorous head.

As the mind is naturally led to imitate an object which it admires,
consequently it will be naturally led to avoid one which it detests. Hence the
many perverse characters, and some which are degrading to human nature drawn in
history, will operate nearly as beneficially as great and good ones Look then
abroad through Nature to the range of planet's suns and adamantine spheres.
Wheeling unshaken through the void immense;
And speak O Man! Does this capacious scene
With half that kindling Majesty dilate
Thy strong conception, as when Brutus rose
Refulgent, from the stroke of Caesar's fate,
Amid the crowd of patriots; and his arm,
Aloft extending like eternal Jove,
When guilt brings down the thunder, called aloud
On Tully's name, and shook his crimson steel,
And bade the father of his bounty hail!
For lo! the tyrant prostrate on the dust,
And Rome again is tree. -- AKENSIDE, BOOK I.

. In history our political knowledge is increased, when we trace the different
forms of government, their peculiar maxims and laws, the duties of the various
executive powers; the privileges and manners of the people; the manner in which
governments took their rise, and the degeneracy and particular evils which
occasioned their downfall. By seeing these, we can reap instruction, and guard
against the evils which arise in governments. From the histories of all nations
we obtain this precept, that governments established, though on the most wise
and Republican principles, generally degenerate into tyranny. The art to render
ourselves agreeable to our fellow creatures in social intercourse, to bestow
upon them satisfaction and pleasure, and to excite in their minds an esteem and
regard for us, which is necessary in society, is one of the most pleasing and
desirable qualifications we can obtain. The variety of events and of characters
in history, will always furnish us with some examples illustrative of the
sentiment we have advanced; which will not only please our company, but enforce
the assertion. The cause that renders a traveller pleasing and esteemed in
conversation, arises not from his superior understanding, but from the great
number of curious and entertaining incidents, which he retains in his memory
and introduces in seasonable and applicable opportunities. The reader of
history obtains his knowledge at a much easier and cheaper rate than the
traveller; he experiences not the many inconveniences to which the other is
liable; the vessel bears him not, on the ruffled bosom of the ocean to some
distant country, far from his relations and friends. The many evils to which
men are subjected to in this world for want of foresight; the guile and deceit
of mankind render the knowledge of human nature of the greatest importance;
without it the smiles of the deceiving villain would be named sincerity, and
the mask of hypocrisy, friendship and love. Beside the evils arising from a
want of the knowledge of human nature, being a great incitement to our
exertions in the pursuit of it: it is a study exceedingly curious and pleasing
-- It makes us acquainted with ourselves from which alone we can form an idea
considerably accurate of the human mind at large. What is more delightful to
the intelligent and enquiring mind, than to contemplate on the various passions
which have actuated the soul; the great lengths which certain impulses have
hurried human beings beyond the limits of moderation and reason.

What more astonishing? than the sublime works of the Deity, who made and
created all things, and by whose power they still retain their various
movements and existence. The means to obtain an object of so much importance as
the knowledge of human nature, must be held by every person in the greatest
estimation. There are only two ways, experience and history. The one of which
is clustered with thorns and briers and painful to the lacerated traveller; but
the other a delightful path ornamented with verdure and flowers, where the
cooling shadow of the surrounding trees protect us from the parching heat of
the sun.

In history the many schemes which are contrived to decoy persons, the
characteristics of a designing villain, the fawning and friendly demeanor of
the flatterer, teach us to be aware, and to keep an eye of suspicion upon many
persons. Without the assistance of history, the young student, just proceeding
from his study into the deceitful world, would fall into many snares and evils:
for the disposition and passions of human nature are not so widely different,
that the designs and arts which were practiced in the Greek and Roman nations
are no similar with those in the present age. I shall not now proceed farther
to relate (...) many and great advantages derived from history. I have
endeavored to give a brief sketch of some of the principal ones. Considering
the pleasure and great importance of this branch of literature, it is
surprising that there are in many youth entirely unacquainted with it.

When the names of ancient heroes and statesmen are mentioned in their hearing,
they are at a loss and make an awkward appearance. The ignorance of history in
some youth proceeds not from their want of reading, but from the manner in
which they read. When they take up a history, they attend wholly to the
amusement which it affords them, and not to the improvement. Hence they skim it
over so quick and superficially, that in a short time it becomes entirely
erased from their minds. The advice which authors have recommended to us when
reading history, is, to pay a particular attention, to reflect for a
considerable time on some scene which has raised our feelings, for without
this, when we proceed to other events we cannot receive a deep and lasting
impression from it.

The author which I much admire for his simplicity of style, and all the other
qualifications of a historian, is Rollin. By reading his volumes alone we can
acquire a comprehensive knowledge of ancient history. In no part of his volumes
have I ever sound him languid and unentertaining; after having described some
things that are striking, he often draws from them pleasing and improving
reflections. Plutarch's Lives, although they come under the title of biography,
I may here very properly recommend as part of the history of the country in
which they lived, are involved in the lives of his august characters. Gillies
and Goldsmith's histories of Greece are both very improving, but Gillies gives
a more comprehensive view of manners, customs and literature. Gibbon is a
splendid historian, and often decoys the mind more to the style than the
substance. Hume excells in the history of England -- Robertson, who has lately
paid the debt of Nature, in my opinion, is one of the most elegant historians
in the English language; his Charles the fifth and history of America are the
best arguments I can offer.

The introduction to Universal History written by the learned and celebrated
orator Bossuet, ought to be the favorite companion of every youth. In a very
small compass he gives a general idea of all the principal events which have
passed in the world. He accurately distinguishes the periods and situation of
occurrences, which presents his readers when perusing extensive histories, from
falling into certain errors, from confusion, and from placing events in their
improper places. Voltaire has bestowed much praise upon this performance, than
which none has ever obtained greater; he says -- "The Universal History of Mr.
Bossuet is a work that will transmit the author to Immortality."

A late author has written the history of Rome, France, and Spain. The history
of France, of these, I have only read, it appears to me to bear the marks of a
masterly hand; I would recommend it with his other two performances to the
attention of my fellow youth.

I have not recommended all these authors from my own weak judgment only, but
from the approbation of many distinguished characters in literature.

THE DISCOVERY OF TOBACCO, A POEM.
WHILE some in swelling and in pompous strain,
The charms of freedom and man's rights maintain;
And with discernful scrutinizing glance,
Proclaim the glory of the sons of France:
Foretell of empires and of kings the fall,
And when fair freedom shall enlighten all --
While some delight to swell the heroes fame,
Proclaim his virtues, and his honored name:
The glorious death the patriot-warrior found,
And lift the mantle from his bleeding wound
With pomp to lead the astonished heaver over,
The plains of Gallia stained with human gore.
Be it my task to sing Virginia's plant,
Its virtuous juice, its various use descant,
I choose a theme of many deeds the source,
Which soothes the mind by its assuaging force.
Here thought sublime pours not its course along,
Or flows with grandeur Homer's epic song;
Verse sweet and smooth, here bears no soothing sway,
Nor steals the music of a Barlow's lay.
But clothed in simple, or in any dress,
Tobacco bids her bard, his thoughts express;
To hold her up, before the public eyes,
Not clothed in purple, but without disguise;
For excellence needs not the aid of art
To win the friendship of the virtuous heart.
Segar! whose fragrant breath I now obtain,
O smile propitious on your poet's strain;
Who with red nose do hover over my pen,
And whose kind essence from my mouth I send,
Do not to me your genial aid refuse,
But help the lisping of your youthful Muse.
Long have we joined in friendship's tender flame,
Often in solitude your charms I claim.
Come, plodding from your ploughs, ye healthy swains,
While in your jaws the pigtail still remains,
Come squirting from your mouths the fluent juice,
Your quids still vigorous for their pliant use,
Come, help your bard to sing tobacco's praise,
And lead simplicity to deck his lays.
Ye band of snuffers with your boxes come,
The pinch just ready in each broad-fac'd thumb,
Strew scented snuff the Muse's path along,
And with your presence animate the song;
The poet, though a stranger to your arts,
Knows the indulgence which your sex imparts.
Lastly, ye smokers, show your honest face,
With tender friendship meet the wished embrace;
Ye who in pipes or in Segars delight,
With smiles inspire, while I your poet write,
With pipes well lighted puff your scent around,
And with your wit make laughters joyful sound.
The atmosphere with circling clouds over spread,
Whose fragrant odours play around my head.
Hail Christopher, whom genius bid explore
This happy land, this far extended shore,
Where then unfound by the decrees of taste,
Tobacco flourished in its primal state.
The precious Full many a gem of purest ray serene,
The dark unfathomed deeps of ocean bear,
Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
And waste its fragrance in the desert air. -- GRAY.

plant with greenish hue serene,
Here breathed its fragrance, here it blushed unseen,
Untaught by art, it reared its goodly head,
And wide its foliage to the sun beams spread.
But when the swelling and propitious breeze,
Brought to these climes the sons of taste and ease;
When in the vale they reared the humble cot,
And in the cooling shades their cares forgot.
Happy they wandered over the cultured plain,
And thought no more of Britain's cruel reign;
Their joyful songs re'echo'd from the grove,
And pensive warbled the soft note of love.
The bleating flocks in numbers thriving laid,
Along the brooks, beneath the spreading shade.
Tobacco then, man's curious optics drew,
Who silent pondered at the curious view;
Grand to his sight its beauteous form it reared,
Inviting to the taste the plant appeared.
It Is gentle fragrance rising sought his nose,
And soothing seemed to whisper soft repose.
Led by the inclination's firm commands,
It Is leaves he plucked by enterprising hands;
In closer view, then he the leaf surveyed,
And to his curious mouth the thing conveyed.
A while with wonder, and with fear he stood
In thoughtful silence and fixed eyes he chewed.
But soon the mouthful from his jaws he threw,
And pale with fear s^ift over the valleys flew,
He bent his eager way over hills through woods,
And headlong plunged into the swelling floods.
But virtue always has attractive charms,
And draws admirers to her lovely arms;
Sometimes at first her gentle voice they spurn,
But passion prompts the wanderer's return.
Thus fair tobacco first neglected lay,
'Till reason bid unruly man obey,
With friendly kindness taught him what to eat
That dried tobacco was both good and sweet;
Indulgent Nature spread it over the plain
To comfort man and soothe the wretch's pain --
For this tobacco lends its smiling bloom,
Dispels dull sorrow, and dark anguish's gloom:
It is adapted both to mouth and nose,
And tickles fancy while it wafts repose;
It gives to genius persevering glow,
And bids with smoothness strains poetic flow.
It calms the aged in deelining years,
And with soft friendship dries his falling tears.
When these to man instructive reason taught,
Soon from the fields the sav'ry plant was brought,
Before the sun were spread its broken leaves,
No more to wave before the fanning breeze,
The powerful rays its pristine dye subdue,
From green it changes its once lively hue.
Soon as the sun, the friendly soilage dries
Its darkish yellow strikes the gazing eyes.
Now man collects it in his cleanly stores,
Its virtuous essence and its use explores --
He forms it into portions for the jaws,
And with fond pleasure on the substance chews.
Others to snuff the well dried leaves transpose,
And feed with friendship the perceptive nose;
Others to smoke the changing plant thought best,
And feel soft wonders stealing on the breast;
Now every bosom glows with secret joys,
And good tobacco every thought employs --
Exulting high they raise the joyful song,
While thankful praises the loud strains prolong.
This plant ever since has held its peaceful reign;
And still remains the soothing friend of pain;
Rapine and passion shun tobacco's face.
But virtue seeks its kind and sweet embrace.
It calms the tumult of the angry soul,
Even sometimes reason stoops to its control The man that has not music in
himself,
And is not moved with concord of sweet sounds,
Is fit for treasons, stratagems and spoils. -- Shakespeare.


" The man who not in pouch tobacco keeps.
" Nor has not pipes laid up in numerous neaps,
" Is led by rapine and by wrath's control,
" Dark as Erebus, is his cruel soul --
" In such a man my friend but not thy trust,
" Thousands he will sacrifice to inward lust,"
But seek the man who keeps the goodly quid,
In neat array beneath the shining old:
The man whose nose is tinged with fragrant snuff,
And who delights tobacco's smoke to puff.
This is the man who sympathising hears,
To tales of sorrow bends his listening ears;
Tobacco's juice has sought his feeling mind,
And kindled charity for all mankind --
When rising youth rough science paths explore,
When learning's pages slow they ponder over:
When the fair scenes which histories convey
With anxious eyes delighted they survey:
When pleased they strive the Muse's walks to tread,
And thoughtfully incline their studious head;
Tobacco in deep thought adds pleasure's glow
And bids more free their young ideas flow;
It animation in their breasts inspires,
And from soft slumbers wakes poetic fires;
Puffed from their mouths it gives them thought profound,
In circles rising, throws its scent around.
When solitude her dark gray mantle throws,
And lulls the world in quiet's calm repose,
A solemn and a gloomy stillness reigns,
The voice of Nature's ceased upon the plains.
By solitude's surrounding scene oppressed
A pensive melancholy clouds my breast;
To sooth my grief no favorite friend is nigh,
No tender accents to suppress my sigh,
For none the solitary bard can claim,
None can he call by that delightful name.
The kind Segar with mournful phiz I light,
And bid its smoke salute the shades of night*
Soon its sweet breath flow rising in the air,
Regales my senses and relieves my care;
Puff after puff in quick succession flow,
Composure soon supplies the place of woe;
Again with joy, I rear my drooping head,
And soft repose invites me to her bed,
With musing glow upon her breast I leap,
And sink inraptured in the arms of sleep.
ADDRESS to the NIGHTINGALE. A SONNET.
HUSHED be the blast which howls in sullen roar,
Still be yon Bell, which casts its tinkling round,
Lulled be the wave which rolls against the shore
"While eagerly I catch the thrilling sound."
Often has sad sorrow hailed thee bird of night,
And listened to thy solitary song,
Sighed to the zephyr's swift and fearful flight,
Which woeful murmured as it moved along.
What fascinating charms are in thy strain?
That sweetly melts the bosom into peace,
In sweet composure lulls the lover's pain,
With soothing mandates bids affliction cease.
But now no lover seeks thee in the grove,
No mourner smitten by a captious lass,
Not yet this bosom has been prey to love,
And still may Cupid long unheedful pass.
Strike lonely bird thy melancholy lays,
It Is MELANCHOLY HERE triumphant reigns;
The moon pale wanders over her dreary ways,
Wrapped into silence tumult shuns the plains,
Fanned by the gale thy trilling sorrows rise,
Soft plaintive echo leaves her vacant cave,
The breeze more sadly through the willow sighs,
Which shades some stranger's solitary grave.
My musing bosom the kind influence feels,
Still the fond song the sweetest bard extends,
The quivering lay yet on my bosom steals
From clouds ambrosial beauteous PEACE descends.
ADDRESS TO ADELINE.
WHEN beauteous Adeline attunes her lyre,
Each poet-bosom thrills with genial fire,
The patriot passions with fond rapture glow
When freedom's charms in warbling music flow,
When Independence in her soaring strains,
Smiles over Collumbia's free and happy plains --
Soft was thy music, fair poetic maid,
Which sweetly sung in Beth'lem's lonely shade,
When Lehieghs stream received the plaintive song,
And still more mournful murmuring flowed along.
Often has thy lyre in accents smooth and slow,
Tuned in soft melody the tale of woe.
The flowing numbers told a maid distressed,
And wafted sorrow to a stranger's breast,
Fair scenes of Nature in luxuriance rose,
And kindly smiled on Adeline's repose;
But still their charms no soothing aid impart,
Still thoughtful sorrow damps thy feeling heart.
Thy odes inspiring lively ardour cheer,
Thy tender elegy demands a tear,
The lofty strain of LIBERTY is thine,
The soothing numbers of the sacred nine;
Accept sweet poetess what candor pays
In admiration of thy tuneful lays.
HISTORY OF ELVIRA.
COLONEL Armenius had long been an officer in the army; his breast had long
felt the noble glow of patriotism, and long had he sought the battles of his
country -- while he was engaged in the discord and tumults of a camp, his
family were retired in a country seat of his some miles distant from London,
mourning his absence. At last growing too aged for the fatigues of the war, he
returned home with his hoary head encircled with the wreaths of laurel which
his valor had won, to enjoy domestic happiness in the bosom of his family; he
brought with him a gentleman of the name of Mr. Tollard, who had long with him
supported the dangers of war, and whose breasts were united together by the
indissoluble ties of friendship. When Mr. Armenius arrived at home, how great
was his surprise and emotion to find that a beloved wife was snatched from him
by the arms of death -- the stroke he deeply felt; he now, in the contemplation
of Elvira, an only daughter, derived his greatest happiness.

Sarina, the beautiful seat of Colonel Armenius, was situated on a rising
eminence, beneath which flowed a spacious water: nature and art both combined
to render it truly delightful. Here the romantic mind could indulge its
imaginary pleasures; it might retire with its roving fancy to some sequestered
spot, where naught is found to disturb its meditation. Here the spreading tree
afforded a cool retreat, covered with thick and verdant foliage; the murmur of
the running stream excited to reflection, and to a certain degree of
pensiveness, which lulled the mind to soft repose. Here also the temperate and
philosophic fo^^d an abode suitable to all their wishes. This was the place
where Elvira had spent many happy years, and where a mother and a governess
inculcated in her tender mind the principles of virtue, and gave her all the
instruction and accomplishments which distinguish the improved female. -- Mr.
Tollard, according to the Colonel's invitation, took here his residence, and
contributed much to the sociability and happiness of the place. He was
sensible, mild, open and generous; his person much resembled Armenius's, but
his face did not so much characterize the soldier, being more mild and placid:
he was of a noble and respectable family, the possessor of a large fortune, and
had no near relation living except a sister, who soon purposed to spend some
time at Sarina, and to become the companion of Elvira. The gay Adeline (which
was her name) had hitherto resided at London, with an old aunt: she had often
visited Elvira at Sarina, and was a lively, handsome girl, nearly of the same
age with Elvira. The return of Mr. Armenius had now spread abroad, and many
came to pay their congratulations: among the number was a Mr. Harmer, a distant
relation of the Colonel's, who introduced to him an only son whom he had
brought with him. This young gentleman, who claims a share in our tale, was
remarkable for external beauty: he was about nineteen years of age, tall, and
beautifully shaped: his face corresponded with his person; his fine blue eye
sparkled vivacity and enticed the beholder; but alas! why have we to say, that
his beauty, like that of a Paris, covered a deceitful, cruel, and treacherous
heart? he was dissipated and debauched. This adds strength to an observation
made by experience, that remarkable beauty is seldom accompanied with virtue.
The top is lifted from the polished and plated coffin, and lo! a loathsome
corpse appears. He concealed the blackness of his heart from his friends by
dissimulation; but notwithstanding he had been detected in many notorious and
villainous acts, yet his beauty, joined with an engaging address, made him the
object of admiration. Let the observation made concerning beauty, not tend to
injure, in any degree, the character of our heroine, who, I have before said,
was remarkable for beauty, for there are exceptions from every general rule;
and not only this, but I make distinctions between beauties; and that which
Elvira possessed experience could draw no such remark from. Elvira's did not so
much consist in the beauty and symmetry of the features, as in a certain divine
expression which animated her serene countenance. A Cleopatra's beauty is the
rich and beautiful tulip, which erects its ornamented head, and excites the
admiration of every beholder, far and near. Elvira's, the modest blushing rose,
whose beauties the near observer, and one acquainted with its excellence only
perceives. Such was young Charles Harmer, a dangerous visitor at Sarina,
especially when an enchanting creature like Elvira dwelled there, who knew no
guile and no deceit. When this young gentleman was introduced by the Colonel to
his daughter, no wonder that the salutation of such a person should tinge her
face with a blush, and that such a person should prepossess her in his favor.
This prepossession was augmented when she listened to his lively conversation,
and when she observed that he now paid to her the most of his attention. He
addressed her with mild and gentle accents; congratulated her on the arrival of
her father, and mourned with her the loss of a mother. Elvira returned suitable
and modest answers, and surprised him with an understanding equal to her
beauty. The hours had passed unperceived by Sarina's inhabitants, engaged in
sweet intercourse; and evening was drawing a veil over the face of the sun,
when young Charles proposed a walk, which was accepted by Elvira. When they
were retiring the Colonel cast a pleasing smile on his lovely daughter, which
Elvira returned while the rose suffused itself over her face.

They now directed their steps toward the water's side; and while they enjoyed
each others conversation, the calmness and beauty of the scene contributed to
augment their pleasure. Young Harmer, in the language of admiration expressed
the beauty of the evening, and of the place. Says he, the evening is the emblem
of calmness and serenity; all that in the day contributed to disturb
meditation, is hushed in quietness and repose. It is now that gloomy sorrow
leaves her discontented mansion, and walks abroad to survey the beauties of
Nature, the temporary soother of her woes. He then, in expressing the beauty of
the place, observed, that it was only suitable for such inhabitants, and
sufficient to sooth the Colonel's former sufferings. The city was the seat of
Elvira's enquiries, and she was informed in every particular. When she enquired
concerning the assemblies, O! says he, they are indeed truly delightful; there
is no such sociability and cheerfulness in any place: and what a delightful and
useful accomplishment dancing is! it banishes all gloomy ideas from the mind,
and gives activity and sprightliness to the body. Elvira only replied, that she
was glad to see so powerful an advocate espouse the cause of an amusement she
was very fond of. He then told her that the last assembly he visited, he was
very much struck with the beauty of a young lady, whose hand he had the favor
of to walk a minuet; and that when on the floor her beauty attracted the
attention of the whole company, and much, that of his own: that when he had
handed her to a seat he was greatly entertained with her agreeable and lively
conversation. She asked him if he had any acquaintance with Miss Elvira
Armenius; and when he answered in the negative, she related a great many pretty
things concerning her. Upon enquiry, he found her to be a Miss Adeline Tollard,
the expected heiress of a great fortune. Elvira, pleased with this relation,
returned, that Miss Adeline was her intimate friend, and that she could not
sufficiently thank her for propagating reports concerning her supposed
excellence; but that she would not attempt her excellencies, as they were too
well established, and needed no eulogium. The insinuating Harmer, smiling,
said, that Miss Adeline, among her many virtues, must have mingled confidence
and self-conceit to attempt Miss Elvira's; but that friendship had engaged her
in the cause, although unequal to the arduous task. Elvira, blushing, told him
to remember that friendship never puts vice in the scales to preponderate with
virtue, and is therefore incapable to draw any true or just character.

They now approached a little hill which gradually arose from the water, whose
verdant top seemed to invite an agreeable seat. When they had ascended it, what
was Harmer's surprise, when he observed the beauty and regularity of the grass,
the spreading foilage of the trees which surrounded it, and the different
flowers exhaling the most agreeable odor. -- The common hill was suddenly and
unexpectedly changed into an Helicon or Parnassus. Surely (cries he) nature
never, entirely of herself, formed this delightful spot, but art must also have
lent her assistance. -- Elvira, smiling, told him, that it was a selected place
of here is, sacred to reflection and contemplation; that she often in the evening
resorted hither, to pay her vow^ to those venerable gods. Here (says she) I
have often passed many an agreeable hour with my dear Adeline, whose company
made every thing assume a new charm. Then friendship directed our discourses,
and we never thought or dreamt of sorrow. Sometimes Adeline would here tune her
lute, and the echo would resound to the charming melody. O then the evening
seemed too much in haste to interrupt our joys -- "Friendship! mysterious
cement of the soul!
Sweetner of life! and solder of society!
I owe thee much. Thou have deserved from me
Far, far beyond what I can ever pray,
Often have I proved the labors of thy love,
And the warm efforts of the gentle heart
Anxious to please. --


Here also, I have often sent invocations to the muses, but alas! without
effect. O! cries Harmer, could the muse ever reject such a suitor, or refuse a
visit to such a place? No, says Elvira; she disdains not the place; but it is
the humble and obscure mind; for she attends the enlightened and intelligent
even in a wretched garret. Let it then be my duty, when females, like Calista,
sing in gentle lays, to listen and improve, until I catch the note. Harmer
replied; this, Miss Elvira, is only the report of an individual, whom modesty
hinders from speaking the contrary; but where is a second to confirm it? I am
certain none can be found, and therefore you must pardon me if I stand
unconvinced.

They descended the hill and approached the house, as the shades of evening
were quickly declining. -- When Elvira retired to her chamber, and was left
alone to her meditation, the captivating Harmer employed the most of her
thoughts: they represented him as beautiful and agreeable, and a youth of
almost every perfection; as polite, but especially so to herself. In short, she
felt something which she could not express, and which her youthful mind had
never felt before: what this was, experience best can tell, and inexperience
shuns the dangerous task. -- Elvira no less commanded the attention of young
Harmer: she inspired him with more reverence and honorable intentions than any
female he had seen: she impressed on his mind a great idea of her understanding
and beauty, and made him consider her as a prize well worth obtaining, and that
too much pains could not be taken in answering this end. As he was to return
home with his father next morning, he was already planning the time of his
return. These were their pleasing meditations, until sleep dispersed conscious
ideas, and presented illusive ones; until the anticipating and reflecting mind
sunk in repose: for pleasure cannot, like sorrow, entirely banish her influence.

The next morning after breakfast the horses were prepared for their departure.
At taking leave, the Colonel pressed them often to visit their friends at
Sarina. Young Harmer, following the example of his father, approached Elvira,
and imprinted a kiss on her cherry lips; she blushing wished them a pleasant
journey: they then mounted their horses and rode off. Elvira pursued them with
her eyes until out of sight, and then retired into the house, secretly
regretting the departure of young Harmer: but short was her regret, for Harmer
soon returned, and continued frequently his visits at Sarina: he became the
open suitor of Elvira, and affection imperceptibly stole on her heart, while
ignorant of the real character of her treacherous lover.

When guarded by the most accurate hypocrisy, how could an unsuspicious female
penetrate into the real character of a lover, especially when that hypocrisy is
connected with beauty, and manners the most refined and engaging? But yet often
truth prevails and shows the dangerous haunts of vice, and gives the virtuous
mind a chance to flee from this dangerous companion.

But to return -- the months had now flown away in speedy succession on the
wings of pleasure, and Adeline Tollard had not arrived according to
expectation; the warm breast of friendship must therefore feel anxious, and
necessarily enquire the cause -- Elvira therefore dispatched a letter enquiring
this, and informing her, that she now mourned for her long absent friend, and
that, expecting her, she had improved their little seat, which would send forth
its blossoms in vain: that she had a great many things to tell and ask her.
Soon after she received the following answer: --

My dear Elvira,
"IT is duty which has hindered me from flying into the arms of my friend; it
is the indisposition of an old and affectionate aunt -- could I, without
necessity called, be so long absent from you? My friend might have trusted that
naught but this could have been the cause. But as my aunt is now recovering, I
propose to be with you in a short time. I have a great many things to tell you
which have lately occurred; one of which I cannot refrain to inform you of now.

"Being one afternoon, in a large company where the conversation happened to
turn upon your father's arrival, as soon as the name of Colonel Armenius was
mentioned, a young officer who sat attentive to the discourse in one corner of
the room, started up and repeated aloud the name with all the gestures of
astonishment and surprise: but soon after recollecting his situation, he
gracefully begged the company's pardon. He then drew his chair by my side, who
held a principal share in the discourse, and with all the eagerness of an
interested friend, asked me, in a rapid but polite manner, many questions
concerning the Colonel. I satisfied him in the best manner I was able. After
which he exclaimed, "I thought that this gallant officer fell gloriously
fighting for his country; but thanks to Providence he is yet spared to be a
still greater blessing. Ah! few are the men his country can boast of his equal
in military knowledge, or in goodness of heart!" He then enquired if he had any
children. I told him he had none but a daughter, the blossom of Sarina, and a
young lady excelling in every point of view. He then returned to his old
corner, and occupied in pleasing thought, was most of the time silent. I
enquired concerning him, but was informed no farther than that his name was
Dormer, that he had been an officer in the army, and had lately arrived from a
distant journey. Before my letter arrives I think he will be at Sarina; my
imagination already paints him, caught in my friend's enticing snares; methinks
I see you and him, occupied with each other's engaging chat, ascend our little
hill, which, contrary to what you say, shall not send forth its blossoms in
vain. -- Ah my friend, in such a person I could almost be your rival; but
certainly I cannot revoke what destiny ordains. Yes, my Elvira, your friend
prophecies that this is the prize which your happy lot turns out -- Dormer has
not the accurate beauty of Harmer -- it is not in him that we admire regularity
of features or fair complexion: but there is a certain expression which calls
him handsome; his face and person have both the appearance of a sprightly and
active soldier -- it is the face of courage, generosity, and love -- a person
of strength and activity.

"This enchanting man has so imperceptibly stole upon my pen, that, with him as
its subject, it has drawn out a letter. -- My love to your father and my dear
brother, and my best respects to Charles, and tell him that a young soldier is
coming to turn him out of his birth."


Elvira showed this letter to her father, and observed, while he was reading
it, various emotions present themselves in his face. After he had done she
ventured to enquire the cause of them -- 'O my Elvira! (says he) it is joy on
account of the preservation of this amiable youth; young Dormer next to my
daughter, and equally with Tollard, shares my affections -- from him is
banished all looseness of morals, and in him center very many amiable
qualities: but perhaps your father's friendship and gratitude toward him, may
pass over his foibles.' Elvira interrupted him, exclaiming, 'What gratitude is
it my father mentions?' 'Gratitude for the preservation of my life -- He bore a
captain's commission in the same regiment which I commanded, and had next to
myself the love and esteem of the soldiers. There was in the same regiment an
officer, whose name was Freeman, who was second in command, and whose breast
was the receptacle of the greatest treachery and dishonor; This officer, ever
since I had been promoted before him, harbored in his breast the greatest
jealousy against me, and thought if he could possibly get rid of me, he would
succeed me in command. After having planned all the means malevolence could
invent all to no purpose, his horrid soul did not stop at the detestable crime
of attempting my life: he therefore singled out three soldiers, and promised
them great rewards if they would perpetrate this shocking act; but they, too
fond of their commander, spurned at the thought, and threatened to inform me of
the whole affair; he, however, by large bribes, obtained their silence.

Being also stopped here in his design, and his anger heightened by continual
disappointments, he behaved to me in the most insolent manner, and spread
reports abroad, injurious to my reputation. Unable to bear such behavior, I
demanded satisfaction, and desired him to meet me in a plain some distance from
the encampment, without seconds, and that he might chose his own weapons -- He
s^^t me answer, that he would be there according to appointment, and that he
thought (although uncommon) swords would be the most proper, as no report might
be heard. Although he sent me this answer, his coward soul was struck with
fear, to meet the man whom he had basely injured, and thought now or never he
must free himself of such an enemy, to establish his ambitious views, and to
keep himself from dishonor: he therefore, by much cost and pains, obtained at
length three men of a different troop to waylay me in the evening. Accordingly,
in the evening when I was returning from a walk, I was surprised to see these
men rise from an ambush with drawn swords -- I defended myself to the utmost of
my abilities, but would have fallen a victim, had not the amiable Dormer
accidentally directed there his steps, to rescue his wounded commander. As soon
as he perceived me struggling with these assassins, he darted like lightning
upon them, and one instantly fell a sacrifice to his unbounded fury; the
remaining two fled, and the dying assassin confessed that he was hired by
Freeman, and begged forgiveness.

When I returned to the camp, I saw astonishment, guilt, and cowardice pictured
on the wretched Freeman's visage. Dormer wished to publish the action to the
camp, but I prevented him, and told him the point of honor between Freeman and
me; and that he need not fear on my account, as I was pretty expert at the
sword. Freeman being now unable to extricate himself, must either lose
altogether the character of a soldier, or meet me: suffice it to say that he
did, and that treachery received its dismal reward from the arm of injured
innocence. As soon as Freeman fell, Dormer came from a place in which he was
concealed, for the affectionate youth feared that the perfidious wretch might
plan some other plot, and wished to be near to lend the assistance of his
valorous arm -- and we heard the dying Freeman confess all his treachery. Not
only in this, but in many other instances, has Dormer been the most
affectionate of friends. Happy is the time now approaching, when I shall press
to my bosom this my young and amiable friend: but O happier still if the
charming Adeline prophecies right.

Every day the inhabitants of Sarina looked for the arrival of Dormer, but he
disappointed all their expectations. The colonel feared he had forgotten his
old commander, or that something extraordinary had happened. Elvira, in the
company of Harmer, felt no way anxious for his arrival, and was blind to the
description of her friend and father: but Harmer dreaded his coming, not only
on Elvira's account, but for reasons yet unknown. One evening when they were
all sitting before the door, a young man on horseback appeared: when he
approached nearer, they discerned by his dress that he was an officer; as soon
as he had come up he threw himself from his horse and enquired for Mr.
Armenius; the colonel immediately arose, and they were instantly in each
other's arms. After this warm embrace was over, Dormer was introduced to the
other two; they all then retired into the house: the colonel fixed his eyes on
his young friend, and addressed him in the warm language which friendship
dictates; he observed a gloomy melancholy cloud his manly features, and that
his former vivacity and sprightliness were flown; and by Miss Adeline's letter
this change must have commenced since she wrote it -- 'Ah! (says the colonel)
have I no more an interest in your heart, that the presence of an old friend
who has so long been absent from you, cannot command dejection from your
features? -- O! (replied Harmer) never shall my love and affection for my
Armenius cease; equally with a father he shares my affections, but pardon the
sorrow of an aching heart -- Long ago, as soon as I heard of your existence, I
should have flew into your arms; but that an only and amiable sister has fled
from home, and gone we know not where; I have been detained in making search
for her, but all to no purpose; and I must soon return to renew them, for never
shall I cease until I have found her.' -- The face of young Harmer during this
relation underwent several changes unperceived by the company, and he next day
planned some excuse for his return home. Dormer soon after returned home,
having promised to write to the colonel, and left behind two sympathising
breasts.

Adeline Tollard soon after arrived at Sarina, where Friendship stood with open
arms to receive her: she informed her brother of the recovery of her aunt; and
she and Elvira unburdened to each other the secrets of their bosoms. Elvira
acknowledged that Harmer stood first in her affections, but that she could not
deny Dormer had many engaging and insinuating charms, and that she felt for him
the endearing tie of gratitude, for preserving the life of a father. She then
related the story which had been told her.

They often resorted in the evening to their little seat, and there passed the
time in the most pleasant and improving manner. One evening when they rambled
there they observed the grass to be pressed as if some person had been sitting
there: this a little excited their surprise, but it was greatly augmented when
they found a paper in which was written the following elegy: O modest Eve, in
placid mourning dressed,
A wandering votary in thy pensive train
Relates to thee her woes, and now requests
A momentary soother of her pain.
And thou, fond, beautiful, delightful seat,
A soft recluse t'indulge my gloomy woes;
Afflicted gratitude shall often repeat,
Here Isabella snatched a short repose!
When Phoebus sinks beneath the gilded hill,
And slow descend soft nature's dewy tears;
When hushed in peace lie noise and tumult still,
Poor mourning Isabella here appears!
Sequestered from the prying public eye
Affliction strikes her melancholy key;
Here she sends forth a mourner's languid sigh,
But pity drops no friendly tear for me.
Ah! generous Pity, now could naught avail
TO assist, to soothe my throbbing anguish'd mind?
Were she to hear my melancholy tale,
Nor keener sensibility refined.
Yet something points to Friendship's sacred flame,
Where soft attractive Sympathy resides;
Where Ignominy blushes not for shame,
Nor the soft weakness of herself she hides.
In her fair bosom I could pour my grief,
While warm distilled the sympathetic tear;
While from her mouth the accents of relief
Like soothing music lulls a startling fear.
For me my weeping father, weeping friends,
Shall search with anxious eagerness in vain;
Alas! his darling daughter soon descends,
And awful death shall wash away her stain.
Ah! how could form and beauty so extreme
With such a dark and cruel soul be joined!
Ah! why on me did it enticing beam
And captive lead poor Isabella's mind!
Farewell, once more, thou gloomy friendly spot,
To morrow's eve again I shall repair
To seek of thee what often before I Have sought,
A solitary soother of my care.


When they had read this, "Ah!" says Elvira, "while this has been to us the
seat of joy, it has been to another the seat of woe; while it has received our
mirth and laughter, it has another's tears and sighs: the sorrowful Isabella
complains for a friend -- she shall not long want one -- she shall have two.
Let us also, my dear Adeline, repair hither: she to mourn her misery, we to
endeavor to alleviate it." When they returned home, the Colonel put in their
hands a letter he had received from Dormer. When reading it, they had come to a
certain part, they both showed gestures of the greatest astonishment. The
Colonel immediately enquired into the cause, but they turned it off, that it
was regret that Dormer had not yet found his sister. Let us leave it to the
reader's penetration, by placing before him his short letter.

My dear Armenius,
When I left Sarina it was not long before I arrived home, where I found my
father and friends in the greatest affliction, as all search as yet for my
sister has been vain; to what to attribute her absence we do not yet know: it
cannot be from any ill-usage, for her father is the most affectionate of
parents. Can it be any love affair? Ah! that is the most distracting thought.
Now, while I write these few lines, I am about to renew my search for my
beloved sister, the lost Isabella; on this account excuse so small a letter
from the most affectionate of friends.

George Dormer.


They now found the name of Dormer's sister to be the same with this unknown
maid; "perhaps," said they, "she may be the same personage." -- They were now
already impatient for the return of the evening; and as soon as it appeared,
they directed their steps toward the little hill. When they had come to the
foot of it, they walked softly up it, for fear of alarming the stranger, if she
was already there. When they had reached the top, the first object that struck
their eyes was the beautiful Isabella, sitting with her back reclined against a
tree, with hands clasped and eyes directed toward Heaven; her beautiful hair
hung loose about her neck; her pale and snowy visage, and tears which slowly
flowed, bespoke the fair daughter of affliction: The name of Harmer had just
died on her lips, when she cast down her languishing eyes and beheld her two
fair visitants: she started and uttered a cry; but soon after recovering
herself, she said in wild accents, "What chance has directed here two beautiful
young ladies? flee from the seat of misery and ignominy." "Pardon," says Elvira
interrupting her, "this intrusion; we last evening found out that here an
unknown maid mourned her misery, "without an ear to hear, or eye to pity." We
have come to endeavor to soothe affliction's aching breast, and to open two
bosoms, where Isabella may pour her grief; but yet, if our presence is painful
-- sensibility shuns giving pain." Elvira then showed her the verses they had
found. Isabella replied, "That unhappy paper too well informs you of my
situation; I am unable to refuse such amiable offers of friendship: I have fled
from the house of a father, deceived by a treacherous, but alas! too
captivating villain. Pardon me for not mentioning names; notwithstanding I know
well your secrecy." Elvira heard the name which died on Isabella's lips when
she first perceived them: her untried fortitude was unable to bear the severe
trial; thus to see the unhappy situation of an amiable female, and to find that
Harmer, the man whom she adored, had been the cause of it; she would have
fallen had not her friend supported her. Isabella saw her agitation, and knew
that something else beside distress on her account must be the cause. When
Elvira recovered sufficiently, she confessed to Isabella the whole affair
concerning herself and Harmer, and that she would now endeavor to banish him
from her affections, and to receive (more agreeably to her father's
inclinations) the amiable Dormer. The name, inadvertently expressed, had such
an effect upon Isabella, that it immediately discovered her to be the lost
sister. The letter which her brother had written was then related to her, and
she was made acquainted with all that Elvira knew concerning the family. When
they parted they agreed often to meet on the little hill.

When Elvira and Adeline returned home, the first person they saw was Harmer,
who had just come: he arose with his usual engaging air to salute them, but was
coldly received. Before he could have an opportunity to enquire the cause, the
young ladies retired to their chamber, where Elvira passed a restless night.
The next morning Harmer endeavored to find Elvira alone: he at last obtained
his wish, and addressing her in his usual mild and enticing accent, said, "My
amiable Elvira, I hope I have not in any manner injured you; if I have, do not
so severely punish a slight fault." Elvira replied, "Perhaps, Sir, you have not
injured me, but I wish to have no connection with perfidy; I have once, I own,
had a partiality for you, but this I now banish from my breast: as my s^itor, I
beg no longer to have the favor of your visits. In vain may you entreat the
cause of this; in vain may you implore my forgiveness, neither shall at present
be granted." Harmer having found all fruitless, immediately mounted his horse
and rode off. -- When Elvira and Adeline returned again to the hill, they found
Isabella more composed than usual. Elvira related to her what had lately
happened. "Ah!" exclaimed Isabella, "you told Harmer too much; he will easily
suspect you have seen me; I must stay here no longer." Just as she spoke these
words, Harmer sprung from a bush where he had been concealed, and prostrated
himself before the terrified Isabella, and in accents o^ the greatest distress
said, "My Isabella, I know it is vain, but yet I beseech you to bestow your
forgiveness upon one of the most guilty, but now most penitent of men: the
amiable Elvira has brought me to my senses: O that she would lend her
persuasive eloquence to make me retain them: I have most basely injured you; I
now strive to repair it in the best manner I am able: I came here without the
least thought of meeting with yea; I came to enquire of Elvira where you were
concealed, as I suspected she had some knowledge of you, when she upbraided me
with perfidy." Isabella, almost drowned in tears, sobbing, said, "rise, Harmer,
I see you are sincere; I forgive you, but I shall never be your wife, unless
you fall before my father and brother, acknowledge your crimes, and implore
their forgiveness." "Ah!" my Isabella, "is that all? that I should voluntarily
have done: I now go to fulfill it." He then tore himself away, telling them he
should return to inform them of his success the fifth evening from this. The
evening at length arrived; the three young ladies had long been on the hill
expecting Harmer's coming. He at length arrived, as the shades of evening were
quickly declining; his hair all dishevelled, and his face expressive of
fatigue; and approaching Isabella hastily said, "You are mine; it is granted;
come, haste home this very evening to dry your weeping father's tears." He then
led her down, the hill, at the foot of which was a chaise, and after having bid
Elvira and Adeline (...) affectionate farewell, rode off. When the two friends
returned home, they informed the Colonel of the whole affair. Upon hearing of
it, his eyes sparkled with pleasure, and he at last exclaimed, "Now, my Elvira,
this is one of the happiest minutes of my life; no young man is before Dormer
in your esteem." She, blushing answered, "She could not deny it, and that if he
conducted himself in a proper manner she could have no objection against him."
Need we add, that he did conduct himself in such a manner, as to win the
affections of Elvira, and to bestow upon her the name of Dormer, as well as
that of a mother.

AUGUSTUS AND AURELIA. A FRAGMENT.
AUGUSTUS had just entered his 19th year, when, by the death of a father he
came to the possession of a large and independent fortune; he had one year
before completed his education. He was not remarkable for regularity of beauty
and fairness of complexion, but for a manly appearance and winning demeanor.
Although he possessed some foibles which are always attendant on mortality, yet
his many shining qualities far preponderated. His was not like to the authority
of a British noble whom his tenants almost worshipped. He acknowledged the
plain and industrious farmer his equal, and to them his house and heart were
open; for he dwelled in the beautiful and fertile regions of America, where
liberty and equality spread their extensive domain; where the language of the
inhabitants is, "We will be free." A refined sensibility which he possessed
made him seek for the distressed, and to delight to soothe the breast of
affliction by his affability and charity. He now resided at his country seat
with an only sister and his family domestics, beloved by all who knew him. His
seat was large and beautifully situated; his youthful mind was not yet inclined
to domestic affairs, he therefore entrusted them to an old and faithful steward
who had long been attached to the house. His time he commonly employed in the
improvement of his mind, and in the company of some select friends. He
delighted often to wander from home, to behold the beautiful scenes with which
the country abounds.

As Augustus and his sister Louisa were returning from a rural excursion, they
were much delighted with the beauty and situation of a little cot which stood
on their property; they would have advanced unto it, but the evening being far
spent prevented them.

Some time after as Augustus was walking out unaccompanied in the evening, he
directed his steps toward this cot which he formerly so much admired, and when
he had come up to it he leaned on the fence with which it was enclosed; he cast
his eyes around, and beheld with admiration and pleasure the neatness of the
house, as well as the improvements which surrounded it; but a still more
beautiful object attracted his attention, he beheld a beautiful young female
gracefully reclined beneath a tree; her side face was turned toward him, and
he indulged himself with the pleasing feeling that he feasted not at the
expense of delicacy. He observed by her pale countenance, on which he could
perceive that the rose formerly bloomed, that some secret uneasiness sat heavy
on her heart; she was stroaking the neck of a little dog which fawned at her
feet: she was clothed in the simple weeds of rusticity, but even at her first
appearance the idea arose in Augustus's mind, that so much beauty could not be
born in so low a sphere. Augustus silently retired behind some trees for fear
that this beautiful stranger should perceive him. He had not been long there
before she arose, cast her expressive black eyes around, and walked toward the
door of the cot, calling her little dog, in a voice which equalled the sweetest
music. Her graceful movement and elegantly proportioned person did not then
escape the transported attention of Augustus. From her appearance he judged her
to be about sixteen years of age. After she had disappeared, Augustus rose from
his place of concealment, and directed his steps toward home reflecting on the
beauty of this fair cottager, and planning some scheme to become acquainted
with her. His imagination from such an outside appearance, already painted the
amiable and cultivated mind, while his suspicion that she was not the daughter
of the possessor of the cot, was greatly increased. When he returned home, his
first enquiry was for his old steward; he enquired of him who it was that lived
in the cot; but all that the steward could inform him, was, that a Mr. Ambern,
a clever honest man had been there for the space of a year. To his question
whether he had any daughters, was answered, he had never perceived any children
there but a little son. These answers, although they did not satisfy Augustus,
confirmed him that the young female was not the farmer's daughter. While his
curiosity was greatly excited to discover who she was, his feelings were now
much more interested; his heart already beat with sympathy for the distress
which he thought he discovered, in this beautiful unknown. When he had related
these circumstances and suspicions to his sister Louisa, her curiosity was
immediately excited, and she was already planning some scheme to become
acquainted with her situation, but ^ers was sympathy for imagined distress,
unaccompanied with the feeling which afflicted beauty imparted to the tender
breast of Augustus, and which none of a different sex could feel. Augustus
resolved by some mean or another to get acquainted with the possessor of the
cot, in order to draw from him some particulars relative to the affair, and to
^ender his visiting at the cot proper. He therefore dispatched a servant next
morning with a letter, inviting him to his house in the evening, the servant
returned with an answer, that Mr. Ambern would do himself the honor of waiting
on him, and when asked by Augustus who he had seen, O, cries he, besides the
man and his wife, I saw a most beautiful young lady, who appeared about the age
of Miss Louisa, sitting in the corner with her eyes swimming in tears, and a
beautiful picture tied by a ribbon hung from her neck, I think it must surely
be that of some lover. This simple speech of the servant made such an
impression on the mind of Augustus, as convinced him that his breast was in
this instance susceptible to the charms of beauty, as well as to the feelings
of sympathy and sorrow. In short, let it be sufficient to say, that the charms
of this lovely maid had smitten the susceptible breast of Augustus. When the
evening arrived, and Augustus was alone in his chamber, a rap was heard at the
door, and a servant directly led in Mr. Ambern. Augustus arose to receive him,
and after he had welcomed him to his house, they sat down sociably together.
Although his manners were not what is commonly termed graceful, they were
simple and easy, free from all affectation. Augustus was informed by him, that
he had been an officer in the American army; that he had been in several
engagements, in one of which he received a wound. Augustus's young mind, which
glowed with patriotism, now burned with redoubled friendship toward him. He
enquired how many children he had, to which, after a little hesitation, he
replied only one. He was about to question him concerning the young lady which
he meant to say his servant had seen there; when Mr. Ambern looking at him with
a smile, cried, I know it is in vain, my young friend, to hide from you what
you allude to, and although requested to secrecy, I will inform you of what
little I know, not only from a motive to satisfy you, but that you being
acquainted with the circumstances, may be in some degree useful. Augustus
replied, that there needed not any other plea but distress to engage his
protection; but especially, in favor of one arrayed in such charms, his
interestedness must be greatly increased, for he now informed Mr. Ambern he had
been an eye witness of them. Mr. Ambern replied, you are yet acquainted with
but half her charms, for equal to her beauty is the cultivation of her mind;
her sweet enticing manners, her engaging conversation, have so won upon the
affections of my wife and myself, that we love her almost equally with our son.
We feel almost equally with herself for the distress under which she appears to
labor. She has a little instrument through which she breathes the sorrows of
her soul in such melancholy strains as to often draw tears from our eyes. But,
my friend, I will pass from this, to tell you what little I know concerning
this amiable young lady. About a week past, late in the evening as we sat at
tea, we heard a carriage stop, and soon after a knocking at the door, when
opening it, a young gentleman of genteel appearance, and noble countenance, led
in this young female; they both appeared to be in distress; I invited them to
sit down, which they immediately did; we all sat for some time in profound
silence, at last ^he young gentleman arose, and in the sweetest and most
melancholy accents, desired me to walk a little way in the field with him. I
immediately complied, leaving the young lady with my wife; we had not proceeded
far when he thus addressed me -- you will, no doubt, wonder to see two persons
thus enter your house with whom you have not the least acquaintance; but it
will be sufficient to inform you that it is distress which has thus obliged us
abruptly to claim an entrance; and at the door of the industrious and honest
husbandman, misery is seldom refused admittance. I interrupted him with
assurances of the sufficiency of his apology, and expressed, in sincere terms,
my interest in his sorrows; that if I could in any way serve him, it would give
me the greatest pleasure. With tears of joy and gratitude he acknowledged my
kindness and hospitality: He told me, I need not harbor the least suspicion of
their dishonesty, for it was virtue that bade them fly hither. But (continued
he) you must pardon me for not relating the cause of our appearance here, you
shall hear it at some future time; the few minutes which circumstances allow me
to stay here will not permit me: But let me now call your attention to the
trouble which I solicit from you -- This lovely female which I have brought
under your roof, I beseech you to protect; let her remain with you as one of
your family; be a kind and indulgent parent to her; let it remain a secret that
she is here; endeavor to soothe her in her affliction, but do not endeavor to
draw the cause of it from her, as it will heighten it -- excuse, my protector,
the shortness and abruptness of my expressions, as haste will allow me no
others. We then turned toward the house; when the young gentleman entered it,
and, while the tears trickled down his cheeks, he exclaimed, now, my Aurelia,
having found a faithful guardian for you, suffer me to bid you farewell: It
shall not be long before I shall return to restore you to joy and to your home.
The lovely Aurelia sprang from her chair, and encircled his neck with her snowy
arms, exclaiming, in accents almost inarticulate, return soon my Ferdinand, my
dearest --. The last word here I was unable to distinguish. Ferdinand, after
having eembraced her, and, with all the politeness of afflicted gratitude, bid
us farewell, walked hastily from the door. He immediately sprang in his
carriage, dropping his purse, which I had formerly refused. I returned to the
house, much touched by the generosity and distress of the youth. Aurelia the
next morning seemed to have much recovered her spirits -- to prevent discovery,
she dressed herself in those garments in which you have seen her. This is all,
my dear young gentleman, that I know about the beautiful Aurelia. After much
other conversation, chiefly concerning the same subject, Mr. Ambern returned
home. When Augustus was left alone, his thoughts naturally remained with the
object of his late conversation: his curiosity, instead of being diminished,
was rather increased. The behavior of Ferdinand, the young gentleman who
accompanied her, and the picture which the servant had seen about Aurelia's
neck, convinced him that he was her lover. The pain which these reflections
gave, told him the state of his heart -- He was resolved to guard himself
against her charms -- Sed omnia vincit ^mor.

One evening, which was very calm and beautiful, when silence waved her gentle
hand, and hushed the world in quiet and repose, when the mind is filled with
thoughts congenial to the scene, Augustus took up his flute, upon which he was
a great proficient, and directed his steps toward a little grove, which grew a
small distance behind the house of Mr. Ambern. Aurelia was the subject of his
meditation. When he came to the grove, he reclined himself beneath a tree, and,
after having remained for some time in silence, he applied his mouth to his
flute, and through it breathed forth such harmonious strains as corresponded
with his feelings: The melody, in sweetest vibrations, floated on the air, and
the hills were responsive to the trembling notes -- The feathered songsters
forgot their song, and listened in attentive silence -- Nor were these the only
listeners -- This grove was often the resort of Aurelia -- The beauty of the
present evening had invited her thither, and she was now listening in a little
place surrounded by bushes, a silent hearer and spectator of Augustus -- She,
unseen, now perceived him, as he formerly did her -- She was charmed with the
beauty of the music, which was also congenial to her feelings -- but the manly
appearance of Augustus claimed her attention more than his strains -- While
thus Augustus indulged his feelings, his sister Louisa, who had observed him
walk toward the grove, and who determined to follow him, now came up, and,
laughing, caught hold of his flute, and said, Why, Augustus, what is the matter
with you -- what makes you so grave and serious of late, that you must run into
the woods to play such dolesome ditties? -- Augustus, smiling, without making
any reply, took his sister by the hand, and they directed their steps home. --
Aurelia, when she returned to the cot, did not relate what she had seen -- From
the appearance of Augustus, she supposed he was a young gentleman of fortune,
and that some secret uneasiness dwelled within his breast -- Her heart
acknowledged the charms of his music, and of himself. The next morning Augustus
determined to pay a visit at the cot -- He, therefore, after breakfast, went
unaccompanied, and was received with great joy by its industrious inhabitants
-- In casting his eyes around the room, he misled the object for whom the
present visit was designed -- Delicacy prevented him from expressing his
disappointment, but Mr. Ambern perceived it by his countenance -- It was,
however, of short duration, for he had set but a few minutes, when Aurelia
entered, with her hat on, just returned from a walk -- She did not perceive
Augustus, who had arisen at her entrance, until she had advanced a few steps in
the room; but directly after, her eyes meeting his, a crimson blush diffused
itself over both their countenances -- Aurelia immediately recollected the
young gentleman she had seen in the grove, whose music had so greatly
entertained her. Mr. Ambern then introduced them to each other -- a certain
embarrassment was visible in Aurelia -- After they had set down, Augustus, with
his usual engaging demeanor, endeavored to enter into conversation, nor were
his attempts unsuccessful, and the common embarrassment which subsists between
strangers was soon removed -- He could not behold, but with admiration and
emotion, her beauty, which was heightened by the exercise she had been taking
-- Without the aid of ornament, and richness of dress, she now appeared in her
own charms -- her beautiful eyes beamed sweetness and love -- her flowing locks
hung graceful on her back, unadorned by the hand of art -- She had not the
fragrance of cosmetic perfume, but the flowers of the garden bloomed on her
bosom. Augustus was equally pleased with her conversation, and he found, that
his imagination had not painted her in too high colors.

He pas^ed the evening in her company, and was sorry to see it so rapidly glide
away. At his departure, he informed Aurelia, that he had a sister nearly of the
same age with herself, who would be happy to possess such an invaluable
acquaintance. Aurelia thanked him for his politeness, and expressed the
happiness she should experience from a friend. When Augustus returned home, his
mind was almost wholly occupied with Aurelia -- His sister Louisa jocularly
questioned him concerning where he had been -- He, without disguise, informed
her of the conversation at the cot, and of the liberty he had taken in offering
her friendship to Aurelia. Louisa rejoiced in this opportunity of getting
acquainted with her -- Her curiosity had become so greatly excited, that she
resolved the very next day to visit her -- She did so, and she and Aurelia
became intimates at the very first meeting -- This intimacy gradually
increased; Aurelia often visited Augustus's feat, himself and his sister often
at the cot. Augustus now informed Aurelia, where he had first seen her, but
never ventured to utter a syllable respecting her situation. She, in return,
informed Augustus where she had first seen him, and how much she had been
entertained with his flute.

While thus the intimacy and passion of Augustus were daily increasing, an
event happened, which draws my tale to a speedy conclusion: --

One evening Augustus was on a visit to the cot; when he had approached within
view of it, he perceived a carriage standing before the door; his curiosity was
greatly excited, to know to whom it belonged. He softly entered the house, but
what was his surprise, when the first object that struck his eyes, was a young
gentleman with Aurelia clasped in his arms -- His heart throbbed, his pulse
beat quick, the thought immediately occurred, that he was to have his beloved
Aurelia snatched from him forever, by a successful lover. The young gentleman
who held Aurelia, did not perceive Augustus at his first entrance, but upon her
whispering to him, he turned round. They instantly caught each other's eye,
stood for a moment gazing on each other, then flow into each other's arms,
while Augustus exclaimed, O my Ferdinand, is it you, my former dearest friend
and classmate? After this warm embrace, Augustus's first inquiry to Ferdinand
was, why he had come hither* -- Ah! my dear Augustus (he cried) I have come on
a very pleasing embassy; to recall home an only and beloved sister, who has
fled here for protection from a father who was going to force her into marriage
with one whom she detested. As soon as Ferdinand pronounced the name of sister,
Augustus was unable to contain himself -- he sprang forward toward Aurelia,
and pressed her rosy cheek to his -- she did not receive him with a frown, but
a blush and a smile. Here the author breaks off his narrative, assuring those
who have honored his little tale with their perusal, that the conclusion which
they will be naturally led to draw, will be the true and right one; such an one
as the author, if he had felt himself disposed, would have drawn himself.

GENIUS. A POEM.
COLUMBIA hail! each patriot's boast and pride,
Where virtue glories, and the brave reside;
Where Freedom dwells in charms celestial fair,
And bold unfurls her banners in the air. --
Smiling she roves the ever blooming fields,
Views the grand landscape which the mountain yields,
She silent ponders on old Hudson's brow,
And hears his waters rolling loud below.
She to the city turns her beaming eyes,
And sees its columns towering to the skies;
Enchantingly she smiles, and waves her hair,
Which flows in ringlets with an easy air.
A snowy robe conceals her heavenly form,
And screens the goddess from the howling storm;
A graceful cap sits lightly on her head,
And nodding plumes her placid brows overspread.
Her polished leg an (...) buskin binds,
There ^he rich (...), in transparence shines,
A thoughtful glow spreads her enticing face,
Each look is beauty, and each movement grace.
Her form divine, her mien, her charming air,
Equally graceful, elegant and fair.
Lo! yonder comes, from yon reclusive grove,
Along whose thickets, rills meand'ring rove,
Her sister genius with majestic tread,
Fair wreaths of laurel grace her sacred head:
A splendid garb behind flows loosely down,
Her lovely waist two starry belts surround. --
Her azure eye far darts its piercing rays,
Explores the planets in their wheeling ways;
Fair Nature's stores, the ocean's rolling wave,
The towering mountain and the dismal cave:
An awful grandeur, with enchanting ease,
Commanding dignity, each charm to please,
Dwell in her gestures, and her melting strain,
And quell the passions to her happy reign --
The youth enraptured follows to her shade,
And gives his soul to the celestial maid.
The goddess speaks! what soft melodious sound,
Casts its sweet music, and its accents round!
What soothing strains enchant the panting breast,
And lull its sorrows and its cares to rest.
" Columbian youth! my spacious paths pursue,
" My lone retreats I wide extend to you;
" Let not the mountain's steep and rugged height,
" Retard your way, or terrify your sight:
" Once when you climb its bold and haughty brow,
" The plains of Eden sweetly bloom below:
" Its streams and lawns delight the wandering eye,
" Its cascades murmur and its zephyrs sigh,
" Its lonely gardens in luxuriance bloom,
" Breathe forth their songs and shed their mild perfume.
" The views of Nature which my Newton made,
" The scenes of science which this sage surveyed:
" The sight of terror which my Franklin drew
" When from the clouds the lawful lightning flew,
" Strive favorite youth with eager warmth to claim,
" And join with Franklin your immortal name --
" Be it your care to charm the lift'ning throng,
" To bear their passions with your speech along;
" But seek no art save gestures graceful air,
" The affectations weak bombastic glare:
" Let Nature prompt the feelings of the soul,
"And hold the passions in her just control.
" Does eloquence entice you with its charms,
" Columbia hails you with her joyful arms;
" Within her senate Independence reigns,
" And binds no sycophant in royal chains;
" Here raise your voice in Freedom's sacred cause,
" Adopt those schemes congenial with her laws.
" The orator of Greece in Freedom's aid,
" And in the garb of eloquence arrayed,
" Roused from their slumbers every Grecian chief;
" Each grasped his sword and flew to her relief.
" Rome's lofty temples and her splendid feats,
" Her fragrant gardens and her cool retreats,
" The spacious capitol where virtue bloomed,
" The traitorous Cataline would have consumed;
" Had not a Tully reared aloft his head,
" Dispelled his schemes and struck the traitor dead.
" What breast is callous to poetic force,
" Who feels no rapture from this passion'd source?
" If fondness leads, let poesy be thine,
" Court the sweet favors of the tuneful nine:
" But if they shun your anxious request,
" Cast the fond wishes from your youthful breast;
" But if they smile, and glad approve your lays,
" Still prove more worthy of their thrilling praise.
" But stay, if gold is pleasing to your sight,
" And wealth and equipage your mind's delight;
" The Muse bestows no favors but her strain,
" No other friend to sooth thee in thy pain.
The goddess ceased; her arms bewitching spread,
And wav'^ ^he laurels which adorned her head.
The vocal throngs which listened on their trees,
The lulling murmur of the evening breeze,
Which paused in silence when the goddess spoke,
Waked from their transports and their slumbers broke:
They raise again their soft and matin strains,
And breath their music over the silent plains.
DAVID's ELEGY OVER SAUL AND JONATHAN. 2 SAMUEL 1 CHAP. 19 VER.
ON sad Gilboa's drear and silent plain,
Where lofty mounts in sullen darkness rise;
Dejected Israel, all thy beauty's slain,
Thy pride and glory in fallen grandeur lies.
Tell not in Gath or Askelon our woe,
Lest the glad maids of Philistine rejoice;
Soft let the voice of mournful sorrow flow,
Still be the warriors dull and plaintive voice.
Barren Gilboa, be thy towering head,
Let no rich fruits thy blasted deserts yield,
Nor dews, nor rain, their liv'ning influence shed;
There fell our hero on thy bloody field --
Readiness fatal sword was dreadful to his foe,
The valiant trembled at the glittering view:
When princely Jonathan loud twang'd his bow,
Swift to its aim the awful arrow flew.
Swifter than eagles cleave their rapid flight,
The sprightly warriors ran the hostile ground;
Stronger than lions in the furious fight,
They poured their strength and death terrific round.
In life and health, on each fond aspect played
The smile of friendship and fair beauty's bloom,
But now they have sought death's solitary shade,
And undivided sha^^ one silent tomb.
Daughters of Israel strike the gloomy song
With sighs and tears your monarch's urn attend,
Let notes of sorrow murmur sad along,
And, borne by zephyrs, to the skies ascend.
In ornaments of gold and fond delight,
Your charms the monarch in fair pride arrayed,
Your purple vestments splendid met the sight,
And shining gems their sparkling rays displayed.
Where Gilboa rears its melancholy head,
The trump of battle threw its solemn found;
The precious blood of Jonathan was shed,
And tinged the verdure of the thirsty ground.
Never let this voice forget its sorrowing moan,
These streaming eyes with sympathy to flow,
Dear to thee, Prince, was Jessy's humble son,
Love in thy breast assumed its genial glow.
When from the shades of Bethlehem I came,
When adverse fortune aimed its deadly dart,
Thy generous bosom ever was the same,
More firm thy friendship than the virgin's heart.
Fallen are the mighty on Gilboa's plain,
In scattered ruins war's bright weapons lie
The tears of friendship, and of love are vain --
In vain, (...) Prince thy David's lonely sigh.
OITHONA A POEM OF OSSIAN VERSIFIED.
ARGUMENT.
GAUL, the son of Morni, attended Lathmon into his own country, where he was
kindly entertained by Nuath, the father of Lathmon, and fell in love with his
daughter Oithona. The lady was no less enamoured of Gaul, and a day was fixed
for their marriage. In the mean time, Fingal, preparing for an expedition, sent
for Gaul. He obeyed and went; but promised Oithona to return if he survived the
war, by a certain day. Lathmon too was obliged to attend his father Nuath in
his wars; and Oithona was left alone at Dunlathmon, the seat of the family.
Dunromath, Lord of Cuthal, taking advantage of the absence of her friends,
came, and carried off by force, Oithona, who had formerly rejected his love,
into Tromathon, where he concealed her in a cave. -- Gaul returned on the day
appointed; heard of the rape, and sailed to Tromathon, to revenge himself on
Dunromath. When he landed, he found Oithona disconsolate, and resolved not to
survive the loss of her honor. She told him the story of her misfortunes, and
she had scarce ended, when Dunromath with his followers appeared at the other
end of the island. Gaul prepared to attack him, recommending to Oithona to
retire until the battle was over. She seemingly obeyed; but secretly armed
herself, rushed in the thickest of the battle, and was mortally wounded. Gaul
having put to ^^ight and pursued the enemy, was returning toward the cave to
look for Oithona, when he found her l^aning on the rocks just expiring. He
mourned over her, raised her tomb, and returned to Morven. The poem opens with
Gaul's return to Dunlathmon at the time appointed, after the rape of Oithona.

OITHONA.
"AROUND Dunlathmon pensive glooms arise,
The moon shows half her face upon the hill:
Night's gloomy daughter turns her rolling eyes,
She sees with sorrow the approaching ill --
The noble son of Morni's on the field:
Ceased is the sound within the spacious room,
Long streaming beams no more their gladness yield,
Trembling they come not; through the awful gloom,
Oithona's gentle voice is heard no more,
Where fair Duvrannas, streams, in murmurs roar.
Ah! whither in thy beauty have thou strayed,
Where wanders Nuath's daughter, dark-hair'd maid?
Lathmon is absent on the warlike plain,
But in the hall thou promised to remain
'Till Morni's son had sheathed his shining blade,
And sought you in Duvrannas cooling shade,
'Till he from Sturmon came to seek thy charms,
And tell his passion in thy snowy arms!
The tear at his departure sought thine eye,
Secret thy bosom heaved the pensive sigh;
But thou co^'st not with music and with songs,
Nor the harps cheerful, lightly-trembling sound,
Hushed is the echoes of the tuneful throngs;
Sorrow has thrown her gloomy garb around."
Such were the words of Gaul, when he came nigh,
Where strong Dunlathmon's towers majestic beam on high --
The gates were open, darkness wrapped the wall;
The winds were blustering through the vacant hall;
The trees had strow'd the threshold with their leaves,
Night's mournful murmur rode upon the breeze.
Upon a rock great Morni's son reclined,
A tender sorrow footh'd his warlike mind:
Trembling, his soul thought on the lovely maid,
He told her beauties to the whispering shade;
He knew not where his searching steps to turn,
Or whither the fair maid had gone to learn!
The son Morlo the son of Leth was one of Fingal's most famous heroes. -- He
and three others attended Gaul on his expedition to Jonathan.
of Leth beheld his silent care
And heard the winds play in his bushy hair,
But he his voice and needless words withheld,
For he Gaul's sorrow and his grief beheld!
Now both these chiefs sunk in soft sleeps repose,
The glim'ring visions of dark night arose. --
Before the eyes of Morni's son appeared,
Oithona's beauteous form by love endeared,
Loose and disordered, waved her shining hair,
Her Lovely eye rolled deep in tears, from care,
With crimson blood, her snowy arm was died,
The robe half hid the wound which pierced her side;
Over the brave chief she stood in mournful mien,
Her words were feebly heard, in voice serene.
"Sleeps Gaul, once lovely in Oithona's eyes?
Sleeps Morni's son and Nuath's daughter's low?
Around dark Tromathon the waves arise,
Within the tearful cave I sit in woe --
Oithona, not alone, O Gaul remains,
There also stays dread Cuthal's bloody chief;
He in the rage of love, your bride retains --
What can Oithona do, where seek relief?"
A rougher blast, rushed through the spreading oak,
Night's gloomy visions sled; the dream was broke.
The hero rose and snatched his aspen spear,
His soul was rage, his beaming eye struck fear;
Often toward the east he turned this sight,
Impatient he accu^^d the lagging light:
At length bright Sol's enlivening rays prevail,
The hero lifted up the spreading sail --
The winds came rust'ling from the lofty steep,
He bounded on the billows of the deep.
On the third day Tromathon's walls arose
Like a blue shield reflective streams disclose,
Against its rocks the white wave roaring flows.
Oithona on the coast, sat by her cave,
She fixed her eyes upon the rolling wave;
Trembling, the tears over her fair cheek ran down,
And fluttered to the wind her snowy gown.
But when she saw Gaul in his arms arise,
Starting she turned away her sorrowing eyes.
Her lovely cheek is bent, in crimson died,
Her white arm trembles by her heaving side;
Thrice from his presence she attempts to fly,
Thrice her steps sailed her while the chief drew nigh.
"Daughter of Nuath," said the noble chief,
"Why do thou fly from Gaul in sullen grief?
Send forth mine eyes, Death's terrifying flame!
Does hatred darken in my soul; or blame?
Thou art to me the east's gold-gilding ray,
Which lights the stranger's solitary way:
But thou with sadness, hide thy glowing face,
And shun thy hero's and thy Gaul's embrace?
Is the dread foe, of fair Oithona, near?
My soul burns in me for to dart the spear,
The sword of Gaul, now trembles by his thigh,
And longs to glitter in his hand on high.
Daughter of Nuath speak; do thou not see,
My love, my sorrow, and my tears for thee?"
"Strumon's young chief," replied the gentle maid,
"Why have you come to this sad cruel shade?
Why come thou over the waters dark-blue wave?
To seek Oithona, in her gloomy cave?
Why did I not in secret pass away,
Like the fair flower which lifts its head unseen?
Before the blasts its withered leaves decay,
They strew its once gay foliage over the green.
Why did thou come to hear my parting sigh?
I vanish in my youth; my name shall die;
The mournful tale my father soon will hear,
And sink in anguish over his daughter's bier."
Sad thou will mourn for thy Oithona's fame;
But she shall sleep within the narrow tomb,
Deaf to the mourner's voice who sighs her name,
And slumbers over her turf in silent gloom.
Why, graceful chief of Strumon, did thou come?
Where rise the sea -- beat rocks of Tromathon.
"I come fair maid, to seek, thy hated foes,
To soothe thy bosom and relieve thy woes!
Before mine eyes the chief of Cuthal's slain,
Or Morni's son shall fall upon the plain!
When Gaul is low, Oithona, raise my grave,
Upon that oozy rock; where rolls the wave,
When the dark-bounding ship shall pass below,
To the sea's sons this well tried sword bestow,
That they may bear it hence to Morni's hall,
And hang it glittering from the polished wall --
No more the grey-hair'd chief his eyes will turn
Toward the desert for his sons return.
"Shall Nuath's daughter live," the maid addressed,
While a deep sigh stole from her gentle breast?
"Shall Nuath's daughter live, when Gaul lies low,
Feel no keen anguish and no tender woe?
My heart is not that rock; my soul the careless seas,
Which lift their dark-blue waves to every breeze,
And roll beneath the storm; which sweeps along,
And raises the tempestuous, billowy song.
The blasts which lay the son of Morni dead,
Oithona's branches on the earth shall spread,
Together we shall wither, noble chief;
The narrow house, the grey-stone bring relief.
Thy lofty rocks, thy sea surrounded shore,
O Tromathon, Oithona leaves no more.
Night Oithona begins to relate how she was carried away by Dunromath.
came with her dark clouds and gloomy train,
When Lathmon sought the warlike on the plain;
When to Dunthormoth's mossy rock he went
To his brave father's wars; and raised the tent;
Dark night came on, I in the hall remained,
At the oak's beam, which its wide form sustained.
The wind abroad howled through the rust'ling trees,
A solemn sadness, hung upon the breeze,
I heard the sound of arms; joy tinged my face,
I thought of thy return, and fond embrace --
It was the red-hair'd strength of Cuthal's chief,
The grim Dunromath; joyful in my grief,
His eyes rolled fire, in awful fierceness lowr'd,
My people's blood had died his torturing sword:
Their bleeding bodies spread the flowing ground,
And horror quiver'd on each gaping wound.
Weak was my feeble arm; what could I do?
I could not lift the spear, or shoot the bow.
He raised the sail amidst my grief and tears,
And pleased for Tromathon's high rocks he steers --
Lathmon's return, the cruel coward dreads,
Wide to the wind the canvass sail he spreads.
But lo! with troops, the gloomy warrior comes,
Before his gliding ship, the dark wave foams:
Whither, O Gaul, for safety will thou go?
Many's the warriors of thy hated foe.
"My steps never turned from war," the hero said,
And quick unsheathed the lightning of his blade.
"Shall I, Oithona, then begin to fear,
When thy dread foes in shining arms appear?
Go to the cave my love and there remain
Until the battle cease upon the plain.
Thou son of Leth quick bring our father's bows,
Great Morni's quiver dreadful to his foes!
To bend the bow be our three warriors care,
Ourselves will lift the beaming spear --
They are a host upon the rocks afar!
Our souls are strong and invincible in war!"
Oithona sought her solitary cave,
And silent listened to the passing wave;
A troubled joy within her bosom slows
Like lightning's path, which stormy clouds disclose;
Her soul's resolved the crystal tear is dry,
That trembled in her wild and fearful eye.
Dunromath, slowly with his chiefs drew near,
He saw the son of Morni with his spear;
Contempt, upon his face, contracted, glows,
A smile upon his dark-brown cheek arose;
Near half concealed by the wide spreading rows
His red eye rolled beneath his shaggy brows.
"Whence the sea's sons?" The gloomy chief begun,
"Have the winds driven you on dread Tromathon?
Or come you here to Cuthal's cooling shade,
To search Oithona the white handed maid?
The unhappy's sons, ye poor and feeble band,
Come to Dunromath's unrelenting hand!
His eye spares not the weak and timid foe,
He sees with joy a stranger's blood and woe.
Oithona is a beam of glad'ning light,
Which Cuthal's chief beholds with fond delight;
Would thou come on its beauty like a cloud,
Son of the feeble hand in weakness proud!
Thou may come, but thy old father's hall
No more thou wilt see, but by my vengeance fall."
"Do thou not know me?" Gaul, the hero said,
"Thou red-hair'd chief Cuthal's cruel shade?
Thy feet in car-borne Lathmon's war were swift,
Upon the heath and over the rocky clift;
When the stained sword within my thundering hand,
Pursued the host in Morven's woody land?
Dunromath, mighty is thy tongue's fierce sound,
While now thy warriors pour in crowds around.
But do I fear them haughty son of pride?
Though not in numbers I in strength confide."
Thus Gaul indignant on Dunromath glanced,
And dreadful in his shining arms advanced --
Dunromath shrunk behind his troops with fear,
But Gaul pursuing pierced him with his spear;
His sword lop'd off his grim and shaggy head,
While death approaching, its dread horror spread.
Thrice by the lock the ghastly head he shook;
Dunromath's people to swift flight betook.
Dread Morven's arrows quick pursued the foe,
Ten were the warriors that the shafts laid low;
The rest lift up the wide and spreading sail,
And bound upon the deep before the gale.
Toward the cave Gaul sought the lovely maid,
And in its scabbard sheathed his deadly blade.
He saw a youth reclining on the rocks,
His form was graceful, loosely waved his locks.
A fatal shaft had pierced his side and thigh;
Beneath his helmet faintly rolled his eye --
The former joys of Gaul's brave bosom cease,
He came and spoke the soothing words of peace.
"Can Gaul's hand heal thee, of the mournful brow?
The mountains I have searched where herbage grow:
Them I have gathered on the secret green,
Where glides the deep unruffled and serene --
My hand has closed the hero's bleeding wound,
Their eyes have blessed me, and my kindness crowned.
Where, youthful warrior, do thy fathers dwell?
Were they the mighty sons, who glorious fell?
Sadness like night, thy native streams shall seek;
You Are fallen in thy youth, and blooming cheek."
The graceful stranger in soft voice replied,
"Great were my fathers race, in warlike pride,
But they shall not be sad; or sorrow shed,
In fond remembrance over my slumbering head;
For like the morning mist my fame has fled.
High walls upon the banks of Duvran beam,
And see their mossy towers in the stream. --
Behind a rock with pines ascends on high,
And distant far, majestic strikes the eye,
There my brave brother and his warriors dwell,
Give him this helm, and give my last farewell."
The helmet fell from Gaul's uplifted hands,
Oithona wounded, before the warrior stands!
Within the cave herself in arms she would dressed,
And came to die upon her hero's breast.
Half closed are now, her heavy azure eyes;
Her snowy bosom throb'd repeated sighs:
Copious the blood, pours from her heaving side,
And tinged the verdure with its crimson tide.
"O Morni's noble son!" She whispering said,
"Prepare for me the narrow mouldering tomb;
Sleep grows upon my soul like darkness's shade,
My closing eyes are bent in awful gloom!
O had I, at Duvranna, dwelt in fame!
Then had my years come on in smiling joy;
The virgins then would bless my steps and name;
And fair Oithona every tongue employ.
But, son of Morni! in my youth I fall!
My father blushes in his mournful hall."
She fell -- pale on the rock of Tromathon
The mournful warrior raised her silent tomb.
AN EPISTLE TO A FRIEND, FROM THE COUNTRY.
WHEN Nature's scenes with pleasing eye I view,
My tender thought turns, favorite friend, on you;
Friend of my youth, whose sympathetic soul,
Swayed by soft friendship's genuine control,
Has bid for me the tear in sorrow flow,
Has sighed responsive to the tale of woe,
And felt for me joys fascinating glow.
Far from my friend I mourn my absent lot,
And ease my bosom with indulgent thought,
The aid of fancy my fond breast employs,
To trace our pleasures and our youthful joys;
Our happy studies and our warm disputes,
Our curious plans and wandering pursuits;
When led by fancy's wild and fairy dreams,
Well pleased we pondered over some secret schemes.
Honor and fame then swelled each friendly breast,
And fondest hope has lulled them into rest,
When learning poured her lofty strains along
We each have listened to her soaring song;
Have fondly smiled and thought the maid our own,
And dwelt in science and in Greek alone.
Often when we wandered over the distant plain;
We talked of Homer's grand majestic strain:
We said how sweet the gentle Maro sung,
What copious music warbled from his tongue.
Sweet flowing Pope has also claimed our praise,
As we often listened to his soothing lays;
Dropped a sad tear at Eloisa's doom
And heaved a sigh over his Maria's tomb.
Often have we paused over Thompson's lively scenes,
And cast our eyes over Nature's flowing greens.
When he described the Thames' murmuring flow,
We thought we heard some plaintive stream below.
The youthful D -- s has our praise employed,
His patriot prologue we have often enjoyed;
We read his strains and thought, with pleased surprise,
A ripening Pope would in Columbia rise.
Sweet to the youth is fancy's siren dreams,
Sweet to his thought imagination's schemes;
The present time they pleasingly employ,
And warm the soul with visionary joy:
Far from my friend no more on these we dwell,
No more these dictates of our bosom tell;
No more conversing with my friend I rove,
Along the valley and the cooling grove --
The trees which hover over the rocky cave,
The loud hoarse murmur of old Hudson's wave,
The verdant vales which strike the wandering sight,
The towering mountain's grand majestic height.
The gale which whispers through the quivering trees,
Have partly lost their charms to sooth and please:
Friendship, these scenes of rural life endears,
Greener the valley in her sight appears.
THE DEATH OF CUTHULLIN, A POEM OF OSSIAN VERSIFIED.
ARGUMENT.
CUTHULLIN, after the arms of Fingal had expelled Swaran from Ireland,
continued to manage the affairs of that kingdom, as the guardian of Cormac the
young King. In the third year of Cuthullin's administration, Torlath, the son
of Ca^^ela, rebelled in Connaught; and advanced to Temora to dethrone Cormac.
Cuthullin marched against him, came up with him at the lake of Lego, and
totally defeated his forces. Torlath fell in the battle by Cuthullin's hand;
but as he too eagerly pressed on the enemy, he was mortally wounded. The
affairs of Cormac, though for some time supported by Nathos as mentioned in
another poem, fell in confusion at the death of Cuthullin. Cormac himself was
slain by the rebel Cairbar.

It may not be improper that the reader may fully understand the poem, to give
some information respecting Cuthullin.

Cuthullin the son of Semo, and grandson to Caithbat, a celebrated Druid in
tradition for his wisdom and valor, married when very young Bragela the
daughter of Sorglan, and passing over into Ireland, lived for some time with
Cormal, grandson to the king of Ulster. His wisdom and valor in a short time
gained him such reputation, that in the minority of Cormac, the supreme king of
Ireland, he was chosen guardian to the young king, and sole manager of the war
against Swaran, king of Lochlin. After a series of great actions, he was killed
in the twenty-seventh year of his age. He was so remarkable for his strength,
that to describe a strong man, it has passed into a proverb, "he has the
strength of Cuthullin." They show the remains of his palace at Dunscaith in the
Isle of Sky; and a stone to which he bound his dog goes still by his name.

THE DEATH OF CUTHULLIN.
IS this the sighing wind on Fingal's shield?
Or do past times their solemn accents yield?
Sing on sweet voice, my pleasing thought employ,
Through midnight glooms, you whisper peace and joy --
Sing on O Bragela in night's dull shade!
Cuthullin's love, and Sorglan's beauteous maid.
"'It Is the white wave which over the rock prevails,
And not Cuthullin's gladly swelling sails --
Often do the gloomy mists deceitful prove,
And paint the ship of my returning love!
When round some stalking ghost they rising shed,
And to the wind, their greyish mantle spread,
Why thy wished coming, chief! do thou delay?
What, generous Semo's son, detains thy stay?
Four times has Autumn sought us with its breeze,
And raised Togorma's loudly foaming seas;
Since thou have been where roars the strife of war,
And from her chief, Bragela, distant far!
When misty isles will you with clamorous sounds?
Re-echo to the mighty warrior's hounds?
But ah! your clouds are dark and hung in gloom,
And sad foretell my hero's hapless doom.
Weeping Bragela sorrowing calls in vain!
Night's awful shadows hover over the plain,
The face of ocean's with damp mourning spread,
Beneath his wing the heath cock hides his head,
In the drear desert by the rising steep,
The hind and heart in thoughtless slumbers sleep,
When the fair morn sheds her bright silver beam,
They rise and wander by the mossy stream --
But when the sun with majesty appears,
Continued flow Bragela's sorrowing tears;
When pensive night salutes my languid eyes,
My breast awakens to its tender signs --
When in thy arms will Erin's warrior come
And seek Bragela, and thy peaceful home."
Thy mournful voice O Sorglan's maid I hear,
Pleasant's thy strain in Ossian's listening ear!
But to the hall of shells, fair maid retire;
To the oak's beam, which lights the pleasing fire,
List to the murmur of the passing wave,
Which Dunscai's walls with foaming fury lave,
Let sleep's soft influence visit thy blue eyes --
Let the brave hero in thy dreams arise!
At Lego's lake the great Cuthullin stays,
Where the dark waters roll their furious ways,
The shades of night the generous chief surround,
His numerous warriors spread the fertile ground.
A hundred oaks a kindred warmth supplies
The feast of shells in smoking fragrance rise;
Beneath a tree old Carril strikes the lay,
His gray locks glitter in fair Luna's ray;
The rustling blast of dark brown night is near,
And lifts before the breeze his aged hair --
He sings Togorma and its gallant chief!
"Cuthullin's friend in disappointed grief --
Why art thou absent, Cormal, in the day,
When glooms and storms prohibit thy delay?
The southern chiefs have raised the pointed lance,
Against car-borne Cormac dreadful they advance.
Thy blue waves roll the winds, thy sails detain,
But not alone does Cormac now remain --
The son of Semo fights his hated foe!
The son of Semo, bends the deadly bow!
The son of Semo leads the dreadful war!
The terror of the stranger from afar --
He that is like the frightful mist of death
Borne by the sultry winds destroying breath,
In its dread presence the great sun grows red,
The people fall when its thick vapors shed."
Such was old Carril's thrilling song, when lo!
Appeared a son of the approaching foe;
He threw upon the ground the pointless spear,
He spoke the words of Torlath to the ear!
Torlath the chief from Lego's sable wave!
The Prince of Heroes, "bravest of the brave,"
He that to battle his brave thousands led,
To pour his vengeance on young Cormac's head;
The car-borne Cormac who far hence remains,
At Temora's halls and solitary plains,
His warlike father's bow he learnt to bend,
To lift the spear, and swift the weapon send;
Nor long did thou, youth's mildly shining beam,
Lift the bright spear, and taste life's flowing stream;
Behind thee Death stands dim in blackened night,
Like the dark moon behind its growing light.
Before the bard the great Cuthullin rose,
That came from Torlath, and his numerous foes --
The son of songs, whom glory's strains employ
Honoring he gave the flowing shell of joy.
"Sweet voice of Lego," great Cuthullin said,
"What Is Torlath's words the chief of Connaught's shade?
Comes he to feast with generous Semo's son?
Or to dread battle with the rising sun?"
"He comes to battle," the stern hard replied,
"The bright sword glitters by great Torlath's side!
The hero comes to sounding strife of spears,
Which warble music to the warrior's ears!
When the gray worm reflects on Lego's main,
Torlath will seek you on the extended plain --
King of the misty isle will thou in arms,
Meet this great foe and join in war's alarms?
Awful is Torlath's bloody spear in fight!
It Is like a meteor of the gloomy night.
Its dreadful point he lifts, the people fall!
And terror freezes the fierce souls of all --
Upon the lightning of his dreadful blade,
Death (...) terrific, clothed in crimson shade!"
Cuthullin fierce replied, "Bard do I fear?
The car-borne Torlath's sworn and threatening spear!
Brave as heroic thousands Torlath fights:
But know Cuthullin's soul in wa^ delights.
Bard of the times of old the warrior's pride.
The sword rests neither by Cuthullin's side:
Upon the plain the rising morn shall beam;
And on the (...) of Semo's champion gleam.
But on the heath do thou O bard remain,
And let us hear thy sweet and flowing strain,
Partake the shell, and hear steal soft along
The warbling accents of Temora's song."
"This is no time," the gentle bard replied,
"To hear the song in-joyful music glide;
When in dread war approach the great and brave,
Like the loud strength of Lego's rolling wave.
Why sunk in sorrow dark Slimora's still!
With all thy silent woods and pensive glades;
No star now trembles on thy dusky hill;
No moon-beam glimmers through thy awful shades;
But the sad meteors of death are near,
The watery form of greyish ghosts are seen;
Why clothed in darkness do thy haunts appear?
And silent horrors hover over thy green."
Now murmuring dies, the bard's slow plaintive songs,
Old Carril joins and pours the strain along;
The soothing notes in gloomy music roll,
And sweet instill soft sorrow to the soul --
Joys that are past are called to pleasing view
And tender ^hemes the thoughtful breast renew.
Along Slimora's dark and sorrowing plains,
The ghosts of bards are heard in woeful strains,
Th^^^ whispering woods soft sounds flow sad along
Night's verdant valleys the fond note prolong.
So when the day is lulled in silent ease,
And in the valley steals the cooling breeze;
The mountain bee's sweet hum strikes Ossian's ear,
And claims the tribute of a tender tear.
In their swift course the gales the murmur drown,
But soon again returns the pleasing sound.
Slant looks the sun upon the dreary field!
Gradual the hills to lowering shadow's yield!
"Cuthullin bid his hundred bards to raise
The lofty song in noble Fingal's praise:
The song he hears when night's dark shadows blend,
When pleasing dreams upon the chief descend!
When distant far the floating music calls,
And the faint light gleams on fair Selma ^walls;
Or let the grief of flowing Loira rise,
Brave Calmar's Calmar the son of Martha. -- His death is related at large in
the third book of Fingal -- he was the only son of Matha, and the family was
extinct in him. The seat of the family was on the banks of the river Lara; near
the place where Cuthullin lay; which circumstance suggested to him the
lamentation of Alcletha over her son. Alcletha is a poetic name for Matha.
mother's solitary sighs;
When from the hills he answered not her call;
And his strong bow hung in his spacious hall.
Place on that branch the shield of Caithbat near,
Bring near Cuthullin's dreadful aspen spear.
That battle's sound may from the valley rise,
When the gray beam shall gild the eastern skies."
The hero leaned upon his father's shield:
The song of Lara echoed over the field!
The hundred bards were distant on the plains,
Carril alone beside the chief remains --
The words old Carril in loud accents sung,
Around his harp a mournful warbling hung.
"Gentle Alcletha with the aged locks!
Why do thou look toward the desart's rocks?
Whose tender feelings with affection burn,
And anxious wish your gallant son's return.
That Is not his troop which on the heath rejoice,
Nor is that Calmar's loud commanding voice;
It Is but Alcletha, the far distant seas!
The hollow roaring of the mountain breeze!"
"Who Alcletha speaks. Calmar had promised to return by a certain day; and his
mother and sister Alona are represented looking with impatience toward that
quarter, where they expected Calmar would make his appearance.
bounds over Lara's loud meandring stream,
Thou lovely sister of my noble son?
Do not my eyes behold the warrior's beam?
But ah! my eyes are dim and light they shun --
Is not that Calmar which appears to move?
Gentle Alona, daughter of my love?" --
"'It Is but a distant and an aged oak,
Weeping Alona, sorrowfully spoke;
It Is but an aged oak's deceiving beam,
Bent over fair Lara's hoarse resounding stream --
But who with swiftness over the plain draws near?
Sorrow and grief in his quick steps appear;
High he lifts up brave Calmar's bloody spear."
"But Alcletha speaks describing her sons bravery.
with the blood of his sad foes it is spread,
Which he Alona, in his wrath has shed!
Never did his spear return, without blood's stain!
Nor his bow dreadful on the hostile plain --
His awful presence the fierce fight consumes,
The flame of death sits on his waving plumes.
Thou She addresses herself to Larmi Calmar's friend who had returned with the
news of his death.
mournful youth, where is my son, O where?
Ease my fond bosom of its anxious care?
Does he return with his increasing name?
While echoing shields resound the conqueror's fame,
Darkness and silence in thy bosom dwell,
Calmar's no more, my noble hero's fell!
Tell me not warrior of the blood-stained ground!
O tell me not my Calmar's bleeding wound.
Why do thou look toward the desert shade?
Thou sorrowing mother of the chief low-laid."
Such melancholy notes flowed sweet along,
The chief leaned on his shield and heard the song;
The music of their harps the hundred cease,
Sleep softly fell and lulled them into peace.
The son of Semo was awake alone,
His soul was fixed, the beams of battle shone;
Gradual the hundred burning oaks decay,
Faint red light glimmers on the distant way;
A mournful silence wraps the gloomy fields,
The voice of woe its feeble accents yields.
The dead pale ghost of warlike Calmar's seen,
Dimly he stalked along the silent green.
Dark is the wound of the sharp pointed spear,
Pale on his face joys clouded rays appear;
Before the wind his locks disordered wave,
He calls Cuthullin to his chilly cave.
The godlike hero rising from the ground,
Threw his blue eyes in awful terror round.
"Son of the cloudy night he fiercely said
Why do thou leave the grave's dark silent shade,
Why, ghost of noble Calmar, Erin's friend,
Do thou on me thy frightful aspect bend?
Would thou persuade me Matha's gallant son,
The wars of Cormac, and the foe, to shun.
Thy arm in war O Calmar never did cease,
Nor was thy manly voice for silent peace.
How art thou changed O chief of Lara's wave,
If thou would bid Cuthullin fly the brave,
Often has the battle its loud roaring spread,
But from the foe Cuthullin never fled.
I never feared the hideous ghosts of night;
Through the bleak wind they take their dolesome flight;
Small is their knowledge, weak their slender arm,
In courage clothed the hero fears no harm;
But in war's danger glows Cuthullin's soul,
Joyful he hears the warrior's chariot roll,
The trump's shrill blast, the noisy clang of steel,
The hoarse resounding of the bossy shield --
Thou ghost retire to thy sad darksome cave,
Thou art not Calmar, he was great and brave!
War his delight, the hero feared no harm,
Like heaven's thunder was his mighty arm."
The ghost swift winged his melancholy ways,
He heard sweet flow the soothing voice of praise.
Faintly the beam of dawning morn arose,
The silent warriors roused from their repose,
Great Caithbat's buckler dreadful spread around,
The soldier started at the solemn sound --
Waked from soft slumbers and from peaceful dreams,
Green Erin's warriors flock like roaring streams,
Over Lego's plain and distinct sounding far,
The pausing horn proclaims the approach of war.
Dreadful in war, and great his deathless name,
The mighty Torlath with his warriors came,
"Why do thou hero with thy thousands come,
Great Erin's chief and car-borne Semo's son?
The chief of Lego to Cuthullin said,
While mimic lightning flamed upon his blade;
I know the strength which thy fierce arm inspires,
Thy soul in fight is unextinguish'd fires;
Why, on the plain, do we not hero fight?
And let our hosts behold the warlike sight.
Let them behold us like the roaring waves,
Which loud hoarse tumble from the rocky caves,
When their sad murmurs, thundering spread around,
The seamen startle at the threatening sound."
The son of Semo joyfully returned,
While valor in his panting bosom burned,
"Like the bright sun your words inspire my foul,
Thine arm is mighty, great in war's control,
Worthy to meet Cuthullin on the plain,
And the fierce battles of the brave sustain.
Ye men of Ullin seek Slimora's side,
Behold Cuthullin in his fame and pride! --
Carril, to mighty Connal tell the tale,
If in the strife brave Torlath should prevail:
Tell him I blamed the winds which whistling blow,
Where broad Togormac's rolling waters flow.
Never when the trumpet sounded from afar,
Did Semo's hero fly the approaching war --
In Carmac's cause let his bright sword ^e drawn,
Like the bright beams which gild the morning's dawn,
In Temora's plains, let his wise counsel sound,
When threatening danger spreads its gloom around."
Dreadful as Some great Deity of the northern nations.
Loda rushed the chief to fight,
The warriors trembled at the solemn sight.
When the fierce spirit comes in lowering skies,
And scatters battles from his frightful eyes:
In roaring storms when Loda sad appears,
And chills the soldier with terrific fears, --
He sits on clouds, over Lochlins roaring seas,
His mighty hand, the glittering sword unsheaths,
Winds howling from their close and hollow rocks,
Lift the dread spirits long and flaming locks! --
The waining moon half lights his dreadful face,
His features blended in dark gloom we trace.
So terrible Cuthullin in his fame,
Such beaming terrors from the warrior came,
Great Torlath fell by his all con'qring hand;
His weeping warriors sorrowfully stand.
They gather round their fallen hero's shade,
Like misty clouds which desert glooms pervade.
Fired by revenge their thousand swords they drew,
Thick through the air the whirring arrows flew;
Firm as a rock the great Outhullin stood,
Lashed by the billow of the roaring flood;
The bleeding warriors fall in numbers round,
He strode in blood, which flowed the awful ground.
Slimora echoed through its shades afar,
Cuthullin's warriors dreadful rushed to war;
On Lego's dreary plains the battle spread,
Before Cuthullin, Torlath's heroes sled --
The chief of (...) mighty arm o'ercame,
The fields re-echo'd his immortal name.
Pale he returned with slow and solemn tread,
Dark clouded joys his pensive face overspread;
His languid eye in musing silence rolls,
Within his hand his unsheathed sword he holds:
At every step his spear of aspen bends,
Death's lowering cloud in dolesome shades descends.
"Carril, the dying chief in secret said,
Cuthullin's strength, and warlike ardour fade,
No scenes of war shall visit more my eyes,
No more to me shall morn in grandeur rise;
At dark Temora I shall not be found,
No more in counsel will they hear my sound.
Cormac will weep within his sighing hall,
Where is great Erin's chief; ne'll starting call:
But far renowned is fallen -- Cuthullin's fame,
The bards in songs will spread my warlike name.
The youth will say, fired by a martial pride,
O let me die as great Cuthullin died!
Renown the warrior (...) like a robe,
His fame triumphant over the oceans rode --
Draw the sharp arrow Carril, from my wound,
Lay your fallen chief beneath that spreading tree,
Place my bright arms and Caithbat's shield around,
That they Cuthullin with his arms may see."
"And does the son of grey-hair'd Semo fall?
Said gentle Carril with a rising sigh,
In mournful glooms is hung fair Tura's wall,
To murmuring sorrow Dunscai's waves reply.
Thy spouse in lovely youth is left alone;
Thy little son Couloch who was afterward very famous for his exploits in
Ireland.
his father's fate will moan!
He Will come to Bragela, and ask her why
She sheds that tear, and heaves that sorrowing sigh?
To the wide wall he will lift his searching eyes,
And see his father's sword with sad surprise.
Whose sword is that, the little youth will say?
Whose sword is that my mournful mother pray?"
Who like the heart comes over the sadden'd field,
His wandering eyes an eager wildness yield?
The rolling tears from his pale face descend,
He searches for his fallen, fallen friend --
Connal, thou son of Colgar, weeping tell,
Where have thou been when great Cuthullia fell?
Did stormy, unpropitious winds prevail?
Did the south gale swell thy wide spreading sail?
In battle has the mighty hero died!
And Connal absent, fought not by his side.
Let none the tale in towering Selma, spread,
Nor where cool Morven waves its woody head?
Fingal is sad, the desert warriors weep,
And sorrow murmurs on the flowing deep.
By Lego's rolling wave they raised his tomb,
His mournful warriors wept their leader's doom:
At distance from his master Luath lies,
The song of bards rose soaring to the skies?"
"Blessed Every stanza of this song over Cuthullin's tomb close, with some
remarkable title of the hero, which was the custom in funeral elegies.
son of Semo be thy mighty soul!
Awful in battle did thy terrors roll;
Thy strength was like the furious rolling stream,
Like to the eagle's wing thy speed did seem!
Thy path in ^war, was spread with terror's shade,
The steps of death were swift behind thy blade.
Blessed, son of Semo, be thy mighty soul!
Thou car-borne chief where Dunscai's waters roll!
Thou have not, by the great and warlike, died,
Nor have thy blood the spear of heroes dyed --
The shaft that laid Cuthullin low,
Came whizzing from a stranger's bow,
Nor whom he slew, did the weak bowman know;
The arrow came like the dread sting of death,
And piercing stole the chief of Erin's breath.
Peace to thy soul, within thy silent cave,
Chief of the misty isle and foaming wave.
The mighty are dispersed at Temora's wall,
There Is none in Cormac's sadly echoing hall;
The thoughtful king mourns in his youth for thee,
No more thy presence hero, shall he see:
Ceased is thy shield which struck an awful sound,
His foes again in numbers pour around.
Soft chief of Erin be thy quiet rest,
No more shall dangers animate thy breast;
No more Bragela hails thee to thy home,
Or sees thy sails approach through ocean's foam;
No more she wanders on the lonely shores,
And thinks she hears the distant -- striking oars.
She sits within the hall and hears waves roar,
She sees the arms of him that is no more --
In tender sorrow thy fond sighs arise!
Fair maid of Sorglan, sorrow dims thy eyes!
Blessed, chief of Tura, be thy mighty soul!
Awful in battle did thy terrors roll.
PELOPIDAS AND EPAMINONDAS.
THE following was written by the author for his own instruction and
entertainment -- It contains the lives of two heroes whom he has always
passionately admired. Upon reviewing it, and altering several expressions, he
has presumed that it will be acceptable to young persons of his own age and
capacity.

The author has drawn it chiefly from his memory; but when this failed him, he
has had recourse to those authors whom he has mentioned in the notes.

PELOPIDAS AND EPAMINONDAS.
THE Grecians in their primitive state were bands of robbers -- They were
subservient to no laws, nor (...) to no (...) -- The sword was the only
instrument which decided their quarrels and disputes -- The warrior, whose
limbs were nerved with vigor and activity, exercised a lawless tyranny over the
weak; the weak had only to condemn the hand of nature, and submit with patience
to those calamities which could not then be remedied -- But as the human mind
is naturally inclined to civilization, and a propensity to social intercourse
is inherent in it -- we see this country, which exhibited so barbarous a
prospect, gradually advance in refinement. The arm of the savage, which once
raged without control, became restrained by wise and salutary laws -- the
plains which lay a dreary waste, became cultivated, and waved with grain and
fruits -- That country which was first inhabited with robbers and murderers, in
a short time, rose to such perfection in literature, the polite arts, and in
war, that she has reared characters the wonder and admiration of all succeeding
generations -- never while the world remains will their immortal names die. The
rising youth, soon as his understanding begins to expand, seizes with avidity
the Grecian history and dwells with rapture on its animating pages. In the
Grecian history, we are struck with every thing that is grand and noble in
human nature; one while we are led to the field of battle with the military
hero -- we admire his patriotism, his undaunted soul, and illustrious actions.
At other times we become astonished with the justice and amiable qualifications
of many statesmen, and are conducted into the calm and retired life of the
philosopher, poet, and artist.

When the reader arrives to the gradual decline of the Grecian Republic, what a
gloom mus^ sorrow throw over his breast. He beholds the glory and the terror of
the world sinking in effeminacy and oppression. The soul of no here but a
Phocian was then awake to the involving calamities of his country. The voice of
none but a Demosthenes endeavored to awaken the Athenians from their sleeping
inactivity, and to conquer or die. The Athenians, roused by the thunder of
their orator, arose from their lethargy, (...) arose too late; the snares of
Philip had been successful, and the glory of Greece sunk in darkness and gloom.
When we take a view of some of the most celebrated heroes of Greece, we become
so engaged with the illustrious actions of each, that we know not which to
prefer. It is natural to the mind of youth, to enquire which of the celebrated
heroes of antiquity is greatest. Some, captivated by the glaring actions of
Alexander the Great, extol him as the greatest of terrestrial beings. Two,
which I very much admire, and whom I think, in some respects, excel all
others, are Epaminondas and Pelopidas.

Epaminondas was possessed of every qualification necessary to render man truly
great. He possessed all the heroic virtues of a general, and all the milder and
softer virtues of a friend -- He was of illustrious birth, and the son of
Polymnis -- No Theban ever equalled him in knowledge and eloquence. Gilli^s's
History of Greece.
Although poor, he resisted the generous solicitations of his friends, to
deliver him from the honorable poverty in which he was born, continuing poor
from taste and choice, and justly delighting in a state which is more
favorable, especially in a Democratical Republic, to that freedom and
independence of mind, which wisdom recommends as the greatest good. Nor was he
more careless of money, than avaricious of time, which he continually dedicated
to the study of learning and philosophy, or employed in the exercise of public
and private virtue: Yet, to become useful, he was not desirous to be great: He
not only turned his attention to the cultivation of his mind, but to the
acquirement of vigor and strength of body: He had a martial and manly
appearance, and shone at once the hero and philosopher. Pelopidas, the son of
Hippoclus, was equal with Epaminondas in his descent: From his infancy he was
brought up in opulence and plenty, and obtained, when he arrived at the age of
manhood, an immense estate: He possessed, in a high degree, the virtues,
generosity and benevolence, and delighted to relieve the distresses of the
indigent: All his friends he made partake of his wealth, except Epaminondas,
who could never be prevailed upon to relinquish that virtuous poverty which was
so very much adapted to his philosophical disposition. Pelopidas married early
a noble Theban lady, and had by her many children Plutarch's Lives;
; yet, notwithstanding the increase of his expenses, he still continued to
bestow large donations upon his friends; and when some person, in consequence
of this, told him, "That money, which he neglected, was a very necessary thing"
-- "It is very necessary, replied he, for Nicodemus there" -- pointing to a man
of that name, who was both blind and lame.

These two illustrious Thebans possessed dispositions for all kinds of virtues:
But no particular virtue has rendered them more glorious and celebrated, than
the friendship which subsisted between them, which was never broken but by the
hand of death. Pelopidas preferred the society and improving conversation of
his amiable friend, before all the amusements and honor which riches afford.
When he perceived that Epaminondas would receive no share of that wealth which
was bountifully bestowed upon him, he learned equally to despise it, and
changed his rich apparel for the decent clothing of the philosopher.

Great souls, by instinct, to each other turn,
Demand alliance, and in friendship burn.
They both equally possessed beauty and strength of body; they both equally
excelled in athletick exercises, and in swiftness; but Epaminondas, owing to
his greater inclination for literature and philosophical pursuits, surpassed
his friend in knowledge and prudence; indeed not only Pelopidas, but every
Grecian who was his cotemporary, and perhaps he was not excelled by any who
preceded or succeeded him.

There is no where exhibited more conspicuously the great importance and
utility of wise and eminent leaders, than in the history of Thebes -- Before
these two heroes arose, we find Thebes possessing a very little share in the
government of Greece; but, when headed by these two men, she became Empress of
Greece; and after their deaths, she sunk again into her former degree of
insignificancy, and yielded again the scepter to Sparta. In her affliction, she
called for Epaminondas and Pelopidas, but, never did they again appear. The
first place where we behold them acting a conspicuous part, is in the battle of
Mantinea, which was fought against the Arcadians, in the third year of the
ninety-eighth Olympiad. Rollin.
The reader must make a distinction between this and the battle of Mantinea in
which Epaminondas was slain, which did not happen until after the death of
Pelopidas, and which was fought against the Lacedaemonians. The Thebans, in this
war which I have reference to, were friends and allies to the Lacedaemonians.
Epaminondas and Pelopidas were sent with some troops to assist them against the
Arcadians. They both fought in the infantry near one another with undaunted
bravery; but, notwithstanding their great exertions and achievements, the wing
in which they were, gradually gave way, and retreated before the enemy; when
they perceived this, scorning to sly, and supported by intrepidity and courage
in a miraculous degree, they stood firm as two rocks amidst the angry sea, and
alone defied the enemy, elevated to enthusiasm by such great success -- They
joined their shields together, and undauntedly repulsed all who attacked them;
but at length Pelopidas, overcome by seven large wounds he had received, and
fainting with the loss of blood which these occasioned, fell upon the bodies of
the enemies which his warlike arm had extended dead at his feet. Epaminondas
saw his companion fall by his side. He was resolved to die, rather than forsake
his friend, and leave him in the power of the enemy: He advanced before his
bleeding body, and took his determined stand to defend him and his arms, with
his own life. Bereft of that warrior, whose arm (now lanquid and feeble)
terrified and put to flight hundreds, he entirely alone maintained the combat
for a long time with great numbers; but being pierced in his breast by a spear,
and wounded in his arm by a sword, he became disabled, and would have been the
next minute laid lifeless by the side of Pelopidas, had not Agesipolis, king of
Sparta, came from the other wing to his assistance, and unexpectedly saved both
their valuable lives -- They were intimate friends before this desperate
action, but it increased and augmented the virtuous flame -- Friendship arises
from virtue and congeniality of soul, but it is greatly increased by actions
which excite gratitude and admiration.

In the lives of these persons, we do not intend to enter into a minute detail
of the affairs of Greece at this period -- we shall only take notice of events
which are dependent on their actions.

The characters of Epaminondas and Pelopidas added so much prosperity to
Thebes, that the Lacedaemonians became jealous of their rising fame, and wished
to extinguish it -- But they concealed their rancour by the mask of friendship
and alliance. About this time Sparta had resolved upon an expedition against
Olynthus. She had already dispatched Eudamidas at the head of a number of
troops, and it was intended that Phoebidas, his brother, should follow him at
the head of eight thousand more. This powerful reinforcement set out from
Peloponnesus, and in their march northward encamped in the neighborhood of
Thebes. Thebes at this time exhibited a scene of confusion and faction --
Occupied entirely by internal commotion, she was totally defenseless; and
besides, she was lulled into security by alliances which she then held with all
the powerful states of Greece. The commotion of Thebes arose from a warm
dispute respecting the form of government. Ismenias, Androclides, and Pelopidas
headed a party zealous for Liberty, and a popular administration -- Archias,
Leontides, and Philip, who were all very rich, immoderately ambitious,
supported with the greatest enthusiasm and violence, and oligarchical form of
government. This being the state of affairs at Thebes, and the aristocratic
party unable to accomplish their favorite designs, sent secretly to Phoebidas,
to seize the citadel called Cadmea, and to expel the adherents of Ismenias,
and give the possession of it to the Lacedaemonians. They displayed, in the most
eloquent terms, the glory which would attend such an immortal action, as to
make himself master of a defenseless city, and one which was in alliance with
his state; that such an act would greatly assist in the reduction of Olynthus;
that the Thebans, who had published, by decree, that no person should act
offensively against Olynthus, but should remain entirely neutral, would not
fail, after such an exploit, to furnish him with as great a number of troops,
both horse and foot, as he should think necessary for the reinforcement of his
brother Eudamidas.

Some eminent historians have supposed this to have been a concerted plan with
Sparta itself -- This, I think, is extremely probable, for Sparta, in a very
few instances, was eminent for her political justice. Agesilaus, one of the
greatest kings they ever possessed, and who was much celebrated for this
particular virtue, committed actions highly unjust and unpardonable. Sparta, we
have also seen, was at this time jealous of the increasing glory of Thebes, and
elevated by the pitch of grandeur to which she had arrived, as she now held
much the superiority over Athens: But the greatest proof of this assertion is
the manner in which they behaved -- After Phoebidas had taken possession of the
citadel, they deprived him of his command, fined him one hundred thousand
drachmas, but still kept possession of the Cadmea, and continued in it a strong
and well supplied garrison: An action inconsistent, extremely base, and one
among the numerous others which blast the Spartan name. But, however this is,
Phoebidas listened to the proposal of this perfidious party; he was a general
of much ambition, and who wished very much to signalize himself in some
extraordinary action: This one, which now opened before him, perfectly
corresponded with his ideas of magnificence and greatness. Whilst the Thebans,
secured by their alliances, and little knowing the ingratitude of Sparta, whom
they had lately served in the Arcadian war, celebrated the feasts of Ceres, and
indulged themselves in the pleasures arising from their religious ceremonies,
Phoebidas suddenly led on his troops, and took possession of the citadel. The
Theban Senate were then sitting -- Leontides, one of the leaders of the
aristocratic faction, entered the Senate chamber, and, addressing the Senators,
informed them, that they need not be the least apprehensive of danger from the
Lacedaemonians who had entered the citadel; that they had only come to regulate
some affairs highly necessary in the city, and that they would only inflict
chastisement on those violent disturbers of the public tranquillity; that as
for himself, being always desirous of the happiness of his country, and willing
to lend his aid to restore that tranquillity which had for some time past fled
his beloved country, he would now take the liberty of exercising that power
which his office of polemarch gave him, of confining all persons who caballed
and bred disturbances in the state. Rollin,


He here concluded his speech, and instantly ordered Ismenias to be seized, and
carried to the citadel, where he might remain secure. The party of Ismenias,
when they saw their leader conducted to prison, and fearful of the violence
which the opposite faction would exercise upon them, since they had now the
government entirely in their own hands, sled from the city with great
precipitation, and, mourning the fate of their distressed country, retired, to
the amount of four hundred or upwards, to Athens. They soon after received
sentence of perpetual banishment, by a public decree. Among the number of the
banished was Pelopidas -- But Epaminondas remained unmolested, prosecuting his
philosophical studies at Thebes; for the party thought there was nothing to
fear from a man who devoted the whole of his attention to literature, and who
was surrounded with poverty. Rollin.
After the capture of Thebes, the fortune of the Lacedaemonians never appeared
more strongly established, or shone with more splendor. They now ruled all
Greece with absolute sway -- All Boetia was entirely under their control --
Corinth obeyed their orders in every respect -- Argos they humbled, and held in
dependence -- The Athenians, abandoned by their allies, and in other respects
in a declining situation, were by no means able to oppose the victorious
Lacedaemonians.

They chastised and reduced to still stricter obedience, those people who
attempted to throw off their oppression, and to become free. The punishments
inflicted upon some for exertions of this nature, terrified all others from
attempting the like. Now the sole Empress of the land and sea, all trembled at
the terror of their arms, and bowed in humble submission to their victorious
warriors, before they would dare attempt to fight those whom they now supposed
invincible. The great king of Persia courted their friendship, and the tyrant
of Sicily descended almost to meanness to obtain their alliance -- But, says
Rollin, "A prosperity founded in injustice, can be of no long duration. -- The
greatest blows that were given the Spartan power, came from the quarter where
they had acted the highest injuries, and from whence they did not seem to have
any thing to fear, that is, from Thebes." Pelopidas and his party now found an
asylum in Athens; their virtues and engaging behavior rendered them beloved by
the nobles and worthy men of Athens. The infamous Leontides, when he was
informed of these circumstances, sent secretly (...) to Athens to dispatch some
of the most virtuous and heroic exiles -- All escaped except Androclides --
Sparta at the same time dispatched letters to Athens, commanding them not to
afford the exiles the least assistance, but to expel them from their walls, as
they were the common enemies of all Greece. That humanity and virtue, which, in
the most illustrious state of Athens, was always the amiable characteristic of
an Athenian bosom, revolted at such an infamous proposal, and spurned it with
de^estation -- Instead of obeying the commands of imperial Sparta; they
rejoiced at this opportunity of expressing the gratitude which had ever
remained sacred in their breasts, since Thebes lent their assistance on a
similar occasion, and helped them to establish their democracy of which they
were deprived. What a contrast is there here of Athenian virtue and Spartan
infamy! Who would not rather be an Athenian, although inferior at the present
time in war to Sparta, than a blood-thirsty and ungrateful Lacedemonian? The
Athenians, although they had reason to fear the indignation of the Spartans,
for their kind treatment of the banished Thebans, still obeyed the dictates of
duty, of virtue, and of gratitude. But, to return to Pelopidas, whom we shall
soon behold shine with glorious luster! whom we shall see the hero of an
action, a greater than which history cannot boast.

Sparta had now for four years exercised an absolute power over Thebes -- She
had set over it three tyrants, Leontides, Archias, and Philip, who performed
every species of tyranny without control, which their cruel and ignoble souls
dictated. Pelopidas, who was then very young, was unable any longer to contain
his indignation and patriotism, when informed of the cruelties of the tyrants
-- He resolved to enter into some plan to restore his country her former
freedom, or to sell a life, which, without it, was unhappy and disagreeable --
He, therefore, requested a meeting of all the exiles then at Athens; which
being effected, he arose from his seat, with a countenance on which glowed
undaunted courage, and, in an oration splendid for its patriotic and truly
heroic sentiments, represented to them, with all the eloquence and ardor of
enthusiasm, that it was unworthy for honorable men, and for Thebans, to remain
inactive, after having saved their own lives; to behold, with calmness and
indifference, the beloved country in which they were born and educated,
enslaved and miserable; that to rely upon the protection and support which
Athens afforded them, was a situation mean, dependent, and, besides, very
precarious; for that Sparta, having much the superiority over Athens, might
oblige them to acquiesce to any proposals they should make; that the orators of
Athens, who were then the rulers, needed even now to be fawned and flattered --
which occupations were unworthy, and degrading to the Theban character; that no
scheme could be too hazardous to accomplish the liberty of their country, and
that none appeared to him more promising than that which Thrasybulus pursued;
that he was a model of intrepid valor and generous fortitude; that as he set
out from Thebes to destroy the tyrants of Athens, so they might march from
Athens to restore to Thebes its primitive freedom.

When the youthful hero had finished, the assembly resounded with universal
applauses; every individual admired the zeal and scheme of Pelopidas: They then
considered and digested affairs, necessary for the execution of their purpose.
Information was secretly dispatched to some of their friends at Thebes, of all
their designs, which met with a joyful reception. Among their friends which
still remained at Thebes, were Charon and Phyllidas: Charon was one of the
noblest and wealthiest persons of the city, and a determined advocate for a
democratical form of government. Phyllidas was of an enterprising activity, and
possessed a very insinuating address; He had so engaged himself in the favor
of Archias and Philip, the two most licentious of the tyrants, by his
craftiness and cunning, that they procured him the important office of
secretary of council, and seldom executed any plan without first consulting
him. By frequent secret intelligence between these two Thebans and Pelopidas,
their designs became properly arranged, and ripe for execution. Charon was to
receive them in his house, and have every thing necessary for the project:
Phyllidas was to give an entertainment to Archias and Philip, to endeavor to
heat them with wine, and introduce in their company some lewd and licentious
women. Epaminondas was at this time endeavoring to inspire the young Thebans,
by his discourses, with a passionate desire to throw off the Lacedemonian
tyranny. He was made acquainted with every circumstance relative to Pelopidas's
intentions, but took no active part in the destruction of the tyrants. The time
for action at length arrived; the little band of conspirators marched, and made
a stop at Thrasium, a small town not far distant from Thebes: There they
resolved, that a small number of the youngest of them should enter the city,
and try the first dangers, and if they were surprised by the enemy, the others
should provide for their families. Twelve young heroes, of the best families of
Thebes, united together by a faithful and virtuous friendship, rivals of honor
and glory, offered themselves for this bold and dangerous exploit -- Pelopidas
was their daring leader, and after him were Melon, Democlides, and Theopompus.
Goldsmith.
The distance between Athens and Thebes was about thirty-five miles: The
conspirators had thirteen miles to march, through a dreary and hostile country.
After having taken an affectionate farewell of their companions, and dispatched
a messenger to Charon to give him notice of their coming, they set out,
disguised in the dresses of sportsmen, carrying nets and hunting poles, that
such who met them, might not have the least suspicion of their designs. They
arrived, without being noticed, toward the close of the evening, at Charon's
house, who received them with courage and honor, the peculiar attributes of a
great soul. The approach of impending danger did no ways intimidate him, or
alter his sentiments. What condu^^d to their success in not being discovered,
was a great fall of snow which took place in the evening; the north wind blew
cold and piercing, so that almost every person remained within doors. Their
arrival at Thebes like to have been prevented by the following circumstance --
Plutarch.
One of the conspirators who remained in the city, who was a sincere friend to
democracy, and to the exiles, but who was deficient in that fortitude and
resolution, so greatly necessary for carrying on such a hazardous enterprise,
and could think of nothing but the dangers, difficulties, and obstacles which
presented themselves to his terrified imagination -- When he heard of the
approach of Pelopidas, by the messenger which he had dispatched to Charon, all
the terrors of the designs appeared greatly exaggerated to his mind -- He
secretly made this inquiry to himself, How can a few weak and indigent exiles
shake the government of Sparta, and free themselves from that power? In this
disposition of mind, he privately retired to his own house, and, revolving the
circumstances over and over, at last resolved to send some friend to desire
Pelopidas to defer the enterprise for the present, and retire to Athens until a
more convenient opportunity should offer.

This friend immediately went home in a^ great a haste as possible, and, going
to the stable, led his horse out, and desired his wife to bring him the bridle;
but she not knowing where to find it, returned to tell him, that she believed
it was lent out to some neighbor -- Her husband immediately got into a violent
passion, which was returned with equal ardour by his beloved spouse -- neither
being willing to leave the field, or to own themselves conquered, continued the
combat for a long time -- the wife cursed her husband, and prayed heartily that
he might break his neck in the journey which he was about to take -- Thus they
continued this heroic employment until it was late, when the husband,
considering this as an unhappy omen, gave over all thoughts of the Journey.

Here, then, let it be said, to the honor of scolding, and to the glory of
women, that by these, Thebes recovered her Liberty and Independence.

The important hour of action approached -- Phyllidas, the artful secretary,
had prepared the concerted entertainment in the treasury -- No Gilli^s.
article was omitted, that could gratify the senses, and lull the activity of
the mind in a dream of pleasure -- But still the joys of the tyrants were
interrupted in their voluptuous career, by a certain obscure rumor, spread
among them, that a party of exiles lay somewhere concealed in the city -- All
the address of Phyllidas could not divert the terror of his guests -- The
tyrant Archias immediately dispatched one of his lictors to request the
attendance of Charon. Night had now spread her glooms over the city: The
conspirators were buckling on their armor, and hanging their swords by their
thighs, expecting in a few minutes to proceed to their enterprise -- suddenly
was heard a loud knocking at the door -- Charon himself opened it, and received
with awe the message of the tyrant -- Pelopidas and his band wrung their hands,
believing that all was discovered, and that they should die without effecting
any thing to their own glory, or to the advantage of their country -- After a
moment of dreadful reflection, they unanimously advised Charon to obey the
mandate without delay. -- Charon was a man of intrepid courage; he stood
unmoved at the danger which threatened himself, but was full of concern for the
situation of his friends: fearful lest he might be suspected of treachery, if
so many brave citizens should fall victims to the tyrants rage, he went to the
apartment of his wife, and brought out his only son, a youth of about fifteen
years of age, who, in strength and beauty, was superior to all the youth of
Thebes; he gave him into the hands of Pelopidas, pronouncing these remarkable
words -- "If you discover that I have betrayed you, and have been guilty of
treachery on this occasion, revenge yourselves on me, in this my only son,
whom, as dear as he is to me, I abandon to you, and let him fall a victim,
without mercy, to his father's perfidy." Rollin.
-- These expressions drew tears from the eyes of many: It much hurt the
feelings of these heroic Thebans, to think that Charon should suspect that they
indulged any idea of his dishonesty. They affectionately conjured him not to
leave his son with them, but to conduct him to a place of safety, that in some
future time he might rise the champion of his friends and his country's wrongs
-- Rollin,
"No," replied the noble father, "He shall stay with you, and share your fate.
If he must perish, what nobler end can he make than with his father and his
best friends? For you, my son, exert yourself beyond your years, and show a
courage worthy of you and me -- You see here the most excellent of the Thebans
-- Make, under such masters, a noble essay of glory, and learn to fight, or, if
it must be, to die, like them, for Liberty -- For the rest, I am not without
hopes, for I believe, that the justice of our cause will draw down the favor
and protection of the Gods upon us." He concluded with a prayer for them, and,
after embracing the conspirators, went out. He endeavored, on the way, to
compose his countenance in such a manner, that he might answer, without
suspicion, the questions of Archias -- When he arrived at the door of the house
where the feast was held, Archias, Philip, and the other magistrates who,
through apprehension, had arisen from the table, met him there, and immediately
asked him if he knew any thing concerning a report which was spread, respecting
the arrival of some disaffected people in the city? He affected gestures of
astonishment, and perceiving, by the answers which they made to some questions
he put to them, that they had no accurate information of the affair, he
ventured to speak in a more bold and commanding manner, and said -- "It is very
probable the rumor you speak of, is only some false alarm, intended or
interrupt your mirth and entertainment: But, as the slightest hints of such
things ought not to be neglected, I will go and make the strictest search which
possibly lies in my power." Phyllidas, who then appeared, praised very much his
prudence and zeal -- He then led them back to the entertainment, and placed
before them some of the most captivating liquors.

Charon, when he returned home, found his friends, not prepared to sly, but to
die gloriously, and to sell their lives at a dear price -- The joy which glowed
upon his face, explained at once their good fortune -- He made them acquainted
with all that passed, which raised them from dejection and despair, to the
highest degree of hope. This circumstance, which threatened to prove fatal to
the design, was directly after succeeded by another much more alarming --
Archias, Philip, and the other magistrates had not long returned to the table,
after the interview with Charon, when a courier arrived from Athens, bearing
every mark of haste and trepidation, desiring to see Archias, to whom he
delivered a letter from an Athenian magistrate, of the same name, his ancient
friend and guest -- This letter revealed the whole conspiracy, and every
circumstance relative to it, as afterward discovered -- The messenger told
Archias, that his master desired him to read it instantly, as it contained
business of the greatest importance, and which required immediate
consideration. Archias took the letter, saying, smiling, "business tomorrow,"
Plutarch.
and put the letter under the bolster of his couch, without reading it. Fortune
proving thus kind to our bold adventures, they now were equipped, and every way
prepared for the attack: They now set out, divided into two parties -- Those
which were to attack Leontides, were headed by Pelopidas, and those which
marched against Archias and Philip, the tyrants who were at the feast, were led
by Charon and Melon. These arrayed themselves in the flowing vestments of a
woman, and overshadowed their countenances by a load of wreaths and garlands
Gillies.
-- In this disguise they approached to the door where the feast was kept --
upon their entrance, the guests raised loud shouts of joy, expecting that these
were the women which Phyllidas had promised them an interview with; they
immediately dismissed all the servants who attended at the feast. -- At a
signal given by the commander, the conspirators, like lightening, unsheathed
their swords, and rushed upon the tyrants, and some of their partisans, pointed
out to them by Phyllidas: They, being in a situation incapable of defense, soon
fell victims to their unbounded sury.

But Pelopidas had a more difficult task to accomplish; he had not to encounter
with persons debauched and debilitated with wine, but with a sober, wise, and
brave man. When he and his party came to the door of this surviving tyrant,
they found it locked and bolted, for he was already in bed and asleep; they
knocked several times before any person answered or came to open it -- at last
a servant approached, and demanded their wishes; one of the band answered him
in a satisfactory manner; he then opened the door, which he had no sooner done,
than the conspirators rushed in, laid him lifeless on the floor, and bent their
way toward the chamber where they knew Leontides slept. He, hearing the noise
and the shriek of the servant, immediately suspected the true cause: He
instantly leaped from his bed, seized his sword, and prepared to make as
vigorous a defense as possible; but, unhappily for him, he forgot to extinguish
the candle, which he always kept burning in the room, which, had he done, it
would have thrown the conspirators into confusion, and made them mistake each
other for a foe. Leontides, however, received them boldly at his chamber, and
laid Cephisodorus dead at his feet, who was the first man that attempted to
enter -- Their leader, Pelopidas, seeing one of his brave men slain in the
contest, became exceedingly enraged, and rushed furiously forward to the
passage; but it being very narrow, and the dead body of Cephisodorus lying in
the way, the dispute was long and difficult, owing to the many disadvantages
under which Pelopidas labored, and as no person but one could possibly engage
at once; however, the youthful and vigorous arm of Pelopidas at length
prevailed, and laid the impious wretch at his feet.

They went from thence in pursuit of Hypates, his friend and neighbor, and
dispatched him likewise.

This immortal exploit being performed after this manner, with unexpected
success, messengers were immediately dispatched to Thriafium, where their
companions still remained. The doors of all the prisons in Thebes flew open to
the victorious republicans; the prisoners, wretched victims of tyranny, once
more breathed the fresh air, and enjoyed the use of their limbs; the porticos
were deprived of their spoils; the cutlers shops were broken open, and arms
were given to every person they met.

Ep^minondas heard the voice of liberty, and came clothed in polished armor,
which glittered to the rays of the moon, leading a troop of some of the most
noble persons in Thebes, which he had collected together -- All the city was in
great terror and confusion; most of the people knew not to what to assign the
reason of this disturbance -- Multitudes thronged the streets -- The houses
were illuminated with torches -- Some audible voices at last hushed in dreadful
silence the confusion, and proclaimed Liberty to Thebes! the death of the
tyrants! and summoned to arms the friends of democracy.

The Lacedemonian garrison most authors have thought guilty of ill conduct, in
not falling upon them when the disorder prevailed during the night; for the
garrison consisted of fifteen hundred Spartans, besides three thousand
aristocrats who had taken refuge in the citadel. They, alarmed by the cries
they heard, by the illuminations of the houses, and the multitudes of people
which flocked the streets, remained still, and only dispatched a courier to
Sparta, desiring a reinforcement.

At sunrise the next morning, the exiles arrived from Thraisium, completely
armed. -- Epaminondas led Pelopidas and his party in a large assembly of the
people, who received them with repeated shouts of applause, and poured forth
their thanks and gratitude in the most animated language.

Pelopidas addressed them in an oration, desiring them to assist their country,
and join with their gods in demolishing the tyranny of Sparta. The same day
Pelopidas, with Meion and Charon, were chosen Boetarchs.

Soon after the early arrival of the conspirators from Thraisium, a body of men
arrived from Athens, to the assistance of Pelopidas, consisting of five
thousand foot and five hundred horse. These troops, with others which came from
several places of Boetia, composed an army of twelve thousand foot, and the
same number of horse. Pelopidas, considering that a reinforcement might
probably very soon arrive from Sparta, led on these troops with as much
expedition as possible to attack the citadel. The events of the siege are
variously related; some say the garrison made a very vigorous defense, and were
at last forced to surrender on account of the failure of provision: But the
most probable account is, that they made a very feeble resistance, being
intimidated by the alacrity and enthusiasm, as well as the increasing number,
of the assailants. The garrison had their lives granted them, and the liberty
to go to whatever place they pleased.

The Cadmea surrendered only a few days before the arrival of a fresh force
from Sparta. Cleombrotus led on a powerful Lacedemonian army as far as Megara,
which, with a little more expedition, would have saved the citadel. Two of the
generals who capitulated were punished by death, and the other was so heavily
fined, that he had to go into voluntary banishment, at Peloponnesus.

Thus we have followed an action of which Pelopidas, our hero, was both the
proposer and conductor. "It is," says Rollin, "the greatest exploit that ever
was executed by surprise and stratagem, and may very properly be compared with
that of Thrasybulus, who delivered Athens from the same subjection. Both
Pelopidas and Thrasybulus, destitute in themselves of all resource, and induced
to implore a foreign support, from the bold design of attacking a formidable
power, with an handful of men; and, I have taken this comparison between
Thrasybulus and Pelopidas from Rollin, in his own words.
overcoming all obstacles to their enterprise, solely by their valor, had each
of them the good fortune to deliver their country, and to change the face of
its affairs entirely: For the Athenians were indebted to Thrasybulus for that
sudden and happy change, which, freeing them from the oppression they groaned
under, not only restored their liberty, but with it their ancient splendor,
and put them into a condition to humble and make Sparta tremble in their turn.

We shall see in like manner, that the war which reduced the pride of Sparta,
and deprived it of the empire, both by sea and land, was the work of this
single night, in which Pelopidas, without taking either citadel or fortress,
and entering only one of twelve into a private house, unloosened and broke the
chains imposed by the Lacedaemonians on all the other states of Greece, though
it appeared impracticable even to produce such an effect."

The freedom of Thebes, restored in the manner which has been related, lowered
the pride and dignity of imperial Sparta. She breathed nothing but revenge, and
prepared, with every exertion possible, all affairs requisite to bestow a
chastisement adequate to the crime of the audacious Theban rebels, who dare
assert the rights of man, and the greatest privilege of human nature. The
Thebans, who had formerly tasted of liberty, and knew the charms of that
celestial Gods, resolved to maintain their recovered rights, and to die
rather than yield in so sacred a cause.

These dispositions on both sides occasioned an, inveterate war, which lasted
nearly seven years, and ended with the battle of Leuctra, which produced a
revolution throughout the whole of Greece.

Age^^laus, on account of his old age, excused himself from acting the part of
a general. Cleombrotus entered Boetia with a very powerful army, spreading
dismay and terror before him. The declining Athenians, when they saw the great
exertions of Sparta, became so terrified, that they renounced the Theban
alliance, fined, banished, and put to death all their firm adherents.

The affairs of Thebes now appeared truly desperate, having no friend or ally
on whom they could depend -- It was only the singular qualifications and heroic
virtues of their leaders, that supported it.

Pelopidas and Gorgidas, who were then at the head of the government, consulted
some scheme by which they might create a quarrel between Athens and Sparta.

Cleombrotus, after a campaign of 2 months, returned home, leaving one
Sphodrias to command a numerous force at Thespioe. This general possessed
courage and enterprise, but very little prudence. His character and disposition
were well known by Pelopidas -- Pelopidas thought that he would be a good
instrument in effecting a rupture between Athens and Sparta; to accomplish
which, was then his principal design -- He, therefore, dispatched a particular
friend of his to him with money, which he was to offer him, while he bestowed
upon him insinuations and flattery, yet more agreeable to him than money. This
friend, after having represented to Sphodrias, that a man so great and glorious
as himself, ought to perform some wonderful action, to render his name
immortal, proposed to him the taking of Piraeus by stratagem, when the
Athenians had no suspicion of such an event: Such an action, continued he, will
be extremely grateful to your countrymen: The Thebans, enraged against the
Athenians for their base conduct and desertion, will swell with praises the
name of Sphodrias, and lend you all the assistance in their power.

The ambitious Sphodrias listened with attention to this speech of the friend
of Pelopidas: He envied the glory of Phoebidas, who, according to his ideas of
greatness, performed a very renowned exploit: But he still considered it as
more glorious to seize Piraeeus, and deprive the Athenians of their power, by
an unexpected attack. Transported with joy, he immediately made preparations
for the execution of this illustrious action, which was even more horrid than
the seizure of the Cadmea.

The distance between Thebes and Thespioe was not more than twenty miles, which
furnished an easy opportunity for the prosecution of these secret practices --
But the great distance between Thebes and Athens, which exceeded forty miles,
rendered the intentions of Sphodrias extremely unsuccessful. He marched from
Thespioe with the flower of the garrison, with a view of surprising Piraeus
before the dawn of the succeeding day; but daylight overtook him in Thriasium,
near Eleusis: The news of his approach was soon spread in Athens (...) youth,
with their usual celerity, seized their arms, and obliged Sphodrias shamefully
to return to Thespioe. The Athenians dispatched an embassy, complaining
bitterly of the insult which had been offered them. In consequence of which,
the Lacedaemonians, under the shadow of virtue, deprived Sphodrias of his
command; cited him to appear before the civil magistrates; but finally
acquitted him.

This injustice of Sparta exceedingly exasperated the Athenians, and involved
them in a long and dangerous war.

The Athenians immediately made a new alliance with Thebes; fitted out a large
fleet, commanded by the illustrious Timotheus, son of Conon. Agesilaus, at the
head of eighteen thousand foot, and fifteen hundred horse, made frequent
incursions in Boetia, committing great damage, but not without considerable
loss on his side. There were skirmishes every day between the armies. It was
altogether owing to the abilities of her generals, that Thebes was able to
carry on a war against a superior force, commanded by one of the greatest
captains of antiquity. The whole glory and great success, at this period of the
war, is justly due to Pelopidas, for Epaminondas had not yet taken the lead of
public affairs.

The arms of Thebes were crowned with victory at Platea and Thespioe, where
Phoebidas (the same person who had surprised the Cadmea) was slain. At the
battle of Tanagara, Theban valor shone very conspicuous -- Pelopidas there
slew with his own hand Panthoides, the chief commander. The engagement at
Tegyra rendered particularly glorious this youthful hero -- It was a prelude to
the battle of Leuctra, which was one of the most illustrious engagements that
has ever happened.

Pelopidas, with his soldiers, having failed in a design he formed against
Orchomenos, which declared on the side of the Lacedaemonians, were returning by
Tegyra, which is remarkable for its narrow passes. The Lacedaemonians, marching
from Locris, met them on the road -- As soon as the enemy was perceived
approaching, a soldier ran in great haste to Pelopidas, and, exceedingly
terrified, exclaimed, "We are fallen into the enemy's hands." Ah! replied he,
why should we not rather say, that they are fallen into ours? Plutarch.


He instantly ordered his horse, which were his rear-guard, to begin the attack
-- He drew out his foot into a close body, which were only 300 in number,
called the sacred battalion -- He hoped, wherever these charged, being so
closely united, they would break through the enemy. Gorgolicon and Theopompus,
the Lacedemonian generals, formed their infantry into two battalions; each of
these divisions consisted of 900 men. The engagements of those parts where the
generals on each side commanded in person, were very fierce and dreadful. The
Spartan generals, who charged Pelopidas with great fury, were slain first; all
the troops that were around them were either killed or dispersed: The remainder
of the Lacedaemonians were so terrified, that they opened a passage for
Pelopidas to march through; but he, disdaining to retreat, advanced furiously
against those who were still drawn out for battle: He made a terrible slaughter
among them, spreading terror and dismay wherever he went -- He did not pursue
far the routed enemy, fearing he might be surprised. -- But continued his
march, crowned with the wreaths of victory.

This encounter depressed the spirits of the Lacedaemonians; for it had never
before happened until this time, that the Lacedaemonians had been defeated by an
inferior, or even an equal number; but in this instance they were more than
three times the number of the Thebans.

They now became deprived of that glory; the Thebans, in their turn, became the
terror and dread, even of those who had rendered themselves so universally
formidable. Rollin.


The war had now lasted several campaigns: All Greece began to grow weary of a
war, which, although victory was more frequently on the side of the Thebans and
Athenians, redounded to the enrichment and aggrandizement of Sparta. They began
to turn their thoughts once more on the blessings and smiles of peace, and to
concert measures necessary to obtain an object so delightful.

Deputies were sent from the different states to Sparta, who still held the
power and control of Greece; Epaminondas, whom we left pursuing with ardor the
paths of philosophy, was at the head of this deputation. -- He now became very
much celebrated for his profound knowledge and education; but he had not yet
shone conspicuous as a statesman and military hero: His friend Pelipodas was at
this time the most illustrious hero of Greece, without Timotheus, the Athenian
general, is considered as his equal.

In the counsel of the deputies, where Agesilaus, as king of Lacedemonia
presided, Epaminondas listened in thoughtful silence to the tyranny of the
king, and the mean and dependent spirit of the deputies, who coincided in every
thing he said: But he preserved his magnanimity and independence of soul; he
feared not the frowns of Agesilaus, or his sycophants; he was a philosopher! he
was a patriot -- He arose from his seat in deliberate warmth; by the thunder of
his eloquence, he made the haughty Spartan tremble on his throne: He spoke not
for the advantage of Thebes alone, but of Greece in general; in which he
endeavored to spare the effusion of human blood; vigorously insisted on the
necessity of establishing a peace on equality and justice, for that no peace
could be firm and durable, which was not equal and consistent in all its parts.

This discourse, founded on reason and justice, made great impression on the
minds of the hearers. Agesilaus observed the effect it had upon the deputies,
by their thoughtfulness and silence. To prevent this effect, which it might
have to his disadvantage, he demanded, in a haughty manner, of Epaminondas,
"Whether he thought it just and reasonable, that Boetia should be free and
independent! That is, Whether he agreed that the cities of Boetia should depend
no longer upon Thebes?"

Epaminondas answered it with equal warmth, by a similar inquiry, "Whether he
thought it just and reasonable, that Laconia should enjoy the same independence
and liberty?"

When Agesilaus heard this, he rose from his seat in great rage, ordering
Epaminondas instantly to declare, "Whether Boetia should be free?"

Epaminondas, firm and resolved, replied again, asking, "Whether, on his side,
he would consent that Laconia should be free?" Rollin.


The tyrant, unaccustomed to the language of an independent hero, and of one
who feared neither him nor his absolute power, upon the repetition of this
question, became so inveterate, that he banished the Thebans out of the treaty
of alliance which he was then concluding with the other states of Greece. The
rest of the allies signed it, imperfect as it was, dreading the power of the
Lacedaemonians, if they refused.

In consequence of this treaty, the armies of Athens were to be disbanded and
recalled.

Thebes was now left alone to brave the fury of the most powerful state of
Greece. Agesilaus, and his son Archidamus, collected a very powerful
Lacedemonian army, and summoned the aid of their confederates: Sickness
prevented Agesilaus from taking the field in person; but he commanded his
colleague, Cleombrotus, to march without delay into the territories of the
enemy, promising him, that he should be soon joined by a powerful
reinforcement. Cleombrotus halted in the plains of Leuctra; it was surrounded
on all sides by ridges of mountains, which reared their lofty heads to the
skies; the most conspicuous of these were called Helicon, Citheron, and
Cynocephaloe. In this place, as was reported, were buried two Theban damsels,
whose virginity had fell a sacrifice to the brutality of three Spartan youths.
Not able to support life under the load of dishonor, these beautiful and
unhappy females flew, before the poisonous breath of disgrace, into the arms of
a voluntary death: Their old and afflicted father, Scedasus, followed their
example, imploring vengeance from gods and men. Goldsmith.


The Thebans were extremely terrified; they saw themselves without a friend and
supporter, braving the waves of adversity, while the states of Greece looked
on, and gave them up for lost. They little then knew that the abilities of one
man were to secure them from impending ruin, and make them triumphant over
their foes. This was Epaminondas -- We have hitherto beheld him as an amiable
man, a philosopher, and an orator; but now we will see him in the field of
battle, surrounded with virtue and glory. He was appointed by his countrymen
supreme general of the war, and had several colleagues joined with him as
generals. He immediately raised all the troops which he possibly could, and
began his ^^arch. Several persons, to prevent his marching, came and informed
him of many unfavorable omens they had -- He (...) replied, "There is but one
good omen, to fight for one's country."

Pelopidas then commanded the celebrated sacred (...) which consisted of youths
nearly of the same age, bound together by friendship and the nearest ties, and
resolved never to (...) an enemy.

When Pelopidas left his house to join the army, his young and beautiful wife,
in taking her last farewell, with a shower of tears, beseeched him to avoid as
much danger as possible, and to think of her while in the tumult and clangour
of battle. He made this remarkable reply to her, "Private men are to be advised
to take care of themselves, but generals to take care of others."

It was a dispute among the Theban generals, whether they should offer the
enemy battle or not: Pelopidas was a warm advocate for battle; but three of the
generals were against it; the voice of Epaminondas was only wanting to decide
it which way he pleased; he firmly declared for the engagement.

While the two armies lay at Leuctra, determined on battle at the succeeding
day, it is related, that at the dead of night, when a solemn stillness reigned
throughout the camps, Pelopidas dreamt that he saw the two Theban maids, whose
deaths we have related, weeping at their tombs, calling curses and evils upon
the Spartans; that their father, Scedasus, also appeared, commanding him, "to
sacrifice a young red haired virgin, in honor of his daughters, if he desired
to be victorious in the ensuing battle."

The next morning when Pelopidas arose, and reflected on the dream, his
humanity revolted at the dreadful command; he resolved in his mind not to obey
it, notwithstanding it was contrary to the opinion of the soothsayers. While
Pelopidas was in this frame of mind, a wild she-colt, which had broken loose,
ran neighing through the camp, but when she approached near the place where he
was, she stood still and silent: The whole army admired the sparkling redness
of her mane; the stateliness of her form and actions. The thought instantly
occurred to Pelopidas, that this was the virgin which was represented to him in
his dream: He ordered her to be seized and sacrificed, in honor of the violated
Theban maids.

This circumstance was spread through the army, and tended to animate their
spirits. The time of battle arrived -- The two armies were very unequal in
number; the Lacedaemonians consisted of twenty-four thousand foot, and sixteen
hundred horse; the Thebans had only six thousand foot, and four hundred horse,
but all of them valiant men, determined to conquer or die.

The commanders of each army were very celebrated generals: Cleombrotus may be
justly ranked among the greatest heroes that ever Sparta produced; and
Epaminondas among the greatest that ever the world produced. The two armies
drew out upon a plain Rollin.
-- Cleombrotus commanded on the right wing, consisting of Spartans, on whom he
most confided. To receive the great advantage which his superiority of horse
gave him, he placed them in front of the right wing, where he commanded. The
allies who formed the left wing, were commanded by Archidamus, the son of king
Agesilaus.

The Theban general viewed with attention this arrangement of the enemy; he was
sensible, that the issue of the battle would depend upon the domestic troops of
Sparta, who were incomparably braver than their allies: He, therefore, resolved
to command in person the left wing, to strengthen it with the best of his heavy
armed troops, and to make a very vigorous attack on the right of the enemy,
determined to seize or destroy the person of Cleombrotus. The sacred battalion,
headed by his friend Pelopidas, he placed near his person; these closed the
left wing: The remainder of his infantry he drew up on his right in an oblique
line, which the farther it extended, became more distant from the enemy: This
curious disposition on the right was made, to prevent his little army from
being surrounded by the numbers of the enemy, who resembled the form of a
crescent: His horse he posted in the front of his left, after the manner of the
Lacedaemonians.

The action began with the cavalry: This skirmish continued but a short time,
when the sixteen hundred horsemen of the Lacedaemonians gave way, before the
impetuosity and bravery of the four hundred Thebans: Being driven back upon the
infantry, they put them into considerable confusion: This disorder was still
more increased, by an impetuous sally made upon the flank of Cleombrotus, by
Pelopidas, at the head of his sacred band. Epaminondas followed close his
horse, and fell suddenly on the phalanx with all the weight of his heavy
battalion: He bore down all before him. The danger of their king recalled to
their ancient principles the degenerate disciples of Lycurgus. Gillies.
The most valiant warriors (...) from every part, to the assistance of their
prince, placed themselves before him, and fought with desperate valor. They
repelled the astonishing progress of Epaminondas, until the dragoons who
surrounded the person of Cleombrotus, were totally slain, and the warlike king
himself pierced with many wounds, and, fainting with loss of blood, fell dead
upon the field, amidst the bleeding bodies of his enthusiastic defenders. The
fall of their chief added new fury to the Spartans -- They held the death of
their king as a much less disgrace than to leave his mangled body to the view
and insults of the enemy -- To recover his body, they made every exertion;
their amazing efforts were successful; but they were unable to obtain any other
advantage -- Epaminondas was careful to fortify his ranks, and to maintain his
order of battle; the firmness and celerity of his assault gained him a complete
and glorious victory over an army more than four times his number -- He routed
them in every quarter, and, following them very vigorously in their flight,
killed a great number. Epaminondas erected a trophy in celebration of this
memorable engagement.

Never before had the Lacedemonian arms received so much disgrace; in their
former most bloody engagements, they had never more than five or six hundred of
their citizens slain; in this battle they lost four thousand men; the Thebans
only three hundred.

When we consider the battle of Leuctra in every circumstance, the great
numbers of the Lacedemonian army, their bravery, the excellency of their
generals, we will be led to exclaim, that this victory of Epaminondas is one of
the most glorious and astonishing that has ever happened in the world: In no
instance has the qualities of a general been so eminently displayed.

Before the time of Pelopidas and Epaminondas, the Thebans could not stand
before the victorious Spartans, and after their deaths, they fell again into
the same degeneracy.

When the intelligence was spread over Greece; that the Thebans, with the loss
of only three hundred men, had gained an immortal victory over Sparta, it
occasioned revolutions in every quarter.

The Thebans sent an account of this victory to Athens, demanding at the same
time aid against a common enemy; but the Senate of the Athenians, which was
then sitting, influenced greatly by Timotheus and Iphicrates, treated the
embassy rather coldly, and refused the desired assistance.

Epaminondas and Pelopidas were, after this battle, appointed joint governors
of Boetia: They assembled all the troops of Boetia, and all the assistance of
their allies, whose number daily increased, and entered Peloponnesus, driving
all before them. Many places revolted from the subjection of the Spartans:
among these were Elis, Argos, Arcadia, and the greatest part of Laconia.

It was then about the winter solstice, toward the end of the last month of
the year -- The first day of the next month was the time appointed for the
resignation of their offices; it was enacted by law, that death should be
inflicted upon all those who held them beyond that time: The rest of the
colleagues, fearful of bad weather and of the dreadful consequences of the
infringement of the law, wished that the army should march immediately back to
Thebes -- Epaminondas and Pelopidas, on the contrary, animated the citizens,
and exhorted them to take advantage of the fear and alarm of the enemy, and to
follow an enterprise, which would be of much benefit to the state, and which
would more than compensate for the neglect of this formality. The army approved
this salutary advice. Epaminondas, therefore, entered Laconia at the head of
seventy thousand soldiers, a small part of which were Thebans.

The great reputation of the two generals had spread so extensively abroad,
that allies flocked in numbers to their standard, obeyed with great respect
their orders, and marched confident of success, when they were their leaders.

In this expedition they united all Arcadia into one body; they captured
Messenia, driving before them the Spartans, who had been in possession of it
near two hundred and eightyseven years. It was a country extremely fertile, and
in extent nearly equal to Laconia. Rollin.
Epaminondas called to their paternal country its ancient inhabitants, who were
dispersed in the different states of Greece, Italy, and Sicily: They heard the
friendly invitation, and, animated by the love of their country, inherent
inhumanity, they flocked in joyful crowds to their once happy land.

This wise and benevolent action-of the Theban gave immoderate grief to the
Spartans: aninveterate animosity had always prevailed between them and the
Messenians, and was incapable of being extinguished until the ruin of one party.

It is related, that Epaminondas, after having ravaged the country in sight of
Sparta, crossed the river Eurotas, which was at that time very much swelled by
the melting of the snows: as he passed at the head of his infantry, some of the
Spartans pointed him out to Agesilaus, who, after having for a considerable
time surveyed him in a very thoughtful manner, raised up his hands, and said,
"wonderful man."

After these successes, the rapidity of which we can scarcely imagine,
Epaminondas led his army through Cenchea, on his return home. -- During his
march he defeated the (...), who, to prevent his passage, had (...) him, in
narrow ways, with which that country abounds.

The two Thebans, when they returned home, after having performed such
memorable actions, instead of receiving honor and applause from a grateful
country, were summoned to appear as criminals against the state, for having
disobeyed one of its strictest laws, in retaining their commands four months
after the term appointed for their resignation; during which time they
performed those exploits which we have briefly related.

Such a behavior, at first view, excites indignation in every generous breast
-- But when we consider, that it is upon the obedience of the laws that the
existence of government depends, and particularly the situation of Thebes at
that time, who had lately recovered her freedom, our indignation ought to be
changed into admiration. Thebes rejoiced at their victories, but still they
arraigned their laurelled heroes to the court of justice.

When these two generals appeared before the magistrates, Epaminondas, instead
of pleading his cause, delivered an eulogy on the victories he had gained,
together with his friend -- He stood undaunted, although surrounded by persons
envious of his glory -- He spurned from him supplication, or language unworthy
of a philosopher. Both he and Pelopidas were unanimously acquitted, and he
returned from his trial, as he did from battle, surrounded with glory and
universal applause.

When the Lacedaemonians beheld the Thebans successful in every undertaking, and
daily increasing in strength and grandeur, they began to tremble so, the fate
of Sparta -- They knew the enterprising spirits of Epaminondas and Pelopidas,
and they had dreadfully experienced the terrors, of their arms. That imperial
state, which lately gave law to Athens, dispatched an orator, who sorrowfully
implored their kind protection and assistance. The orator described, in the
most pathetic terms, the miseries, the eminent danger in which Sparta remained;
the haughtiness of Thebes, and her ambition, which extended its views to the
empire of all Greece: He represented the danger which Athens herself had to
fear, if, without opposition, Thebes was allowed to drive all before her, and
daily acquire new allies: He dwelt upon the time when a strict union prevailed
between Athens and Sparta, and when, by their united efforts, they preserved
all Greece from destruction. Goldsmith.


The Athenians acknowledged the justness of most parts of this discourse: They
felt sorrow for the distress of Sparta, and were jealous of the increasing
power of Thebes. Their compassion entirely forgave the injuries they had
formerly received from their armies, and they finally determined to assist the
Lacedaemonians with the whole of their forces. A league and consederacy was
concluded against the Thebans.

The king of Persia, desirous to reconcile the Grecian states, sent one
Philiscus for that purpose; but his embassy proved unsuccessful. -- He then
returned home, after having bestowed large sums to the Spartans for carrying on
the war.

The Spartans, not yet content with the assistance of the Athenians, and
wishing still to enlarge the confederacy, dispatched deputies to the great king.

When the Thebans heard this, they thought it was necessary to deputize some
person on their side -- Pelopidas was chosen for this purpose.

The fame of his great exploits had spread so extensively abroad, and had
raised him so great in the eyes of the world, that when he appeared at court
among the princes and nobility, they received him with joy and acclamations;
they related his exploits, and crowned him with praise and applause. Artaxerxes
paid him extraordinary honors; he publicly extolled him before his lords.
After having heard him speak, more nervous than the Athenian ambassador, and
more simple than the Lacedemonian, he esteemed him more than ever -- He gave
him far the preference to all the rest of the Grecian deputies. The king
granted to Pelopidas all his requests, so that he entirely baffled the desires
of the confederates.

He returned home, clothed with honor, and without accepting any of the riches
of Persia; a behavior widely different from Timagoras, the Athenian ambassador.

The esteem of Thebes for him was augmented by the good success of his embassy,
which had procured the freedom of Greece, and the re-establishment of Messene.

Shortly after the return of Pelopidas from this embassy, new troubles arose in
Greece, which called him once more into the field of battle.

Alexander, the tyrant of Pheroe, entertained secret designs of subduing all
Thessaly under his subjection. He declared open war against several parts of it.

The terrified Thessalonians immediately dispatched ambassadors to Thebes,
begging the assistance of some troops and a general. Epaminondas was at that
time engaged in the Peloponnesian war. The command of this expedition was
unanimously given to Pelopidas: He marched with an army to Thessaly in a little
time -- reduced Sarissa to a capitulation, and obliged Alexander to come, in a
suppliant manner, and make submission to him. He endeavored, by mild and
lenient behavior, to soften his hardened disposition, and to change the cruel
tyrant into the humane prince; but, finding these endeavors ineffectual, and
hearing every day of his cruelties and vicious pursuits, he exercised more
severity toward him. The tyrant, upon this usage, secretly fled with his
guards.

Pelopidas, having settled the affairs of Thessaly, and defeated the schemes of
Alexander, led his army to Macedonia, where Ptolemy was carrying on war against
his brother Alexander, the king of Macedon, respecting some political affairs.
The two brothers had invited him to be the judge and arbitrator of their
quarrel, and to espouse that side which should appear to him to be the most
just.

When he arrived, he quieted all disturbances and disputes; he recalled all
those persons who had been banished by either party, and returned to Thebes,
taking with him Philip, the brother of Alexander, and thirty youths of the most
illustrious families of Macedonia, to show the Greeks the authority of the
Thebans, and the extensive reputation of their arms. One of the hostages was
that Philip, who was father of Alexander the Great, and who afterward enslaved
Greece. It is said, that he placed Epaminondas as his model for imitation as a
warrior -- but the other excellencies and virtues of this truly great man, he
possessed not the least share of them.

The troubles of Macedonia had subsided only for a short time, when they broke
out again with greater fury than ever. Ptolemy murdered his brother Alexander,
and seized the kingdom. The friends of the deceased called again for the great
Pelopidas, who had formerly so wisely terminated their disputes.

Always willing to lend his assistance to distress, he readily undertook their
cause. Desirous to arrive at Macedonia before Ptolemy had time sufficient to
execute his intended projects, and to establish himself firmly on the throne,
he raised, in haste, mercenary troops, and marched against him. When (...)
approached near each other, (...) some secret means, corrupted those (...)
soldiers, and, by large sums of (...) them desert their general, and come over
on his side. But, being awed by the glory and name of Pelopidas, Plutarch's
Lives.
he went to him, and, in a submissive manner, caressed him as his master and
superior, and solemnly promised him, that he would retain the crown only as the
guardian to the son of the deceased king, and that he would unite himself in
such a strict alliance with the Thebans, that their friends and enemies should
be theirs. As security for these engagements, he gave as hostages his son
Philoxenus, and fifty children who were educated with him. These Pelopidas sent
to his countrymen, desiring them to show them affection and tenderness.

Pelopidas was extremely enraged against the mercenaries, for their treachery.
Being informed, that they had deposited the whole of their effects at
Pharsalus, a city in Thessaly -- ^e thought this a fair opportunity to be
revenged upon them, by depriving them of that, for which they proved perfidious
traitors -- He, therefore, collected a few Thessalian troops, and marched to
capture Pharsalus. He had arrived but a few minutes, and was preparing to
attack the place, when Alexander the tyrant, his former enemy, came against him
at the head of a powerful army. Rollin.
Pelopidas, who had been sent as ambassador to him, believing that he came to
justify himself, and to answer to the complaints of the Thebans, for his cruel
proceedings, went to meet him, taking no person along with him but Ismenias --
He well knew that Alexander was an impious wretch, void of faith and honor, but
he supposed that the terror of Thebes, and his own dignity and fame, would
prevent him from executing any violence on his person -- He was, however
deceived, for the tyrant, seeing him and Ismenias alone and unarmed, seized
them both as prisoners, and made himself master of Pharsalus.

This perfidious action filled the minds of the subjects of Alexander with
terror and dismay -- They feared greatly for themselves, on account of the
violent proceedings of the tyrant, who imbrued his hands daily in the blood of
the innocent; and for the fate of their country, from the revenge of the justly
enraged Thebans.

When the news of the capture of their leader was conveyed to Thebes, extremely
incensed against such a detestable proceeding, she immediately dispatched an
army into Thessaly. Epaminondas happening at that time to lie under the
displeasure of his countrymen, the command of this expedition was given to some
person of very little fame, and incapable of so great a trust. Epaminondas,
actuated friendship and patriotism, entered the army as a private soldier.

Alexander conveyed Polopidas to Pheroe -- he exhibited him as a show to all
persons who, led by curiosity, came to gaze upon the man whose exploits had
rendered him so famous, and who deprived Sparta of the command of Greece.

The tyrant hoped, by this degrading circumstance, his pride would be humbled,
and his courage abated. But the heroic soul of the Theban remained firm -- His
humanity revolted at the cruel ties which he beheld exercised upon the unhappy
Phereans -- He consoled them by affectionate language, and by informing them,
that it would not be long before the tyrant would meet with a punishment
adequate to his crimes. He informed Alexander himself, in threatening language,
of his dreadful cruelties on his innocent subjects, and that, as soon as he was
released by his countrymen from consinement, he would punish him severely, not
only for his perfidy to him, but for his other vices; and that it would be more
wise in him to put to death a person who, when freed, he dreaded the power of
his vengeance, than persons who never did him any harm, and who, in every
instance, were obedient to his will.

The tyrant, amazed at his magnanimity and greatness of soul, asked him why he
was so desirous to die? -- Rollin.
The illustrious prisoner replied, "It is that thou may perish the sooner,
by being still more detestable to the gods and men."

Alexander, after this, awed by the heroism of Pelopidas, committed him to
close confinement, and gave orders, that no person, under penalty of death,
should approach near his dungeon, or attempt to speak with him.

Thebe, the wife of Alexander, and daughter of Jason, the predecessor of the
present tyrant, desirous to see the warrior, whose name had resounded
throughout the world, and who had been so much celebrated for his external
beauty, implored the permission of her husband that she might be admitted into
the company of the Theban captive. Thebe, who was extremely handsome, and very
much beloved by the tyrant, after many eager entreaties, obtained at length her
desire.

She found Pelopidas sitting in a melancholy posture, in a retired part of his
prison; he was dressed in the habit of sorrow and distress; his beard was
neglected, his hair uncombed and dishevelled; but still the hero shone through
this mean disguise; distress had not yet conquered the aspect of dignity. When
she found him in this situation, she was unable to refrain from tears -- "Ah!
unfortunate Pelopidas (said she) how I lament your poor wife!" He replied, "And
I you, who, being at liberty, can endure a tyrant so cruel and unjust as
Alexander." Plutarch^^.


These words made great impression on her mind, for she hated, as well as
dreaded, her husband -- Repeating often her visits to the prison of Pelopidas,
and conversing concerning Alexander's actions, her aversion and abhorrence of
him daily increased.

The Theban generals who entered Thessaly with an army to revenge the seizure
of Pelopidas, performed no actions of any importance, and finally were obliged,
through their incapacity, to abandon the country, and leave Pelopidas in his
former state of confinement.

The tyrant pursued them in their retreat, killed numbers of the troops, and
brought shame and disgrace on the Theban arms..

The whole army at one time would have suffered a total defeat, had not the
soldiers beseeched Epaminondas, who served as a private man, to receive the
command, and to endeavor to prevent the ruin of the army. This he accepted,
and, at the head of the cavalry and light armed troops, placed himself in the
rear, where, by his skill and prudence, he completed the retreat, and saved the
Boetians from destruction.

The generals, when they returned home, were fined each ten thousand drachmas,
which is about 225l. sterling. Rollins.


The Thebans now, regretting that they had not appointed Epaminondas to the
command formerly, substituted him in their place.

This great man, actuated by public good, forgave their former neglect, and
received the ^ffice.

The name of Epaminondas struck the tyrant with terror, and inspired his
enemies with joy, who hoped now to behold an end to his cruelties and
oppression. But, preferring the safety of his friend to his reputation,
Epaminondas did not prosecute the war with his usual vigor and rapidity, for he
was apprehensive, that the tyrant, when driven to despair, would pour his
vengeance upon Pelopidas; he chose rather to hover about him, and terrify him
into his designs.

This he soon accomplished -- Alexander dispatched to him persons to apologize
for his insults, and to offer his alliance to the Thebans. Epaminondas refused
either peace or an alliance to so impious a wretch -- He only granted him a
truce for thirty days, and, after having rescued Pelopidas and Ismenias from
their confinement, returned victorious to his native home.

Thessaly had enjoyed but a short repose, before the tyrant of Pheroe, unable
to change his natural disposition, again invaded their territories, and deluged
their fields with blood. He entirely desolated several cities, and placed
strong garrisons in Pthia, Achoe, and Magnesia. Deputies were immediately
dispatched from this unhappy country, imploring the assistance of a few Theban
troops, and that Pelopidas might be their commander. Thebes granted their
requests.

On the day of the departure of Pelopidas, the sun, which had shone with
uncommon luster and magnificence on the morning of the same day, became at noon
totally eclipsed, and wrapped Thebes in its gloom and awful darkness!

Dread and consternation damped the bosoms of almost every Theban. Pelopidas
knew that this appearance in the Heavens flowed from a natural cause -- But,
unwilling to lead on those to battle, who looked upon the darkness which spread
over the plains, as the presage of calamity and woe, and who were entirely
dispirited by the imaginary terrors of superstition: He, therefore, departed,
contrary to the will of the soothsayers, with the Thessalians, taking with him
only three hundred Thebans -- Being joined by a few troops of Thessaly, and
their allies, he encamped near the city of Pharsalus, at the foot of the
mountains of Cynoscephaloe.

Alexander, conscious of the smallness of his force, approached against him
with an army consisting of more than twenty thousand men, challenging him to
battle; nor did the valiant Theban refuse! but drew out his little band to meet
him. The action commenced with the cavalry, which proved victorious to the
Thebans; but Alexander, having obtained the most advantageous ground, charged
with great fury the Thessalian infantry. Pelopidas, when he perceived this,
immediately recalled his ^orse, and, ordering them to attack the enemy's
infantry, he snatched his buckler, and ran to that part where the engagement
was the warmest, animating his soldiers by his voice and actions. The Thebans
and Thessalians, roused by the example of their beloved general, made every
exertion possible for so small a force; the infantry of the enemy gradually
gave way. Pelopidas darted his eye, beaming terror through their retiring
bands, in search of the tyrant, who had formerly treated him with so much
indignity. When he perceived him on the right wing, endeavoring to rally his
soldiers, the prudence of the general forsook him; he neglected the care of his
life, the orders necessary for the battle, and gave his whole soul up to
revenge: He rushed impetuously forward, raising aloud his voice, and daring his
adversary to single combat -- The coward tyrant feared his dreadful presence,
and shrunk behind his troops -- These received the enraged warrior with a
shower of javelins and spears -- The battalion stood firm for a considerable
time; but Pelopidas drove before him the first ranks, strewing the ground with
many bleeding victims of his rage: none daring to approach him, he stood alone
the victor of the field.

The dastardly Phareans, at a distance, showered on him their javelins and
spears, until at length, pierced in the breast and on the arms, the imprudent
hero fell.

His troops, when they perceived his alarming situation, poured furiously on to
his assistance; but they arrived too late, they found their general dead.

They did not now give way to grief, but devoted themselves entirely to
resentment; they desperately charged the retreating enemy, routed them, and
covered the plain with the numbers of the slain; more than three thousand of
the tyrant's troops fell in this engagement.

This action of Pelopidas has been much condemned by some eminent historians
very justly, and we would in vain plead his youth, his resentment, and natural
aversion to tyranny, as excuses sufficient for his rashness. No general was
ever more sincerely lamented; instead of shouts of victory! a solemn stillness
spread the dreary plain; instead of the loud and joyous blasts of the trumpet!
the voice of sorrow was feebly heard in plaintive murmurs; instead of smiles of
exultation! the deepest glooms of affliction sat drooping on each warrior's
countenance.

As his army marched with his body in procession to Thebes, the magistrates,
priests, and people of all classes flocked from every city they passed, and
joined the procession, carrying crowns, trophies, and armor of gold.

The Thessalians, in whose service he had been slain, deeply sensible of their
obligations to him, and shedding tears of genuine regret over his fate,
requested from the Thebans the honor of his burial -- This mark of affection
they could not deny -- The funeral of Pelopidas was celebrated with
magnificence and woe -- The tears of two countries were shed in fond
remembrance over his tomb -- the one of which he raised from slavery to the
empire of Greece, and the other he protected from the ravages and cruelties of
the tyrant of Pheroe.

Thebes was not content with only lamenting the death of Pelopidas, for the
immediately sent an army against Alexander, which stripped him of his conquests
in Thessaly, and subjected him to the Theban power. Shortly after this, he was
murdered in his bed by Thebe his wife, and her brothers.

The Thebans, deprived of one of their supporters, still retained their
preeminence, and flourished under the conduct of Epaminondas. At that time
almost all Greece was involved in war and confusion.

The people of Tegea sent a messenger to Thebes, imploring their assistance
against the Mantineans; the Mantineans, on their side, called for the aid of
the Athenians and Spartans. Rollin.


The former gave the sole command of the war to Epaminondas. He marched with
his troops into Arcadia, and encamped at Tegea. While he remained there, he was
informed, that Agesilaus, at the head of his army, had set out from Sparta with
a design of meeting him. Upon this he formed a plan of taking Sparta herself by
surprise -- In the night, unknown to the Mantineans, he marched for Sparta, by
a different road from that which Agesilaus had taken. His enterprising spirit
would have met with success, and the city would have fallen into his hands, had
not a Cretan, by some secret means, become acquainted with the intention, and,
with amazing celerity, arrived time sufficient at Agesilaus's headquarters to
acquaint him with the danger of Sparta.

The king instantly dispatched a courier to Sparta, and, by a hasty march,
arrived there in a short time himself.

The Thebans, soon after his arrival, were perceived crossing the Eurotas.
Epaminondas, when he had drawn his men up on the other shore, saw that his
design had been discovered; but, having proceeded thus far, he thought it a
disgrace to retire without making any attempt, or performing some action after
his tiresome march. He divided his army into several squadrons, and made
furious attacks upon the city; he Rollin.
penetrated as far as the public place, and seized that division which lay on
the bank of the river Eurotas. Agefilaus, and his son Archidamus, fought with
astonishing talour -- They fought with the fury of despair -- They saw that the
fate of Sparta, once the glory of Greece, depended upon these exertions --
Archidamus, outstripping the old age of his father, shone in this battle with
extraordinary glory! It was to him that Sparta was indebted for her
preservation -- With a band of Spartan youths, he rushed forward against the
enemy, and drove before him all whom he attacked.

The Theban chief, having failed of his design, suspecting that the assistance
of the Arcadians would every minute arrive at Sparta, and knowing that he had
not a sufficient force to stand against such numbers, returned to Tegea, having
performed what never general did before.

The troops of the enemy, consisting of Spartans, Lacedaemonians, Athenians, and
allies, soon after marched in pursuit of him.

Epaminondas regretted that his troops were to be brought so soon to action,
after having undergone so much fatigue -- But, considering the disgrace and
inconvenience of a retreat, he ordered his army to prepare for battle.

In all the civil wars of Greece, the Greeks had never before fought with such
numerous armies. Upon the right wing of the Lacedaemonians were the Mantineans,
Arcadians, and Lacedaemonians -- the center was composed of the E^eans and
Acheans, the weakest of their troops -- the Athenians alone formed the left
wing.

Epaminondas ranged the Thebans and the Arcadians of Tegea on the left -- upon
the right the Argives, and his other allies in the center: The cavalry of each
were posted before the wings -- He marched in the same order in which he
intended to fight, that he might not loose time in the disposition of his army,
when he came up with the enemy -- He marched slowly along upon the hills, with
his circuit extended, as if he did, not intend to fight that day -- When he
arrived to a certain part of the mountain, he commanded his men to halt, and
lay down their arms, pretending that he intended to encamp there -- The enemy,
who wondered at his curious movements, now thought it evident that he had laid
aside all intentions of coming to an engagement that day -- they abandoned
their ranks and arms, dispersed themselves about the field, and banished all
thoughts of battle for that time..

Epaminondas seized this opportunity, so favorable to his design -- he
suddenly, by wheeling to the right, changed his column into a line of battle --
his troops became immediately formed in the order which he meant to fight --
His left wing consisted of the flower of his army, which he formed as at
Leuctra, in the shape of a wedge -- The center and right wing were composed of
troops in whom he placed but little confidence -- He ordered these to move very
slow, and to make a halt before they came up with the enemy, so that he might
first attack the enemy before these engaged. Rollin.


The Lacedaemonians were amazed when they saw the Thebans thus advancing
terrible against them -- they instantly snatched their arms, bridled their
horses, and flew to their ranks.

The Theban horse, ordered by their commander, attacked those of the
Lacedemonian, and obliged them, after a fierce engagement, to seek shelter
behind the infantry.

Epaminondas, pursuing close this advantage, attacked with vigor the Spartan
phalanx -- No troops ever fought on each side with more desperate bravery --
they soon broke the spears with which they first contended, and grasped with
fury the more durable sword -- A dreadful slaughter continued on both sides for
a long space of time.

Epaminondas thought it his duty to obtain the victory by making an
extraordinary effort in person -- He put himself at the head of a small band of
dauntless Thebans, and made a bold charge upon the enemy, in that part where
they were most successful -- He cut to pieces the first ranks, and dangerously
wounded their general: His band,. animated by his example, drove all before
them, and penetrated the dreadful phalanx -- Dismayed by the appearance of
Epaminondas in so furious a manner, the Lacedaemonians gave ground -- The whole
Theban army saw the exploits of their general, and grew more desperate in their
exertions -- The enemy retreated before them with great slaughter: -- The
god-like Theban did not live to enjoy his victory so gloriously obtained --
Some of the most resolute Spartans, feeing, as they fled, his great ardour in
the pursuit, suddenly rallied, and made a stand -- they let fly a shower of
javelins, aimed with great skill at Epaminondas -- whilst he endeavored to
avoid those, and still, with undaunted heroism, spursued his victory,
Callicrates, a young Spartan, with a javelin pierced him mortally in the
breast; the wood of the weapon snapped, and the iron continued buried in the
wound -- he fell upon the ground in excrutiating tortures. The enemy, informed
of this circumstance, returned again to the engagement, and fought with great
courage to obtain the body of Epaminondas -- The Thebans, like tigers, defended
their beloved hero, routed their foes, and bore him from the bloody field --
With him retired the soldiers' vigor and courage; they felt no desire to pursue
their glorious victory, since bereft of their leader, whom they supposed no
more. The cavalry, who had defeated the enemy's horse with much slaughter,
returned sorrowful and dejected from the pursuit, as if they had suffered a
defeat. In the right wing the Athenian cavalry, finding themselves not pursued,
after being repulsed, rallied themselves again, and, instead of going to the
assistance of their foot, who were flying before the Thebans, they attacked a
detachment of the enemy, placed without the line, upon the hills which
surrounded the plain. They, in this skirmish, proved victorious; they routed
the detachment, and put it to the sword.

Rollin.
After these various advantages and slaughters, the weary soldiers of each army
ceased from fighting, and rested upon their spears -- the martial trumpets
sounded a retreat.

The Lacedaemonians and Athenians pretended that the victory was theirs, because
they had cut in pieces a detachment -- But the Thebans, with much more justice,
claimed it, since they had defeated the enemy's right wing, and remained
masters of the field -- Both sides erected trophies, and refused to ask
permission of the other to inter the dead; for this, with the ancients, was the
acknowledgement of a defeat -- The Lacedaemonians, however, finding their claims
feeble and fruitless, sent first to demand this degrading occupation.

Epaminondas had been carried into his (...). After the battle, all his
officers, and the most distinguished Thebans, flocked around him -- The
surgeons, after having examined his wound, declared, that it was impossible for
him to survive after the weapon was extracted.

These words threw a solemn gloom over the feelings of every warrior present --
"Tears streamed from every eye."

The dying chief expressed great (...) about his arms, fearing that they (...)
fell into the enemy's hands -- (...) generals presented his (...) upon it a
look of (...) joy -- When he was (...) were victorious, (...) peace, for I
leave my (...)."

Some of his (...) that he should die (...) children to inherit his (...) --
"You mistake," said he, (...) a smile of death, "I leave behind me two
beautiful daughters, the battles of Leuctra and Mantinea." Rollin.


These were the last words that Epaminondas spoke; he expired while the surgeon
was extracting the iron from his breast.

Thus died this glorious Theban -- If we consider all his qualities, we (...)
with justice pronounce him one of the greatest (...) that ever existed; he
possessed the most brilliant and amiable qualities of human nature; he was a
philosopher and a hero; neither him nor Pelopidas were ever conquered in
battle, or defeated in eloquence. By their wisdom and martial qualities, the
little state of Thebes rose to be empress of Greece; but after their deaths,
calling in vain for her chiefs, she suddenly fell from her sublimity and
grandeur.

ERRATA.
Page 12, line 15, for raven's, read ravens. 13, 1, Cynthia, midnight. 35, 18,
breeks, brogues. 88, 3, women, men. 92, 9, gloom, gloomy. 101, 22, from them,
to be wholly left out. 101, 23, for poetry, read music. 102, 21, call, cull.
130, 10, lot, cot. 133, 7, plodding, ploding. 134, 16, cyress. cypress. 138,
23, presents, prevents. 160, 8, heaver, hearer. 162, 13, taste, fate. 221, 6,
the, flee. 231, 17, Sturmon, Strumon. 239, 12, and to be left out. 245, 12, for
flowing, read flowery. read flowery. 254, 6, leads, bends. 254, 7, bends,
leads. 358, 6, shadow's, shadows.


