THE ECHO: OR, A SATIRICAL POEM ON THE VIRTUOUS TEN, AND Other Celebrated
Characters: TO WHICH IS ADDED, A New SONG on the Treaty.

PRINTED AT HARTFORD [CONNECTICUT.] 1795.

THE ECHO. [AUTHENTIC.]
Philadelphia, June 29, 1795. SIR,
I HAVE seen in your paper of this date an abstract of the Treaty between the
United States and Great Britain, which, though not perfectly correct is nearly
so.

As this pablication will probably excite a newspaper discussion, it is of
importance that the people should possess a full and accurate knowledge of the
subject to which their attention may be drawn, and which I think has already
been improperly withheld from them. Lest therefore, the Treaty should be
presumed more favorable, or be represented to be less so than it really is, I
send you herewith a genuine copy, which you may correct your statement by, or
make such other use of as you please, for the purpose of giving to the citizens
of America full information respecting this momentous business.

I am, sir, your obedient servant, Stes. Thon. MASON. [One of the Senators from
Virginia.]

To B. F. Bache, Editor of the Aurora.
THOU great descendant of that wondrous man,
Whose genius wild through all creation ran --
That man who walked the world of Science over,
From ink and types to where the thunders roar --
To thee, friend Bache, these lines I now address,
Prepared on purpose for thy hallowed press.
I Have picked thee out because I highly prize,
Thy grandfire's memory, and thy knack at lies,
That good old man behind him left a name,
Unmatched in luster on the rolls of fame --
A love of science -- and a love of fun --
Witness our lightning-rods and many a hopeful son.
Among those sons perhaps not one remains
More worthy Franklin's accidental Otherwise called come-by-chances.
pains,
Than thee, Ben. Franklin Bache -- to faction's soul,
Dear as the streams which through life's channels roll.
In thy blessed paper, which like clouds of night,
Shuts in the darkness, and shuts out the light,
I Have seen an abstract of the treaty dire,
Designed to light the democratic fire.
As that has had full time to work its way,
And call the public spirit into play,
Before their passions have a chance to flag,
I Will let the cat jump out the senate bag.
For ten long days my soul has been confined,
My tho'ts all shackled, chained my freeborn mind,
No damned black negro ever was closer pent,
Nor strained new cider harder for a vent.
It Is true that all the time the senate sat,
I did not figure greatly in debate;
Indeed I did not once attempt to speak;
But my heart's sound, although my head is weak --
And yet, in this respect I Am not alone,
Eight other tongues were silent as my own,
Save once when Johnny Langdon silence broke,
And for the space of half a minute spoke;
But finding out that he had started wrong,
He sealed thenceforward his uneasy tongue;
On Burr alone our hopes and wishes lay,
Burr was our spokesman, counselor, and stay;
In him we trusted for the last relief,
In times of trouble, and in hours of grief.
In short you will be astonished when you know,
How far our party first and last would go --
Old Robinson, borne down with faction's care,
As usual, As a proof that this Senator relies generally upon divine
assistance, the following story is related of him. One of his brother Senators,
whose political tenets differed widely from Mr. Robinson's, taxed him with
having propagated a story about him which injured his character. The old man
found himself in difficulty; and knew no better way to get out than to evade
the conversation. Accordingly, he told the gentleman, that it had given him
great pain that they should differ in sentiment -- that in consequence of that
pain, he had often prayed to heaven, that if he was wrong, he might be led to
think like the gentleman -- or if the gentleman was wrong, that he might be led
to think like Mr. Robinson -- for he could not bear to think differently from
such a sensible man, even if that man was wrong in his opinions. --
tried to help himself by prayer;
But finding heaven had turned a deafen'd ear,
No deigned to answer nor appeared to hear,
As ne plus ultra turned to Burr his course,
And gained relief from that more handy source.
But though we could not reason quite so strong,
Discuss so ably and declaim so long,
Yet we'll convince them on the other side,
That our free tongues no longer shall be tied;
No haughty senate by its tyrant laws,
Shall longer lock our democratic jaws.
Perish their secrets! -- laws were made for fools --
True democrats despise the senate and their rules.
In pure republics secrets never exist,
Knowledge, like wind, should blow wherever it list,
No man can claim a right exempt to know,
Science and truth in common streams should flow,
Where each at will his parched bill may dip,
And as occasion calls enjoy a sip.
Thus borne away a drop by every hand,
Knowledge will bless each corner of the land.
Hard very hard would be the poor man's lot,
If every one might hoard up all he would got,
And thus establish over these happy plains,
A dreadful aristocracy of brains,
From which no common man his 'rights' may draw,
Without transgressing some despotic law.
We Are all determined, WE, 'the virtuous TEN,'
The major part of thirty common men.
For by the rules of democratic lore,
Twenty is less than ten by three or four -- The common principle in
Representative governments, "that the majority shall decide," seems to have a
singular construction among our democrats. In common cases one more than half
is a majority. In the case of establishing Treaties, the Constitution requires
two thirds. Still these patriotic Democrats would persuade us that we ought to
obey one third, let two thirds say what they may. It is this kind of majority
that the Democrats in the United States compose. However what they want in
numbers they say they have in merit.

I say, that we are determined, one and all,
That JAY'S vile treaty to the ground shall fall.
The subject we expect will raise a heat,
In every town where clubs and traitors meet.
From thence extend itself from shore to shore,
'Till peace and government exist no more.
For well the truths of sage experience show,
That Faction's plants in towns and cities grow;
For there collect the refuse of mankind,
Prepared for treasons, and for plots designed.
There every traitor hides his forfeit head,
There finds protectors, and there looks for aid,
There noisy demagogues their standards raise,
Sedition's sparks there kindle to a blaze.
O thou, my native land! by heaven designed;
As the last refuge for the human kind --
The land, where Freedom builds her blessed abode,
Where lavish Nature all her blessings strewn,
Where Health and Plenty hand in hand appear,
And Pleasure wantons through the varied year --
Often thy horizon black'ning storms over cast,
And bend thine honors to the sweeping blast;
To civic feast, dark clubs, and riots fell,
The plot of traitors, and the lies of hell;
To Bradford, JARVIS, Madison and Giles,
Old Adam's weakness, and old Clinton's wiles.
But to return -- examine all this TEN,
And see if they don't form a set of men,
On whom their country's happiness may rest,
Safe as a secret in a gossip's breast.
First General Jackson -- he is a fiery blade,
By nature honest -- but so so by trade.
His eyesight reaching only to his nose,
He thinks the world beyond is filled with woes,
And thus beclouded mid a flood of light,
Each object startles, empty sounds affright;
While by this maxim he has acted long --
"What I cannot see through certainly is wrong."
Pierce Butler next, a man of sterling worth,
Because he justly claims a noble birth; It is said to be a fact that this
doughty Republican, is descended from the Family of the duke of Ormond.

Doubtless great Ormand's duke foresaw in thee,
The heir of freedom and equality.
North Carolina counts her number TWO,
Who each can lift the hand, and make a show.
Farther than this, they do as they are bid,
And follow wheresoe'er their masters lead.
Ah, Thomson Mason! long thy fame shall rise,
With democratic incense to the skies,
Long shall the world admire thy manly soul,
Which scorned the haughty Senate's base control,
Came boldly forward with thy weightyn ame,
And gave the treaty up for public game,
Expecting doubtless that thy praise would sound,
When the full mug, and "patriot toast" This was a very natural calculation. A
man who had not decency sufficient to comply with an injunction of such a
respectable body of men as the Senate of the United States, ought to expect to
be toasted by drunken Democrats.
went round,
But sir remember, though the sons of rout,
When drunk, may push thy name with glee about,
Though faction's slave, Ben. Austin. lifts the hand,
And hails thee savior of the sinking land;
Yet honest men with indignation fraught,
Will search thy bosom to the inmost though it,
And on thy brow will fix a deeper stain,
Than tinged the murderous front of guilty Cain.
Thy Colleague is a decent sort of man,
But tinctured with the Jacobinic plan;
And thinks that every thing the Frenchmen do,
No matter what -- we ought to do so too.
Kentucky sends John Brown, a peaceful man,
A likely chieftain of a mountain clan.
More fit by far, with fierce maurauding force,
To scour the Mississippi's lengthened course,
To drive the Spaniards, from their native soil, My readers will doubtless
recollect that a few years ago a certain gentleman was planning an expedition
down the Mississippi, for the virtuous purpose of driving off the Spaniards,
and taking possession of their country.

Feast on their tears, and fatten on their spoil.
Cut Indian's throats, their huts and fields destroy,
And riot in the waste of human joy;
Than to sit down and form a foolish plan,
To guard the peace and happiness of man.
Next in the train the courtly Burr is seen,
With piercing look, and ever varying mein;
Though small his stature, yet his well known name,
Shines with full splendour on the rolls of fame;
Go search the records of intrigue, and find
To what debasement sins the human mind;
How far it is possible for man to go,
Where interest sways, and passions urge the blow,
While pride and pleasure, haughtiness and scorn,
And mad ambition in his bosom burn. For the remainder of this character see
Aristocracy an epic poem, lately published.

Next from New Hampshire, filled with burning fire
To climb ambition's steep a little higher,
See Johnny Langdon, searching every side,
Doubtful with which it is safest to abide.
At length our southern brethren clearly saw,
His ballast was not proof against a flaw;
Accordingly they told him how to steer,
Which point his course to lay, and when to veer,
Told him the story of the French receipt, A certain great man boasts much of
the sacrifices he made during the war. This probably alludes to one of them. It
may have been the case that he made many more such, as he proved a very wealthy
man at the close of the war.

(A kind of coufin to a common cheat,)
But yet, if he possessed sufficient skill,
To shift and tack to suit their varying will,
They to reward him for his glorious race,
Would try to vote him in to fill John Adams' place.
Poor doting Moses! wherefore do thou stray?
Is the good, harder than the evil way?
Or can thy stupid undiscerning head,
Alone by Faction, and her sons be led? It is a common fact, that persons
naturally possessed of great mental weakness, and yet not absolute idiots, are
exceedingly prone to mischief.

Thou week old man! it is little short of crime,
On thee to waste the smallest space of time.
These are the virtuous, patriotic TEN,
The major part of thirty common men.
Believe me, sir, I Have not the smallest doubt,
That when this publication shall come out,
Our countrymen will in a ferment glow,
And wage dire war wherever newspapers go.
Long has the Treaty lurked beneath the shade,
And long the work of mischif been delayed;
But, as such game don't offer every day,
I Will throw it out and see the bull dogs play.
Full well I I see how democrats will meet,
And drink seditious toasts at every treat,
Roar out to Liberty to save the Land,
And damn a Treaty they don't understand.
Full well I see how every mother's son,
In wild disorder through New York will run,
While hosts of carmen, tinkers, sweepers, bawl,
Damnation seize the Treaty, Jay, and all.
With joy I see great Brockholst lead the van,
That honest, peaceful, modest, humble man --
A man whom every Democrat adores,
Because he feeds them from his scanty stores,
Stores never swelled by speculations vile,
But gathered slowly by the hand of Toil.
O Brockholst Livingston, thou wondrous man!
Sure Nature formed thee on her wisest plan!
When opportunity presents, thy mind
Never lingers Opportunity behind.
Thou'st learned the art to make all objects bend,
To help thee forward toward thy favorite end;
And when that end is good -- for instance, GAIN --
All means are just which may that end attain --
I mean to cheat, or break, to increase thy pelf,
And now and then perchance to stab thyself; If this allusion shall perplex any
person, for an explanation, let him trace out a quarrel which happened some
years ago in New York, between a certain Lawyer (now a great Democrat) and a
Mr. Smith, during which the former thought proper to fall down in the street
one night, and say he was assassinated; but in the end it was strongly
suspected he had wounded himself, in order to save a caning; and injure the
character of his antagonist.

In short, to run the Livingstonian round,
Where every trick of knavery is found.
Close at his heels, trots cousin Peter R.!
And Maturine, a younger, feebler star!
Two hopeful brothers of a hopeful breed,
Two thrifty plants of old approved seed,
Who long have tried by arts and measures base,
To lift from filth the remnant of their race --
A race so sunk, by habit so depraved,
So long by vice and infamy enslaved,
So weak, so haughty, pompous, proud, and mean,
Indeed so black, so shameful and obscene, As one might reasonably expect from
this character, these people are true Democrats.

That naught but strength Omnipotent can save
Their name, deep sinking in Oblivion's wave.
To these, succeed a patriotic train
Of Whigs, scarce rescued from their brethren slain;
Old Whigs of seventy-six, whom Fate decreed --
Not for the cause of Liberty to bleed --
Whigs, not employed by Freedom to withstand
The force of Britain in this desperate land --
But IRISH WHIGS, accomplished in the art,
To take of others property a part,
Who nightly risqu'd the stretching of the neck,
To rob a hen-roost, or a pocket pick.
Perchance three quarters of this patriot band,
Within three months first saw this 'sinking land,'
Sold for their passage, from the gallows saved,
That this vile Country need not be enslaved;
But still a Club to Livingstons allied As a proof of the facts stated in this
passage, the following story is related. A party of these Whigs of 1776 (which
had just arrived from Ireland) assisted Mr. Peter R. Livingston at the late
town-meeting in New York, in burning the Treaty. Within a few days after this
patriotic transaction, fourteen of them were taken up, and confined in New York
goal for theft and burglary. How could master Peter find out these sons of
Liberty and Equality so soon, unless by the force of SYMPATHY?

By every string that nature ever tied.
Far to the south, where on her oozy bed,
Like some sick sea-nymph Charleston bows her head,
Her languid sons collect in solemn state,
To join their sages in the grand debate.
There like the vision in the sacred Book,
Old Gadsdon's dry-bones in a whirlwind shook,
But over the rest chief justice Rutledge stands,
Stamps with his feet, and boxes with his hands,
And 'mid the applauses of the gathered crowd,
Shows what a Judge can do by bawling loud,
That zeal intemperate helps a desperate cause,
And Passion much adorns a Minister of laws.
Thou learned Judge, whose eloquence can move
Tag, Rag, and Bobtail loudly to approve,
What pirate, that may hear thee talk of war,
Would fear to stand a prisoner at thy bar,
Assured that sympathy so strong as thine,
Would save him harmless from the hempen line?
But let us hear, sir, what you have to say
Against the Treaty -- alias, Mr. Jay.
"I though it when Mr. Jay was sent to treat,
That Britain was to lose and we to get*
Instead of which, it seems, that Mr. Jay
Basely agrees to meet them half the way.
How foolish! how ridiculous a plan,
To take an inch, when he might had a span!
He ought at least to have made them promise well,
Even if he knew they never would fulfill.
This is the rule I practice every day,
I often promise, but I seldom pay;
A truth my friends will all believe, who know
How cheap my Bonds in daily market go. What, Judge, have they got below the
old price of ten shillings in the pound?

If Mr. Jay had bluster'd round a while,
And swore he would have, at least, the British Isle,
His Majesty, no doubt, with Cap in hand,
To appease our wrath would give us up the land.
For now Great Britain has so aged grown,
That she has hardly strength to stand alone,
And had we only seized her by the throat,
She would have snuffled like a strangled shoat,
I Am satisfied our Envoy did not know
What he was sent for, what he had to do;
He has not shown a common school-boy's skill,
Or else he would had it SHALL instead of "WILL."
How scandalous a cession! how absurd!
I Would sooner lost the Treaty, than the Word.
We'd better much have fought a year or two,
Than yielded up a word that was not due.
I never liked a Treaty, nor its end --
These "Laws Supreme" our stubborn necks may bend;
I see no reason why they should exist,
Let laws be settled by the force of fist;
Then unrestrained, our Pirates may at ease,
In countless swarms securely scour the seas,
On plunder bent, with force resistless go,
And hurl destruction upon friend and foe,
But if this Treaty should be ratified,
Snug in our ports our privateers must ride,
And spite of all Democracy can say,
Instead of plundering, we shall have to pay.
By Heaven! I Would sooner draw my trusty knife,
And take from Washington his useless life,
(Although I love him so, I make no doubt,
That I should cry my eyesight almost out)
Or, in the common Carolina phrase,
I Would rather take the daylight This undoubtedly meens Gouging according to law,
or in a Judge-like manner.
from his face,
Than that his potent, all-commanding hand,
Should seal destruction to Sedition's Band."
But chief on Boston's It may be necessary for the Echo to mention, that in
this general expression, he does not mean to include the great body of the
wealthy, respectable, and orderly inhabitants of the town of Boston. He is no
stranger to their character, and reveres them for their firmness in support of
the government of their country, and their unparalleled exertions to discomfit
those sons of sedition and anarchy -- the Jacobins, or Democrats.
sons our hopes rely,
There Expectation turns her anxious eye;
There Faction hatches first her glorious brood,
There Riot finds perpetual stores of food,
There wild disorder all her poison sheds,
There Insurrection lifts her hundred heads,
From whence to southern climes the spirit flows,
And as it travels hot, and hotter grows.
Do thou Ben Bache the Treaty bear along,
Post-haste to show it to the Boston throng --
Drive through Connecticut with swiftest speed, It is said, that this great
Printer hired a conveyance to carry him through a part of this State on Sunday,
in order that he might outstrip the stage, and have a chance to sell his
treaties* or else for fear of catching Aristocracy.

Stop not to sleep, nor scarcely stop to feed,
For Democrats find sure destruction there,
As quick as toads and snakes in Irish air --
And bid (though late he is rather under par)
Great Jarvis wage again the wordy war,
Again attempt with Federal strength to cope,
And not forget, that while there is life, there is hope, Surely this maxim must
have often occurred to the political Doctor, in the course of his extensive
practice; at least one would think so from his holding out in some political
cases to prescribe, even when the coffin of his patient was making.

Bid him pursue Sedition's beaten way,
Town-meetings lead both knaves and fools astray.
Now see the Demagogue in haste advance,
Sieze his broad shield, and shake his trusty lance,
In Faction's cause for furious fight prepare,
Unfurl her flag, her bloody standard bear.
See at his nod, his spaniel, Adams, It is said, that this patriotic printer
opens his mouth for Doctor Jarvis to spit in. That he had a principal hand in
collecting the Boston town-meeting, is an undoubted fact; and might easily have
been guessed by their mode of proceeding.
run,
"Fire! fire!" he cries, "the world is all undone!
"The awful day of judgment's near at hand!
"Hell's flames already kindle in the land!
"Help! help! great goddess! It is well known by every body, that this fellow
never prays, except to the goddess of Faction.
stretch thy arm to save!
"Thy sons, thy cause, sink downward to the grave!"
Now wretched Type runs raving round the streets,
Accosting every Democrat he meets --
'Call a Town-meeting! call! for God's sake call!
'Or soon our 'self-created Club' shall fall,
'Soon shall disgrace our every step attend,
'And all our prospects in confusion end.'
The day arrives, a day overcast with gloom,
'Big with the fate of Cato and of Rome.'
From every hole, behold the shabby throng,
To Faneuil-Hall creep anxiously along --
A Club, which Treaties never knew, nor saw,
A Club, known better to the civil law;
Too poor to profit should the Treaty stand,
Too poor to lose, if Ruin whelms the land;
But proper tools for Jarvis to employ,
Fit tools to riot, pillage, and destroy.
Now loud and clamorous the debate begins --
Jarvis his thread of tropes and figures spins;
And often pauses, often calls aloud,
To every member of the gaping crowd,
To show him if the Treaty should go down,
Why Faction's hopes were not forever flown.
To prove that he responds faithfully, the Echo has here taken the first person.
'And here my friends, I solemnly declare.
(And by your looks I shall not make you stare)
It Is not John Jay that calls your speaker here,
It Is not against the treaty I appear --
To read it through I never have taken pains,
And scarcely know a sentence it contains --
But Government -- it is Government I dread,
Which hangs like Sinai over the pilgrim's head. See Bunyan.

The time is come when Jacobins must make
Their last exertions for Sedition's sake,
When Federal measures, Federal men must fall,
Or Ruin seize ourselves, our plans and all.
This Treaty cuts us off from every chance
Of fighting Britain, and of helping France,
Of course, no hope of war will then remain,
And we must be content with peace again.
Now who would wish to settle down in peace,
To see his wealth, and happiness increase?
And yet, so long as government shall stand,
It Will spread its terrors over this dastard land,
And when in wisdom IT shall choose to say,
We democrats must tremble and obey.
A dismal proof of this we lately saw,
When Faction yielded, and when triumphed Law;
When boldly ranged along Rebellion's field,
Our Whisky-brethren raised the daring shield,
While all our Clubs with expectation viewed,
The hopeful prospect of a time of blood;
When low in dust our Government should lie,
And peace and safety from our country fly --
When true French Freedom, from the abys of hell,
On misery bent, and ravening fierce to kill,
Armed with her bloody knife and flaming brand,
Should roll her car tremendous over the land.
But soon appeared great Freedom's awful form --
Still grew the thunder, disappeared the storm,
Back shrunk Rebellion from her flashing sight,
And all our prospects vanished into night.
Now I Am for living free, entirely free,
God never made a man to govern me;
And hence this inference I most clearly draw --
That we may prostrate government and law.
And let us now the glorious work begin,
To flinch is cowardice, to doubt is sin.
All who attempt the Treaty to uphold,
We'll swear are traitors, bought by British gold.
One of that sort just now got up, and said,
He should be glad to hear the treaty read;
He wished delay -- delays must not be had,
I Have never read it, but I swear it is bad;
If it goes down, I Will bet my ears and eyes,
'It will the people all unpop'larize;' The Doctor said this "In a manner that
would have done honor to a Cicero," says his printer, Mr. Adams. Pray Mr.
Adams, who ever told you any thing about Cicero? Why did you not say, which
would have done honor to a Joseph Blake, Jun. the classical young orator who
seconded the Doctor at the town-meeting, in routing poor Mr. Hall. You might
then have appealed for proof to an Oration he spoke a few years ago, on the 4th
of July, in which he says that this Continent is very happily situated, being
"barricaded on one side by vast regions of soil." Be so good Mr. Blake, before
you decide against the Treaty, as to tell us which side of this Continent is
barricaded by vast regions of soil.

Boobies may hear it read ere they decide --
I move it quickly be unratified.'
So said -- so done. With Democratic view,
They saw the direful Treaty through and through,
And though it stood unread, and unexplain'd,
They found much in it that it never contained;
The vote was passed; each blockhead raiz'd his hand,
And though it himself, no doubt, the savior of his land.
Now sage Honestus from his seat arose,
Thrice strok'd his chops, and thrice surveyed his toes,
Thrice strove his mighty project to declare --
Thrice stopped to see if parson G. was there.
For well he knew the satyrizing priest,
Would hang him up a scarecrow, and a jest,
If once he saw his wayward footsteps stray,
But a small distance in the factious way.
Ah timid man! thou nothing had to dread,
Among thy club appeared no honest head,
No parson G. was there thy steps to trace,
And paint the guilty terrors of thy face;
At length the struggling patriot silence broke,
And every traitor chuckled as he spoke.
"Had it not been for Thomson Mason's care,
We had been tangled in a doleful snare,
This Treaty vile would in the dark have lain,
And WE to damn it wished but wished in vain.
Thus should this mob whites, negroes, boys, and all,
Prescriptive Tenants of our Faneuil-Hall,
WE should, my friends, WE fifteen hundred men,
Been forced to yield to twice the number TEN.
But WE have acted well in Freedom's cause,
We Have shown ourselves superior to the laws,
And if the President can only see,
How well agreed, and positive we be,
Though he already may have set his name,
To Jay's eternal monument of shame,
He Will think it best, to stop the growing rout,
To dash his pen across, and blot it out.
To Mason then a vote of thanks I move,
A genuine proof of Democratic love;
And then to Mr. Bache, his worthy post,
A single dollar for his sweat and cost."
SUMMING UP.
O Washington how stands thy dauntless breast!
Do scenes like these disturb thy nightly rest?
Though Charleston mob, like lice in Egypt, swarms,
Though Rutledge rages, and though Pinckney This used to be a very virtuous man
when he was in the old Congress; I do not know how it is with him now. -- "Two
whores already in my chariot ride. Biograph. Anier Art. Pinck.
storms,
Though Bache and Mason join It is not uncommon for members of Congress from the
southward to be out of cash at the end of a session; and this was a good plan
to supply the revenue.
to print, and sell,
Though Hydrop Blair The rest of this man's name is M'Clenachan.
"the Treaty kick to hell,
Though thieves and Livingstons with patriot ire,
Commit the accursed paper to the fire,
Though JARVIS The names and character of the New York Chamber of Commerce, is
given to the public in this days Chronicle -- The Public will judge between
them, and a Rutledge, a Pinkney, a Muhlenburg, a Livingston, a Cooper, a Dawes,
a Jarvis, a Ramsey, a Gadsden, and a host of other uniform patriots who are
opposed to the Treaty. Boston Chronicle, Aug. 13, 1795. Yes, Mr. Adams, by the
aid of the ECHO, the public will be able to do it very fairly. And what do you
think will be that judgment. I can tell you. That it is very fortunate that you
have got one or two Lots, which may possibly save your Sodom. -- But, as they
are, I very much doubt whether even Beelzebub would take them, without you put
them down 13 to the dozen, as bakers do biscuit.
thundering from his murky cloud,
Sheds night and terror over the astonished crowd,
Yet, shall thy heart, so often used to share
Dangers and toils too great for man to bear,
Shrink back appalled, its firmness all resign,
When pigmies bluster, and when knaves combine?
ILLUSTRIOUS MAN! thy indignation show,
And plunge them headlong where they ought to go.
Then turn thine eye, this mighty realm survey --
See Federal Virtue bless thy glorious sway,
See infant States, beneath thy plastic hand,
Stretch in vast numbers over the boundless land,
The desert blossom, towns, and cities rise,
And Peace, and Freedom hail their kindred skies,
While all earth's empires, states, and kings, behold
Millennial scenes of happiness unfold. Since the Echo finished his Response,
he has seen the President's answer to the Selectmen of Boston, and he
felicitates them on their mavelous success. For though the Hawk-eyed Mr. Adams
has found out by reading this answer, that at the date of it, the Treaty was
not signed, yet, it is to be hoped, that there is discernment enough among so
many Selectmen, to see, that instead of the information which Mr. Adams has
found, it contains a firm dignified disdain of the clamor of a rabble, even if
it be composed of 1500 men, with Doctor Jarvis at their head; and that the Echo
understands the character of GEORGE WASHINGTON, at least as well as a Boston
Town-Meeting. There is now nothing left for you gentlemen, Jacobins, to do, but
to attack the President, swear that he is bought by British Gold, and that you
will all be damned if he is ever elected President again.

As for the Livingstons, and their Irishmen, they will have some reason to
believe, that what Mr. S. Smith has stated to them as the President's answer to
the New-Yorkers, is true, when they see the letter to the Bostonians. Otherwise
they might certainly doubt; for the signature does not afford "the best
evidence the nature of the case will admit of."



A SONG: Tune, Yanky Doodle.
BROTHER Jonathan, what're you 'bout,
What the nation ail's you?
Why with Treaty make such rout!
'Vow your reason fails, you:
CHORUS.
Yanky doodle, keep it up;
Yanky doodle, dandy,
Sure you have had a powerful cup,
'Lasses mixed with brandy.
You, if Treaty is not right,
Georgy will not sign it;
'Til't has teeth, it cannot bite,
To him then resign it.
Yanky, etc.
G -- lle, he is a st -- nking hound,
So is sh -- poke P -- tt, you,
Crowing dunghills, I Will be bound,
Braging Jay is bit, you:
Yanky, etc.
George, though at the riggling pole, The helm of a vessel.

Keeps the vessel right, you,
Treats till merchants are made whole,
Tipping Yanky-bite you:
Yanky, etc.
Treaties, they are solemn things,
Deacon Ziba told us,
But if broken once by kings,
Broke, how can they hold us!
Yanky, etc.
Treaties Britain never made yet
But she would cut and slice them
Slop's of seventy may not fit,
Yankies then can splice them.
Yanky, etc.
Mind your bread and butter, you
Quit this tarnal mouthing?
France is rising full to view,
Britain's Hag is southing.
Yanky, etc.
Let Us treat on then, get our cash,
Get the Western Posts too,
When her fleet is gone to smash,
Tickle up her hosts, you.
CHORUS.
Yanky doodle, keep it up*
Yanky doodle, dandy,
Sure you have had a powerful cup,
'Lasses mixed with brandy.
FINIS.

