THE Mystic Cottager OF CHAMOUNY: A NOVEL.

As in the hollow breast of Appenine,
Beneath the shelter of encircling hills,
A myrtle rises far from human eye,
And breathes its balmy fragrance over the wild;
So flourished blooming and unseen by all
The lovely Rosalie.
THOMSON'S SEASONS. PHILADELPHIA: Printed by W. WOODWARD, No. 36, Chestnut
Street, for T. STEPHENS, No. 60, South Second Street. 1795.

ADDRESS TO THE PUBLIC.
CONSIGNED to the benignant smile or a capricious frown of a disinterested
public, these humble pages are presented as the genuine dictates of the moment
of imagination, unbiassed by the assistance of compilation to frame their
fable, or veil its imperfections; traced by the pen of juvenility, and sacred
alone to the inspiration of compassion that excited the idea of attempting a
simple tale free from the corruption of guile, for the sole endeavor of
raising a trivial sum for the benefit of a distressed Orphan, deprived of the
blessing of sight, and thereby rendered incapable of maintaining herself,
consequently dependant on the humanity of those whom Heaven has deigned to
crown with affluence, and inspired their hearts with liberality to relieve the
child of sorrow.

Under the auspices of a generous public should this humble attempt meet a
favorable reception, the juvenile Authoress can alone impute its success to
their benevolence, and trembling at the critic's glance of deprecation,
consoles herself only with the hope that reflection will whisper the unfeigned
reality of its design, and the tear of pity fall on its errors, while the soul
of sensibility will anticipate the tortures of suspense for its fate under such
interesting circumstances.

Conscious deference shrinking like the tender sensitive, droops with fear, and
the sunshine of approbation can alone revive it; but if blighted by the breath
of censure, alas! the storm that levels the fancy-nursed embryo will desolate
all future bloom. Relying on the humanity of an encouraging public, the
orphan's devoted prayer shall rise to heaven as the grateful incense of a heart
overflowing with the effusion of sensibility, indebted to their generosity, and
amply recompensed by the lenient approbation, the honest gleam of gratitude
will ever glow in the heart of their

Most obliged humble Servant, THE AUTHORESS.

THE MYSTIC COTTAGER OF CHAMOUNY.
CHAP. I.
AUGUSTUS Tankerville, Marquis of Sevigne, was a native of Switzerland, the
last descendant of an ancient and noble family, who on the decease of his
Marchioness, came over to reside in England, in o^r to try if by changing the
scene he could divert the melancholy which was his inseparable companion, in
the southern clime.

The Dowager Lady Mentoria, his aunt, who was fondly endeared to him during the
whole course of his life, determined to accompany him and his charming
offspring; the eldest of whom, a son, had very lately taken the title of St.
Laurens, and the ladies, Adela and Louisa, were then in their seventeenth and
eighteenth years, charming accomplished women, who had improved an elegant
education by a refined understanding molded to every impression of virtue and
genius; in short it was an arduous decision to adjudge the prize of beauty or
sensibility to one in preference to the other.

Lady Adela was tall and of exquisite proportion, and her complexion
beautifully transparent; and the roseat bloom of health diffused its beauties
on her cheek, her profuse hair of the palest brown, and the benignant softness
that beamed from her fine blue eyes, gave her the appearance of a celestial
divinity.

Lady Louisa was rather shorter than he sister, yet sufficiently tall to be a
gracefully elegant figure. Her hair was auburn, and sported in the fantastic
luxuriance of nature on a bosom and shoulders of the finest form; her
complexion clear, her teeth beautifully white and regular, and a thousand
dimples played round her coral lips; her eyes were dark and expressive, yet
tempered with ineffable sweetness; her voice exquisitely melodious, and her
genius lively and expanded; of the French and Italian languages she was perfect
mistress; the science of music was her chief delight, and she touched the piano
and harp to perfection; in the dance she was the sprightly aerial of the scene,
where her inimitable attitude and grace captivated every beholder.

Lady Adela with a constitution more delicate, had never studied to excel in
that accomplishment, yet she joined the festive group, with a peculiar degree
of graceful ease, but her principal perfection consisted in copying minutely
elegant drawings, from the choicest collection of the most eminent proficients,
add to which her natural taste, and the picturesque views that bounded the
confines of the castle, gave unlimited scope to the prolific and accurate
traces of her animated crayon.

Her amiable brother, Lord Edwin St. Laurens, possessed a noble spirit, a
generous expansion of soul, and an understanding chaste and refined, while
liberality, gratitude, and generosity were the aspiring virtues of his heart.
He was now just of age, and was preparing to make an excur^ ion through
Switzerland, and explore the beauties of that country, before he undertook his
trip to India, accompanied by his juvenile friend, the Chevalier D' Aubigne,
then at Paris, and with whom he intended passing some weeks before his return:
Ladies Adela and Louisa reluctantly parted with their brother, accompanied only
by his faithful valet Carlos, who earnestly entreated to attend his master,
"for there," sighed he, "in a romantic cottage, on the mountains dwells my
sweet little Marcella, and if you will indulge me, honored Sir, in this
request, my life and services shall be ever devoted in gratitude." A manly tear
was hastily brushed away, and Lord Edwin's acquiescent smile sealed his hopes.

The morning of departure arrived, and the Marquis embracing his son, bid him
write often, and never forget he had left a parent in England, anxious for the
welfare of a dear and loved child, the pride and glory of his declining years.

Lord Edwin pressed his hand, uttered an affectionate avowel of obedience, and
tenderly saluting his lovely sisters, departed from the castle.

The faithful Carlos, all gratitude for the favor of attending his master,
redoubled his assiduity on every occasion. Carlos, though the son of a Swiss
peasant, possessed great natural abilities, and had been instructed in the
early part of his life in many necessary accomplishments, to fulfill the duties
of his present station, by a gentleman residing in Savoy, who had recommended
him to the patronage of Lord Edwin about two years since, possessing great good
nature and a naturally lively disposition: Lord Edwin would often wonder at the
visible gloom that sometimes overspread his countenance, in spite of every
endeavor to conceal it, but since the name of Marcella had escaped his lips,
he was all life, all happiness, and merrily passed the hours with due deference
and distinction to his noble master, who was now at no loss to guess the cause
of his suspicions.

About the second week they arrived at the foot of the mountain, on whose
summit the well known cottage of Marcella's parents reared its humble shelter;
Carlos swiftly darting to the door, peeped through the casement, and gently
tapped, instantly the latch was drawn and Marcella flew to the arms of Carlos.
-- Lord Edwin seated at a distance on an impending jut of the craggy steep,
beheld with delight the faithful and sincere raptures of these artless lovers.
Marcella was a pretty little figure, habited in a pale brown stuff jacket, with
a short blue petticoat, that displayed one of the prettiest legs and yellow
slippers in Savoy; her dark ringlets were confined by a blue silk net, through
the folds of which many sportive curls wantoned over her polished forehead, a
small handkerchief of lawn shaded her bosom, and on her arm was suspended a
basket of luxuriant grapes just gathered from the vineyard behind the cottage.

After the moment of surprise was over, she advanced with Carlos toward Lord
Edwin, and modestly offering the produce of her basket, entreated his Lordship
to walk in and take shelter from the meridian sunbeams, as the day was growing
sultry. A cluster of the purple vintage was as gratefully accepted as bestowed,
but the visit to the cottage was declined; Lord Edwin in fact did not mean to
intrude on the worthy inmates, but wished to stroll and amuse himself for half
an hour, he then promised Carlos he should return in three days and pass^ week
with these happy mountaineers, while he paid a visit to a family about thirty
miles distant. Marcella's eyes glowing with delight seemed to thank him, and
Carlos, filled with admiration of his kindness, bowed his grateful
acknowledgments of the favor conferred with so much real condescension.

Lord Edwin kept his promise of sparing the enraptured Carlos, but his
departure mightily pleased him, the poor fellow had arisen by day break, and at
five he crept down stairs to wake the servants, and saddle his mule, which he
fastened to the back gate, and entering the hall was met by Lord Edwin, who,
tempted by the beauty of the morning, had arose to give him some orders forgot
the preceding evening. Are you already equipped, Carlos? Yes, my Lord, I shall
now be off in five minutes, answered he, very deliberately, tying up his little
bundle of linen, in which he had actually packed up one boot: Lord Edwin
observed the circumstance, and stifled his ^isibility 'till the package was
completely finished, and the poor fellow half crazy with delight, and his every
thought employed in anticipating the joyful meeting, begging to know, if his
Lordship had any farther commands; being answered in the negative, instantly
made his respectful obeisance and mounted his mule.

"Stop, Carlos," cried Lord Edwin, "do they usually travel here with one boot?"
-- Carlos instantly cast his eyes on his right leg, and beheld it only equipped
with a stocking and slipper: "'It Is very true my Lord," answered he, but heaven
knows where I have left it. Why, if you should have occasion to make use of it,
rejoined Lord Ed^^^, only untie your bundle and you will find it carefully wedged
in. Carlos instantly laid his hand on the handkerchief and to his great
confusion felt the truth of his conviction: "Bless my heart," cried h^,
twitching the knot, 'twas Walter's fault, for he was asking me so many
questions about Marcella all the time, that I could attend to nothing but the
pleasure of gratifying his inquiries. Lord Edwin enjoyed a hearty laugh at the
bustle that detained the anxious traveller, who had not even waited to swallow
a morsel of breakfast, but a few moments completed the arrangements and once
more mounting he galloped off and was out of sight in in an instant.

Time did not hobble on crutches with Carlos and Marcella, and at the appointed
time he returned, delighted with the promise of again passing her cottage to
bid adieu, in his way to England.

CHAP. II.
LORD EDWIN's tour again commenced and he determined visiting the Vale of
Chamouny, he therefore hired a guide and bent his course to that beautifully
romantic scene. Here he rested to contemplate the roseat tints of morn
interspersed with golden fluids, reflecting its glowing beam on on the summit
of the mountains: A murmuring cascade broke the solemn silence that reigned
around; the dulcet notes of a shepherd's pipe wafted on the bosom of the breeze
sounded from the valley; here a huge cliff bent its lowering brow majestically
grand; there one more fertilized exhibited the traces of the plough, on its
rugged sides, while blooming wild weeds luxuriantly hung in waving wreaths from
innumerable impending projections of rocks; many beautiful vagrant rills gently
stole through various crevices, while some impeded in their course by rude
fragments of stone impetuously broke a passage and precipitated the sparkling
foam down a tremendous declivity 'till it paused in the mazy windings of a
gentle stream.

"How sublimely beautiful is this wild luxuriance of prolific nature,"
exclaimed the enraptured spectator. The sun was rising to animate each
picturesque beauty, but the heat was great; "Let us descend the mountains,"
"said Lord Edwin, I am very thirsty, and perhaps at those distant cottages I
could procure a draught of milk, Aye plenty, your honor, replied the guide, if
you will condescend to accept some at the cottage of Reuben and Giraldine
Desmoulines, where the sweet girls will be up, and can supply your honor with
an excellent breakfast, for I am always welcome as a prince, and any company I
conduct are shown the greatest respect. "proceed," said Lord Edwin, my
curiosity may possibly be yet more gratified.

Slowly they descended a winding path 'till they reached the valley, and here
they again rested. On every side the towering Glaciers reared their
snow-crowned heads in a thousand fantastic forms, and proudly contrasted their
admirable superiority of magnificence with the fertilized mountains beneath,
while scattered on their summit and various tracts of the acclivity in
irregular romantic shelterings of the steep peeped the white cottages of the
peasants; in short, no situation could exhibit a scene more diversified and
pleasing; here the eye wandered from one beauty to another more enchanting, and
when it seemed to have discovered some still more superior view, the slightest
glance presented another if possible more inviting and wonderful, apparently
raised by the power of magic to captivate the astonished beholder.

The shining be stole from her hive, and murmuring through the air was busily
extracting from the bloom her liquid sweet; two or three hovels only situate in
perilous apertures of the mountain, had suffer devastation by the falling of
the snow from the tremendous heights, where a coagulated mass had lately been
driven by the winds, bearing in its passage mouldering fragments of rock, whose
inevitable direction had crushed and partly smothered the desolated roofs. Lord
Edwin shuddered, yet the spectacle was truly grand, for part of the mass had
fallen in different directions, some on the edge of the steep, some in the
meandering rivulet, and part rested on the rustic one-railed bridge that
crossed the stream, from whose uncouth structure suspended innumerable isicles
of the most curious form; the aerial choristers were warbling their oraisons,
and the inhabitants of the vale seemed the only undelighted enjoyers of the
scene, because to them it exhibited no novelty, consequently but little
allurement; the eye of the stranger alone beheld it with admiration, and the
heart of sensibility could alone feel the exquisite sensations of delight its
contemplation inspired.

By the most inviting paths, bordered with flowers, strewn by the hand of
nature, they at length arrived at the cottage; nothing could be more
centrically situated to command the surrounding beauties of this magic spot:
The door was open, and a charming girl had just entered with a lap full of
flowers to deck her burnished casement, whose chequered pane glowed with the
refulgence of the rising sun.

"Ah! Madelon," said the guide, "is dame Giraldine up? Can you furnish his
honor with a cup of milk, an oat cake, or a glass of your excellent mead?"
Madelon dropped a curtsey, and blushing more beautiful than the roses she held
in her hand, modestly entreated Lord Edwin to walk in and accept their humble
fare. Not at all displeased at his guide's perspicuity in whispering that
Madelon was a pretty girl, he contemplated, as he walked by her side, the sweet
^^mplicity of her regular features, which though they could not be deemed
handsome, yet an indescribable something in her modest smile told you her bosom
was the recess of tranquillity, the mansion of peace.

She then led him to a neat apartment, where a second female was merrily
turning the spinning wheel, and sweetly singing some rural ballad, but the
moment Lord Edwin entered, the song ceased, and the wheel was stopped, while
the enchanting countenance of the industrious peasant presenting him her chair
with a graceful curtsey, made him start with astonishment, her straw Hat, which
hung on the back of it was instantly tied on, and modestly intended to shade
the deranged plaits of a neat lawn cap, which confined part of her luxuriant
light tresses, while a few straggling ringlets played on her lovely face; her
sparkling blue eyes beamed the very soul of sensibility through the shades of
the finest dark eye lashes, that resembled fringe of the most beautiful gloss
and texture, and the exquisitely traced arches of the same color, penciled by
the hand of nature, added a still superior elegance to her features; her dress
was simple yet the very model of neatness, and while Lord Edwin gazed with
rapture, his fancy compared her to a flower of exquisite beauty and delicacy,
reared in an uncultivated soil by the hand of Providence, blooming in the ^ades
of obscurity.

Entranced by the delightful contemplation, he was roused from his reverse by
the voice of his guide, addressing a pretty little girl about twelve years old,
who was tenderly gazing on a nest of young birds she humanely was endeavoring
to feed. In tears my little Josephine, reiterated he. "What have you there,
sweet cottager," asked Lord Edwin, peeping over her shoulder, "that causes that
compassionate tear?

"A nest of unfledged birds, your honor," replied she, wiping off the crystal
pendant on the back of her worsted mitten, "I bought them this morning of there
cruel boys, who were going to torment them; I had but one florin which they
gladly took, so I popped them into my apron, and tying up the bundle of faggots
I had been to pick up, placed them on my head, and come home pretty well
loaded; but what vexes me most is, they wont eat, and I cannot help shedding a
tear they seem so pitiful."

Well, thought Lord Edwin, what perfection shall I next discover in this
enviable vale; already have I been enchanted with the beauties of nature, and
the aspiring virtues of generosity and humanity have just presented themselves
to complete the picture.

In one corner sat a pleasing looking woman about fifty, mending a net, who,
with the utmost cordiality begged his honor would partake their humble
breakfast^ ^out^ (...) soon be home with the milk; said she, "and Madelon shall
spread the table in a minute."

Carlos, who was lolling II Pen^erose over the back of his mule, at the door,
happened to address his master by the title of my Lord, and the e^r of dame
Giraldine catching the sound, she s^d from her seat, and whispering Rosalie she
instantly tripped up stairs and brought down an old fashioned high-backed
chair, with a yellow stuff-cushion. "Your Lordship," said the sweetly blushing
maid, "unused to so hard a seat, wi^ do us the honor to accept this as much
easier."

Lord Edwin smiled, and to prevent apologies Instantly exchanged, and drew near
the table, which was expeditiously spread with grapes, hard eggs, cream cheese,
a piece of honeycomb, a brown loaf, some oat cakes, with a bottle of mead and
some delicate whey, the milk only was wanting to complete the dejun^, which was
brought in a few minutes, frothed, in a large pitcher, borne by the venerable
cottager, whose arrived was announced by the caresses of a little lame Chamois
Mountain Goat.
, who left his straw basket and limped out to welcome his return: 'Twas (...)
Chamois, she had found it almost famished and expiring with a fractured leg on
the mountains about a twelvemonth since, and it had been from that time her
favorite cosset, partially grateful to herself and Reuben, but scarce ever
noticed the rest of the family.

Reuben, who had shrunk behind Lord Edwin's chair, reluctantly took his seat at
the earnest solicitation of his noble guest, though he would much rather have
kept his station in the rear. This breakfast is to me superior to the most
sumptuous treat! said Lord Edwin, and the pleasure of memory will often retract
with the highest satisfaction, the delight I have experienced in the society of
this hospitable family; yes, Desmoulines, I truly envy your allotted portion of
happiness."

Rosalie probably attending more to the energy of this eloquent address, and
adoring the condescension of the illustrious speaker, than paying attention to
what she was about, forgot the sharpness of the ^i^e she was using, and her
negligent hand slipping, the pointed steel made an incision in her left arm,
from whence the blood issued fast, and Lord Edwin alarmed at the accident,
hastily snatched his handkerchief from his pocket, and bound it ^ound the w^nd.
This mark of politeness suffused a blush on the cheek of Rosalie, her heart
palpitated she knew not why, and the pain had instantly vanished, since the
application of the magic handkerchief, while she timidly apologized, and hoped
he would give her leave to keep it 'till his return through the vale, when it
should be properly washed and carefully restored."

Lord Edwin, who did not want perspecuity to discover the reality of this
little strategem, replied, he thought he should alter his rout, and not pass
the vale on his return. "Ah! then," replied Rosalie with faltering voice, while
the rose vanished from her cheek, "we shall never see you again, and this
delicate handkerchief must be washed through while you stay." Lord Edwin was
now convinced of the reality of his ideas; he had observed her fine eyes
earnestly fixed on his unknowing the magic influence their luster beamed -- and
gently taking her hand, "don't trouble yourself about such a trifle," said he,
"keep it 'till I call again, it is very probable I may return in the course of a
fortnight, and if the pain of your arm will permit you to enjoy a walk, you and
your sisters shall be the directresses of my footsteps to explore the farther
beauties of this charming elysium: Lead on then, sweet girls, and give me proof
of your taste in the different views you each shall point out."

Rosalie's heart leaped with delight, and the hats and mittens were on in an
instant. Reuben led the way, and Madelon soon arrived at her favorite spot,
which Lord Edwin acknowledged to be well worth remark and admiration. "Then
you will not approve my choice," sighed Rosalie, "for every body says its a
pleasing prospect but too dull, turn on the left and descend to that rivulet."
-- Lord Edwin obeyed in silence, 'till his wandering steps brought him to the
most beautifully romantic recess among the cliffs, art or nature could devise.
From the crevices of a mountain burst an irregular cascade, spangling in its
fall innumerable flowers that sprang on the craggy steep, while in various
niches apparently almost impracticable to climb, rested the straggling Chamois
from the excesses of the sun; but what most attracted Lord Edwin's notice was a
small marble shrine, shaded by a luxuriant cypress, while a thicket of rose
trees guarded it with its blomming branches, and a profusion of twi^ing flowers
encircled it on every side; on a small tablet was engraved the following lines,
"Sacred to the memory of L. S. G. the loveliest rose of Chamouny," a small lute
was tied with a black ribbon to the bough of a cypress that wept over the tomb;
and Reuben as he turned away dropped a tear.

"Whose shade owns this emblem of gratitude? asked Lord Edwin. Reuben shook his
head and pointing to Rosalie clasped his hands and walked slowly and pensively
on. "When your Lordship honors us with another visit, time, I hope, will not
be so precious as it is now, and then you shall hear the history of this valued
shrine; but the day is hurrying on, and if your Lordship means to proceed it is
time to pursue your course over the mountains, before the night draws in, as
you will not find accommodation farther on. Lord Edwin repressed his curiosity,
and taking his advice, returned to the cottage.

Rosalie's prolific pen frequently produced some poetic composition, and
Madelon one evening found her fertile imagination deeply employed in penciling
down the following lines as she had taken her seat in this favorite romantic
recess at the foot of the cypress, whether she ^d strolled to indulge her
exquisitely enjoyed Pensoroso.

THE MATERNAL SHRINE.
Where clust'ring roses vernal sweets combine,
To shade this consecrated marble shrine;
When moonlight sheds her soft enamored beam,
And silv'ry shadows tint the vagrant stream:
While Philomel repeats her plaintive tale,
Far in the mazes of the winding vale:
It Is then I lull the pensive hour away,
With my lov^ ^ure's most fascinating lay,
Whose soothing melody I fervent love,
And softly press it as I lonely rove:
For often beneath this drooping cypress tree
Soft mimic echo distant answers me:
So sweetly consonant the plaintive strain
To wayward fancy seems to sooth my pain;
And when I shed the heart sprung trembling tear,
Some angel form methinks is hovering near,
On aerial wing benignly wasted nigh,
To catch and bear to heaven the sacred sigh;
The evening incense of my votive prayer,
Often poured in secret on the desert air,
When I indulge the luxury of woe,
'Till friendship sooths the tear and bids it cease to flow.
Rosalie quitting the room, soon after returned with a basket which she had
filled with grapes pomegranates, and almonds. "Here my Lord." said the lovely
girl, as she entered, placing her hand on her bosom, to convince him the
ejaculation came from its most sacred recess, "Here, alas! is the only tribute
my gratitude can offer for your polite condescension," casting her eyes at the
same instant on the handkerchief that enveloped her wounded arm, it is a poor
recompense, to be sure, but the best our vineyard produces to refresh a thirsty
traveller, and our good mother is preparing a few eggs and dried tongues, with
a bottle of mead, which we hope your Lordship will not be offended at, for Mr.
Carlos can fasten them on his mule."

Lord Edwin heartily thanked her, and shaking hands with the whole family,
promised to call in ten days for his handkerchief, and bring little Josephine,
a bird for her humanity to the callow brood her last florin had purchased, and
accepting a bunch of roses from Madelon he mounted his mule.

"Bless me," said Rosalie, "this basket has los^ ^ts handle, and will tire Mr.
Carlos's hand to c^^^y, but I believe I have got a string that will fasten it,"
Saying which she drew a piece of blue ribbon from her bosom and twisting it
through the plaiting lifted it upon the saddle whilst Lord Edwin transfixed to
his seat, had observed with a sensation of pleasure this last act of Rosalie.
"God bless you, sweet cottagers," said he, "and remember, Rosalie, not to
remove the bandage too soon," then waving his hand rode off. Ah! thought
Rosalie, I needed not that injunction, it is too soft to remove for a coarser,
and I shall never, never have such an honor again. Alas! poor girl, little did
thy innocent bosom suspect a deeper wound was pierced within thy heart.

From the small casement of her chamber she secretly watched the track of the
mules 'till the envious mountain's obtruding steep hid the scarcely discernable
objects, and closing the window with an unusual sullen reluctance, she
descended to her spinning, but she did not sing; once she attempted the balled
she was warbling when Lord Edwin entered the cottage, but her voice failed and
the song was never repeated.

As she sat meditating on the visit of Lord Edwin to their cottage, for which
she conceived the honor totally owing to the friendship and favor of his
guide; gratitude to the poor but friendly muleteer inspired her pen to dedicate
a few lines expressive of his occupation, as her fancy suggested the idea of
his usual perilous tract over the mountains, subject to the emergent haste of
the evening traveller, through the rigours of gloomy winter, or effervent heat
of sultry summer.

THE MULETEER.
When over the moon a misty veil,
Obscures her palled sylvan light,
When howling winds burst over the dale,
And no bright eve-star lends its light;
Then over the cliff's impending brow
Our lowly muleteer must go.
His twinkling lamp he cautious bears,
To guide him from the chasms deep;
And often the rushing cataract hears,
When every eye is sealed in sleep;
For drear the hour through hail or snow,
Alas! the muleteer must go.
Joyous he views the rising dawn
Break from the thick-rob'd shades of night:
With fluid gold the blushing morn
Sheds her soft ambient beam of light:
Over craggy steeps ascending slow,
Our blithsome muleteer must go,
The early songstress sweet reclines
Upon her mate's soft plumag'd breast,
And warbling 'midst the waving pines,
She courts the traveller to rest;
For often as her sweet numbers flow,
The muleteer forgets to go.
Yet, though severe, the toil he braves,
At midnight sheltered in some cot,
He heeds not how the t^ pest raves,
And all his hardships are forgot;
When mountain grapes, and mountain cheer,
Refresh the weary muleteer.
Then traveller his care repay,
And let him turn his ragged mule,
Back to his hovel bend his way,
From fervid heats to shades more cool;
For thus your bounty through the year,
Supports the humble muleteer.
CHAP. III.
IT was the tenth evening, as Lord Edwin promissed, when he returned to
Chamouny; Rosalie and Madelon had strolled to the top of the mountain to
discover if the traveller approached; their best gray stuff jackets had been
neatly put on, and their clean lawn caps were fastened with primrose top-knots,
each took their spindles and seated themselves on the summit of the steep, to
watch his arrival; the shades of the evening veiled the fading landscape, and
the moon was rising in faint silvery gleam. Rosalie grew restless, she tangled
the flax, threw the spindle aside, took it up again, and again the flax broke:
her patience was every way exhausted, and once more 'ere she returned to the
cottage, she climbed an impending part of the mountain, and with earnest and
outstretched eyes, she at a great distance descried the mules slowly pacing the
winding track; instantly the blood forsook her cheek -- returned -- fled -- and
returned again. Madelon observed her agitation with the deepest regret, and
carefully concealed her thoughts, determined however to mark the reception on
all sides, and Lord Edwin soon after gained the summit. "How are my sweet
girls?" said he, extending a hand to each, "I have a trifle for Madelon, a
charming bird for Josephine, and a lute for Rosalie, who, I am informed, plays
delightfully." Rosalie thanked him more eloquently with her eyes than her lips,
and they descended to the vale.

Impatient to impart the pleasing news, Rosalie tripped quickly on to apprise
Giraldine, while Lord Edwin chatted with Madelon, and passing a whithered
rose-tree. "Bless me" said he, "how the roses have faded in Chamouny, and even
the cheeks of Rosalie have lost their usual bloom since I saw them. "Ah!"
replied Madelon, "they have drooped indeed, but I still entertain a hope, some
of them may revive."

The peculiar emphasis rested on the word some, accompanied by an arch look and
half a smile, did not escape Lord Edwin, and he would have asked an explanation
had not Rosalie and Josephine at that moment joined them.

"Where are your little birds?" asked he, tapping the rosy cheeks of
Josephine." "Oh, all dead, my Lord," answered she, shaking her head, they did
not live two days after you left us; poor Rosalie's arm was so painful^ she
could not spin, so I was obliged to help her, and perhaps neglected them."

"Never mind," replied Lord Edwin, "Carlos has a sweet bird for you." At that
moment the faithful domestic entered with the portmanteau and bird: Josephine
eagerly examined its beauty, but wished it had been a parroquet, that she might
have taught it the name of the generous donor. "Do you sing?" asked Lord Edwin.
Josephine again shook her head; "ask Rosalie, my Lord, she is our sweetest
nightingale, though she has not sung a song this week past." Lovely innocent,
thought Lord Edwin, how sweetly have thou revealed the ill secreted thorn that
rankles in the bosom of thy charming sister.

Supper was served by Madelon soon after, and Lord Edwin entreated to stay and
accept a spare bed they sometimes accommodated travelers with, while Carlos
was provided with another at a neighboring cottage.

The blushing tints of rosy morning scarcely dawned when Lord Edwin was
awakened by the plaintive melody of Rosalie's lute under his window, and rising
he peeped through his casement; she had taken her seat in a little arbor which
half concealed her by the profusion of roses that depended from the rural
lattice, while the expressive beauty of her countenance depicted her to the eye
of fancy the most perfect semblance of the queen of love reposing in her
Paphian bower. She had fastened the lute to a violet ribbon which hung at her
side, and when she had finished her plaintive air, gently let it fall to its
appropriate situation, and remained some moments in a deep reverie 'till the
approach of Josephine with a fine basket of peaches roused her from the
attitude of contemplation.

Some few words, uttered in a low key escaped the attentive ear of Lord Edwin,
but as they entered the house he plainly distinguished the voice of Rosalie,
utter the following words.

"Don't, touch them Josephine, 'till his Lordship comes down, I dare say he
likes peaches, and at least we can give him our share; 'twas lucky Lindor
should send them, step up and listen if his Lordship is stirring, while I
gather a few blossoms to ornament the parlour."

The voice was then silent, and Lord Edwin drawing aside the little muslin
curtain that had cautiously concealed him, finished his dress, when casting his
eyes round to admire the neatness of his apartment, he observed a miniature
suspended on a small hook by a piece of black ribbon much worn. Curiosity was
on the wing, he approached, and taking it in his hand, strictly examined it.
"Whose could it be," it was rather improbable it should belong to any of the
family, and he had never yet seen any one in this cottage whom it resembled,
certain he was if it proved a real copy, the original must be a most beautiful
woman, and the robe she wore, added to the band of pearls which confined part
of her flowing tresses, bespoke her at least a person of dignity; in short, it
was a mystery his penetration could not unfold* he hung it up and viewing it at
a distance, fancied he could trace the bewitching smile of Rosalie, yet the
idea seemed so absurd he instantly altered his opinion, when a transient
thought recalled to his memory the promised explanation of the little shrine he
had visited in the recess of the mountain, and half convinced him this
miniature tended to elucidate his surmise, and he descended the stairs with a
full determination of claiming Reuben's promise.

CHAP. IV.
CICELY, the notable girl who performed the drudgery of the family, smoothed
her clean yarn apron, and dropping a very low curtsey, ushered him into the
little parlour, where the breakfast awaited his descent. The family were all
assembled and each hoped he had rested well. "Perfectly so," answered Lord
Edwin, "if the nightingales in this part of the world did but lull one to sleep
by their evening song, instead of chaunting so merrily of a morning."

Rosalie's cheek instantly felt the force of his address, Madelon smiled, and
Giraldine nodded at Rosalie, expressive of her condemnation, in having
disturbed the slumberer.

"I hope your Lordship will excuse it," said the worthy Reuben. "Rosalie would
deem herself ungrateful not to delight in her new present, the charming proof
of condescension and politeness in so illustrious a stranger as your Lordship,
it is an early hour I presume with your honor, but for us peasants it is almost
noon day."

"True," replied Lord Edwin, "but it was not sleep occasioned my absence, for
in fact I have been this half hour contemplating an elegant miniature up
stairs, and if it would not be deemed impertinent, I should like to know whose
resemblance it was."

Madelon looked earnestly at her mother, while Rosalie's cheek turned pale, and
a starting tear irradiated her eye; every one was silent but the innocent and
loquacious Josephine, who, clasping her hands, and gazing tenderly on Rosalie,
cried, "Oh! my Lord, don't you think it very like our sweet Rosalie, why its
her own dear mamma's picture."

Confusion and surprise prevented Lord Edwin's reply, and as no one appeared
able or willing to contradict the assertion, he was pretty well convinced of
the reality of the story. At length recovering the power of articulation, he
ventured to inquire a few particulars, and Josephine being silenced, Giraldine
proceeded to relate the narrative of Rosalie, "who, she said, was born in that
cottage about seventeen years since, that M. Tourville their noble landlord,
one evening, at a late hour, brought a most beautiful lady wrapped in a close
veil, in a chaise and four, that a gentleman accompanied them, and an elderly
servant on horseback. M. Tourville told her the Lady was a widow in very
unhappy circumstances, and near her time, earnestly begging Giraldine to
undertake the charge of the infant, if it lived, and also be faithful and
diligent to the lady, for whose board she should receive an ample compensation,
as her health was in a very precarious state, and she wished to live recluse.

Giraldine added, the lady appeared almost distracted at parting with her
companions, and as the carriage drove off she heard the servant ask the
postilions if the Marquis meant to cross the mountain with guides and lamps, or
if he staid in the vale 'till morning; but they replying they had orders to
proceed, drove on; by this she conceived her lovely inmate was some person of
consequence in disguise, and did not doubt but one day this strange adventure
would be cleared up; that she passed by the name of Madam Lavinia de St. Clair,
and was brought to bed of the charming daughter he now beheld, to whom the
enraptured parent gave the name of Rosalie; but, alas! continued the worthy
Giraldine, the dear affable lady was never cheerful, and a visible and hasty
decline soon succeeded.

M. Tourville came often to see her, and at his earnest entreaty she was
removed to Montpelier for change of air: Ah! never shall I forget our parting;
the sweet babe was left, drowned in tears, to my care, for I could not leave my
family, and as she took a last kiss, she tied that miniature round the bosom of
the infant, "take care of it Giraldine, for my child," said she, "it may one
day be useful, I need not say it is the faithful resemblance of her wretched
mother, she was then helped into the chaise, and drove off in anagony of grief.

Since that time our sweet change has never left us. M. Tourville constantly
vi^ted us twice a year, and would take the greatest delight in seeing Miss
Rosalie grow up so handsome, books of all sorts were brought by him for her
instruction, but she was never suffered to visit him at Paris: Poor dear Madam
de St. Clair, alas! lived but three weeks after her arrival at Montpelier,
leaving her sweet infant to the guardianship of M. Tourville and the gentleman
who brought her first here, but being a great personage, he never condescends
to pay us a visit, but sends his old steward once a year with a handsome salary
for her board, and it is now near three months since we have received news of
M. Tourville, who we fear is ill.

"God avert such a misfortune!" exclaimed Rosalie, "It is much about the time
our annual visitor arrives, Oh, methinks I long to see good Mr. Montague."

"Montague," cried Lord Edwin, "pray what sort of a man may he be, is his hair
remarkable white, and has he a small red mark on the left cheek?"

Yes, that he has," answered Josephine, "and I often look at it as I sit on his
knee."

"And does he not live with the Marquis of Sevigne?" answered Lord Edwin, with
apparent agitation.

"Oh, I don't know," replied Rosalie, "he tells us he is bound to secrecy, and
we must not ask, but he hopes one day to convey me to England in all the
splendor I deserve, and frequently he sheds tears as he fits gazing on me; in
vain have I conjured him on my knees to reveal my hapless tale, but he always
evades my request, and while my pension is constantly remitted I am happy in
the protection of my adopted parent, who has faithfully and tenderly guarded my
helpless infancy, and sorrowful will be the day if I should ever leave them;
but it is strange, my Lord, you should know Mr. Montague, I wish he may come
tomorrow for he is expected this week."

"I wish he may," replied Lord Edwin, much embarrassed, "and I will prolong my
stay a day or two in consequence; for should he prove to be the person I
suspect, it may be in my power to render myself serviceable to you; but tell
me, sweet girl, how that miniature came to be left in a stranger's chamber,
suppose they had purloined it?"

"Oh lack-a-day," answered Giraldine, "we have no thieves in Chamouny, and it is
hard to suspect; but you must know, my Lord, that chamber is our dear young
lady's, but she is so affable and kind that she frequently sleeps with Madelon,
to accommodate strangers whom the guide often calls with, to taste my mead; for
though we are private cottagers, we are always happy to oblige any traveller
who will honor us with their company."

"You are very good and bountiful," said Lord Edwin, "and I must now claim my
friend Reuben's promise relative to the little sh^ine, although I can partly
guess to whose memory it is consecrated."

"Then doubtless your Lordship can suppose it no other than Madame St. Clair's,
and so it is: You must know, the dear lady used frequently to stroll to that
spot, which she called the Recess of Solitude, and there she would pass whole
days in reading and weeping, so soon after she died I erected that tomb, and as
all our neighbors used to adore the very path she trod, and admire her beauty,
I thought it would be no offense to style her the sweetest Rose of Chamouny,
and such is the inscription you have read; This romantic place you may be sure
is dear to us all, for every eye in the vale has shed its grateful tears there*
and our lovely charge too often indulges melancholy at the foot of that
cypress, when she can steal out alone."

"And could you never learn the family or connections of Madam St. Clair!" said
Lord Edwin.

"No, your honor, we never dare ask M. Tourville, he was always so secret, and
Madame never dropped the least ^int; and sure it could be no business of ours,
for as we could not relieve her sorrows, why should we ever (...) to know them?"

Rosalie sighed, and a responsive one echoed from to ^ bosom of Lord Edwin: "I
have caught the infection of your low spirits, sweet girl," said he, "do fetch
your lute and enliven us with some of your favorite melody.

Rosalie obeyed, and Lord Edwin taught her a beautiful air, of which he was
passionately fond, and which the admirable taste of Rosalie seemed to improve.

CHAP. V.
MOST part of the day was past in viewing the beauties of the vale, and when
the gold-empurpled ray of evening shed its parting gleam upon the mountains, a
poor blind youth from a neighboring hamlet playing on a fantastic pipe and
tabor soon summoned the cottagers to a little lawn* where a rustic ballet was
formed, to the great amusement of Lord Edwin, who, seated on a distant bench,
enjoyed the innocent delight that manifested itself in each smiling
countenance, and when the piper and the villagers retired, the family turned
into their cottage to partake of their simple supper which Giraldine had
prepared, and at an early hour they sought the soothing insensibility of
tranquil slumber sacred to the soul of peace.

The night was majestically beautiful, a solemn silence prevailed -- Lord Edwin
gently opened his casement, silvered by the moon, which exactly beamed on the
miniature; a rustling gale agitated the poplars, and gently waved the
dew-weighed heads of the full blown roses that encircled the chequered pane,
and the perfume they exhaled was exquisite. Sleep's magic fillet could not veil
his eye, Montague was hourly expected, Montague, the steward of his father!
'Twas strange! 'twas mysterious! He knew Montague constantly visited Italy
every summer, but he always understood his own private affairs demanded his
attendance; his father too had been very circumspect in his conduct, for he had
never heard the most distant hint that could awaken suspicion, he would
therefore wait the event of Montague's arrival; and with such reflection he
closed his window, and retired to his cleanly coarse pillow, 'till the voice of
Rosalie, and the trampling of mules under his window awakened him from his
disturbed and irregular slumbers.

He was not long dressing, for the voice of Montague maddened his impatience,
and faltering yet resolute, he descended to the parlour, where the good old man
had seated Josephine on his knee, and was answering her quick-repeated
questions concerning a favorite lap-dog she had given him last year, when the
voice of Lord Edwin complimenting him jocularly on his safe arrival at the
cottage, petrified him to his chair. "You are a man of taste, Montague," cried
he, "to prefer the hospitable reception of these worthy peasants in preference
to any accommodation you could receive in the vale of Chamouny; Giraldine's
cream cheeses suit your palate, Rosalie's grapes are more luscious than any
vineyard here produces, and the dried tongues and oat cakes of Madelon's
preparing, are a most inviting bon ^ouche to refresh a fatigued traveller,
hobbling over uncouth mountains purely through kindness to his relations."

A sarcastic smile accompanied these last words* and Montague abashed and
confounded, felt their full force on his cheek, where the flush of conscious
duplicity indicated the explicit truth, as he faintly acknowledged that he
frequently called as he passed.

"Nay," replied Lord Edwin, "spare those lips the disgrace of a falsehood, we
all know the extent of your travels never exceeds the boundary of this vale, I
am also acquainted with the motives of your embassy, therefore be candid, you
need not fear reproof when acting on the principles of honesty and benevolence;
but you and I must have some private conversation on the subject, for depend on
it I shall revert to facts, such as have long been entrusted to your secrecy,
and expect an impartial and faithful account of this mysterious conduct, you
know the irritability of my temper, and your ready compliance with my wish will
alone prove the sincerity of the attachment you have ever professed for me.

CHAP. VI.
LORD EDWIN then left the room with a countenance expressive of unusual
ferocity, and such as the faithful Montague during a service of twenty^five
years had never seen clouded with the furious storms of anger; for his young
Lord he would readily have braved every danger, but to betray the confidence
reposed in him by the Marquis, after being so strictly enjoined to secrecy, was
a point of honor he could not reconcile himself to give up, and he conceived
himself plunged in an inextricable labyrinth, yet as Lord Edwin had discovered
this charming protegee, and seemed to be perfectly acquainted with great part
of the affair, doubtless his information had been accidentally obtained from
Giraldine or Rosalie, consequently, on a moment's reflection, he concluded the
Marquis could never reproach him for explaining the remainder, which would ever
reflect honor on himself, and could be no farther prejudice to Lord Edwin; he
therefore determined to disclose every circumstance within his knowledge, and
leave the event to Providence.

He then snatched up his hat and crossing the lawn entered the vineyard, where
he beheld Lord Edwin reclining on a rustic bench, minutely examining the
miniature of Madame de St. Clair. "Come hither," said he, seizing the arm of
Montague with a degree of impetuous energy, "Do you know the original of this
copy?" The poor old man (who knew an evasive answer would only tend to irritate
Lord Edwin) replied he had seen the lady whose resemblance it bore, but did not
know who she was, or ever should." "Why not?" asked his Lordship, "you must be
more explicit; where did you first see her, and, with whom?"

"With my Lord the Marquis," answered Montague, "about seventeen years since,
and all I know of the transaction is, I was one evening at ten o'clock ordered
to pack a small portmanteau, in consequence of a letter my Lord had just
received from a private hand, which appeared to have agitated him greatly; the
carriage was immediately ordered with post horses, and myself the only person
permitted to attend him, and we pursued our jour^ey to Paris as fast as
carriages and vessels could carry us, but the Marquis observed a solemn silence
the greatest part of the way, and when he did condescend to ask a question,
'twas sullen and snappish."

"At length we arrived at an obscure inn very late in the evening, where a very
elegant lady fainted on my master's shoulder, and I was ordered by a French
gentleman to leave the room; in half an hour fresh horses were ordered, and the
above lady and gentleman stepped into the carriage with the Marquis, and drove
quickly off.

Shall I confess my curiosity was awakened, and I ventured to ask Janette, the
bar-maid, if she knew the parties, but she, poor girl, spoke very little
English, and that in so complicated a dialect, I could not gain one particle of
the desired information, for they were perfect strangers, and "Je ne scais
pas," was the prevalent answer from the Maitre d'Hotel to Le Valet d'Ecurie.

About three days after, the carriage stopped one evening at this cottage, good
dame Giraldine's candle would have been extinguished in another moment, (for
the good folks were just undressing) when I was ordered to tap at the door, out
popped the head of Reuben to inquire who disturbed them, and the voice of M.
Tourville from the carriage instantly brought him to the door.

"I know the remaining circumstances of Madame St. Clair's story, therefore
abridge that part and proceed from the Marquis's departure." Montague bowed and
continued.

We then returned to the confines of Paris, where we left M. Tourville and made
the best of our way to England, where about five weeks after the Marquis's
sister, who was a nun in some convent, died, and the next post brought account
of the death of Madame St. Clair. Ah! I shall never forget being called into
the Marquis's chamber; Montague, said he, poor Madame St. Clair has paid the
debt of nature, after giving birth to a lovely daughter; I trust you have never
revealed the circumstances of our tour, or her departure from Paris, after the
secrecy I enjoined you to observe; you, and you only, are acquainted with the
business, swear you will never divulge the confidence I am going to repose in
your bosom, as it is of the utmost importance to be concealed at present; to
your hands then I shall remit proper sums for the maintenance of this infant,
to whom I am left guardian you shall convey it every summer, and bring me
proper information how she is, and when it is in my power to bring her to
England, I shall feel myself happy in having her under my more immediate care,
which at present her infant state prevents me.

Such was the promise I engaged to fulfill, (...) as M. Tourville is very lately
dead (...) depute^ to convey Miss Rosalie to the castle, and from thence to
Thornley Abbey."

"To the solitudes of Thornley," cried Lord Edwin, "is my father going to
immure this blossom, amidst the rest of his secluded sweets, buried in oblivion
there?"

"Why she was to have staid at the castle, but when I told the Marquis how
handsome she was, he instantly altered his mind."

"She goes to Thornley then," said he, "'till the departure of Edwin, for
should he see her with the same partial eyes you do, I know not the
consequence, and then the measure of my uneasiness would be complete."

"A charming plan," replied Lord Edwin, "but some deep mystery remains, which I
will endeavor to elucidate: Charming Rosalie! if she loves like me, no power
on earth shall separate us; take her to England, I will follow every stage in
disguise, to protect her, and by the time she has inhabited the antique abbey
about a week, I shall make my formal enter, by popping in upon lady Mentoria
and her fair companion, in the midst of their dinner, when least expected."

"Mercy defend me," exclaimed Montague, "is it possible my Lord will risk the
Marquis's eternal displeasure, by fixing his affection almost instantaneously
on the very object his caution would conceal, and utmost vigilance separate?"

"Every remonstrance is vain," replied Lord Edwin, rising hastily from his
seat, "I am going in search of Rosalie, and in the mean time do you inform
Giraldine." He then turned into the cottage, and found Rosalie at her busy
wheel. "Lay your spinning aside," said he, "we must have a few moments
conversation: You are going to England, charming Rosalie, with Montague, in two
days, he has brought a letter expressive of the Marquis's commands, and you
must obey them. Rosalie involuntarily laid her hand on his arm, "Oh, my Lord,
how shall I reconcile myself to leave this peaceful home, these dear-loved
protectors of my infancy," and a tear trembled in her eye. "Make yourself
happy," replied Lord Edwin, "I will conduct you, sweet innocent, my arm shall
guard you safe from every danger to the shores of England."

"Ah no, my Lord, you jest but with my sorrow, how is it possible?" cried she,
clasping her hands, "at any rate, I am most probably going to be stationed in
some menial capacity in the Marquis's family, for an orphan dependant on his
bounty can expect little else, my gratitude then shall lead me to obey with
cheerfulness the commands of my benefactor; but the task of parting will I fear
much grieve poor Giraldine, she is old, and I shall never perhaps see her more."

Lord Edwin now found it necessary to explain the mystery, by declaring himself
the son of the Marquis, avowing his ardent love for her, and declaring she
alone should ever share his happiness. "Why then so reluctant, sweet girl, more
pleasing prospects shall unveil to your view, and the sunshine of prosperity
shall shed its ray, and renovate my beauteous blossom though transplanted from
its native soil," and he kissed the tear that fell upon her hand.

Rosalie appeared much agitated: "Alas! that I am every way unworthy the honor
your Lordship has conferred," said she, "I am perfectly convinced, retract then
your vow, my Lord, and view only with the eye of beneficent friendship, the
ill-fated cottager of Chamouny; ah^ why was I doomed to be the sport of
capricious fate, or create one moment's uneasiness to one whose superiority
prevents my retaliation of affection, without incurring the consure such
presumption would merit, and dared this erring heart reproach Providence,
'twould murmur that relentless fate should have instigated your visit to this
peaceful vale, where you will have plucked from us the blooming rose of
happiness, and left us only the thorns of regret. If I solicit to remain with
this happy family, I fear I shall never enjoy the peace I once knew, for a
continual dread of having offended my benefactor, and the idea of ingratitude
to your Lordship would break my heart, yet persist not in accompanying me to
the Abbey, after the strict injunctions the Marquis has enjoined Montague."

"Say not a word," replied Lord Edwin, "my plan is formed, and I am determined
to execute it; go to Giraldine, who is apprised of your departure, take only
one dress with you, for Montague has orders to furnish you with a genteel
habiliment as soon as you arrive in England, and remember when we meet at the
Abbey necessity will compel us to be strangers 'till the mystery of your
parentage can be explained."

Thus ended the discourse, and Rosalie promising to observe discretion on her
part, rushed to her chamber, and threw herself across the bed, her bosom
agitated by the contesting passions of love, gratitude, hope, and obedience;
but time was swiftly passing, her stay would be short, and she determined
dividing her clothes equally between Madelon and Josephine, and she was going
down in search of them when the miniature c^ught her attention, she took it
down, and fastening it to her bosom, earnestly examined every feature. "Would
to heaven thou could speak," sighed she, "I should then be acquainted with my
destiny; miserable girl that I am, thus to be ignorant of every circumstance
relative to my family."

Again she would have indulged a moment's reflection, if the foot of Madelon
had not roused her reverie; she opened the door, Madelon was in tears; she
kissed the cheek of Rosalie, and wept on her shoulder: -- "Thursday," sobbed
she, "we lose our dear sister."

Rosalie endeavored to pacify her, assuring her she would write as often as
possible, for Montague had promised her a conveyance at least four times a
year. "Ah! that will be poor consolation to me," replied Madelon, "but we must
submit."

What a mixture of pain did these charming girls struggle to suppress, 'twas
the real sorrow. of separation. To Madelon and Josephine her clothes were
equally divided, a straggling ringlet was purloined by each as the treasured
relic of a dear loved friend, a valued sister, her lute only was reserved to
take to England, for that was too valuable to be parted with even to Madelon.
Every thing being settled for their departure, it was agreed Lord Edwin should
proceed with the travelers the whole way, and as he spoke the Italian to
perfection, and Rosalie also, he conceived passing by the title of Signior
Carlini and sister, he should elude all suspicion during their tour; he meant
also to procure a veil at the first convenient situation, which Rosalie should
keep closely drawn, and never take off, which being almost a usual custom in
that country, would by no means appear a singularity.

CHAP. VII.
THE supper was prepared on the second evening, and the family assembled: --
Giraldine sat gazing on, vacancy jogging her foot, and lost in thought; Reuben
drew the cork of a choice bottle, the produce of his well-cultured vineyard, to
revive their drooping spirits, but it would not do -- no one's appetite served.

Madelon's hand rested on the shoulder of Rosalie, who was caressing with
plaintive adieu the little Chamois, that rested in her lap, unconscious of the
loss he too was going to sustain. Josephine, the innocent sprightly Josephine,
was earnestly entreating to accompany them about three miles over the
mountains, but as the guide could not return with her, and Madelon was obliged
to stay and console her mother; a prudent observation of Lord Edwin, not to
experience a second parting scene, repelled the wish, and it was no more
repeated.

Montague to hide his feelings, and prevent joining in conversation, had taken
his solitary seat at the door: The prattle of Josephine no longer enlivened
him: Rosalie's spinning wheel ceased to turn: Madelon's little garden had not
received its evening visitor's refreshing care, to renovate and tie up the
drooping plants, and Giraldine's basket of knitting hung neglected on the
branch of a rose tree that encircled the casement.

Carlos musing on the thoughts of his separation from Marcella, in like manner
was no very lively companion to Montague; as he was pensively lolling over the
gate of the vineyard, contemplating the arrival of a group of peasantry, who
were advancing in procession, but not one smile beamed on their countenance.
They were come to take leave of Rosalie, each had brought some little pledge of
esteem: A curious osier basket, a purse, a pair of mittens, a silk net for her
hair, a variegated pincushion, a curious jar of the choicest honey, a few
pomegranates, with various other trifles according to the age and distinction
of the donor.

Lord Edwin was enraptured to behold the un^eigned tear of real sincerity that
dimmed the bright eyes of the female peasants for his beloved Rosalie -- they
chatted about half an hour and then took an affectionate farewell.

"The dust," said Carlos, as he watched their departure* "won^ (...) very
troublesome tomorrow, Montague, for ^nks the plentiful showers that have
fallen from the eyes of these faithful affectionate peasants will abate the
inconvenience of our being blinded by it should the wind even rise, it is the
first time, Montague, you or I ever witnessed such a scene but as my Lord
justly observes, this Vale abounds with rarities."

"A similar shower may perhaps lave the flinty roads of Savoy," replied
Montague, "'ere Carlos returns to England, and recounts the drops that fell in
Chamouny."

The chord of sympathy was touched, and its vibration was strong and severe.
"Montague's raillery might amuse and cheer our hospitable friends within,"
answered Carlos, "suppose we see if we can render ourselves serviceable?"

Montague assented, and they turned into the cottage, where Rosalie was packing
her presents in a small portmanteau, which, with a basket of refreshment, was
to be fastened on Carlos's mule. Again and again they took leave, and retired
to rest, for the mules were to be saddled by six o'clock.

Sleep's magic fillet, steeped in poppied essence, for the first time lost its
power over the whole family. Not a soul closed their eyes; Reuben and Giraldine
talked the tedious night away; Madelon and Josephine steeped their pillows in a
briny bath, while Rosalie pretended sleep to prevent encouraging the painful
ideas of separation, and Lord Edwin alone had retired with a light heart
enraptured to have discovered the mine that concealed so inestimable a jewel,
whose brilliancy would dazzle every beholder, when polished by emulation, and
who would not envy him its possesssion.

They were all up by five, and again the parting tear fringed with gems the
down^cast eyelids. T^ morning was serenely beautiful, and Rosalie as her
dejected eyes wandered, for the last time, over the picturesque beauties that
bounded her view, secretly thought the Vale of Chamouny had never before looked
so beautiful: A small purse of Louis presented by Lord Edwin to Madelon and
Josephine, and a liberal compliment from the Marquis by the hands of Montague,
amply satisfied the careful guardians of this lovely protegee; a short adieu
was all Lord Edwin could permit, and the handkerchiefs of Madelon and Josephine
were just discovered to wave in the breeze as Rosalie took a last look from the
summit of the mountain.

CHAP. VIII.
AFTER the departure of Lord Edwin from the Castle, the Marquis, as was his
usual custom, retired to his library -- 'twas much about the time Montague paid
his annual visit to Chamouny, and a certain presentiment, instilled by
apprehension, darted across his imagination. "Gone to France, and means to pass
through Italy," exclaimed he as he shut the door, "Ah! heaven avert he should
discover the concealment of Rosalie, but surely Edwin's disposition is not so
romantic as to search the obscure cottage to gratify his taste: No, no, the
gallant and noble ancestry of his father will prevent my son from falling into
the errors of commonality."

The Marquis's pride, which was ever his predominant characterist^^, now
reigned in full force, and ringing his bell with a degree of violence, he
ordered Montague to attend. The faithful steward obeyed the summons: He was the
chosen regulator of the Marquis's plans, and had lived in the family
twenty-five years, he was now in his fifty-seventh year, beloved and respected
by every one in the family, and gratitude and obedience to his superiors,
gentleness and courtesy to his fellow servants had gained him the esteem he so
justly merited; the most implicit confidence sealed his lip where necessity
required, and the most noble sentiments of liberality and compassion flowed
from the dictates of his honest heart; he was still active and diligent, though
he was stealing through the autumnal vale of life to the winter of a happy old
age.

"Shut the door" said the Marquis, "and sit down," Montague obeyed in silence.
--

"My son is gone to Paris," resumed he, "and as it is (...) the time of your
annual trip, I would have you instantly set off, I have a strange presage he
should meet with Rosalie: It Is time she should be brought to England, and as I
am now her sole guardian, I shall place her at Thornly, under the inspection of
Lady Mentoria Edwin, he will by that means never see her before his return from
Italy, and by that time she will perhaps be disposed of, for you alarmed me
when you said she exceeded your expectation in person and manners, and that
such was the general opinion of every body, and if Edwin should discover her in
his tour through those mountains, who can tell the consequence?"

"Good my Lord," cried Montague smiling, don't raise imaginary evils, for
should Lord Edwin meet with her, who is to unraval the mystery known now only
to God and yourself?

"Why true," answered the Marquis, "I did not reflect on that improbability:
however, as the poor girl will be expecting you set off on Thursday, Edwin
cannot reach that part of the world this fortnight, as he goes to Paris and
makes some stay: Here," continued he, opening his escrutore, "is a sufficient
sum to defray all expenses."

"I wish," said Montague, "the sweet lady, her mother was alive." The Marquis's
color mantled on his cheek, and he fetched a deep sigh. "I can assure you,"
resumed Montague, "Miss Rosalie is far handsomer than her mother's picture."
"Her mother's picture! cried the Marquis how for God's sake should she come by
it?" "Why Madam gave it to Giraldine for the child when she went to
Montpelier," "I charge you then," said the Marquis, "the moment you arrive, to
demand it in my name, seal it instantly, and restore it safe and unseen by
mortal eye to my hand; go, Montague strictly obey this injunction, and return
soon as possible." He promised to observe his directions, bowed, and withdrew.

The Marquis remained some time ruminating, and then entered the breakfast
parlour, where Lady Adela and Lady Louisa were winding some cotton for their
tambour, very much tangled: The Marquis smiled at their perplexity, "I am much
in your situation, my dear girls," said he, "for I am about to unravel a
delicate skein, mysteriously tangled."

Lady Louisa let fall her hand to listen to the Marquis's strange address, and
the winding ceased. "What aenigma have you to puzzle us with, dear Sir"
answered her lively Ladyship, "do give us the most easy clue to discover it,
for really our patience is almost exhausted, with this troublesome skein."

"The mystery I am going to unfold, my children, is not yet arrived at the
proper crisis of explanation, nor must you require it 'till time and
opportunity permit me to disclose the important secret."

"The lovely sisters involuntarily looked at each other in amaze. Adela then
pensively cast her eyes on the ground, and waited the procedure, while Lady
Louisa more susceptible, caught his hand, and fixing her fine eyes on his
averted countenance, cried, "Pray dear Sir, relieve our suspense."

Expectation was on the wing, 'twas the moment of explanation, as the veil of
secrecy gently devolved the mystery long consigned to the recess of faithful
silence, a moment elapsed, and the Marquis continued.

"I am going to introduce to your favor and protection a delicate plant,
reared in an uncultivated soil, though sprung from a rich and fertile stem,
which torn by the ruthless and capricious winds of fate, withered, drooped and
died, leaving to the more favorable breeze of heaven the nurture of its
sole-surviving blossom; the soil of Italy was destined to fear this desolated
flower, and now luxuriance and perfection mark the opening beauties of this
tender valenursed lily, I shall transplant it with assiduous care to the
protection of my amiable daughters, cherished by their fostering hand, it will,
I trust, repay, with grateful blossom, their watchful attention* Such is the
plant I wish them to preserve, if same with partial praise has not deceived me.
Montague is commissioned to convey it safe to England, and if you find
rusticity has veiled one charm, prune with discretion the impeding leaf, while
as its rising beauty witnesses improvement, a father's ardent love shall be the
fond requital of your care."

He ceased, and the starting tear that glistened in his eye, reflected back the
crystal pendant that impearled the cheeks of his attentive auditors, but Lady
Louisa's dimpled smile banished the tear, 'twas the incense of exquisite
sensibility from hearts whose monitor was humanity.

"I perfectly understand you, my dear Sir," said she, "and conceive the plant
you have so sweetly and interestedly described, partakes the sensitive nature,
if so, when committed to the charge of Adela and myself, it shall at least be
exempt from the rude pressure of derisive insensibles, whose unfeeling
curiosity might be tempted to censure, where compassion should predominate."

"And after the inviolate secrecy which seals our father's lip," replied Lady
Adela, "his daughters will ever prove themselves worthy the confidence reposed
in them, by never seeking to explore the secret unpermitted, it is sufficient to
us the lovely protegee is countenanced by a parent who has ever evinced himself
the faithful friend of the unfortunate.

The Marquis pressed them to his bosom, and, relying on their discretion,
informed them he was guardian to the lovely orphan, that a genteel fortune was
left in his hands for her maintenance, and that he wished every affection to be
shown her as the relic of a friend dearly revered, but to whom he had sworn
never to reveal her birth or connections 'till a convenient opportunity; he
then wished them a good morning and withdrew.

His horse was soon after ordered, and he bowed to them as he crossed the lawn
-- The charming sisters, left to their own reflection on this interesting
subject, formed a thousand conjectures; Lady Adela wondered what friend's child
it could be whose concerns required such strict secrecy. "I long to see her,"
said Lady Louisa; "I should like to know if she is handsome," continued she,
adjusting her beautiful tresses through the solds of her muslin turban, while a
spark of envy darted through her bosom at the idea of a rival, though her
natural sweetness of temper would have forgiven such a superiority, even to her
most inveterate enemy, yet the suggestion was very apt in the bosom of a young
female.

Sir Henry Lansdowne's elegant phaeton and four greys, at that moment crossing
the lawn, caught the eye of Lady Louisa, "Good heavens!" exclaimed she, "here
is Sir Henry's greys entering the gate, how shall I escape, for positively he
shall not see me en dishabille, for as he is most probably your swain, and I am
on my preferment, it may mar my fortune, and I should be sorry to interrupt so
charming a tete-a-tete, so adieu, dear Adela." The window invitingly open to
the garden was low, and Lady Louisa instantly leaped out and flew for refuge to
a recess in the shrubbery.

Sir Henry enquiring for the fair fugitive, was told she was dressing; by the
side of the window hung a beautiful landscape, just framed, which attracted his
admiration, and he placed himself with his back to the light in order to view
more accurately some beauty Lady Adela was pointing out, when turning to the
window to enjoy the perfume of the geraniums that encircled it, he perceived a
pale green slipper hanging on the branch of a rose bush, with a small fragment
of muslin floating on the briar.

"Bless me," cried he, "the owner of this slipper has encountered the thorns,
whether in search of the rose I cannot say, but surely the fugitive, by leaving
such evident traces had some particular object to pursue or elude, had both
slippers remained, one might have concluded some lovely saint had commenced her
pilgrimage to Loretto from this favored spot, and left these trophies to
announce her departure."

Lady Adela's cheek flushed crimson: To have discovered her sister's retreat
would have offended her, and yet the embarrassed state in which she had so
precipitately left her demanded it, to extricate her from the capability of
raising a falsehood; Louisa's sarcasm also of Sir Henry being her lover, had so
much deranged her for the moment, she scarce knew how to receive him, and to be
left tete-a-tete was a double mortification, for never had the slightest
partiality been visible in his conduct to Lady Adela; on the contrary, she had
regarded her sister as the object of his repeated visits, and whilst those
ideas crowded her imagination, she scarce knew what answer to make.

"If the slipper is yours," repeated he, "permit me to reach it." "Oh no,"
answered Lady Adela, it is Louisa's, pray let it remain," catching his sleeve as
he stepped over the Duchess. "As it is Lady Louisa's," said the delighted
Lansdowne, I will venture to restore it." Lady Adela's vexation increased,
"Pray return, Sir Henry," cried she, "probably Sylvio may have stolen it from
my sister's dressing room, he is very mischievous." "Do you think he tore this
transparent strip from her gown at the same time, if he did, he was an arch
fellow to lay the blame on the thorns, and make them the apparent depredators
of his ingenuity."

The fact was now too evident to be denied, and Lady Adela could only entreat
him to return; "For heaven's sake, Sir Henry," cried she, flying to the door,
and well knowing Louisa could not be concealed far off, by the deprivation of
her slipper, "Stay, at least 'till I have enquired if Andrew has removed the
steel traps."

"O, I fear them not," replied Lansdowne, bowing saucily, and perfectly seeing
through this excellent stratagem of his fair suppliant, "traps of steel nor
chains of iron don't prevent my discovering the retreat of this lovely
fugitive, besides, as I have a presentiment she has just trodden the path
before me, it is most probable from the silence which reigns she has escaped all
such danger as your fears tend to magnify, or should she have fallen the victim
of such a disaster, I will be the champion to extricate her, though a dragon
guarded the shrubbery; yet don't attempt to follow 'till I have explored every
avenue to ensure your safety," added he, with a sarcastic smile.

Lady Adela turned her head to conceal her too visible confusion, while
Lansdowne darting through the vista, was enclosed in the mazes of the shrubbery
in an instant, and Lady Adela gravely returned to her seat.

In vain he peeped through every aperture, she was not to be found; at length
turning a corner into a very romantic shade, called the wilderness, he caught
the glimpse of her gown darting swiftly round the trees, and turning through
the first path, sprung through a thicket of Suringo's, and caught the end of
her ^a^, but his buckle unfortunately entangling, h^ rightly prize slipped the
knot which confined the Persian to her waist, and leaving the trophy in his
hand, reached the house before him, and flew to her dressingroom.

Lady Adela followed her with a flush of anger on her countenance; "Is your
ridiculous scamper over?" said she to the breathless Louisa, who had thrown
herself on a couch, "never again, sister, subject me to form friv^lous ex^, and
when your folly is discovered act in so chil^ a manner: What must Sir Henry
think of your behavior; half undressed, only one slipper, and flying without
the least reason from a pursuit sure to overtake you; I have only to beg you will
adjust your dress and descend to apologize for your imprudence."

Lady Louisa, who tenderly loved her sister, felt the force of this
conversation most poignant, a reproach from Adela was a wound to her heart. "I
have been guilty of a weakness," said she, "but the intention was a harmless
frolic;" and as she passed the glass the conviction of her error from the
appearance of her robe brought an involuntary tear in her eye: Adela's
admonition was kind, thought she, as she descended the stairs, and I will for
the future suppress my volatile spirits.

Agitated and vexed she gently opened the door, Lady Adela nodded a smile of
approbation, and Sir Henry placed her on the sofa: "Had Lady Louisa attempted
her agility in running for the celebrated apple, she had surely vanquished the
swift footed Atalanta, and obtained the prize."

Lady Louisa blushed: "Which of us do you think was most to blame," cried she,
"me for flying you in this ridiculous race, or you for pursuing me when you
must naturally suppose I had my reason for absenting myself, and I did not
conceive my sister's attractions so few as not to be able to render you any
amusement during my absence, and I honestly declare my flight wa^ ^he whim of
the moment to elude curiosity, how then could I imagine the polite Sir Henry
would have intruded on my retirement, by boldly insisting on forcing me to
discover myself when it was not agreeable."

Sir Henry stung with the severity of this last word, repelled as much as
possible, the fiery glance that darted in his eye. "To err is human," replied
he, "to forgive divine; and as I now appeal to a divinity, whose characteristic
is compassion and benevolence, thus let a suppliant sue for pardon," gracefully
dropping on one knee, and presenting the sash and slipper: "The ardent desire
of having one peep at so charming a fugitive, whom I had never consciously
offended, induced me to explore your retreat, one fascinating smile seals my
pardon, and Lansdowne vows never to intrude again 'till the benignant eye of
Lady Louisa marks his fond wish, and permits him so great an indulgence."

"Sir Henry's elegant apology has sufficiently atoned for his frolic, and
Louisa trusts forgiveness beams as sincerely in her eye as it expands in her
heart." An eloquent look at that moment confirmed the reality of her address,
yet it conveyed to the bosom of Lansdowne an idea not easily forgotten, for Sir
Henry's partiality had long subsisted, and he waited only to be assured his
hopes were not founded on a baseless fabric; thus the information he wished to
obtain he conceived the eloquent eyes of Lady Louisa had powerfully expressed:
That she entertained a respectful esteem was all he could at present flatter
himself with, and as he well knew she possessed every social virtue, he did not
doubt but in time sympathy would raise the spirit of friendship to the exalted
and servent passion of love, for every perfection, in his opinion, centered in
this paragon of excellence, and if an error ever blazed in her conduct, it
could only be imputed to a peculiar flow of good spirits, the incense of a
heart which knew no guile, and a quick sensibility and imagination unrestricted
by prudery or affectation: she was youthful, innocent and gay, her heart had
never known a pang of real sorrow, every hour had glided on the wing of
happiness, nor had she ever been tempted to pluck the rose of love,
consequently its thorns had never wounded her bosom.

CHAP. IX.
THE rest of the morning passed in chat 'till the Marquis's return, who,
pleased with his visitor, begged he would stay to dinner, for Sir Henry, as the
son of his most favorite youthful companion, who trod with him in childhood
the paths of learning, always found a hearty invitation at the castle: "About a
fortnight hence," said the Marquis, "is the united birthday of my daughters,
which I intend to celebrate with all possible festivity; the neighboring
nobility and gentry will have general invitations, and the peasantry shall
enjoy every harmony and pleasure their hearts can wish; I intend to form a fete
champetre, and your presence will add to our felicity."

The high blood that flowed in the Marquis's veins had ever panted for an
alliance with this noble youth, and he flattered himself one of his daughters
might be able to captivate, in his opinion, so glorious a prize. The ample
estate of Sir Henry, the elegant education he had received, and improved to
every advantage; the virtue of his ancestors shining in every action, and
flowing in every sentence, had so inflated the pride of the Marquis, that every
hope rested on this favorite scheme.

Every elegance was preparing at the castle, and the most sumptuous luxuries
procuring; every belle in the vicinity was racking her invention to appear the
most attractive object, and not a domestic but equally enjoyed the delightful
anticipation of the approaching festival, and even the old gardener, whose
venerable locks straggled in silvery threads on his wrinkled temples, was half
persuaded to suffer his niece Agness, who was waiting maid to Lady Adela, to
have them fastened with a new black ribbon, and, wear a little powder on the
occasion, but in vain did she endeavor to rally and tell him he would look so
young he should be her partner on the lawn.

"Don't teaze me Agnes," said he, "you nor any other female shall ever have the
honor of decking my head."

Agnes smiled for the moment at his shrewd reply, yet as she recollected her
worthy uncle had once loved and met a severe disappointment, she pitied him
from her soul, as she was well convinced his attachment to a single life had
not arisen from a froward disposition, or an absolute aversion to the sex in
general, a sigh sacred to his sorrows escaped her, and Andrew perhaps at that
moment felt a similar sensation, as he walked slow and pensively out of the
servants hall.

"Well, I never liked old bachelors," said the little thin housekeeper,
drawing up her head and smoothing her apron, "but I must say Andrew is the best
tempered creature I ever lived with in my life, yet, as I often tell him, his
generosity out-runs his pocket, poor good soul."

At this last ejaculation, uttered with a deep sigh, Agnes raised her eyes and
fixed them on Mrs. Gertrude's little gray orbs, peeping over the dark circles
of an ancient pair of green-glass spectacles.

"Was you ever in love?" asked the facetious Agnes, "or do you ever mean to
marry?

"What is past," cried the little notable dame, "bears no very pleasing
retrospect, and what is to come one must be more than mortal to devise."

"Why I can tell you," answered Agnes, determined to enjoy her frolic, and
assuming the predelictive air of a fortune tellers, earnestly gazed on the palm
of her hand -- "What Is to come is, Andrew -- "

Gertrude started and withdrew her hand, half angry, yet half determined to
forgive* "What of him for God's sake."

"Nay," replied Agnes, having slily observed Andrew crossing the lawn with a
basket of fruit, what would you wish more than a present of some peaches this
morning, which I prophesy will arrive in a few minutes for your acceptance."

Poor Gertrude, who had placed a different construction on the first hopeful
words uttered by the mischief-loving Agnes, scarce knew how to extricate
herself from the censure her agitation had incurred, and therefore thought it
most proper to trip out of the room, and leave Agnes to receive the peaches and
bearer; foralthough she conceived herself much past her prime, there was a
degree of pleasure in knowing herself esteemed by so worthy a man as Andrew she
could not forego.

"Love indeed" muttered she to herself as she trotted up stairs, "I should be
an old fool to be in love now adays; to be sure I have a great regard for
Andrew, but I dare say he never had the least thoughts of me more than
civility."

Thus argued Gertrude, yet she half wished to persuade herself Andrew's opinion
might be different to her conjecture, and as she crossed the looking glass
vanity tapped her on the shoulder, and turning her head she conceived a pin was
still wanting to adjust her ribbon which probably had never been thought of if
Agnes's bewitching conversation had not instilled the idea of attraction, but
the bell ringing terminated her reflection, and she briskly descended to obey
its summons.

The Marquis had as yet received but one letter from his son, and that arrived
before he left Dover, and his silence was a mystery he could not explain. "'It Is
probable his friends engross so much of his time," thought he, "that every hour
not dedicated to them is devoted to refreshing slumber, to recover him from the
excesses of dissipation; yet methinks he might have stole half an hour to
gratify me, by hearing of his welfare; however, I trust as pleasure is his
pursuit, prudence will conduct him safe."

The day following brought him a second letter, expressing Lord Edwin had
changed his route, and had proceeded to Italy.

Had a spectre, the most horrible imagination could depict, presented itself at
that moment, it could not have produced a greater agitation than the Marquis
experienced -- every nerve ^ibrated, every feature was marked with ghastly
astonishment -- the very project he wished to stifle in embryo had burst forth,
and presented the most formidable picture or vexation, tinged with the highest
coloring the power of imagination could shade. Yet Montague's late
conversation darted a ray of comfort and composed his irritable mind.

When he met the ladies he slightly mentioned the subject, by saying Edwin was
by this time in Italy. "Probably," said the lively Lady Louisa, "he may chance
to meet our little Chamouny cottager."

The Marquis shrunk with apprehension; if he does, answered he unguardedly,
What impression could a peasant make on him?

"Impression!" repeated the lively Louisa, "Why, suppose I was a handsome
peasant-girl, and you a Marquis, a slight impression of the lip might be no
great degradation, and as Edwin loves to contemplate beauty, such a
circumstance might occur."

Rage tinged the Marquis's cheek: "Ridiculous!" cried he, "Do you suppose the
girl would suffer such an insult, or Montague permit it?"

"Well," said Lady Adela, "I cannot think a cottager would conceive it an
insult; and as to Montague's prevention, what are the remonstrances of an old
man to the absolute determinations of a young one, to whom obedience and
respect demanded his silence,"

The sting of an asp had not more severely wounded the bosom, than this
applicable speech had the peace of the Marquis.

"I trust," said he, recovering his chagrine, "Rosalie has too much good sense
ever to make me suspect her of such an imprudence, much more that occular
demonstration should convince me the suggestion was become a reality; she is
now chaste as the unsullied snow that crowns her native mountains, and it shall
be my care too warm a sun does not dissolve and contaminate that purity it now
so eminently possesses."

"If I should ever feel myself disposed to be in love," said the arch Louisa,
"I Would take a trip to Lapland, and bring home my heart so thoroughly chilled and
cased with an impenetrable shield of ice, that should repel and defy the
meridian beams of India's burning sun to dissolve it."

"Time will convince us, Louisa," returned the Marquis, "your intrepidity of
being held captive, liberty is your motto, and a chain, even of gold, would be
to you a galling fetter; but let us take a turn through the grounds, I want
your genius and advice in the disposal of some ornaments in the grotto.

CHAP. X.
IT only wanted two days of the fete and the elegant arrangements of every
device exhibited the taste of the ladies; innumerable fancies decorated every
part of the castle: Sir Henry Lansdowne, and his friend, Lord Carlton, soon
after arrived in the Baronet's elegant phaeton, and beautiful greys, followed
by two smart little lads in scarlet jackets and velvet caps, which rendered the
equipage an interesting and charming object from the windows, but, alas! the
ladies were not there to admire them as they dashed over the lawn.

Lord Carlton's manly features lost their usual pensoroso on his arrival at the
castle: He was the darling son of an Irish nobleman, well educated, possessing
an ample fortune, and inferior to few in gentility of deportment, elegance of
address, or amiability of disposition, but when compared to the lively and
spirited Sir Henry, he was justly and frequently styled the virtuous and
benignant Mentor; and was his friend's superior in age, about two years, but
the contrast of their dispositions entitled them to the difference of ten.

The elegant Lady Adela and fascinating Louisa, were strolling on the arm of
the Marquis, in a distant avenue of the shrubbery, when Sir Henry and Lord
Carlton advanced to meet them.

They were dressed in their morning muslin robes, their hair wildly disordered
by the wind, waved on their shoulders in irregular luxuriance, while the beams
of the sun cast a pleasing reflection on their beautiful features, through the
texture of small chip hats negligently fastened with a plain ribbon; on the arm
of Lady Louisa hung a basket of flowers just selected from the green-house,
while the delicate fingers of Lady Adela twined through the wires of a small
cage that imprisoned an exquisite Virginia nightingale, which she was removing
from a too sultry situation in a portico of oranges, where its enchanting song
delighted every listening ear.

Lord Carlton held the arm of his friend: "One moments pause, Lansdowne," cried
he "to contemplate the most charming group I ever beheld: are those the
divinities I am to be introduced to? And which is the lovely goddess at whose
shrine you worship? What elegance and beauty! Methinks had there been one more,
my fancy had not unjustly conceived the graces had strolled to this charming
spot; that little floral deity seems to tread on air, as if her magic feet
would scorn to crush the blossoms that invade her path, while the majestic and
graceful carriage of the other presents one with the expressive resemblance, of
the dignified Minerva, each reclined on the arm of a venerable and benignant
sage, who seems dispensing smiles and happiness, blended no doubt with some
precept of instruction, as appears by his pointed finger and earnest
conversation."

"Why, Carlton, you are quite in heroics this morning," answered Sir Henry,
"but recollect you are to sacrifice only at the shrine of Minerva, for that
angelic Hebe, Flora, Thalia, or what you please to call her, is alone dedicated
to wing each hour with rosy bliss for Lansdowne's future days, but they
approach, and you shall judge farther."

"My friend, Lord Carlton, Sir," continued he, presenting him to the Marquis,
"of whom impartially conversing your goodness permitted me to introduce."

The Marquis cordially extended his hand, and politely welcomed him to the
castle, while a glow of confusion embarrassed the ladies at the surprise of so
unexpected a visitor.

Carlton ventured a glance at the forbidden fruit, thought its temptation
delicious, and immediately fixed his eyes on the serene features of Lady Adela,
offering to convey the cage into the house, a politeness acknowledged by a
graceful compliment quite her own.

"Sweet prisoner," cried he, admiring his beautiful plumage, "captivity with
thee must lose its rigours, the attention of thy lovely mistress surely repays
thy loss of liberty; fed by her gentle hand, and courted by her dulcet voice to
warble thy sweet note, who would not envy thee, gay songstress?"

Lady Adela smiled. "His native clime had surely yet more charms, my Lord,
where liberty, delightful liberty, was all his own, when at the evening hour he
sweetly poured his plaintive melody, to hail his mate within the well known
grove, but now captivity desires those joys the little solitaire softly
diversifies his notes with tender thrilling strains, which often to fancy's ear
seems to repeat some mournful plaint of separated love."

Carlton was delighted with the sweet beam of compassion that animated her
countenance, each sentiment seemed so congenial to his own, and her soft and
pleasing address rendered her the more captivating object of his esteem, whilst
in the conversation of Lady Louisa he conceived he could distinguish a
predominance of levity, though biassed by extreme politeness and affability:
Such were the impartial ideas he formed of each, and Lord Carlton's opinion
seldom deviated from the most favorable yet real points of true discernment.

The most pleasing converse beguiled that day, and on the third the natal morn
was ushured in by the five twinkling bells from the steeple of the romantic
church about half a mile distant. A public breakfast in the Park commenced the
fete, and the company assembled in elegant dishabille, numerous tables were
spread under the shade of some venerable majestically-towering elms, while a
band of music artfully concealed amid the luxurance of a portico of oranges and
odoriferous shrubs, at once delighted and surprised; profusive refreshments and
delicacies furnished a superb dejune, and the repast ended at two o'clock, when
an elegant gondola with flags, bearing the Marquis's arms, decorated with
several emblematic devices, and cushions of pale blue satin covered the seats
to receive the delightful group, who chose to enjoy the refreshing breezes,
under an awning on the spacious canal, to the soft notes of the enchanting horn.

Others, whom timidity prevented joining the aquatic group, rapaired to a
Turkish marquee, purposely erected for an accommodative shade to the ladies, as
spectators of a select company of gentlemen, who were to exert their skill in
archery to obtain the silver arrow, and the rich bugle horn, prizes bestowed on
the conqueror by the lovely directresses of the amusement.

The tent was composed of buff and green satin in broad stripes, looped at the
entrance by large tassels of silver, and fest^ons of bullion fringe; on the top
was placed a superb sun of variegated luminous colors, that kept in perpetual
motion, and produced a beautiful effect; sofas of correspondent satin were
placed on the inside, whilst various ensignas of archery suspended on falls of
white satin that lined the marquee. Sir Henry proved the fortunate claimant of
the bugle horn, and the fair hands of Lady Louisa invested him with his trophy.

While the silver arrow was next adjudged to the Honorable Frederic Waldegrave,
a resident in the vicinity of the castle, an orphan, of noble ancestry, just
returned from a short trip to his paternal seat, about five miles distant. He
was polite, amiable, and engaging, his countenance pleasing, his conversation
interesting, nineteen summers only had bloomed upon his brow, and as a young
man totally left to follow the bent of his own inclination at that early period
of life, could it be wondered if, distant from the restrictions of a morose
guardian, his naturally lively disposition sometimes led him into error, yet
very few had yet blazed in his conduct; instinctively inclined to cultivate a
capacious, fertile and rising genius; his penetrating dark eyer beamed with
delight, while his luxuriant hair of rich brown flowed on his well turned
shoulders, as yet unconfined by the regulation of fashion, no ribbon confined
it, no powder sullied its gloss: His jacket was composed of green satin, his
waistcoat buff, his hat black satin, looped in front with a superb brilliant,
and a green feather, rendered him the superior object of general admiration,
for dignity, affability, and grace seemed to have combined their powers to
complete the the perfection of this noble youth.

As he advanced to receive his reward, he dropped gracefully on one knee, and
kissing the fair hand that bestowed the arrow, placed it in the front of his
sash.

Lady Louisa, who sometimes amused herself with drawing the bow, chose to
preside over the archers' party, whilst Lady Adela, in compliment to the rest
of the assemblage, took her seat in the gondola.

The dresses of the lovely sisters were exactly alike: loose Grecian robes of
transparent French lawn over sarsenet petticoats, the waist and sleeves clasped
with bands of pearls, and their beautiful tresses shaded only by a veil of the
same texture, thrown gracefully back and fastened with a lily of pearls, while
the lower fall descended to the waist and joined the cestus. The simplicity and
becomingness of this elegant dishabille is scarcely conceivable, and the
sublimity of their countenances heightened by their charming blushes created by
the encomiums of the company, very aptly entitled them to the Duchess of
Montreville's remark, who observed, they resembled the express character of
vestal virgins, both from their real dispositions and negligently graceful
dress.

Two hours thus devoted completed the morning amusement, and the company
retired to dress for the masked ball in the evening. The grand drawing room was
hung on the occasion with white satin, over which in various forms suspended
wreaths of roses, while columns of variegated foils entwined with oak leaves
and golden wheat divided the compartments: Three superb chandeliers of
different colors, representing emeralds, rubies, topazes, amethists, etc. gave
a most beautiful appearance; they were supported by enamelled doves, suspended
with chains from a rich painted ceiling; the sofas duchesses and chairs were
covered with white satin fringed with silver, and in various parts of the room
were disposed golden eagles supporting on their backs delicate fillagree
pedestals, on which were placed the most curious exotics, while small incense
vases of fragrant aromatics blazed their magic flame on the chimney pieces,
whose exquisite and matchless petrifactions formed a most beautiful spectacle.

On a portion of the lawn was erected a platform for the dancers, should the
evening prove fine, and beautiful Luna in compliment shed her most refulgent
beam to invite the harmonious and sprightly group: innumerable lamps were
suspended and encircled the trees, which almost uniting at the top formed a
vernal canopy, intercepted through the waving branches by contrasting
moonlight: To complete the picturesque sylvan scene, a band of music stationed
in a distant pavilion, and the beautifully illuminated grotto immediately
opposite across the lake, furnished an interesting object of admiration to the
dancers, for the reflecting mirrors, burnished fossils, shells and brilliants,
gave to fancy the idea of enchantment, while irregularly flowing down a craggy
flight of marble steps a murmuring cascade broke its passage from the mossy
carpet of the grotto to the lake, where the trembling moonlight clearly
distinguished its circling form in rapid descent, concordantly joining its
murmur to the inspiring notes of the distant horn.

Sir Henry supported the character of a pilgrim -- Lord Carlton a magician --
the Hon. Frederic Waldegrave, as cupid, with an elegant bow and arrows tipped
with gold, which he dexterously directed to every youthful female, while to the
married ladies he distributed fetters of roses, which he assured them "were
thornless." One arrow only missed its aim, it was levelled at an elegant nun,
her foot stepped on it, and its texture being light and brittle, it snapped,
and disconcerted the sly archer.

"I never refuge an enemy," cried the Religeuse; "although no enchantress, I
possess a spell more powerful than your arrow, gentle Cupid, it is a heart
defying thy magic, because every recess is guarded by reason, thy most dreaded
foe; take thy aim amid the circles of gallantry, for my devoted sisterhood
shrink from thee, vain boy, and every thought soars superior to thy influence."
Cupid obediently drew the silken bandage across his eyes, and mingled with the
group.

A flower-girl next addressed the magician, to explain her fortune: "Beauty,"
answered he, "fades like the blossoms in thy basket, cast them away and select
others, among which choose the aloe, to watch its bloom will teach thee
patience* add the blossoms of time, and place next to them the rose of
happiness, carefully dividing the thorn from the heart's-ease, mingle the
evergreens of truth and fidelity, and present the selection to the most
generous purchaser." Promissing to observe his advice, she tripped away.

A beautiful figure of Hope courted universal-admiration, who proved to be Lady
Adela. "Will thou, sweet maid, by thy magic inspiration, deign to lighten my
burden?" asked Cupid. "Apply to prudence to fledge your arrows, and beg
constancy to step them in her purest essence, and my best exertion shall
effectually crown your wishes," answered she.

The pilgrim next addressed her. "Whither are you wandering bare^oo^? asked the
elegant enchantress, leaning in pensive attitude on a superb anchor, "Do you
prefer the thorny paths of superstition? or do you only affect to deceive us in
your pretended pilgrimage? Change your route if bound to Lor^tto, believe me
you will not find green slippers on every rose-^ush to ease your feet as you
travel on." "Oh, I Will compound for a few thorns," answered he, "provided the
path does not conceal steel traps." A significant pressure of her hand
convinced her the compliment was returned in the very reality of seu d'esprit.

As he glided away, Lady Louisa's appearance, as the goddess of fortune with
her splendid wheel drew the whole assembly's admiration, and her dulcet voice
instantly claimed attention. "I have selected a few prizes," said she, "the
keep-sakes of hope and fortune, which I shall distribute as chance directs, the
humble memorials of this day."

A sultana advanced and the fickle deity presented the wheel, from which she
drew a card, which adjudged her the embroidered handkerchief; a general
congratulation was whispered round on the applicable prize, but as prudence and
modesty sealed the lip of the donor, animadversion ceased. Numerous elegant
bagatelles were distributed among the motley group, and each party, highly
delighted with the ^olite remembrance, treasured the little gift as an
estimable memorial of friendship and respect.

At one the dancing ceased, when sumptuous tables, provided with every luxury
the season produced, were spread in the grand saloon, where the Marquis
presided, the most convivial and delighted spectator of the whole party: At the
hour of three the company retired, and the inmates of the castle stole to the
pillow of Morpheus.

The utmost decorum had been observed by the domestics and peasantry, who had
equally enjoyed the evening by dancing on the back lawn, to the enlivening pipe
and tabor, where Mrs. Gertrude condescended to lead down the first dance with
Andrew, to the no small diversion of Wilson and the Marquis's valet.

CHAP. XI.
LORD EDWIN and his lovely protegee pursued their journey over the mountains
and environs for several days, 'till they reached the cottage of Marcella,
where they rested and partook some humble refreshment, while Carlos again
repeated his faithful adieus.

The spot that surrounded the cottage was romantically beautiful; from the
protruding sides of the mountains depended clusters of the purple vintage in
rich festoons, while in various parts of the acclevity the traces of the plough
divided the velvet slopes, between whose chasms lofty water-falls in diamond
showers spangled the obtruding shrubs and flowers with its radiant crystals, as
morn in saffron vesture tinted with her reflected orient beam the waving pines,
that clad the mountain steep.

Marcella bade a thousand adieus as she wiped the intruding tear on the corner
of her apron; her spinning was placed at the door, and as the mules slowly
paced on she took her seat, her head rested on the arm that supported the
inactive spindle, while her eyes were fixed on the lessening objects, and the
hand that lay in her lap still held the little gold cross, the treasured
keep-sake of her lover, consecrated with the heart-sprung tears that saved its
burnished sides.

Rosalie involuntarily looked back a few paces distance; Carlos was transfixed
to his mule a statue of despair, gazing a last look with an extended hand that
meant to wave, but the impulse of activity was suspended and the useless limb
dropped by his side.

"Poor fellow," said Rosalie, her fine eyes absorbed in the tear of
sensibility, "these are unfeigned sorrows of the heart."

"I pity them from my soul," added the benignant Lord Edwin, "Carlos in general
possesses great fortitude, yet I find he is not proof to the innovations of
love."

No particular circumstance occurred worthy observation 'till they arrived at
Dieppe, where Carlos humbly petitioned to bestow his mite by a young female
mendicant, instinctively stopped to listen to the voice of distress, while
Mademoiselle Rosalie and his Lordship were taking lemonade vis-a-vis in a small
room from whence they could observe his motion.

"Ah, the poor unfortunate," said Carlos searching his pocket for a few sous,
very willingly drawn, while she presented a small basket of toothpics, "Le
Souvenir," said Carlos, modestly taking one, "I shall take this trifle to
England, and when I look on it I shall be reminded of Janette: But I will not
look to explore sorrows it is not in my power to alleviate -- Adieu then, the
tear that in spite of every effort to retain it bedews my cheek, is the incense
of a heart that has nothing more to give, yet it is consecrated to the child of
misery."

Jannette's tear mingled her thanks as she walked pensively on, and Carlos with
folded arms stood contemplating her neat figure, and wasted a sigh to her
sorrows 'till the voice of Lord Edwin tendering him a few Louis roused him, and
he lightly skipped after Jannette, and chucking them into her basket pointed to
his Lordship and returned.

Jannette curtsied low three times, and tying her little fortune up in a small
leather purse, looked earnestly at it, clasped her hands, and raised her eyes
in silent ejaculation to heaven for the unexpected bounty of the benevolent
strangers, put it in her pocket, wiped another tear, yet another still
succeeded, 'twas the drop of sincere gratitude, it would intrude -- the
feelings of nature were not to be commanded, and the tooth-pick girl possessed
them refined only by the hand that planted, not nurtured them, yet were they
eminently imitative, and her expressive eyes had repeated the whole history of
her misfortunes to Carlos, without one syllable escaping her lips; eloquent
revealers, beaming the impartial truth, though often pressed by bashful modesty
to conceal the unpitied sorrows they relate, yet sweet compassion marks the
timid glance, and joys to cheer the sad dejected eye long wandering over the
gloomy chequered landscape shaded by tempestuous clouds of human life.

The packet in which the travelers were to sail for England was very full, and
Rosalie drew her veil close over her face, while Lord Edwin wrapped himself in
a large cloak, and permitted his fine dark hair to shade his countenance, as a
disguise more favorable to his stratagem, and which so much altered his
features as to elude the resemblance he formerly bore the family, and as
Signior Carlini and La Bella Rosara his sister, they took their seats in the
cabin.

Rosalie soon found the motion of the boisterous wave agitate her stomach, and
she fainted on the shoulder of Lord Edwin: This indisposition so alarmed him
that he had nearly thrown off his disguise to assist her, and bearing her in
his arms on deck for the benefit of air, blundered over a young buck who
impeded the passage, and unfortunately trod on the gouty foot of an old morose
bachelor, which compliment was returned by a hearty oath and a violent thrust.
"Manners, you brute; have you no compassion you frisking Italian devil?"
exclaimed he, limping into the cabin.

Lord Edwin enraged at this invective, now thought proper to address him in the
English language, and in fact to procure some assistance for the lovely burden
now senseless in his arms. "I shall teach you manners, friend," cried he, "when
I come down again, at present I am too much engaged in the charge of my sister."

"Sister?" exclaimed the buck sarcastically sneering, "A mighty polite brother,
methinks if he possessed a little more manners for strangers it would better
become him; Oh, it is an absolute boar to be treated thus, my hair, my coat, my
neckcloth bear testimony of the savage's ferocity."

These last words echoing in the ear of a stiff-starched little old maid,
instantly made her bustle up. "Mercy defend us, a boar in the packet did you
say, Sir? Gracious God! the fierce creature may tear us all to pieces, I hope
he is chained; I would not have come for the world if I had known it."

"Oh you need not be alarmed, replied the buck, taking her brown shrivelled arm
and seating her again, "it is only a two legged savage, that has caused this
confusion, by stumbling over half a dozen of us with his prey in his paw."

"A savage with his prey?" reiterated the prim virgin, whose stupidity could
not understand his rhodomontade, "what is it any thing like a monkey?"

"Oh yes! returned he, enjoying the joke at at her expense, while her features
stiffened with terror, "It certainly is of that specie, though it styles itself
a man; in short to calm your fears, Madam, it is the famous Signior, who has
just left the cabin: I am sure if my sister, like his, had shammed dead, I
should not have thought proper to clamber up with her weight at the danger of
my own legs, and crush half a dozen others.

"Aye, aye, you are right," cried old square toes, "self-preservation is the
first law of nature, I never risked my precious limbs gadding after a parcel of
pert toads, not I, fal-lal dangling nonsense."

By this time the antiquated Miss had drawn a small case bottle from her
pocket, declaring her stomach, in consequence of the flurry she had just
experienced, to be rather qualmish, and strongly recommended the old gentleman
to taste it, assuring him it was very fine and unadulterated.

"It may, Madam," replied he, "but I am no dram drinker, however I thank you
for your offer."

The little dame reddened with vexation, the odium of a dram-drinker had not
escaped her notice. "Old churl," muttered she, applying it to her lips, and
swallowing a small but usual portion* again consigned it to the bottom of her
long pocket.

Lord Edwin had now left Montague and Carlos to attend Rosalie, as she
preferred sitting on deck, while he descended in search of the two choleric
gentleman he had so unintentionally offended.

"I hope your sister is better, Signior," asked the buck, with the most
sarcastic effrontery.

Lord Edwin surveyed him from head to foot with an air of the most sovereign
contempt, and then passed on to the old codger, "I am come to apologize as a
gentleman to you, Sir, if in the hurry of conveying my sister up I was so
unfortunate to do you an injury, but you must excuse me if I add, the hasty and
ill-mannerly retaliated thrust and oath ill became a person of your years, and
which perhaps makes me draw a conclusion of your birth and education probably
unjust, but for which you must thank yourself: for the accident I readily
apologize, and I hope, as my senior, you will be induced politely to pardon,
and acknowledge the ungentleman-like expressions you made use of where the
result of a moment's passion, urged by an unlucky pressure of your lame foot,
which I am sorry should have felt an additional pang from me."

"As for you, Sir," added he, turning to the young man, "I conceive far too
contemptible a person to converse with, a mere composition of malice, foppery,
and ignorance, quite beneath the notice of a gentleman."

To this address the pitiful spark thought fit to make no other reply than a
sarcastic smile, and humming a tune* marched out of the cabin, secretly
mortified at betraying his folly; while the old gentleman finding Montague and
Carlos descending to receive the Signior's orders, began to think his companion
of more consequence than he at first suspected, and therefore extended his hand
in token of forgiveness, which Lord Edwin's placid benignity accepted, and
animosity ceased on all sides.

His curiosity being roused, the old gentleman determined to try what he could
make of the servants, as he had an inconceivable partiality to high connection,
being a rich but miserly Don; he therefore watched the Signior's absence to
accomplish his scheme, and first addressed Montague with enquiring where his
master and mistress were going.

"To England of course," replied the cautious domestic.

"Ah pray, friend, where might they last come from?"

"Paris," answered Montague, conning over the news-paper.

"Humph!" cried the old man, "that I knew before, but tell me if they are
brother and sister; whether people of consequence, fortune or note in the gay
world, and where they reside in England; come let us hear, let us enjoy half an
hour's chat over a tiff of punch."

"Excuse me, Sir," said Montague, "I have not lived in the Signior's family
twenty-five years, to turn tattler in my old age, and evince myself unworthy
the confidence ever reposed in me, and which I have faithfully supported."

"Nay," cried the other, reddening with passion at the baulk of his project,
"there is no harm in a civil question, it must be a matter of indifference to me
to know who your master is, and if I had not taken a liken to him, I should not
have troubled my head about him, pray is he married?"

Montague uttered his favorite monosyllable, and the disappointed enquirer
walked away. Passing the door of the lower cabin he espied Carlos, "I hope your
Lady's better," said the intruder, taking a seat, "and your master too seems a
mighty affable pleasant companion, and a warm one too, I dare say.

"Why yes," answered Carlos, seeing the drift of his impertinent curiosity,
"few men more so; it is warmish weather in our country."

"Aye you fly rogue," cried he tapping his his shoulder, and sagaciously
winking, "I mean warm in the pocket."

"Perfectly so, and in every other respect," rejoined Carlos, "for generosity
warms his hand, friendship his heart, virtue and gratitude his soul, while
compassion blazes in his eye for every child of misfortune, and the cottage
that shelters the victim of poverty feels the warmth of his beneficence in the
blaze of the cheering faggots that form his little fire."

By every artful kind of stratagem did the old gentleman strive to obtain the
wished intelligence, but Carlos's ingenuity evaded every possible discovery and
he left him to his own contemplation."

Finding himself baffled and derided, he again ventured to the cabin, where he
consoled himself with smoking a pipe, to the annoyance of several females,
whose coughs and whisper were little noticed by him, self-comfort being his
only consideration.

A plump dame surrounded by three shuffling boys, complained loudly of the
offensive tobacco. "Bobby will certainly be sick," cried she, hugging up a rosy
cheeked chub, the express image of herself, "you must either go a top of the
deck, Sir, or I insist the window shall be open, for we shall be poisoned and
stifled alive, as bad as thof we were stuffed in the black-hole at Calcoretta
What do you callum place, I shall be a fine figure by the time I gets to
Brighthamsted; this is my last clean apron, and it looks rare and smudgey,
beside we shall smell like pole-cats; God bless Bobby, he is sick as death."

"If Bobby had stuffed less cold goose just now, his stomach would have been in
a better state to bear these wholesome fumes," cried the old gentleman, "so a
natural cascade will not do him much harm, pop him upon deck he will do very well."

"Who asked your advice, squire nettletop?" returned she, clawing up the boy on
one hip and waddling out of the cabin.

"Lord Edwin and Rosalie were seated on deck, praying for the hour that would
discover the long expected shore, and free them from the disgusting party they
had avoided associating with; the passage was tedious, the wind contrary, but
in six hours after they safely landed at Brighton, where the old gentleman
taking his seat in the diligence for London, unwillingly quitted the Signior
without the least clue of ever seeing him again.

Lord Edwin was now obliged to leave his fair charge, after passing two days,
and the third morning Rosalie was to proceed to the castle. Lord Edwin had
ordered a muslin jacket to be made for for her on their arrival, and also a
straw hat, plainly ornamented with a violet ribbon, habited in this neat and
simple dress confined by a sash of the same color with her hat, innumerable
ringlets of the glossiest hue shading her soft blue-eyes, and the rose of
health blooming on her cheek, she entered the room.

Lord Edwin surveyed her with delight. "Enchanting girl," thought he, "how will
my father fix his eyes on that sweet angelic countenance, that graceful form,
and soft bewitching smile, mingled with hope and fear, as the door opens to
receive the humble trembling stranger, a thousand adieu's trembled on each lip
as the chaise drove off, and Lord Edwin, after watching the speedy vehicle out
of sight, returned to his parlour with a dejected eye and heavy hearty, 'till
the packet sailed in the evening, in which he took his solitary seat on his way
to Paris, where he amused himself in writing, but as the lovely form of
Rosalie, continually before his eyes, banished every other idea, his rapturous
pen involuntarily obeyed the dictates of his heart, and traced the following
lines.

ON ROSALIE.
Pure are her virtues as the unfully'd snows,
Fraught with effervent love her bosom glows;
Celestial softness beaming from her eye,
Spontaneous eloquence expands each sigh:
While balmy sweetness from her lip distills,
Her voice with melody harmonious thrills:
Softer than lyric strains Apollo sung,
Each heavenly accent lingers on her tongue:
When she appears the rose forgets to bloom,
The lily droops nor sheds it gay per^^me:
And when the sprightly dance she blithly leads,
The choice of Paris in her favor pleads;
Peace, happiness, and love, before her bend,
Virtue's own offspring and the muses friend.
When Heaven's harbinger shall claim his prize,
And waft her purest soul to purer skies,
Then shall recording annals trace her fame,
And pity weep when memory breathes her name.
CHAP. XII.
MONTAGUE had been ordered by the Marquis to apprise him of their arrival at
Brighton, which injunction being punctually obeyed, the family where anxiously
awaiting the appointed hour -- the morning had passed and the traveller not
arrived. The Marquis strolled with his daughters to a pavilion in the park, a
beautiful edifice erected and ornamented entirely to the taste of the fair
sisters* Its form was octagon, and the columns that supported it of curious
marble, and a flight of steps with white and gold railing led to the Portico,
the door of which was inlaid with pannals of looking-glass, reflecting the
beautiful prospect, and deluding the eye with an imaginary view through the
pavilion, which produced a charming effect. The window opened in the Italan
style, lattices of green wire supported the clustering roses that encircled one
window, while as round the opposite one luxuriant passion-flowers corresponded
their beautiful shade.

The door opening discovered a spacious room, around whose sides in various
recesses the muses were beautifully represented; in one part an elegant piano
forte, in another a noble library, while various capital drawings, the
performance of ^dy Adela, embellished the compartments: Before the chimney was
raised a stage filled with exotics. The Virginia Philomel, suspended at a third
window over a bowl of gold-fish; and at a fourth was fixed to a camera-obscura.
The matting which covered the center of the floor was composed of colored
straw, wove to the fancy in various devices, and formed by the fair hands of
the ladies, a charming specimen of their taste and abilities: Several pieces of
embroidery, cloth, bead, fillagree, and various other curious performances were
arranged in different situations, and the delighted Marquis had given it the
appellation of "the Pavillion of ingenuity."

Boundless was the landscape on either side, and from this delightful retreat
Lady Adela's pencil traced the picturesque beauties of nature; here they
constantly devoted several hours every morning, to indulge the wanderings of
fancy, while some new invention formed an admirable chief d'ouvre from the
fertility of their imagination, which furnished them a continual source of
amusement.

'Twas here the Marquis had taken a book at one of the windows, while Lady
Adela was adding the last tints to a beautiful landscape, and Lady Louisa
practicing a new Italian air, on her piano, when Montague opened the door of
the pavilion and presented Rosalie.

The Marquis started and the book dropped -- the ladies instantly rose and
conducted her to their father, where the lovely girl respectfully dropped on
one knee, and suffused in blushes raised her fine eyes absorbed in tears, as
the Marquis pressed her hand, and bid her rise.

"My noble generous protector," cried the charming creature, "May the ill-fated
girl your bounty has cherished, reward, by her grateful affection, the duty she
owes her benefactor, long may she share the tender affection he has faithfully
shown her helpless infancy, sacred to the memory of an honored parent once
possessing his favor and esteem."

The Marquis clasped her hand, "Grateful Rosalie," replied he, "the memory of
thy valued mother steals from me an avowal of equal affection for her lovely
child, come then to my bosom and receive that blessing and protection no longer
hers to bestow, while her angelic form hovers over us, and guards thee pure and
spotless as her ^i^ed spirit."

"But I must leave you, my children, for a short interval, Rosalie St. Clair is
so expressly the image of her lovely mother, that it recalls a thousand
painfully-pleasing ideas to my memory: You never knew the amiable lady St.
Clair, my sweet girls, but as the friend of thy father receive with sisterly
affection her hapless orphan, may you ever be united in an indissoluble band of
love, and may happiness continually wave her banner round you."

He then retired from the pavilion to his library, and summoned Montague, from
whom he received the miniature carefully sealed, which he instantly opened, and
beheld indeed the most accurate resemblance of his adored Lavinia; thrice he
pressed it to his lips, and then consigned it to the inmost recess of his
escrutore, enclosed in a packet of papers, expressing every particular of of
the birth of Rosalie, with several letters from Lady Lavinia, these were
carefully sealed with the Marquis's arms, and directed for Rosalie."

"At my decease, Montague," said he, closing the drawer, "These papers will
explain the present mystery, and my sacred promise will remain unbroke, the
faithful vow has never been revealed hy the lip of Augustus, and the angel who
records it on the page of futurity shall never stain it with a blot."

"I think too I have totally prevented Edwin seeing her, he may now traverse
Chamouny and not excite one fear in my bosom."

Montague trembled at the idea of investigation, but as the Marquis did not
imagine he had met his ^n, the subject was not mentioned, and Montague was
dismissed with orders to summon the ladies to tea, happy to have escaped
advancing a falsehood, though had necessity compelled him, he must have
submitted to the action of d^plicity, by concealing the fact, to preserve Lord
Edwin's happiness.

So delighted were the charming sisters with their new companion, that the
cot^^ger of Chamouny, in their opinion, was metamorphosed to the goddess of
innocence and heavenly complaisance; her soul was congenial to their own, and
fortune seemed to have presented them the friend they had long sought. Rosalie,
charmed with the unexpected civility of her reception, was at ^ ^s ^o express
the fervent gratitude she felt: their polite conversation, their encouraging
smiles of approbation, gave her the most pleasing hopes that her endeavors
would ensure the friendship she was so much indebted, and which it should be
her study to preserve, and she almost conceived it ungrateful to give one ^gh
of regret to the memory of past happiness in Chamouny, while benignity beamed
in every countenance at the castle, and welcomed her with the unfeigned smile
of sincerity.

Passing the green-house, Andrew, whose curiosity was ever alive, was purposely
refreshing his blooming parterre, and on their approach had gathered a
beautiful rose, from which his rusty scissars were clipping the thorns, "Would
the lady do me the honor to accept a rose?" asked he, making a low bow, while
his silver-threaded locks waved on his sunburned cheek.

Gratefully, friend," answered she placing it in her bosom. Andrew bowed as a
^ush of pleasure crossed his cheek.

"I subjoin this lily," cried Lady Louisa, gathering o^e that at the instant
courted her hand, "Rose et Lis," added she, "will for the nature be my
favorite selection, I shall place them on the left side of my bosom, and I
trust they will not fade. Lady Adela complimented the bon mot, and Rosalie's
blush outvied the blooming present.

Returning to the house they were met in the hall by Mrs. Gertrude, Agnes, and
Wilson, the attendant of Lady Louisa, to whom the news of Mademoiselle's
arrival had been announced by Montague, cautiously guarding all possible
tendency to discovery, of course then the cottage was not mentioned, he only
knew her name to be Miss St. Clair, and that he brought her from a recluse
family in Switzerland, that she had a genteel fortune, and was the Marquis's
ward: The very idea of a recluse family instantly struck the imperious Wilson,
who conceived the new inmate to be a person of no distinction, as she boasted
neither the title of your Grace, or my Lady, consequently was received by her
as an humble intruder, for insufferable was the hauteur of this fille de
chamber. Each simpered and courtsied, as Rosalie passed, and each in return met
her grateful smile.

"No great things!" said Le Brun, the Marquis's valet, significantly shrugging
his shoulders, and elevating his broad black eyebrows, as he carelessly threw
himself across a chair, and treated himself with a pinch of snuff; "No hauteur
I Will allow, but mightily devoid of the the je ne scais quoi, we people of
fashion are so noted for displaying in style, what do you think ma petite
Wilson, I Will bet your black sparklers against her insipid blue eyes ten to one."

"Bless me, Le Brun." (answered she, stretching her leg across the hearth to
kick a little Italian dog, originally brought by Montague from Chamouny) "Don't
plague me about Mademoiselle, for I detest Italians, a set of crafty toads,
always squeaking and drawling, I hope it will not fall to my lot to attend her, if
she was any body of consequence one would not mind, but as she has been bred up
among the mountains, mighty private it seems, I suppose she will be frisking up
by sunrise, when I shall be just in my first sleep, egad if she does she may
huddle on her croatns as she can, I shall not attend her larum if it rings fifty
times; Lord I should not have patience not I, there is plague enough with this
shammoon dog, we don't want any more outlandish creatures methinks."

Gertrude now interfered to silence her scandalous ^oquacity, "Suspend your
opinion," cried she, "at least 'till time convinces you of the reality of your
ill-natured suggestions, be lenient to the wasp 'till you feel its sting, it is
then time enough to retaliate the injury, but here is Andrew, now judge by his
opinion, "your tea is poured out and your matted chair ready placed for you
Andrew," said she. "Oh, I don't want any," replied he, "I have had a sufficient
feast upon such a smile as my eyes never saw before, in return for a few simple
roses I presented that angelic visitor; powers of mercy, she shamed all my
roses as she passed, please Heaven I Will be up early, for I heard her tell our
ladies she loved to hear the lark's morning song."

"Ah deuce take it, I thought so," cried Wilson knitting her brows, and
muttering in a low key, unheard by Andrew, "I suppose she sings morning hymns
to the sun."

"Yes, yes, continued Andrew, chatting over his cup, "I shall be up, and
perhaps I shall have another smile for my breakfast; Montaque says her name is
Miss Rose -- something, but as I don't understand the parley wooes, Le Brun will
tell me how to pronounce it."

"Oh!" answered he, "its mighty pretty, quite in your style, old boy, it means
the charming composition of roses and lilies, so you must call her Miss
Rosalie.'

"Roses and lilies", reiterated Wilson, fine stuff indeed, I wish Madam don't
prove more like thorns and thistles."

"I wish heartily,' answered Andrew, trotting out of the room, "that you had a
thorn in your tongue, though it is sharp enough already, God knows, so perhaps, a
thistle in your throat might be a more useful silencer of your spite."

Thus ended the controversy, and Agnes agreed she would officiate at Miss
Rosalie's toilet to prevent any farther altercation. Accordingly at the hour of
retiring she attended, but the amiable stranger declined giving her any more
trouble than unpacking her portmanteau, for which she civilly presented the
obliging Agnes with a small osier work-basket; her lamp was then lighted, her
door fastened, and Agnes retired to the housekeepers room, with her curious
present, to the no small surprise and vexation of Wilson, who secretly
determined to have one also the first opportunity.

CHAP. XIII.
THE dawn of day tinged with orient beam the windows of Rosalie's apartment,
and as soon as the servants were stirring, she quitted her chamber, and
descending the great stair case tripped out to enjoy the breezes of the morn;
at the entrance of the shrubbery she met Andrew with his spade and water-pots,
indefatigably pursuing the labors of the day, who, on her approach, let down
the corners of his woollen apron to conceal his morning stockings.

"Pray friend is Montague up? asked the fair stroller.

"No, my lady," answered he, "but I will call him."

"Not for the world," said Rosalie, "let him enjoy his repose; but as I did not
know my way, I thought he might have conducted me over the grounds if he had
been disengaged: Pray is this the way to the green house I passed last night,
could you oblige me with a view of the plants?"

"To be sure my lady," answered the delighted gardener, "I Will just step in for
my coat, with your leave, for I am not fit to attend you in this morning
jacket."

"Oh don't trouble yourself to change it," replied Rosalie, "I shall not remark
the jacket while your civility furnishes me with other amusement; it is the
venerable habit of labor, friend, never be ashamed of it, while it bears the
marks of diligent attention to your employment, it is a badge of honor in my
opinion, and a glory to the industrious wearer."

Highly pleased with this charming compliment, every syllable of which was
treasured in his memory, Andrew bowed and led the way, longing to bless her for
her goodness, yet not daring to utter a word, fearful of offending.

After conducting her to the green-house, exhibiting his store of exotics, and
explaining their several names and properties, h^ proceeded to the most
favorite eminences to explore the adjacent country.

"But we boast far more beautiful views in Switzerland," said Rosalie smiling.

"Why, yes, Ma'am so I have heard my Lord the Marquis say; and our young master
Lord Edwin, they say, is now gone over to enjoy them; Heaven preserve him, a
better gentleman never was born; God help me, I remember his christening, and
rare doings we had; he was always a lovely child, and now he is a man every body
adores him he is so charitable and condescending."

Andrew had jarred a tender string, and it vibrated on the heart of Rosalie,
who begged he would show her the way to the pavilion, that she might indulge an
hour in reading. They then proceeded through the shrubbery, and Andrew opening
the door, "hoped he should not disturb her by pruning part of the foliage that
obscured one of the windows, as the company were coming through the grounds
that morning.

"I must set these geraniums too out of the way," continued he, "for one of the
ladies is very fond of a greyhound, who always follows her horse, and suffers
him to ramble over every thing in his way; the last time he scampered over
these geraniums like mad, and snapt the head of my finest auricula, so if I
don't take care we shall have a second part of the same tune* My Lord too was
not pleased, but Miss Villars did not care, she only whistled him off."

"Whistled!" replied Rosalie, astonished at the idea.

"Oh, yes, my Lady, she can whistle vastly well, and rides a hunting with Lord
Edwin's hounds, in a scarlet jacket and a jockey cap, and our huntsman, Robin,
says she leaps a five-barred gate better than any woman in England; but my Lord
don't ask her to ride when he can help it."

A second blush suffused the cheek of Rosalie, not that she dreaded the idea of
a rival in a heart that had manifested its faithful uninterested attachment in
every instance, nor would she for the world have drawn from Andrew the
slightest question tending to curiosity, though had she been so disposed she
could not have found a more intelligent being for her subject, but her noble
soul scorned such mean artifice, and therefore telling Andrew she would not
detain him longer, he went merrily to work with his shears, while Rosalie
opening the library, drew from thence by chance Thomson's beautiful Poems; the
book opened exactly on the story of Lavinia. The charming tale excited a tear
-- it reminded her of a far-distant and valued friend. Palemon's generosity
impressed the idea of Lord Edwin, and the character of Lavinia seemed nearly
incident to her own: She shut the book, and raising her eyes perceived Andrew
steadfastly gazing in apparent astonishment at the tear she thought private and
imperceptibly shed, and a sigh escaped her, which was answered by an
involuntary responsive one from Andrew, as he descended the ladder with his
shears and basket.

Rosalie touched the guitar, but not knowing its art hung it up again. A port
folio of drawings lay open on the table, and she ventured to peep at a few,
when turning the leaves, the wind being very brisk, wafted a small vellum
medallion into a thicket of woodbines. Terrified and fearful another breeze
should catch it, she hastened down the steps to regain it, but what was her
delight and surprise on beholding the most perfect resemblance of Lord Edwin,
sketched by the pencil of his sister. "Inestimable treasure!" cried she, "would
I dared steal thee, or that I could trace such another, but that is impossible,
yet would Lady Adela condescend to instruct me, I do think by constant practice
I should soon be able to make an humble attempt, and if so, it shall be the
first favor I solicit; however incapable I may be of attaining any degree of
perfection, I will at least exert my best endeavors."

Again she examined every feature and then replaced it exactly in the same
situation, when turning a few more leaves a profile drawing of Lady Louisa
presented itself, and the dress being somewhat similar to her mother's
miniature, reminded her of the Marquis'^ unkindly depriving her of it, without
ever assigning any reason to her.

The hour of nine was now proclaimed by the clock from the chapel, an elegant
edifice for the private use of the family, erected on an eminence in the park,
terminating in a grove of lofty elms, and forming a most pleasing spectacle
from the windows of the castle, and reminding her it was time to return to the
breakfast parlour, where she found the family just assembling: Rosalie blushing
beautiful as the enchanting morning, curtsied and took her seat."

"If you enjoy the delightful breezes of the morning, I don't know why you
should steal the bloom of all our roses, covetous girl," said Lady Louisa
patting her cheek.

"Indeed Ladies I am alone indebted to the same dispenser of bloom that reared
those roses, bountiful Providence, who tinted their leaves with beauty, flushed
my cheek with healthy; I have been up these two hours amusing myself in the
pavilion with some elegant poems, which so much interested my attention* did
not regard the hour 'till the chapel clock warned me to return.

"^e you fond of reading?" asked Lady Louisa.

"Extremely so," replied Rosalie, and my guardian. M. Tourville, who delighted
in study, used to furnish me with numerous pleasant and instructive books, by
which means I employed every leisure hour in instructing myself and Madelon; he
also made me write frequently, corrected my errors, and assisted my
improvement, and every week I was obliged to translate, by the help of my
dictionary and own genius some select piece for his inspection: Such was the
system of my education under the friendly auspices of the most amiable of men,
while my merit was constantly rewarded by some new and interesting boo^, and by
this means I acquired the sole instruction I ever received, although I seldom
saw my friendly preceptor, every interval of his absence was dedicated to his
parting injunction."

Rosalie wiped away a tear of affection to his memory, and the Marquis forgot
to drink his chocolate, while he listened with silent rapture to the sentiments
of his lovely protegee.

"Miss Villars will be here by two o'clock," said Lady Adela, "and in the mean
time we will employ our morning in the pavilion, where you shall see my
drawings and Louisa's embroidery and tambour, and which ever you prefer we will
with pleasure instruct you in."

Rosalie readily acknowledged her partiality to the crayon, and also to obtain
some instruction on the guitar. "I have a beautiful lute up stairs," said she,
"the valued present of a friend at Chamouny."

"Oh, fetch it by all means," said Lady Louisa, "it will have a charming effect
in the pavilion, and you must indulge us."

They then repaired thither, and anxiously awaited the commencement of the
dulcet melody from the lovely minstrel.

CHAP. XIV.
SOFTLY sweet the plaintive strain broke on the attentive ear, and she played
with exquisite taste a pastoral air, whose beautiful simplicity delighted Lady
Louisa.

'Pray who taught you, Rosalie?" asked she, charmed with her taste and
execution.

"Lindor, the mountaineer," replied Rosalie, "the humble admirer of Madelon,
consequently ever esteemed by me: Madelon could not learn, indeed she had not
time, but my fancy was ever so delighted and inspired by music that I begged
Lindor to become my instructor: Oh! how did I use to long for the hour of
evening, that brought our lively youth to the cottage."

"Giraldine then took her knitting to the little bench at the door, Madelon and
I pursued our spinning, Josephine wound our cotton, while Reuben listened with
a smile of satisfaction to each romantic note. Thus passed the hours in
innocent amusement 'till the rising moon warned him to depart, and as it
lighted him home silvered the pain of our little casement, and guided us by its
clear and beautiful beam to our pillows.

"Charming rusticity!" exclaimed Lady Adela, "I am delighted with your
description." At that moment one of the windows became shaded, and Sir Henry
tapped at it, mounted on Andrew's short ladder, which stood invitingly fixed,
had been forgot to be removed, and climbing up with the agility of a squirrel,
he popped in his head, but seeing Rosalie coming to remove a stand of flowers
to facilitate his entrance, he drew back, begging pardon for his abrupt
intrusion, not expecting to meet the eye of a stranger.

"Pray step in," said Lady Louisa, "Sir Henry's temerity seldom finds an
obstacle his ingenuity and address cannot surmount, and as a fluent and
eloquent apology would be no punishment to him to repeat impromptu, do not let
us be deprived of it -- on those conditions we pardon, therefore make an
elegant entree."

Sir Henry obeyed. "I trust," said he, Lady Louisa will not deem it an
impropriety to follow a good example, and as ladies nowadays show their
dexterity in leaping out of windows, it is but proper gentlemen should keep
them in countenance, by evincing their agility in climbing in; do not then
blame a self-raised action, charming fair; Miss Villars and her beaus are just
behind, and probably they may be inclined to try the same method by way of
novel exercise."

"How ridiculous!" said Lady Louisa, turning half angrily away.

At that moment a loud peal of laughter burst from the shrubbery, and Miss
Villars, her brother, Colonel Ardvine, and Lord Carlton ascended to the
pavilion; Miss Villars took her seat on the steps, declaring she was tired to
death, and too hot be stived up in a close room, "So let me alone, Ardvine, you
tiresome toad," continued she, stretching out her legs three parts displayed,
"Do unlace my boot, I have hurt my ancle, and the confinement makes it painful.

Shocked at her indelicacy, Rosalie politely offered her assistance.

"No, thank you, answered the Amazon, with her arms crossed and her foot
extended to the Colonel, "Ardvine is a very useful animal on such occasions, I
will not trouble you."

Then leering at Lord Carleton in a half whisper, "I presume this blushing Miss
is the Marquis's ward I lately heard of, quite a composition of insipidity
methinks, good eyes enough too, but not the least tincture of vivacity about
them, merely as if God had placed them in her head only to look with, not to
express the passions of the soul, moves like clock-work, or as if the poor
thing was afraid of damaging a basket of eggs every time she steps or turns
round."

This speech finished by a tonish stare of impudence, accompanied with a rude
loud laugh, much irritated Lord Carlton.

"Upon my word," replied he, "you are very severe, Miss Villars, and in my
opinion where it is quite needless, I have heard much of Miss St. Clair's beauty
and sensibility, and I confess I think the description of the former by no
means partial, nor do I conceive I shall be much disappointed in the latter, at
least from appearances, however I shall draw no harsh conclusions, nor suffer
myself to be biassed by so transient a view, my motto is "lenity," and I always
cautiously avoid censure, least I incur the character of a malicious
scandalizer; and were I a female, the idea of envy might also be attached; for,
alas! that is become so glaring and predominant a passion with them, that it
moulds every virtue to its own jaundiced impression: for, like a nettle planted
by a rose, you cannot attempt to admire or touch its innocent beauty but you
feel the sting of its malicious and envious competitor, who, conscious of its
inattractive powers, waves its poison to contaminate the harmless blossom, and
undermines its tender leaves where least suspected; If such a weed rankles in
the bosom of Rosalie St. Clair, Ethelbert Carlton will endeavor to eradicate
its pernicious root. Miss Villars may applaud or condemn his morality, but a
moment's reflection will convince her the lecture, however, unpleasing, is
founded on truth, and I trust her candor and good sense will coincide to clear
him from the imputation of prejudice or rigidity to the errors of levity."

This fervently addressed speech by no means pleased his auditor. "I think,"
cried she, Carlton would write a mighty good sermon, and if he will make an
attempt to preach it also, I will condescend to nod some Sunday afternoon in an
opposite pew, for the sake of a moralizing dream."

Lord Carlton, disgusted with her insolent retort, walked away, and took his
seat by Lady Adela, and Miss Villars finding herself abandoned by the beaus,
soon after entered the pavilion, with her boot in one hand and her hat in the
other, and without regarding the presence of any one, ran up to the glass to
admire her blowzy appearance* while the officious Colonel, a petite maitre,
followed close behind. "Your charming tresses sont derange, ma deesse," cried
he.

"Well then, plat them up again," replied she, "I believe I shall be cropped
for Newmarket, it will be so convenient to hunt too with Lord Edwin. Ah!
a-propos, when does he return?

"Very shortly," answered Lady Adela, "but he means to sell his fine hunter,
for the last chase was so infringed on by the farmers, whom Edwin did not like
to reprove, that it rendered it disagreeable, and as he is not very partial to
that cruel diversion, he was easily prevailed on to give it up.

A second glance at the mirror discovered a fault in the adjustment of her
neck-cloth and off it came, folded in an enormous stuffing and two extra
handkerchiefs. Thus far undressed, it was necessary to enquire if the lady
wished to make any other alteration, while the charming sisters, reddened with
confusion, begged she would retire to their dressing room, where Agnes should
attend her; but, lost to every impulse of delicacy, and a perfect adept of
assurance, she undauntedly replied, "she should soon finish." Her dress being
soon after adjusted, Lady Louisa proposed a walk, and parasoles being provided,
and supported by the gentleman, Lady Louisa took the arm of Sir Henry, while
Rosalie, disgusted and terrified, shrunk back to the side of Lord Carlton, who
passing his arm through hers on one side, and Lady Adela's on the other,
strolled to a different part, and left Miss Villars leaning on the shoulder of
Colonel Ardvine.

They soon after adjourned to the stable to give their opinion of a fine horse
lately purchased, in whose commendation Miss Villars was very eloquent, to the
no small amusement of the grooms, to whom she made several observations: They
then returned to the house to take chocolate, and departed, earnestly
entreating the ladies to favor her with their company at the villa, but
cautiously avoided inviting Rosalie, whom she treated with the very essence of
hauteur, and making her only a slight inclination of her head en-passant,
mounted her horse and let off in full trot for a wager with the Colonel.

Many and various were the opinions concerning Miss Villars: -- To the men she
was a general object of derision -- to the women a disgusting Amazonian: Yet,
even while they viewed her conduct, carried to a pitch of absurdity, their
lenient bosoms could not help pitying her errors. Levity in the extreme,
tempered by a degree of impetuosity and ill nature, was her perfect character.
yet though her behavior warranted every freedom, her virtue caught the most
transient alarm.

Possessed of a fine fortune and the only daughter of a noble family, every one
bowed to the dictates of Georgina, and thus trained up in the practice of
self-will, could it be wondered she now reigned the haughty tyrant of
uncontrouled power.

The fair sisters beheld her with disgust; she was by no means a pleasing
associate, whose aspiring virtues could direct or emulate their own, yet as Mr.
Villars, her father, was a man of general acquaintance and respectability, and
frequently visited at the castle from business or pleasure, it was necessary to
be distantly polite to his daughter, who occasionally intruded, but seldom had
her visits returned; yet to the ladies she always behaved as polite and
friendly as her irritable temper would permit.

CHAP. XV.
A FEW days elapsed when a letter from Lord Edwin announced his intended
arrival at the castle in three or four days. The Marquis instantly planned a
scheme of sending Rosalie to the abbey* where the Dowager lady Mentoria had
retired about three weeks since; he wished not to send his daughters, as Edwin
might probably be inclined to pay them a visit, yet to suffer her to travel
sixty miles alone would be improper, and as it was not in her power to
accompany her without a degree of suspicion arising, he determined Montague
should convey her: and lest his daughters should embarrass him by enquiring the
reason of her hasty departure, he resolved to give them a slight intimation of
his suspicions, by telling them, he begged they would never encourage Edwin in
any such ideas of Rosalie, on pain of his eternal displeasure: this they
faithfully promised, and hastened to the chamber of Rosalie, informing her some
friends were expected at the Castle in a day or two, for whose accommodation
her apartment would be wanted, and it was the Marquis's wish she should go on a
visit to the Abbey during their stay, for some private reasons they could not
assign.

"When our visitors are gone" said Lady Adela, "we will come and partake your
society at Thornley, where our good aunt will make you an excellent companion,
her spacious library will serve to amuse you. and your lute will sound sweetly,
and delight Lady Mentoria in her sequestered shades, while, various other
amusements will charm the fleeting hours and not leave you a languid moment."

Rosalie bowed obedience with a heart far more inclined to undertake her
journey than they suspected, and in the evening stepping into the Marquis's
post chariot and four, she set off blithe and happy, waving her hand in
respectful adieus as the carriage drove down the avenue, and the Marquis felt a
degree of pleasure tempered by the hope of security, as he watched the carriage
out of sight.

The evening of the second day showed her the turrets of the Abbey peeping
through the ivy that encircled their basis, and the thick and gloomy-shading
plantations that embosomed the gothic pile: the lambent fires of day darted a
burnished gleam on the high arched windows, and eve's last rosy tints were just
expiring, while ruby shadows in fantastic forms played in the empurpled west,
and the wild poet of the glade joined her soft dulcet note to animate the
passing woodman's rural song, who, homeward trudging to his little cottage in
the neighboring hamlet, displaced the comfortable pipe to chaunt his rustic
ballad, and moved his tattered hat in token of civility to the lovely stranger.

The element was serenely beautiful, innumerable fleecy clouds, tinged with
soft golden fluid, in fantastic forms floated on the azured canopy, and in the
wide expanse of ether the moon's transparent silver-seeming mask peeped forth
its mystic and refulgent form.

At length the chaise stopped at the antique porch; pondrous arches supported
the massy fabric, and from the ivy-twined pillars deep secreted the little
cheerful robin peeped his head and hailed the stranger with a welcome song. The
massy hinges hospitably opened, and received the timid guest.

Montague conducted her through a spacious hall of black marble, while on the
ancient carved pannels innumerable warlike trophies were suspended, the
memorials of at least two centuries; the solemn gloom and the sound of her own
feet echoing up the great staircase made her shudder, and she closely followed
Montague, not daring to turn her head, passing through a long range of gallery,
and peeping into several large apartments, Montague opened an enormous door and
Rosalie started.

On a high chair of crimson velvet, curiously cut, sat Lady Mentoria; a
diminutive figure about seventy-six: habited in a rich brown tabby sacque and
treble ruffles with a short black lace apron and hood* she arose and politely
saluted her fair guest, who presented a letter from the Marquis, which the
Dowager read with attention, often glancing a look at Rosalie, who was
surveying with astonishment the pondrous window frames and dark wainscot,
against whose chequered panel several family portraits in lumbering frames
started their gruff countenances, and chilled her beating heart.

"Mercy on me," thought she, "I wish I was in my native cottage, or safe out of
this place, I have often heard of haunted castles and towers, and this gloomy
Abbey brings it strongly to my remembrance."

"Lady Mentoria finished the letter and enterring into the most pleasing and
interesting conversation, totally dissipated every dislike from the bosom of
her fair visitor; in short it was hard to say which was most pleased with their
companion, for Lady Mentoria subjoined the most amiable, disposition to the
many virtues she possessed, and never forgot the sunshine of eighteen could
cheer the chill winter of seventy, tampered with the genial contrast of
acquiescent politeness and good nature retaliated from youth to age, tenderly
beloved by all who knew her, and respected by every class of society, she had
bent the youthful minds of her neices to the perfect model of her own estimable
character.

The hour of retiring drew nigh, and Lady Mentoria, with the alacrity of youths
tripped along the gallery, and led Rosalie to her apartment, where wishing her
refreshing slumbers she withdrew.

Rosalie left alone began to examine every part of her spacious chamber; the
ceiling was vaulted, and grotesque characters represented on its
damp-discoloured surface exhibited the most hideous and non-descript creatures:
The windows were extremely high and arched in the old-fashioned cathedral
style, darkened at top with several pains of stained glass, one only opened low
enough to obtain a view of the garden; she drew up the dark green damask
curtain that shaded it, and threw up the sash to take a survey of what the
trembling moonlight's palid beam would permit her to discover through the thick
branches of shading trees, that appeared to bound a portion of park, or lawn;
all was silent but the hoarse voice of a Newfoundland dog, from the porter's
lodge, that growled occasionally; she now drew down the heavy frame and began
to undress.

On the opposite side of the room stood a high antique bed, whose fringed
canopy suspended from the ceiling by tarnish brackets; the hangings of the room
were faded tapestry, representing the famous siege of Troy, but as Rosalie was
totally unacquainted with the heathen mythology, she was ignorant of what it
was.

Her wax taper now burnt dim and increased the gloom, her heart beat quick and
irregular, and she would have given the world for a companion: Something at
that moment tapped at the window, and the terrified Rosalie remained
immovable, with her eyes earnestly fixed on the curtain, to observe its
movement, but all being still she mustered resolution to approach it, and
lifting the candle as high as she could raise it at arms length, the sudden
light disturbed the intruder in the form of a large bat, which fluttered down,
on the floor: This was some relief to her terror, and she compassionately gave
him his liberty, and once more composed herself and undressed; but, alas!
crossing the room to extinguish the candle something twitched the top of her
hand, and with an involuntary shriek, she fell on the ground, and the wax taper
being in her hand was smothered and left her in total darkness.

Her shriek soon echoed to Lady Mentoria's chamber, and the Dowager not being
at yet in bed, though she had dismissed her attendant, slipped on a long robe
de chamber and hastened to inquire the cause, and opening the door, all in
white, with a small lamp in her hand, her grotesque head dress, had probably
increased the terror of Rosalie, had she not fallen on her face with both hands
over her eyes, 'till the voice of Lady Mentoria roused her stupor, to whom she
related her fright, begging a thousand pardons for the trouble she had
occasioned. Lady Mentoria smiling, tenderly soothed her agitation, "Make
yourself happy, little timorous girl," said she, "Hervey shall sleep with you;
however let me convince you the imaginary spectre that touched you was no other
than the bell-tassel, which depends from the center of the ceiling, and which
you probably did not observe or suppose yourself within its reach, therefore
rest assured there are no ghosts haunt this Abbey that have not four legs at
least, and should they molest you, your good sense and innocence will protect
you 'till we can trace the tremendous intruders."

Poor Rosalie, abashed and angry at her weakness and exposition, entreated Lady
Mentoria to retire, saying she was perfectly convinced of her folly, and would
not trouble Mrs. Hervey to change her bed.

With this perfect assurance of courage the old Lady retired, and Rosalie
jumped into bed to reflect on her ridiculous timidity, which she determined to
conquer, and committing herself to the protection of the guardian angels, who
hover around the pillow of innocence, she reclined in the sweetest slumber,
'till a robin, perched on a branch that shaded her window, waked her with his
Morning orison.

CHAP. XVI.
ROSALIE obeyed the summon of her plumaged monitor, and descended to the
parlour just in time to see Montague set off home. For two hours she amused
herself in the grounds, and strolling to the end of a high terrace that bounded
the Abbey, she ascended a flight of steps that led to part of a rugged cliff,
from whence on the pebbly shore she could discover the hovels of several
fishermen, and their ruddy children dancing and amusing themselves on the
sands, while their cheerful voices chatting and laughing broke upon the silent
breeze and wasted every syllable to her ear.

A beautiful serene ocean was bounded by a fertilized country on one side, and
a noble shore guarded by impending cliffs on the other. Here she amused herself
half an hour and then returned resolving to spend every leisure hour in this
romantic and beautiful spot, as a favorite retreat from the glooms of the
Abbey, when Lady Mentoria would indulge her with a stroll.

On entering the parlour Mrs. Hervey made her appearance, begging to know if
she chose to breakfast, as her Lady always took her chocolate in her own room,
which she never quitted 'till twelve, therefore desired her young visitor would
amuse herself as she pleased.

Rosalie no sooner finished her dejune but she went to the library, where she
entertained herself for near three hours, 'till Lady Mentoria came in search of
her.

"How is my sweet young friend? asked she, peeping in with her parasole and
cloak, "Will she take a walk?

"Gladly, Madam," answered Rosalie, I shall be happy to accompany you."

"I am going," returned the Dowager ^o visit my pensioners; I have three po^
honest fishers, whose families I support, and by employing them in procuring
fish for my family, and others in the vicinity, I amuse and keep them from the
lethargy of indolence, and never admitting a superiority of preference, if one
more envious quarrels with the other, I rectify their mistakes, and my decision
is their law: Thus I preserve perfect tranquillity, and I never see a cloud of
sorrow or discontent shade their brows; ever blithe and industrious, they may
truly be styled happy cottagers -- But you shall judge.

Proceeding to the cliff where Rosalie had taken her morning seat, she
discovered a winding path, guarded by small green rails, which Lady Mentoria ^d
ordered to be cut through the cliff, in easy descent, expressly for the
facility of her visits, to save at least two miles going round* a bench at the
bottom rested her again to respiration, and Rosalie carried a basket of
currants for the children.

"It will please the little creatures," said Lady Mentoria, "and it will be a
wholesome treat for them; These my dear young friend, are the attentions I wish
you to fulfill, when indisposition o^ engagement prevents my attendance."

"A pleasing employment, my dear Madam, I shall willingly perform to the best
of my abilities," replied Rosalie.

Three neat looking women and seven chubby children now welcomed their noble
benefactress: One produced her spinning, another her knitting, and the third
constantly made and repaired the fishing nets; while their husbands at various
hours when they were on shore, were each furnished with a loom, and wove^
dowlass for their own wear, and the neighboring villagers, to whom her
Ladyship permitted them to sell any requisite quantity, by way of perquisite
and encouragement of their industry.

The boat soon after arrived, and the fishers leaping on shore presented some
beautiful prawns which were received with a benignant smile of satisfaction,
and after making a few inquiries, and distributing the fruit among the
children, (whose sparkling eyes beamed expectation on the basket's store)
enjoined them to be good and dutiful, and slipping a shilling into each of
their hands, told them it was the gift of the young lady they saw with her, to
whom they must be respectfully obedient as to herself.

Slowly they re-ascended the cliff, often pausing to enjoy the healthy breezes
of the ocean, and contemplate the restless wave dashing its starry foam along
the pebbly shore, while at a distance the inflated white sails of a passing
vessel burnished by the meridian sun, glided on the bosom of the parted wave,
and dazzled with its brightness the attentive eye that watched its lessening
sight -- Rosalie was charmed.

"As you love to contemplate the beauties of nature and innocence," said Lady
Mentoria, "I shall now lead you to an inland scene; I have seven cottages in
the village which contain inhabitants of every description, among them are the
youthful and the aged: in one dwells a young industrious couple just married,
in a second an aged pair, in a third a desolated elderly widow, who instructs
and protects two little orphans, in a fourth a couple in the autumn of life,
surrounded by four charming children, whose notability furnishes and assists
their tender parents; in the fifth lives a venerable old warrior, and two sons,
sprightly, clever lads, now his only glory, though the field of honor has
invested him with many badges of valor, and though deprived of one leg, his
crutches are in his opinion trophies he has never regretted to exchange; my
sixth cottage contains a poor blind man and one daughter, innocent, mild, and
beautiful as the morn, the most dutiful affectionate girl the fondest parent
could delight in; while in my seventh and last rural habitation lives a
distressed curate, with a la^ wife and three children; to him I have allotted
the constant and regular observance of morning and evening prayers, in every
family, and to instruct them in reading and writing, of which he is capable,
though the hand of oppression and misfortune has formerly crushed the talents
that it suffered to expand, had reverted honor to himself, and manifested
improvement in others; thus his time is pretty well employed, and there is not
a child in the village who does not delight to receive the mild and pleasing
instructions of Evelyn."

Passing through a romantic picturesque lane, the rural irregular village
presented itself -- Evelyn, whose cottage was first, sat reading at his door,
and closed his book to welcome the visitors; Catharine Evelyn was preparing the
dinner; a fine baby lay in the cradle, rocked by a little girl about five years
of age, while a healthy boy about two years older was shelling some beans.

"Patty's sampler is almost finished, my Lady," said the good Catherine,
leaving the kneading of her dumplins, and presenting a small piece of canvass
very prettily marked.

"Industrious little maid," said her Ladyship, giving the rosy Patty sixpence,
which was consigned to the security of her mother's screw-box, and the visitors
unwilling to protract the dinner, took their leave.

The widow next presented her little charges, whom she was teaching to knit,
and after commending and rewarding their industry, they passed on to a third.

"This is Philip Stanley's cottage," said Lady Mentoria, "and the faithful
Ellen, his newmade bride I see is busy at work, let us step in."

Ellen rose with a basket of stockings she was repairing, and Lady Mentoria
complimenting her jocularly on her improving looks, enquired for Philip, who
was gone to cut turf and faggots, proceeded to the next, where they found
Lennox, the old warrior, mending one of his crutches, and whistling, "God save
the King.'

"Here is a news paper for you," said Lady Mentoria, "which I know is a great
treat to you, but do not suffer the feelings of sensibility to agitate you too
far, remember you have been poorly, yet I don't forbid you to drop a tear of
humanity for the woes of a fellow soldier, as you read the sad devastating fate
of war.

Lennox bowed and consigned it to his pocket, while his eloquent eye and
shaking head seemed to say he could enlarge on that subject if permitted.

"Keep it to yourself," said her Ladyship, "and when you have perused it give
it to Evelyn."

The neighboring cottage sheltered an aged pair, the poor old man crept feebly
out to the door, with his spectacles in one hand, and a letter in the other:
"Your Ladyship will excuse the derangement of our cottage," said he, wiping a
tear on his sleeve, "for we have just received a letter from our dear boy Ben,
who has been eight years in the East Indies, come next Christmas, and the good
fellow sends us the joyful news, he shall be down here in less than a
fortnight, and has brought home something to make our lives comfortable out of
his earnings: Powers of mercy, we have been out of our wits with joy these
three hours, and not a jot of work done for thinking on it, for we thought he
might be dead, and never had a notion of seeing him in this world again."

"Well, said Lady Mentoria, "don't flurry yourself, I will provide a bed for
him in your back room, let me know when he comes, send him to the Abbey, his
dutiful attention pleases me."

The old man bowed, and Lady Mentoria continued her walk.

At the door of another habitation sat two fine young girls spinning, while a
youth was busily employed in pruning some plants in a little garden he had
cultivated and brought to tolerable perfection; and a younger one was conning
his lesson for the next day. Lady Mentoria inquired a few particulars and
passed on to the next.

"You must know," said she, "this cot contains my favorite pensioner, it is
poor blind Orford, and the sweet Maria his only child, we shall find them busy,
no doubt."

Rosalie tapped at the door, which was opened by the charming cottager, with
her knitting and book in her hand; on one side a small table sat the venerable
Orford, who hearing the voice of Lady Mentoria laid down his work, and bowed
his head.

"Always full of employment!" said her Ladyship, taking up some platted straw
his ingenuity had wove together, and formed into small mats and baskets.

"'It Is merely amusement," said Orford, "but last night I finished a large
basket as a present for your Ladyship, 'twill hold grapes or peaches, if you
will honor me by accepting it from a poor blind man; Maria arranged the
colored straw, and she tells me I have not made one mistake; and our
neighbors say it is very pretty."

Maria instantly brought it, and Rosalie and Lady Mentoria wiped a tear as they
admired and inspected it.

"Make me two or three more, Orford, and I will give you half a crown a piece
for your trouble."

"Oh! heavens bless my good lady, the honor of making them will be quite
sufficient, do I not constantly live on your bounty, and while I enjoy that
blessing God forbid I should be covetous; permit me then to make them only as a
small but grateful return for the abundant favors you have heaped on me, and
my heart in consequence will feel lighter, by the idea of retaliating in some
trifling measure, the gratitude I owe you."

"Excellent man!" said Lady Mentoria, "please yourself, and finish them at your
leisure: Maria's jacket wears fast, and I mean to give her a new one."

A flush of joy passed Maria's cheek, and she poured her thanks. Lady Mentoria
soon after returned through the village with every one's blessing wasted around
her.

"What heartfelt satisfaction do these visits afford me," said she, "and my
attention is doubly repaid by the gratitude and honor of my pensioners; these
my dear girl, are the real and only useful plans of relief to the indigent, it
institutes decorum, creates the emulation of virtue, and minutely distinguishes
the weed from the flower, for rear it even in the most prolific soil 'twill
never lose its baneful quantities, and however its external appearance may
deceive, the lurking poison will still contaminate it; but here, thank heaven,
every blossom puts forth its leaf in friendly promise, and every transplanted
branch flourishes fair and satisfactorily: -- There is an exquisite pleasure,
my charming friend, in contemplating such improving and improvable scenes,
which few, (I am sorry to say) whom ability enables, have either the courage or
inclination to view in its proper light; pity the frailties of the debased part
of mankind should deter the generous and humane from instituting a little
select circle of the deserving, under the patronage of good advice and virtuous
example."

"Exalted woman," thought Rosalie, "may the blessing of approving providence
crown thee with her choicest gifts, for who so deserving?"

Delighting in visiting these virtuous pensioners; she often strolled thither,
to pass an hour in the cottage of Evelyn, whose excellent plan of imparting
education among his little flock gave her the highest opinion of his
principles, for benign diffidence and virtuous example formed the constant
method of his encouraging and progressive system for inculcating religion and
morality in their most pleasing emulative forms, and ever prone to admire
merit, and reward its progress, she consecrated the following lines to his
character, and and laid them one morning on Lady Mentoria's breakfast table, as
the produce of an hour's reflection when seated on her favorite cliff.

THE VILLAGE MONITOR.
Merit's a plant so delicate in bloom,
So scarce its growth and arduous to explore,
Often crushed in embryo, and neglect its doom,
That promised buds often droop to rise no more.
But virtue found it withering on the wild,
Pitied its fate, transplanted it with care,
In richer foil, and temp'rature more mild,
Safe from the resolate and blighting air.
Cherished with fost'ring hand, prolific flowers,
Gratefully peeping 'neath the withering leaf,
Diffused their fragrance in sequestered bowers,
No more weighed down with gems of dewy grief.
Tranquil expanding in the prosperous ray,
No tempest ruffling their envied bloom,
Serene the evening of autumnal day,
With gentle breeze shall waft it to the tomb.
'Till spring re-dawning on the mouldering grave,
Shall renovate its verdure once again,
And pity, with the drop of mercy, lave,
Its future blossom on the etherial plain.
In allegory thus permit the pen,
To trace the village monitor's known fame,
For merit blooms with virtuous Evelyn,
And emulation consecrates his name.
Evelyn, my muse impartially repeats,
Evelyn, the pride of Thornley's lone retreats.
CHAP. XVII.
THREE days had elapsed, and Rosalie and Lady Mentoria were just partaking a
fine pine after dinner, when the door opened, and Lord Edwin limping in, shook
hands with his aunt, and bowed gracefully to Rosalie.

"My dear Edwin," cried the astonished and confounded Lady Mentoria, "what can
possibly have brought you to the Abbey, is any accident the occasion of this
unexpected visit?"

"A flight one," answered he. "My horse being restive, brushed too close by the
wheel of a wagon, and has bruised my leg, the pain of which increasing, I
thought it most prudent to make the best of my way to Thornley, and not
endanger it by proceeding to the castle; but had I known you was engaged with
company, I should not have intruded."

"Oh, that young lady is only my companion, the ward of your father, an amiable
orphan, Edwin, who has been bred in an obscure part of Switzerland, Chamouny, I
believe it is called: our dispositions seem exactly to suit, and I trust we
shall enjoy many happy years at the Abbey, occasionally visiting my nieces at
the Castle."

Luckily for Rosalie, Lady Mentoria had been too much engaged and flurried by
the entrance of her nephew, to observe the emotion that agitated the bosom of
her fair companion. Delighted to see him -- fearful of discovery -- doubtful if
he had really experienced the accident he complained of, and unconscious how to
gain a moment's information -- a thousand perplexities banished and recalled
the rose on her cheek, but very fortunately to relieve her suspense Lady
Mentoria begged he would make use of some embrocation, which she retired to
fetch from her private laboratory, and the intermediate moment of her absence
furnished Rosalie with a full explanation of the artful stratagem he had used
to prevent suspicion, by assuring her that he was perfectly free from accident,
and had flown on the wings of love to enjoy her smiles.

Lady Mentoria just then entering with her embrocation, ended the momentary
conversation, and thankfully taking the bottle, he retired to bathe the
imaginary contusion, and soon after returned.

"'It Is strange, said he as he entered, my boot should have given me so much
pain, and yet not the least sign of external injury is perceivable." This he
thought a sufficient excuse, should his aunt, as the famous village doctress,
insist upon examining it and preferring her judgment and skill, so limping as
naturally as possible, the Dowager's credulity was easily imposed on.

In the course of the evening Lord Edwin distantly polite and sedate,
introduced the topic of Italian. "You are, no doubt, a proficient Ma^amselle,"
said he, addressing Rosalie by the most tender epithet in that language, which
being entirely unknown to the venerable companion, furnished them the best
contrivance possible, "Will you," continued he, "do me the favor to correct
any imperfections in that elegant language; conversing with a native I shall
doubtless much improve the little I at present know."

"Nay," replied her Ladyship, "you are reckoned to speak it very fluent, why
then talk of improvement and correction of error; but don't you mean to write
to your father?"

"Certainly not, why should I alarm him," answered he, "you know his timidity
would create a hundred ensuing evils, a day or two will enable me to proceed,
and he will easily make an excuse for my detainment on the road, as travelers
are never certain where curiosity is the deity they seek, and restriction does
not clip the wings of time in her pursuance."

Every point of apparent propriety being thus settled, Edwin remained three
days at the Abbey, and was then unable to plead longer excuse, while Lady
Mentoria, who watched with the most rigid circumspection the conduct of his
Lordship, was perfectly satisfied he entertained no other sensation for her
fair charge than what his natural politness and affability inspired, and
therefore ordering her low cabriolet, took her seat by the side of Rosalie, and
accompanied him part of the way for an airing.

Time had hobbled lamely with the Marquis, but when the long expected moment
arrived, and Lord Edwin mentioned his delay at the Abbey, the Marquis's blood
changed told; but recovering himself he enquired how his sister was.

"Perfectly well, and happy in the society of her fair charge."

"And what do you think of her? asked the Marquis, fixing his eyes intently on
his son's.

"I think her a pleasing and interesting companion," replied Lord Edwin,
assumming all possible sang froid, "a brilliant, the shades of obscurity has
not deprived of its luster, and I don't doubt a little emulative polish will
soon render it a most perfect and admirable acquisition to the envied
possessor: She is a pleasant Swiss girl, charmingly livly, yet modest and
politely diffident, by what little I observed, and I really think she will be a
very delightful companion for my aunt, if the gloomy Abbey does not instill too
much of the pensorose, for it is a wretched dull place and would soon give me
the horrors."

"My aunt tells me she is the daughter of some humble friend of yours, on whose
decease you was appointed guardian: Fortunate orphan! to have the protection of
so benevolent a man: Excuse me, Sir, nor think me guilty of adulation, you have
ever evinced yourself the best of fathers, and my heart would be ungrateful not
to acknowledge your worth."

"She is, alas! the child of misfortune in every sense," answered the Marquis,
secretly rejoicing to have extracted the sentiments of his son, "but I shall
take care of her with the anxious solicitude of a parent, 'till I can marry her
to some worthy and amiable man deserving her affection, and ^u^ded by her
inclination* But don't you think her pretty?" added he, darting a ^trating
look, if possible to confuse him.

"Humph, yes," answered the cautions Edwin, "tolerable; what can you expect in
fact from a complexion exposed to the beams of the meridian, or the keen blasts
of the mountainous climate, unguarded by the shades of art or fashion, to repel
those extremes so pernicious to a delicate skin; all the beauty Rosalie can
boast is the glow of health, that she eminently possesses, and nature has
certainly traced her pencil in the purest bloom to animate her cheek, like the
wild rose exposed to each inclement ray, still boasting loveliness and purity,
while the rude wind that whistles round its head bends with severity its feeble
stem, but cannot divest it of its charms: Yet I do not wish to call her
handsome, her amiability of disposition will sufficiently endear her to those
whose generous and seeling hearts participate her fate."

The Marquis now left him with a mind relieved from suspicion, and festivity
presided the evening circle, 'till Lord Edwin ordering Carlos to unpack his
portmanteau, delivered his father a letter from his friend at Paris, informing
him his son could not sail for India with Lord Edwin, as proposed, from some
particular occurrence, and therefore totally declined the voyage. This was a
second annihilation to the Marquis's projects, and sullen and dejected he
retired to rest.

CHAP. XVIII.
THE morning brought a number of friends to the Castle, to congratulate Lord
Edwin's return, and inquire how soon he intended to sail on his Indian
expedition, amongst them was the Duchess of Albermarle, and her daughter Lady
Cecilia Bouverie, to whom the Marquis's partiality of genealogy hoped to
command the affection of Lord Edwin, as his future bride.

She was too tall to be elegant, her countenance pallid and uninteresting, her
disposition haughty, and her partiality to the follies of dress extravagantly
outre: yet to these imperfections was the Marquis totally blind; to unite the
blazoned escutcheon was his sole wish, and, alas! the finer feelings of
sensibility were eclipsed by the dazzling allurement of grandeur, even founded
on the basis of total disregard; he thought the sacrifice of happiness amply
substituted by the idolatry such splendor would revert on his family from the
anticipated alliance; love had lost its potent charm in his bosom, the flame
was extinct that once blazed, with the spirit of congeniality, and now the
corroding worm of insatiate ambition supplied its place. Fatal tyrant! whose
uncontrolled power sways every precept; love shrinks from thy baneful
influence, pity disolves in tears at thy predominance, while friendship half
withdraws the extended hand of unity, and suspects a lurking thorn concealed
beneath the blooming yet fallacious rose of happiness; and every virtue is
imprisoned by this despot, in its deep recess: But for thy influence the
venerable Tankerville was the tenderest parent, the most faithful friend, and
generous benefactor. His pillow was this night strewn with the sharp thorns of
suspicion and vexation, which every reminiscentia served but to augment, and
his sleepless eyes were languid and heavy when he desscended to breakfast.

After the repast was ended Lord Edwin was summoned to the library, and the
Marquis developed the burdensome secret that rankled in his bosom, by
declaring his sentiments in favor of Lady Cecilia, and earnestly recommending
such consideration to his son.

Lord Edwin, unwilling to believe at first, rallied the subject, (...) silenced
by a stern look from the Marquis.

"Ah! my dear Sir," said he, respectfully taking his hand, "Edwin avows his
real sentiments when he declares, Lady Cecilia boasts no charms to captivate
his affection, love alone must bind the fetter that retains his heart; yet,
rest assured, prudence, honor, and virtue shall unite the rosy links of his
bondage, when inclination solicits the sacrifice at the shrine of fidelity, and
parental affection smiles an approving consent; yet, I beseech you never ask me
to bestow that heart on Lady Cecilia, while its inmost feelings reject with
painful anxiety its inability to retaliate a mutual impression."

"You are resolved then never to comply," said the irritated Marquis.

"Never while my soul revolts could I be the impious wretch to violate the
sacred oath recorded on the page of futurity, under the specious sanction of
pretended love, while duplicity alone veiled my disgust."

"Enough, enough," answered the enraged parent, "seal your lips on the subject,
nor dare invade my ear with your high-flown phrases more; yet remember, the
hour you disobey my wish, by uniting yourself without my approbation, shall
disinherit you from every possible source of fortune I can curtail: Retire and
reflect on the obstinacy of your refusal, and when reason cools your heated
imagination you may probably relent, and study my happiness as well as your own
interest."

Lord Edwin conscious of the stability of sentiment he had just professed,
bowed and withdrew.

The Duchess and Lady Cecilia were unfortunately invited to dinner, which was
no small embarrassment to Lord Edwin after the subject just discussed; the
ceremony of dinner being ended without any particular occurrence, the Marquis
proposed an evening ride, and as (...) Duchess's landau had brought her to the
Castle, it was proposed to accommodate the Marquis, Lady Adela, and herself,
white Lady Louisa mounted Sir Henry's phaeton, and the Marquis ordered his
son's curricle to convey him and Cecilia purposely through mortification: Lord
Carlton and the honorable Frederic Waldegrave mounted their horses; Sir Henry
was to lead the way, the curricle followed, and the Landau and horsemen brought
up the rear.

Lord Carlton's horse had not proceeded above two miles when taking fright at a
water-mill it conquered the skill of the rider and threw him. Lady Adela, who
saw the inevitable danger, shrieked and fainted on the Duchess's shoulder, and
the whole cavalcade instantly stopped; the Duchess's salts were successfully
applied, and Lady Adela revived amidst the confusion of catching the furious
animal, who was now too mettlesome to mount, and at the earnest desire of the
Duchess and lady Adela he agreed to take his seat in the landau, though much
wishing to continue his equestrian exercise, but to calm the terror of the
ladies who so earnestly entreated his forbearance, his polite condescension
obediently adopted their plan, and the vicious steed was to be led by the
servants.

Lady Cecilia, whose companion had probably not entertained her on the most
pleasing or interesting subject, tired with his non-chalance, determined to
mortify herself no longer, but put her resolution of quitting her seat in
practice, and thereby convince herself of the reality or fallacy of her
suggestion, not doubting from his cool insipid behavior her company was
totally, indifferent to him, and begged to exchange her seat with Lord Carlton,
as one of the curricle horses had become very mettlesome since the rapid flight
of the other, and declared her agitation would not permit her to go any farther.

Lord Edwin secretly rejoicing at her riddance, instantly offered his hand to
alight, assuring her, he was apprehensive of the animal's becoming rather
unruly. Lady Cecilia suffered him to lead her to the carriage, into which she
hastily jumped, and took her seat by the Marquis's side, who much chagrined,
told her, he wished she had kept her station, as she would have had a finer
view of the prospect he wished to show her.

"Oh dear," replied she, "I have seen none yet worthy of admiration, and Lord
Edwin complains of the headache, which, of course, rendered our gossip very
insipid; I detest to hear of ennui, much more endure it, it vapors me to death
in five minutes, therefore I thought it best not to increase it by my chat, so
we have not uttered more than ^mony syllable each this half hour; I through
compassion to his brain, and he through inability of subject or inclination,
and I never admire statuary you know," adding a sarcastic laugh.

"If these horses should grow unruly," said Lady Adela, raising herself to
watch their prancing, "poor Lord Carlton may experience a second fall, and as I
have no fears on the subject, I can go with my brother and accommodate him with
my seat."

Not for the world," replied the voice of Lord Carlton at the carriage wheel,
while Lady Adela glowed like crimson.

"Surely," returned the Marquis, "the men are most proper objects to encounter
difficulties, and if any should arise Providence by your prayers will preserve
them no doubt."

The strong emphasis laid on your prayers, uttered ironically, silenced the
deeply interested Adela; and Lady Louisa and Sir Henry were in fact the only
real enjoyers of this intended pleasure. Lady Cecilia found no beauties to
commend in the view she had been brought to observe; dissatisfied and peevish
every object increased her disgust, and lolling on the Marquis's arm with
vacant stare, she just deigned to acknowledge a beautiful natural cascade that
heightened the charms of a picturesque view, was "Pretty enough."

"Insensate!" thought Lord Edwin, as he handed her to the carriage, "How would
Rosalie's eye have wandered over this charming spot, and discovered a thousand
beauties my perspicuity had never remarked, while this insipid mortal finds no
perfection from the circle of her toilet, nor acknowledges a beauty she does
not conceive centred in her own imaginary elegance."

Carlton sat lolling home in the curricle, musing on the energy of Lady Adela's
solicitation, to brave the apparent danger, and resign her safer seat to him.

"Moralizing Mentor!" said Lord Edwin.

"Yes," answered he, "on human virtues in their most captivating form."

"And I on human frailties in their most formidable and disgusting view; thus
we differ: I wonder which reflection will turn to most advantage."

"That we must profit by on mature investigation," replied Lord Carlton, "every
vice has its moral, from which we may improve as prudence and inclination shall
direct, did we always associate with the amiable part of mankind we should be
at a loss to preserve ourselves from the snares and corruption of the evil
disposed, and fall a prey to their ingenuous duplicity, under the specious
sanction of candor and virtue; morality is the most interesting, yet least
observed study of nature, and thus it is we entail calamity by the impositions
daily practiced on credulity; but what shall we say of the man whose view of
vice is shaded only by a veil, whose texture is thinner than the finest gauze,
if he obstinately fears it is too much trouble to examine the picture, by
raising the film that obscures it, and therefore trusts to the judgment and
honor of some by-stander to explain its properties, as best suits his own
digested plan: Such a character is surely as pitiable as it appears
contemptible, and dear bought experience too soon convinces him he has become
the dupe of artifice when too late to retract."

"Bravo," exclaimed Lord Edwin, "I shall record these sentiments with a golden
pen, on the tablet of friendship, thou excellent Monitor."

Various subjects ensued, till they reached the Castle, and Lord Edwin, though
very polite, could not obtain one smile from Lady Cecilia, he was not the man
of gallantry to her taste, and she therefore hastened the Duchess's departure,
as early as possible.

Lady Adela had one morning retired alone to the pavilion, and Lord Carlton
accidentally soon after bent his steps to the same spot, but finding the door
fastened, he ventured to tap, and Lady Adela imagining it one of the servants,
laid down her crayon and turned the key, when opening the door Lord Carlton
appeared on the steps, and she started with surprise.

"I hope I do not disturb you," said he.

"No," replied Lady Adela, much flurried, and cautiously drawing a paper over a
slight sketch she had just made, placed it in the drawer, but unfortunately the
lock would not turn, and Lord Carlton offered his assistance.

"Something prevents it shutting," said he, and pulling it open, the paper
slipped from the drawer and discovered his own picture; but with the greatest
presence of mind he avoided disclosing his surprise, and shutting the drawer
turned and presented the key to Lady Adela, who, unconscious he had seen it was
perfectly collected: Not so the bosom of Lord Carlton, who had not wanted this
proof to confirm his suspicions and utmost wish, and he now determined to gain
the advice of Lord Edwin, and solicit him to reveal his design to the Marquis;
'twas now the fortunate moment of explanation, and he determined to improve it,
as Lady Adela had so charmingly revealed her own secret when least intended.

CHAP. XIX.
ROSALIE in the mean time was become the Angelic Divinity of the Abbey, beloved
by Lady Mentoria with the affection of a parent, and adored by every soul who
knew her: once she had created an alarm amongst the peasants on the shore, by
strolling one evening to the cliff with her late, whose soft and dulcet note
just reached their ear in faintest sound, and brought them from their suppers
to listen; she was seated on the cliff, and being dressed in white the
reflection of the moon on her countenance gave her a palid appearance, and
justified the express idea of an apparition: The alarm soon spread, unknown and
unheard by Rosalie, who deeply occupied in musing on a very different subject,
suddenly rose and turned away, while the cottagers variously gave their
opinions on the wonderful appearance, while timidity instilled innumerable
conjectures as the elevation of the cliff prevented distinct observation, and
before they had time to discover what it could be, the figure vanished.

Lady Mentoria was writing in her study when Rosalie returned, and not wishing
to disturb her, she thought the moonlight so inviting that she bent her steps
to a large balcony, on the flat part of the Abbey roof, between the battlement;
it was formerly erected to command the prospect, but had been seldom visited
for many years past; the door that led to it at the end of the gallery having
been accidently discovered by Rosalie, she had chosen this opportunity of
exploring the boundary, and therefore strolled out to gratify her curiosity.

Here she amused herself half an hour, and then descended to the parlour, where
Lady Mentoria willing to amuse her, rung the bell, and ordered her attendant to
fetch down a port-folio of maps, and an old terrestrial globe from a
lumber-room in the East wing of the Abbey.

Martha took the keys but turned pale as death. "Thomas, or Austin, can help me
to bring it down, my lady, I suppose?" asked she, while the keys jingled from
the tremulous motion of her hand.

"And why not go alone?" said her Ladyship, "you know the room."

"Yes, my Lady, but then I must pass the door that leads to the balcony."

"Well, what of that?" replied Lady Mentoria.

"Oh, the ghost! -- Indeed, indeed, Madam, Austin and I was walking in the
court yard this very evening, and we saw, by the light of the moon something as
white as snow whisking between the battlements, without a head; I am sure I was
not deceived, for though our folks have often said that wing of the Abbey was
haunted, I never believed such nonsense 'till now my eyes have convinced me;
and Austin watched it, and put on his spectacles; but he could not make it out."

"My good Martha," said Rosalie, laughing heartily at her description, "Do not
alarm yourself, for I was the formidable ghost, without a head, upon my honor*
but I am sorry my innocent walk should have created such unnecessary te^ors."

Martha grew instantly composed. "To be sure, Madam, I was scared out of my
wits, for I had not been in our hall talking above five minutes, before in
comes William, who had been round to the cottages on the shore to order some
fish, so says he, this is a long-legged ghost, it has made good haste, for our
fishers saw it a-top of the cliff, not an hour ago* it is a merry one too, for
they said they heard music in the air at the same time, and all the women and
children scampered into the cottages frightened to death.

"Ah!" said Rosalie, "I wandered there too, and thus the mystery is unfolded,
therefore assure yourself you may safely venture up stairs for you will see no
more ghosts there this evening, and do me the favor to remove the prepossessed
ideas of your associates, by revealing the truth."

Martha now quite ^fied, tripped up stairs with a light heart, dou^y invested
with courage, and Lady Mentoria enjoyed the jest at her expense.

Rosalie, to oblige her friends at the castle, penned the following stanzas
during her seclusion at the Abbey, in her lonely morning and evening strolls;
'twas a charming romantic spot, but her fancy now depicted its desolated decay
at a future period of a half century's ravage on its Gothic pile; and Lady
Mentoria much pleased with the production of her youthful poetess, treasured
the manuscript in her cabinet.

THE DESOLATED ABBEY.
As musing fancy guides me over the lawn,
When moonlight beams upon the mouldring tower,
I take my pensive seat by some rude thorn,
On which once bloomed the blossom's pallid flower.
Alas! luxuriant scenes, by fancy changed,
Methinks I view thee crumbling over the earth,
Where in these foliag'd groves so often I Have ranged
And watched of every rose the genial birth.
When rural elegance some fete composed,
Often have I joined the sprightly roundelay;
In rich pavilions sweetly have reposed,
And tasted banquets sumptuously gay.
Here stroll'd at daybreak with my favorite lute,
'Midst odorous shrubb'ries exquisite perfume,
When every sound save echoed plaint was mute,
And zephyrs wasted fragrance from the bloom.
Here if some wandering wretch, the child of fate,
Told his sad tale, and humbly asked relief,
No surly menial drove him from the gate,
Humanity beguiled the tear of grief.
Methinks yon tottering tower's turret peeps,
Through twining ivy fragments rude project,
Prolific round each battlement it creeps,
As if the poor remainder to protect.
Now where the historic page depicted gay,
In beauty traced on the transparent pane,
Will shattered drop neglected to decay,
And cobweb films alone their place retain.
The noble hall too, by the helmets graced,
And cheerful horn which often blithe echo rung;
'Midst ancient warriors stately portraits placed,
As mouldring trophies be neglected hung.
And damps exhaling from the dreary wall,
Over faded tap'stry their rude marks will leave,
Thus desolate in ruin will it fall,
Of every former elegance bereaved.
When gloomy midnight veils departed day,
The screech-owl refug'd in some dark recess,
Will hail the circling bat who wings her way,
To some more favorite niche frequented less.
Then fancy raises the chimeric tale,
That some pale spectre nightly haunts the tower;
Firm in the village such reports prevail,
Where superstition combats every power.
Such tales relate every peasant hears,
Where if the Abbey he must pass at eve,
Ideal fancy added to his fears,
Presents some phantom which his thoughts conceive.
Alas! could every heart with truth assert,
Its virtues pure as those this mansion owned,
How blessed 'twould be to share their real desert,
By meriting the tears their memory mourned.
Embosom'd 'midst the drooping fir and pine,
With solemn cypress and dark mournful yew,
Methinks the tombs of ancestry reclines,
In drear Mausoleum neglected too.
Here would I stroll then to the solemn made,
Indulging pensive thought to friendship dear,
Pluck the last blossoms 'ere their beauty fade,
And consecrate them with a heart-sprung tear.
To these sad wilds I Would sigh a last farewell,
And then reluctant quit each well known haunt,
With grief each bubbling stream would seem to swell,
And solitary bend the drooping plant,
While the park gate with hideous grating slam,
Will seem to bid exclusion to each foot,
Where the gay foliag'd oak that screen'd yon lamb,
Will leave no trace except its knotted root.
Often have I sat beneath its spreading shade,
While to my lute some lark has warbled sweet,
When in full elegance surrounding glade,
Their native beauties blushed in this retreat.
The well-known bench too moss will over creep,
And where each rose in gay luxuriance hung,
Rude tangling weeds will proud dominion keep,
And nettles group the spot where blossoms sprung.
Disrobed the forest and the ravaged vale,
I scarce a path or avenue shall trace;
For where the elm now rustles in the gale,
Prolific briars will supply its place.
Wild-berries clustring on its straggling thorn,
Will then remain to mark the shrubb'ry's bound;
O'ergrown with weeds the solitary lawn,
To memory scarce 'twill prove its high renown.
The dreary thought my sinking heart appalls,
And tremblingly I quit the fancied gloom;
Alas! like this each human fabric falls,
And gradual sinks oblivious in the tomb.
Majestic ruin! noble in decay,
Thy fame shall live when thou art sunk away.
A few days after a severe touch of the gout attacked the venerable Dowager,
who constantly at those periods repaired to the Castle, for the particular
attendance of a favorite physician, in consequence of which they immediately
sat out, traveling by short stages 'till they reached the Castle on the third
evening.

Miss Villars was that day or a visit to the ladies, when the invalid arrived*
and Lord Edwin flying to the carriage, assisted the Dowager to alight, while
his countenance could scarce assume the semblance of sorrow due to the
sufferings of his aunt, as Rosalie followed Lady Mentoria into the parlour,
supported between her nephew and Montague. Lord Edwin chair stood vacant by the
side of Miss Villars, but was instantly removed to the opposite one between the
Dowager and Rosalie.

Miss Viliars's eyes were fixed on the transient exchange, while Rosalie had as
intently observed the situation of the vacated chair. "Upon my word you are an
excellent nurse, and indeed shine superior in that character to any other,"
said the imperious Amazon.

"I always was," replied Lord Edwin, "Lady Mentoria will vouch for me, I have
frequently devoted my evenings to backgammon, for her amusement, while my
sisters have joined some juvenile party in the neighborhood."

"A fine compliment to the belles and beaus," rejoined Miss Villars.

"A proof at least of ^he young man's humanity and condescension to an old
woman, neglected by the youthful part of her own sex, afflicted with an
infirmity heaven may in time retaliate on them."

"I hope I shall never have the gout," answered the haughty fair, "or at least
if I have, I hope my ill temper will never add to the trouble I shall then be
to every body."

"It must undergo a thorough and speedy reform," replied the offended invalid,
"for the impetuosity of youth will never be softened by the infirmities of age;
it will tr^bly augment peevishness, not diminish it, depend upon it, young
lady."

Rosalie, hung tenderly over her chair, endeavored by a thousand little
stratagems to alleviate the pain, and divert her attention, while Miss Villars
turning on her heel with half a smile, asked Lord Edwin if he was too much
occupied to take a stroll for the benefit of the air.

"Ah, do," cried Lady Mentoria, "and take Rosalie with you, it will revive her
after the confinement of a close carriage." Lady Adela joined the request, and
Lord Edwin escorted them.

Lady Mentoria now asked the Marquis if he had any objection to Rosalie's
remaining at the Castle, or if he chose she should return.

"No," replied he, "let her stay, I think I have probed the heart of Edwin, and
found no wound to penetrate, I am therefore easy on that subject."

The evening passed merrily away, and Rosalie retired to a new apartment facing
the portico of oranges, the evening was fair and clear, myriads of diamonds
studded the azured veil of night, and fragrant odours embalmed the breeze, when
something lightly tapping at her window called her attention, and she opened
the sash, when a small note, fastened to a string, was thrown up and reached
her hand; it was Lord Edwin, whose billet earnestly entreated she would allow
him half an hour's chat in the pavilion, by seven o'clock.

Rosalie nodded assent, but spoke not, shocked at his temerity, as Lady
Mentoria's chamber joined here is, and he might have been discovered, she
therefore closed the blind and prudently withdrew.

CHAP. XX.
THE Dowager recovered from her slight attack, and was persuaded to pass a
month at the Castle, during which time Rosalie improved rapidly in her drawing
and music, and her soft melodious voice was to give its first specimen of
delight at a private concert, performed at the Castle; numerous friends and
neighbors were invited, and among the rest the Honorable Frederic Waldegrave
paid his first visit since Rosalie's arrival: Struck with the charms of her
person, he lost his usual sprightliness in the pleasing contemplation, and was
her constant shadow the whole evening, while Lord Edwin, who silently observed
his motions, was deeply concerned and much agitated.

Lady Louisa presided at the grand piano forte, Lady Adela exquisitely touched
her harp, Lord Carlton performed on the violoncello, and Lord Edwin took his
animating mellifluous flute, while Sir Henry flourished the sprightly horn, and
two strangers subjoined their enlivening violins, Rosalie chose the fantastic
tamborine, and two songs, with an inimitable charming composition, adapted for
her favorite lute, constituted her share of the performance; she was purposely
habited in the Savoyard style, and captivated every beholder; her beautiful
solo on the lute received unbounded applause, and when she dropped it
negligently by her side, Waldegrave instantly caught and applied it to his lip.

"Do you play, sir?" said the sweet girl.

"No," replied he, "I am only endeavoring, like the be, to extract the honey
from the little c^lls, because those charming lips have pressed th^^."

Rosalie unused to adulation, felt herself at a loss to give a proper reply,
and Lord Edwin coming toward them at the instant, happily relieved her
embarrassment.

"Rosalie," said he, lay by your magic lute, your next enchantment will be a
song."

"What is it?" asked Waldegrave, touching the leaves of a rose placed on her
bosom, "The Mansion of Peace?"

"No," answered Lord Edwin, perfectly understanding the question, "that
privilege is reserved for a chosen few; the song she favors us with is to aid
the inspiration of Adela's harp, and will convince you it is not ill adapted to
the soul of the enchantress."

He then led her to the orchestra, and whispered her to beware of Waldegrave's
freedom, which he did no^ at present dare resent. The assembly observed a
profound silence, and the beautiful Rosalie and elegant Adela drew forward and
began Mrs. Crouch's favorite song in the Heiress; it is true, the warbler had
often practiced it, but to night she excelled every former attempt: The
benignity of her countenance, and the forcible expression laid on every line,
captivated each attentive auditor, and a general whisper of praise buzzed in
every part of the room.

Waldegrave roused from his enchanting reverie with a profound sigh, and again
repeated his encomiums; the Marquis passing at the moment pressed her hand,
"you are a good girl, and have pleased every body."

"She has enchanted them!" replied Waldegrave, "every body as if inspired by
magic, repeats but the name of this bewitching siren."

The Marquis astonished at this rhapsody, led him away, and the evening passed
cheerfully on, but the succeding day brought Waldegrave to the Castle, on some
frivolous pretense, while Lord Edwin was airing, and Rosalie was unfortunately
alone in the pavilion, finishing a small drawing, while the ladies had retired
to dress. Waldegrave delighted beyond expectation, seized the happy moment to
explain his raptures, offered her his hand and fortune, and assured her of his
unalterable attachment.

"Silence, Mr. Waldegrave," said she, withdrawing her half-devoured hand, "you
honor me too far, reflect for a moment to whom you are imparting your
sentiments, bordering surely on unguarded extravagance, I must not, dare not,
believe them the deliberate effusions of sincerity, surely they must be the
uncontrouled suggestion of the moment, mere inspirations of gallantry, yet
however devoid of propriety, are, I trust, founded on the basis of honor."

"Perfectly so, charming Rosalie, nor time nor absence shall erase the faithful
fond impression, tell me then lovely angel, if Waldegrave's hopes may live in
thy bewitching smile; or doomed to meet thy frown, must he resign that
treasured heart to some more happy rival?"

"Alas!" said Rosalie, "I boast no heart to give, 'twas lost in the peaceful
vale of Chamouny, 'ere I knew these plains."

Waldegrave turned pale, his lips trembled, his hand grew cold as he grasped
hers: -- "Ah! tell me then," said he, "whose bosom guards the inestimable
treasure, and I will fly to hear the tale, where if I find him, as perhaps I
may, unburthened with the gifts of fortune, my ample purse shall well supply
the same deficiency, 'till it has rendered his more humble roof completely
worthy of so fair an inmate; then may I live to hear my Rosalie is blessed, and
Waldegrave, wretched Waldegrave, asks no farther recompense."

He now turned from her to hide the manly tear that flowed in spite of every
effort to retain it; and Rosalie, stung to the soul, remained a perfect statue
of astonishment."

"Permit me to retire," said she, in a low and tremulous voice, "unable from
the overflow of gratitude to thank you as I ought, and incapable of expressing
what my lips would fain utter; yet, may every blessing, every tranquil joy
surround you, and may the heart your fondest love shall choose, return with
equal rapture and sincerity thy matchless generosity and affection, while the
poor humble Rosalie shall waft her purest prayer to heaven for your felicity --
wretched boon I grant, but it is the sacred incense of a heart that would give
more if love and honor did not hold it captive."

"Generous girl!" answered the still more enraptured Waldegrave, "And must I
resign thee? Oh! cruel fate: Yet tell me, I beseech you, the name of my rival,
and I will cherish the envied robber with the affection of a brother, while he
returns the fond caresses of my Rosalie, but if a shade of slight, however
transient, cross the sunshine of thy happiness, then Waldegrave's arm shall
plunge a dagger in the monster's heart, and free the angelic sufferer from his
frown."

Rosalie shuddered with horror, for his countenance during this energetic
speech had assumed every fury of real sensation. "We must meet no more then,"
said she, "you grow furious, ask no further questions, I beseech you, but leave
me to my fate."

"Never, 'till you tell my rival's name and residence, that I may accomplish my
promise," rejoined Waldegrave.

"That I cannot reveal at present, I have cogent reasons, but when time shall
develope my fate, the heart that claims the humble Rosalie's, shall generously
own, and strive to imitate the excellent virtues and gratitude of a Waldegrave;
Adieu then, I must fly to my chamber, or my length of absence will create
suspicion."

"Adieu too lovely Rosalie, a few days will convey me to the asylum of a
faithful friend, whose tender admonition will console my wounded peace." Once
more he kissed her hand, and darting through the shrubbery with the air of a
maniac, mounted his horse, which he had fastened to a tree at the entrance of
the park, and retired unseen by any soul.

Rosalie was transfixed to the gate over which she had leaned, her eyes filled
with tears, her hands clasped and raised to heaven in silent ejaculation, when
the sound of Sir Henry Lansdowne's phaeton roused her lethargic stupor, and
turning quickly back into the house she entered her own apartment, where the
most painful reflections agitated her palpitating heart. "I must assume
duplicity at the expense of discretion," sighed she, "for should the tale ever
be revealed, what misery might it not entail on such a dreadful discovery to
Lord Edwin! O, heaven avert it; already he observes the partial praises of
Waldegrave with the keen eye of suspicion, and strictly repels them: Fatal
secret! repose then in my bosom, where I will cautiously guard thee, and all
will yet be well." --

"All did I say? Alas! no -- poor Waldegrave, where will thou find the balm to
heal a wounded heart? Not on the frozen mountain -- not on the burning sands of
India -- nor in the fostering clime of peaceful happy England; for, Oh! no
balsam can extract the venom, bloom in what soil it may!"

Her eyes had lost their usual luster, when she descended to dinner, and Lord
Edwin observed it, but Rosalie assuring him he was mistaken, and assuming a
gaiety of heart foreign to her feelings, it all passed off.

CHAP. XXI.
A FORTNIGHT elapsed and Waldegrave had never appeared at the Castle, when a
morning visit from Miss Villars, the Chronicle of the vicinity, proclaimed his
departure.

"So Waldegrave has left his mansion suddenly, on a trip to his friend Ellers,
at Lime Park, and the beautiful eminence that overlooks Rose Vale is put in
immediate design, several workmen are employed, and as I passed, seeing them
very busy, I asked for what the structure was intended. 'Why it is for a
hermitage, Ma'am,' says a grey-headed shrivelled old man, 'his Honor intends
it to be very curious and complete, he has given us orders to proceed in the
outer work, and then he will lay out his plan as his fancy strikes him."

"Why this is quite a new whim," said I.

"O dear yes, my Lady," continued he, "and it will be a vast solontory place; I
told his honor the birds would make pretty free, for there is a power of all
sorts thereabouts; O, says he, never trouble yourself about them, their company
will amuse me, and their song will amply repay their intrusion."

"Why yes," says I, "your honor was always good natured to every body, but you
will have a few songs from the rooks as well as the larks, and that mighty
dismal."

"That too I shall equally enjoy," replied he, "so don't disturb them if they
hover about."

"It is a mighty odd notion we think, but to be sure we have only to obey
orders."

"Thus ended the elegant harangue, and I rode off; don't you think it a fine
romantic scheme; what a blooming hermit he will be, Lord Edwin, suppose we make
a formal visit."

"Never disturb the reveries of solitude," answered Lord Edwin, "fan the flame
of his inspiration, by all means, twill turn to good effect no doubt, when so
young a man gratifies the bent of such recluse inclinations."

Rosalie, who had listened to every syllable uttered by Miss Villars's
shrivelled old man, as she maliciously styled him, was at no loss to comprehend
the mysterious enigma, "He is then in reality," thought she, "and the fatal
impression is to be nursed in the shades of solitude, where it will never be
erased."

Lord Edwin surmised some secret scheme actuated Waldegrave's design: Naturally
of a careless lively disposition, could youth like his assume the careful brow,
and woo the shades of seclusion, inventing every pensoroso embellishment to
complete the solitary structure: What turn the fervent page of enthusiastic
reflection by the pale gleamings of a melancholy lamp, when revelling and mirth
had ever led him captive in her jocund train, amid the alluring charms of love
and beauty; Immured within this lonesome cell, he must then pour the votive
prayer to some peculiar deity however he would keep his sentiments private, and
watch the event, as some slight suspicion from his conduct to Rosalie had
awakened a dormant spark of mistrust, yet to doubt the purity of her heart on
the subject was an idea consigned to perpetual oblivion, for he conceived the
chain of honor and affection too firmly bound for the utmost strength and
ingenuity to loose.

Rosalie had written an affectionate letter some time since to Madelon, and
this day received an answer from her favorite friend, fraught with the
faithful and kind remembrance of every cottager in the vale, and Lindor had
enclosed a rustic sonnet, of his own composition, on the departure of Rosalie;
the verse was simple yet interesting to her heart, 'twas a memorial of
gratitude where least expected, and it expressed the genuine dictates of an
honest worthy bosom, that had ever evinced a similarity of sentiment
undisguised by duplicity; it was the first specimen of Lindor's poetical
talents, and where an error required regulation, the effusion of sincerity it
meant to express perfectly compensated; for untutored in the school of
criticism, Lindor presented it in its humble and native guise, relying on the
lenity of the goddess, to whom his rustic muse had made her first; oblation.

LINDOR's SONNET, ON THE DEPARTURE OF ROSALIE FROM THE VALE OF CHAMOUNY.
AH! who shall laid the saffron more,
Now lovely Rosalie is gone?
Who tie the vine by clusters bent,
On rugged steeps where often she went?
Who coll the flowers, or p^^ck the fruit,
Who sing so sweet to Lindor's lute?
Alas! the moonlight dance no more
Enlivens us at evening hour,
And o'en our blithest Philomel,
Forgets her plaintive woe to tell:
The roses drooping wet with dew,
Now seem to mourn her absence too*
The wandering Chamois piteous still*
Often seek her on each neighboring hills;
Then disconcerted bleats his pain,
And slowly straggles back again:
Often when the story's simple jest,
Amuses 'till the hour of rest:
Alas! fond memory will review,
How swift the rosy moments flew,
When Rosalie endeared each scene,
Fair Rosalie's Chamonny's Queen.
There was a certain pathos in these simple lines very pleasing to Rosalie, and
she read them with the greatest emotion of delight: the letter also expressed the
earnest solicitation of Josephine in case her friend should ever marry, that
she might come over to England and be her attendant: Madelon's tender tears had
blotted many expressive sentences, dictated by her greatful heart; and the
prayers of Reuben and Giraldine for her health and happiness concluded this
valued epistle."

Rosalie gave the letter and sonnet into the hand of Lady Adela, and Lord
Edwin, as he perused them, smiled with tearful eyes at this proof of affection,
while he traced in imagination every anxious eye peeping into the contents,
willing to add a thousand tender expressions had the paper been capable of
containing them.

"Gratitude always affects my eyes, said Lord Edwin, giving the sonnet and
letter into the Marquis's hand, who had minutely watched his son's countenance
during the perusal, "I wish your heart too was as susceptible of obedience,"
replied the Marquis, hinting at his son's refusal of Lady Cecilia, for alas!
the thorn of disappointment had secretly rankled in his heart ever since, but
the extreme cautions behavior of Edwin and Rosalie eluded every suspicion;
Lord Edwin, who did not wish Rosalie to understand the meaning of the address,
bowed and left the room.

Lady Mentoria was to remain at the Castle for the ensuing winter, and Lord
Edwin had taken a trip to London for a fortnight with Sir Henry Lansdowne; the
rich autumn was declining, the air grew sharp and frosty, but Rosalie never
failed her constant ramble before breakfast, to supply the expected meal of
five robins, who pecked the crumbs from her hand, and whom she always styled
her plumaged pensioners, employed in this delightful occupation of benevolent
humanity, they soon grew tame, and would often perch on the nearest shrub, and
repay her attention with a grateful song.

Having one day missed a favorite from the circle, and strolling in search of
him to his well-known recess, in an adjoining thicket she found the little
hapless songster frozen by the inclemency of a severe frosty night, apparently
dropped from a favorite thorn, and stretched on a mass of snow, from whose
frozen surface it was impossible to extricate its feeble wings: Compassion gave
a trickling tear to the sufferer's fate, and Rosalie, in memory of him,
dedicated an elegy as she sat pensively musing over his stiffened plumes and
deploring his loss.

THE FROZEN RED-BREAST's ELEGY.
THE snow crowned thorn its sheltering verdure lost,
The whistling tempest every leaf had cropped,
Each twig was spangled by the gelid frost,
And over the withered branch the Robin hoped.
His orange breast with pendants brilliant shone,
His frozen wing refused its wonted aid,
No leafy nest or blossom foliage throne,
Could give the little suff'rer any shade.
The moon shone palid on the drifting snow,
And faintly tinged the pine-clad mountain's head:
Loud from each cavern did the wild winds blow,
While every isicle refulgence shed.
On the lone spray my shivering Robin clung,
Whose legs benumbed could s^^rce support its weight;
His heart beat low, a plaintive note he sung,
A note portending his approaching fate.
Ah! had but pity whispered in my ear,
Or accident revealed thy hapless fate:
To my warm bosom I had pressed thee near,
And strove thy tender life to renovate.
But as in search I stroll'd at early dawn,
'Ere the gay sun in glory had arisen,
Beneath the withered elm and favorite thorn,
My robin's life had left it is plumag'd prison.
Now Rosalie shall with assiduous care,
Place the fond aerial in a grassy bed;
And in fond memory plant a blossom there,
To mark the spot that pillows robin's head.
Softly at eve, as passing through the vale,
I pause to listen at the well-known tree,
Where his companions plaintively bewail,
And seemed to thrill his pensive elegy.
From this charming amusement she had one morning just entered the house, when
Andrew met her in the hall. "A poor traveller is without, resting himself,"
said he "he seems weak and feeble, so I asked him into the housekeeper's-room,
but he refuses, and is sitting near the great gate; he seems more unhappy than
hungry, I think, for I offered him some victuals, but he shook his head and
said he was only tired: He asked if the family were up, and I said no, only
Miss Rosalie."

"Poor fellow!" said the sympathizing girl, "I will go and see if I can relieve
him.'

In a few moments they reached the bench on which sat a person wrapped in an
old surtout and and a flapped hat, an oak stick rested his hands, on which
leaned his head in the attitude of profound reverie, 'till the airy footstep of
Rosalie gently pattering on the gravel roused him, and he raised his head, but
spoke not, for Andrew was close behind gazing steadfastly on him.

"Can I relieve you, friend?" cried the soft voice of Rosalie.

The traveller bowed, placed his hand on his bosom, and presented a small piece
of paper, when Rosalie unfolding it read the following words.

"Pardon and commiserate the victim of despair, and allow five minutes
conversation at the end of the south terrace to the wretched Waldegrave; govern
your surprise, impart a plausible relief, and follow the wanderer."

Twice did she read it to recover her agitation, when taking out her purse to
aid the dissimulation, she gave him a crown which he thankfully received, and
rising took his immediate departure.

"Poor creature," said Andrew as he fastened the gate after him, "he was very
modest, for he did not ask me to carry in that there petition for charity, so
if you had not been up, Madam, he would have gone away almost as poor as he
came, for I had but a few halfpence in my pocket, and that would not have made
him much richer, God knows."

"It would not Indeed," said Rosalie, "for he seemed no common beggar, only a
child of misery, Andrew: but as I could not relieve his sorrows more fully I
did not wish to hear his mournful tale."

"God give you his blessing, for you are all charity and goodness, sweet angel
lady," muttered Andrew, as she tripped away to the terrace, where the disguised
mendicant raising his hat, discovered the well known features of Waldegrave.

"Whence this cruel unguarded surprise, Mr. Waldegrave?" asked the fair
trembler, leaning over the parapet while he seized her hand: "Beware,"
continued she, "the temerity of this ^ntrusion, and be also expeditious in what
you have to disclose, that you may depart undiscovered before the family rise."

"I returned last night," said he, to my desolate mansion, where I inspected my
hermitage, but found it, like every thing else, devoid of the charms my fancy
depicted: I shall now leave it in the course of a week, and bend my steps to
London, where I have procured an India equipment, a few short weeks will
conduct me to my solitary cabin, where, to the mercy of the winds and waves
commit this miserable form; the burning-plains of India will be less scorching
than my heated brain, and each will consu^e the other with greater
precipitation: Will Rosalie, then, deign to breathe a prayer, amid the fury of
impending storms that dash his hapless bark, or will she give one sigh to pity,
as the trembling moon beams through her window, and recalls to mind the
wretched Waldegrave watching the same pale luminary's midnight lamp, reclining
over the lonely deck's vacated platform, while the rough mid-watch mariner,
whose eye is alone unsealed aboard the vessel, whistles in plaintive strain the
weary hour away, yet leaves despair and horror chained to me, whose pillow
planted with remorseless thorns, the points of which are often bedewed with
poignant tears, no longer rests his languid head, or soothes him to repose.
Adieu, angelic purity, tomorrow brings me to the Castle to take my formal
leave -- Ah! here could I linger all the live-long day, and sleep beneath the
covert of these elm^, until Aurora lifts the torch of day, and with her rosy
fingers opes the gates of morn, to cast a longing look of expectation, and
behold thy lovely form, enchanting as the roseate hour, steal to this lonely
spot, and give one smile, one glance of pity to the woes of Waldegrave."

Rosalie's tears had steeped her hankerchief in briny essence. Tomorrow then,"
said she, I shall see you again, Mr. Waldegrave, yet, believe me, if
opportunity does not furnish me with the means of bidding you adieu as my
gratitude would wish, I shall ever entertain the highest sense of the
obligation your sentiments have avowed for me, yet, miserable must I ever be
when I reflect on the cause that drove you from your happy mansion, the blessed
abode of tranquillity 'ere my unhappy fate guided me to this spot to tear that
blessing from your bosom; yet, Oh! forgive the wretched girl, and strive to
conquer an ill-fated love, which, circumstanced as I am, would surely be
profane to hear: Be firm, be resolute, and submit to the decrees of fortune,
suffer your wonted peace and happiness to return, and preserve your inestimable
good spirits for the benefit of all those most nearly concerned in your
welfare."

The distant appearance of Le Brun obliged him to sigh, adieu, and disappear,
as fast as possible, while Rosalie returned to the breakfast table,
ill-disposed to swallow a morsel.

CHAP. XXII.
LORD EDWIN and Sir Henry being in London, Rosalie was pensive, a thousand
painful ideas engrossed her mind. Lady Louisa, in consequence of her swain's
absence, became dull, and her charming sister could only alleviate their ennui,
by chatting and rambling with Lord Carlton, the only remaining beau, whose
engaging sensibility had so far gained the Marquis's favor, that he had
readily, acceded to his wish, by permitting the increasing passion to cement
between him and Lady Adela, and the next spring was to confirm the happy union,
as also the nuptials of Sir Henry and Lady Louisa, an event anticipated by the
Marquis with the greatest delight, and his felicity had attained its summit, if
Edwin too had accepted the hand of Lady Cecelia, but that was not to be, and a
very different circumstance was reserved to prove the affection of the Marquis.

Several little parties had been formed to interest and amuse the lingering
hours, when Frederic Waldegrave arrived at the Castle, and invited the family
to partake of a farewell dinner at the Manor, which was readily accepted by the
Marquis, who earnestly enquired his motives for leaving England.

"I wish," said he, "Edwin would accompany you, but he is so bigoted to his
Parisian friend, that because he declines going this year, no persuasion can
induce him to make the trip."

"And probably I shall not stay long in the West," replied Waldegrave,
"therefore I should only lead him astray, for I shall be a wanderer at large,
where fancy or inclination directs."

Such a negligent reply silenced the Marquis's inquiry, and Thursday was the
appointed day for the visit to the Manor, Rosalie dressed herself as plain as
possible, though she was convinced Miss Villars and every belle in the vicinity
would endeavor to out-rival each other.

At four the company assembled, and were entertained with an elegant dinner,
festivity and hilarity prevailed without alloy, and the evening being very
inviting, the Marquis proposed sailing on a fine canal, that ran through the
extensive pleasure grounds; the sailing-boat was ordered out, and the party
took their seats.

After an hour spent in the most agreeable manner, a threatening cloud presaged
a violent storm, which soon veiled the atmosphere. Rosalie terrified, sunk on
the shoulder of Waldegrave, and the company landed as fast as possible, and
made the best of their way to the house, but as Waldegrave supported the
trembling Rosalie, a vivid flash crossed the path, and again she sunk on his
arm: Each gentleman fully employed with their respective charges, hastened on,
all equally frightened, and saw not the relapse of Rosalie, who happened to
bring up the rear, and Waldegrave, recollecting the hermitage to be but a few
paces distant, bore her thither, and as it was probable the storm would
increase, had endeavored to prevail on the rest to take shelter in its recess
-- but in vain, as they thought best to retreat before the shower fell to
prevent their flight, as they were at least a quarter of a mile distant from
the house.

Waldegrave now carried his lovely burden to the solitary structure, so lately
completed, laid her on a couch, and flew to get some water, when supporting her
head to raise it on his arm, a small pearl cross, confined by a ribbon,
discovered itself on her bosom; instantly Waldegrave slipped the string, and,
purloining the treasure, secreted it in his own bosom, as the only memorial of
her he should be able to obtain, instinctively he pressed it to his lips, and
then consigned it to its future repository.

Scarce had he recovered the agitation of his secretion when Rosalie opened her
eyes, and wildly enquiring where she was, expressed the greatest terror at her
situation. -- The hermitage grew dark, the storm increased, and Waldegrave
soothed her fears by every tender assiduity; But equally alarmed at being
alone, and subject to his addresses, she earnestly entreated to brave the storm
and venture on.

"Impossible!" cried he, it pours in torrents, patience, lovely Rosalie, you
are perfectly safe; we shall soon be missed, and the servants will be sent to
accommodate you with shelter of some kind, I cannot leave you alone or I would
fly thither; be composed, I think I see somebody coming through the vista, but
the flashes are so vivid I cannot discern who it is."

A few moments brought Thomas and Gregory, With the family sedan, and a coat
and umbrella for their master; for the company terrified at their absence, were
fearful some accident had happened, and the fury of the tempest prevented any
but the servants from coming to their assistance.

Waldegrave instantly placed her in the chair, and walked slowly by her side to
pacify her fears; at length they reached the house, and entered the
drawing room, where the party were assembled; every one but Miss Villars
expressed their concern at Rosalie's indisposition.

"Was not the hermitage a mighty snug retreat," cried she, "I wonder Miss
Rosalie should faint there; methinks in the protecting arms of Mr. Waldergrave
there was little occasion to affect terror, for my part I began to think you
both inclined to pass the night there, 'twas devilish unlucky Gregory should
think of the old moldy sedan, to interrupt so charming a tete-a-tete,

"I conceive it a very lucky thought of Gregory," answered Rosalie, and feel
myself much indebted to his civility and good nature."

"Had he been as maliciously disposed as the envious part of mankind," replied
the Marquis, (leering at Miss Villars,) "he would not so readily have invented
a burden for his own shoulders; but I am sorry to see malice so expert in
sharping her arrows on a female lip, yet, I trust, the feathers they are
fledged with are so light and frivolous, that though a breath sends forth a
voll^y in every direction, they seldom wound; for, depend on it, the shield of
innocence repels the misapplied dart, and the disappointed archer feels the
point retaliated with the venom of vexation to her own mischievous bosom."

Waldegrave's eyes thanked the Marquis most eloquently, while Miss Villars,
smiling derision, yet completely and justly ridiculed, replied, he was an
excellent monitor, but would probably meet with very few scholars from the
severity of his precepts.

"And yet, I dare avow," rejoined the Marquis, "I shall very seldom have
occasion to use my correction a second time if my pupils are as susceptible of
the sting as I wish them to be, though I shall never inflict it improperly or
undeserved."

Some of the ladies whispered, and some of the bea^s smiled, for the subject
had been most completely handled at the sole expense of Miss Villars, who,
unable longer to support his severity, instantly took her leave, mortified to
the soul, and determined never to pass another moment in his presence.

The storm now abated, and the carriages drew up to convey the company home,
when Rosalie fastening her cloak, missed her pearl cross, the gift of Lady
Adela: confused and vexed, an immediate search succeeded, but in vain, and
Waldegrave assuring her every part of the grounds should be searched where it
was probable she could have dropped it, handed her into the carriage, and took
a final leave.

On the second day he departed for London, where he met Lord Edwin, and Sir
Henry, from whom he received every friendly wish of a prosperous voyage, and a
few letters of recommendation to some friends of Sir Henry, in the West India
settlements, and early in the following week they acompanied him on board,
while Lord Edwin, as he quitted the ship's side, (from whose gallery Waldegrave
waved his hat) found his heart relieved of a heavy suspicion that had long
rankled there, grounded on the dread of rivalship.

CHAP. XXIII.
ROSALIE unsuspicious of the innocent robbery committed by the hapless
wanderer, often regretted her loss, although the generous Lady Adela had
supplied its place, with an elegant fancy medallion; little did she think that
cross was daily bedewed with the tears of faithful love; little did she know
how often it pressed the feverish lip of hopeless passion, as it rested on the
panting agitated bosom of despair.

Lord Edwin and his companion returned on the appointed day to the Castle, his
countenance was cheerful as the finest summer' morn, his soul serene and happy
as its softest balmy breeze. Rosalie was delighted at his return, yet a soft
sigh sometimes heaved to the sorrows of Waldegrave.

The winter wore away its languid hours in the pleasure of agreeable society,
sometimes shared at the Castle, or passed at the Abbey, and when the joyous
spring peeped forth and smiled, Lady Mentoria conducted her young companion
again to the Castle, for the summer recess. In its beautiful blossomed groves
Rosalie and Lord Edwin often strolled in pleasing converse of an evening, when
the fragrance of the blossom embalmed the breeze, and Philomel, wild poet of
the glade, thrilled her soft cadence half concealed, amid the mazes of her
foliaged nest, while the majestic crescent encircled by her floating silver
fluid, mantled the vagrant rill, and tinged the drooping elegance of numerous
willows, sheltering the rosefringed banks, and reflecting its sylvan beam on
the enraptured countenance of Lord Edwin, as he gazed, the luster of Rosalie's
bewitching eyes vying their contrast with its feebler ray.

"My Lord, the Marquis approaches," whispered Montague, from a thicket of
Seringos one evening, "turn through the shrubbery while I detain him."
Instantly they followed the admonition of their kind protector, and escaped
separately to the house.

The summer now drew on her rosy veil and shaded the retiring spring, who left
her blossoms to the fostering hand of her maturer care, and Rosalie, Lady
Adela, and Lady Mentoria had just returned from a visit at the Abbey, and all
the little circle were again cheerful and happy; the caution of Lord Edwin, had
eradicated every suspicion from the bosom of the Marquis, who, although not
perfectly reconciled to his rejection of Lady Cecilia, loved his son too well
to render him miserable by enforcing his commands, when a circumstance destined
to unveil the long-secreted mystery, presented itself when least surmised.

The sultry sun of July had emitted an almost insupportable heat through the
day, and with the shades of evening followed a succession of black clouds,
impregnated with bituminous matter, deep streaks of red fringed their lowering
inflamed edges, and foretold an approaching tempest.

The ladies alarmed at the excessive loud peals of thunder that soon followed,
and the vivid flashes of blue lightning, had retired to the inner apartment,
less exposed to its direction, when a loud ringing at the lodge gate demanded
attendance, and Montague announced the servant of a stranger earnestly
soliciting assistance for his master, whose horse taking fright at the
lightning, had thrown him with the greatest violence against a projecting
rugged branch of an ancient oak that overhung the park railing, where he had
been obliged to leave him in search of assistance, as he was unable to proceed;
and to add to his misfortune, the horse had fled, but seeing a light in the
lodge it encouraged him to hope for some relief.

This sudden alarm created the compassion of the whole family, and three of the
servants were instantly dispatched with orders to bring the stranger to the
Castle, and when their voi^es in the hall announced their return, the parlour
was instinctively vacated, and the whole family assembled.

The unfortunate man was of very genteel appearance, about forty years of age,
totally inanimate, and half covered with blood, from a contu^o^ in the side of
the head. Lady Mentoria drew near to offer her advice and inspect the wound,
while the three beautiful girls, like benignant angels, stood weeping over the
hapless sufferer, with upraised hands and countenances expressive of the
deepest horror.

A surgeon was immediately fetched, though at the distance of five miles, and
at Lady Mentoria's request the stranger was laid under the rich canopy of
crimson velvet, in the state bedchamber, where life again revived with languid
pulsation, but not the faculty of reason; that alas! seemed chained by heavy
stupor, and he remained many hours in a state of torpid insensibility.

On the surgeon's arrival he pronounced the contusion dangerous, but not so
near the brain as was apprehended, nor could he ascertain the consequences
which might ensure however, he hoped the best, ordered him to be kept in a
state of perfect tranquillity, but declared that removing him would be of
dangerous tendency. Mrs. Gertrude was deputed to sit by him, while his servant
unpacked his portmanteau, and the Marquis could gain a little information of
the rank and character of his invalid, but of this the domestic declared
himself ignorant, he only knew his master's name was Spencer, and that he was
just returned from the West Indies, had hired him about three weeks since in
London, during which time he had resided at an hotel, but was now on their tour
to N --, at the house of some very intimate friend of his master, from whence
they were going to some part of Italy and France.

This account, though plausible, was by no means satisfactory, and as the
servant proceeded to unpack, the delicacy and fineness of the linen, marked
with the initials of E. W. created a suspicion of fallacy in the Marquis's
breast, which he carefully concealed, and Gertrude resigned her situation to
his own servant, and one of the Marquis's for the night, which was passed in
tolerably tranquil slumber.

The Marquis, a^us to inquire the state of his guest, stole softly to his
chamber in the morning, where, finding the door open, he ventured gently in,
when he heard the voice of the stranger earnestly repeating the following
soliloquy, and rested on tip-toe that he might not surprise or interrupt him:
the voice sighed and thus proceeded.

"Sure it is illusion, or my eyes beheld the fair resemblance of my faithless
love: -- Angelic form! sweet placid innocence, if such thou were, cast one soft
smile of pity on the wretched Walsingham! -- Adored Lavinia! Hapless victim of
seduction, Ethelbert loved thee with unfeigned sincerity; Though thou wast
base, perfidious, and contaminated by the breath of vile iniquity: Cruel
accursed Morency! Impetuous injured Walsingham!"

The Marquis shuddered with horror, the name of Ethelbert Walsingham had been
engraven on his heart, with a pencil of Adamant, dipped in poison. He advanced
one step and peeping through an aperture in the curtain, beheld the feeble
invalid raised from pillow, his hands clasped in the attitude of imploring
pardon, and his eyes fixed on a half-length portrait of Lady Lavinia, which
hanging immediately opposite the foot of the bed, convinced him of the reality
of his suggestion, and, overpowered with confusion, surprise, and distress, the
Marquis sunk on a chair, and, drawing aside the curtain, fixed his eager eyes
on the stranger, whom he was unable to address at the moment.

"To whom Sir," asked the feeble man, "am I indebted for the compassion and
indulgence I have apparently received, though alas! the suspension of
recollection deprives me of the idea of what favor my hapless state has
experienced; I have dozed the night away, and just rousing from an irritated
unconnected dream, I recall my scattered senses, and find myself alone in the
mansion of a stranger, whose benevolent humanity seems to have furnished me
with every comfort in a style of elegance I am by no means entitled to, and the
information of knowing to whom I owe such obligation will still add one more to
the number."

"You are now in the Castle of the Marquis of Sevigne," replied the agitated
Marquis."

"Sevigne!" reiterated the breathless stranger, "And that portrait Lady Lavinia
his sister? Gracious heaven! do I in you behold the noble owner of this Castle
too?"

The Marquis bowed assent, and the stranger continued:

"Alas! then let this devoted head sink in eternal slumber on your soothing
pillow: fly me, for I have been a murderer, but, culprit as I seem, I yet shall
sue your mercy. I could unfold a tale that would harrow up your soul, if you
will grant me but an hour's explanation, then would thou spurn me like a
miscreant from thy roof, I will not call thee harsh, I will not murmur."

A convulsive motion prevented his articulation, as he violently grasped the
hand of the Marquis, but recovering he begged the door might be fastened to
prevent interruption, and then proceeded.

"First draw the curtain," said he, "and veil that angelic face, my brain is
frantic, and every sense disordered while I gaze on it."

The Marquis, softened by his agony obeyed, and begged him to proceed with
composure.

CHAP. XXIV.
"I WILL endeavor to disclose the most minute circumstances; the painful task
will cost me many a pang, but ah! gracious heaven, how many has it created you?
Forgive thou peaceful soul, and seal my pardon with one word of comfort."

A tear crossed the Marquis's cheek, and the stranger proceeded.

"'It Is now near nineteen years ever I first visited the family of M. Tourville
at Paris, where the accomplished and beautiful Lady Lavinia captivated my
heart. A native of England, but bred from my infancy on the confines of India,
of noble parentage and good fortune, I had left my parental home to visit the
shore of England, from thence I bent my hapless course, alas! to France,
recommended by an intimate friend to the notice of M. Tourville, I became
almost an inmate of his hospitable mansion: Need I tell you, it was impossible
to behold this angelic woman without eternally wearing her chains -- to me they
were rosy fetters, and while she smiled upon my hopes, life could not boast a
higher blessing; my fond heart doated to distraction, and I had the
undescribable satisfaction of finding my affection returned with the most
ardent sincerity, which was crowned by the nuptial benediction four months
after my arrival, but as my birth and fortune were not equal to hers, the
secret was reposed in the bosom of a sacred few, but carefully guarded from M.
Tourville."

"Alas! at his house now visited the graceful and alluring Chevalier De
Morency, whose partial glances, and to me insolent assiduities never passed
unnoticed: My angelic Lavinia firmly repelled the repeated insolences of this
troublesome intruder, and had not the most obvious reasons prevented my
disclosing my sentiments, and asserting the rights of my protection, a few days
had probably happily ended the business; in vain did Lavinia conjure me not to
be uneasy, adding, a few short weeks would convey us to India, should Lady
Mentoria, her aunt, and the Marquis, her father, withdraw, as she much feared,
their countenance from her, in consequence of not having aggrandized, or united
herself to some family equally illustrious with her own: For her sake then I
remained silent, and her smile calmed all my fears and lulled suspicion to
oblivion."

"A few days after, having occasion to go to Versailles, I left my beauteous
bride, proposing to return on the third evening, and after receiving and
imparting the most tender and faithful adieus, I set off, but scarce had
reached my destination when a billet was delivered me, the bearer of which
departed from the hotel an hour previous to my arrival, and was a total
stranger. The hand was unknown and I hastily tore it open* when the following
lines, now recorded on my heart presented themselves."

"Fail not to return to Paris tomorrow evening, at the hour of nine, conceal
yourself in the shrubbery near the temple, and witness the virtuous designation
of the Chevalier Morency, and the artful abandoned Lavinia: -- Victim of
duplicity, it is thine to punish."

"My blood froze with horror, my brain was on fire -- could it be possible? --
Ah! no, Yet love, honor, justice demanded me to attend the summons, and I
obeyed, previously concealing a poignard to avenge my unmerited injury, should
I discover the cruel fact."

"Punctual at the moment I arrived, disguised and concealed, I awaited the
dreaded appearance, when through the branches of the trees I soon discovered
the white robe of Lavinia, advancing by her side in all the rhapsody of love,
walked the the specious villain, one of whose arms encircled her waist, while
the other grasped her hand to his lips: Lavinia it is true, repelled the
freedom, but as they passed I distinctly heard her utter these words. "Leave
me, Chevalier, it is imprudent we should longer absent ourselves from the
company, fly me, I conjure you, ever your presence is too fatal to us both;
should Walsingham return and find you here, what misery might we not be
involved in; you know my resolution, which neither time nor circumstance shall
make me break, and as you value the peace of Lavinia be discreet.

"But tomorrow," cried he, "will you suffer me to enjoy half an hour's chat in
the morning?"

"Yes," answered she, "if you will swear never to betray your extravagant
affection before Walsingham, nor give him the least cause for suspicion; away,
then, my horse is waiting, and I must return."

"Morency again pressed her to his bosom, and retired, while she strolled back
heaving the deepest sighs, alas! too surely for Morency, for to a mind inflamed
as mine, every spark brightened to a blaze, and had I not heard sufficient to
warrant my suspicion, and convince me of her baseness?"

"Instantly I darted from my concealment, and hurrying to my horse rode on full
speed to the confines of a thicket I knew he must pass, and as he entered
alone, I seized his bridle, discovered myself, and demanded restitution for my
wrongs, but the sneering villain mocking my agony, asked me for whom Lavinia's
heart most glowed with love? For whom she shed the pensive tear, or heaved that
parting sigh, but for himself?"

"If 'twere indeed for thee, villain!" answered I, "thou never more shall
boast; this to thy heart, an injured husband plunges but one poignard, while in
his breast thou have implanted thousands never to be extracted."

The fatal steel pierced his heart, and he fell lifeless at my feet, while
furious as the agitated maniac, I mounted and gallopped off, law (...) the body
exactly where it fell, to the sat (...) might await its discovery. Reflection,
alas! soon convinced me I was a murderer, and the pang^ of conscience were too
acute to be borne."

"Imagining the alarm such a circumstance would occasion, I made the best of my
way to Calais, and that evening sailed in the packet for England, where I no
sooner arrived than (...) wrote Lavinia, reproaching her with perfidy, and
confessing myself the executioner of Morency, and bid her an eternal adieu:
Cruelly as she had treated me, my heart still relented so far as to instigate
an idea of future provision for her, in case our union should be productive of
a helpless and innocent victim, I therefore enclosed different sums to the
amount of one thousand pounds, but what I suffered on the occasion is much
easier felt than described, and I embarked for India in the course of a
fortnight, but had no sooner reached my father's house than I was informed he
had paid the debt of nature six weeks since, and he being a widower, of course
his estates of every description fell to my possession; settling his affairs as
expeditiously as possible, I was persuaded by an intimate friend and
school-fellow to settle near him in the West Indies, an offer I thankfully
accepted, and he purchased in the most advatageous manner extensive
plantations, and a proper number of slaves for me, and under his direction and
advice every thing was conducted with the utmost regularity."

"I had now no method of enquiring the state of affairs in England for two
years, when this estimable friend let off on a trip for this hospitable shore,
to his bosom I had confided my secret, and from his pen I received the
following information. That M. Tourville had communicated the story to you, who
had searched every part of England to discover my retreat; that Lavinia had
given birth to a daughter, and had ended her days in penitence and sorrow soon
after at Montpelier. The child^ he added, was at nurse somewhere in
Switzerland, under the ca^e of M. Tourville, and I conceived I had fulfilled my
duty in the provision I had advanced for its maintenance."

"Yet the spark of parental affection was kindled in my bosom, and urged by the
impulse of nature, I determined repeatedly to come over to England, when by the
intelligence of persons predetermined to subve^ my intentions, I lear^, my
infant had followed its mother to the bourn of tranquillity."

My plantations were fruitful, my slaves diligent, yet the thorn of sorrow and
remorse, was not eradicated by the balm of prosperity, when a second voyage of
my friends, near fifteen years after, again revived my hopes, and e're the
stern winter of life deprived me of my wonted ability to sustain the voyage,
and reconnoitre every circumstantial event, I resolved to hazard the attempt of
visiting Switzerland, and protecting my child, as indubitable authority from
the pen of my friend assured me I was still a father, and my blooming
offspring, who was the express image of her mother, was an humble resident in
the cottage of Reuben Demouline, in the Vale of Chamouny. Bent on this project
I was directing my course to the seat of my friend at N --, who would have
accompanied me on my tour, when this dreadful accident befell me and left me a^
almost lifeless being at your hospitable gates."

"Is it then the punishment I merit thus to be thrown on the mercy of an
offended relative; or is it ordained by Providence I should be rendered the
instrument of ecclaircissement. Patient and attentively have you listened to my
fate without the interruption of a single reproach; from Lavinia I had formerly
heard of your residence, but believe me, as I passed the road I little intended
to have intruded, or discovered myself, unpermitted by your kindness; as the
victim of fate I implore your pity; the rashness of uncontrouled jealousy, the
impetuosity of slighted love, once the most pure and fervent, led me, alas! to
the pinnacle of desperation, for by heaven, an angel had not convinced me the
detested information was a truth, if oral and occular demonstration had not too
sadly revealed the cruel fact.

Here Walsingham burst into tears, and sunk on the pillow, while the Marquis
giving him a glass of water, again took his seat.

"You have, it is true," said he, "endeavored to clear your mysterious conduct*
and had but Lavinia lived she would have exculpated her innocence, and you
might have yet been happy, but your rash cruelty inflicted too deep a wound to
find a cure: alas! she pined in secret, and M. Tourville, to conceal it from
the world, removed her to the cottage of his tenant Reuben, where she was
delivered of a daughter, whom Giraldine nursed, but her health daily declining,
she was removed to Montpellier, where the faded lily drooped and died."

"To have brought home the little Rosalie would have exposed my sister's
injuries, blazoned her misfortunes, and excited the calumny of every malicious
tongue; and as I had faithfully promised her never to reveal the secret to my
own family 'till time should elucidate your conduct. I simply told my aunt
Lavinia had died of a consumption at Montpellier, nor does she at this moment
know Rosalie is my niece; for seventeen years M. Tourville visited his little
charge, and Montague, as my substitute, paid his annual visit, with the pension
allotted her for her board, but on the decease of M. Tourville, eighteen months
since, I conceived it my duty to fetch her from this solitary recess, and
confess myself her guardian."

"My indefatigable search of you, proving fruitless, I determined leaving it to
the sole direction of Providence: I have sacred papers by me to convince you of
her injured innocence, for by Heaven, she was purity itself: excuse the
emotions of my heart, sacred to the memory and virtues of an adored sister,
while for the sake of her lovely child now under my roof, I will strive to
conquer my enmity to her fatally-misguided father; yet remember, your parental
affection alone can induce me to cherish the man whom honor should teach me to
abhor; and may heaven in mercy pardon your errors, aad reclaim your virtues, as
you expect countenance from me. Tomorrow, if the surgeon permits, you shall
see your child, in the mean time I must develope the story to Lady Mentoria, as
too sudden a surprise might endanger her health."

CHAP. XXV.
THE Marquis now left him and returned to the parlour, where h^ ^ated as
briefly as possible the whole occurrence. Lord Edwin was all agitation:
Rosalie, dissolved in tears, and would have flown to her parent's apartment
while the lovely sisters sweetly soothed her woe, and breathed the sigh of pity
to the sad, sad tale.

Lady Mentoria, who doated on her unhappy niece, felt the unexpected stroke of
misery most poignant: "Lovely sufferer," exclaimed she, as she perused the
explanatory letters of Lavinia, which the Marquis had consigned to her care,
previous to delivering them to Walsingham, and though she possessed the firmest
principle of humanity and commiseration for the distressed, a harsh invective
at first escaped her lip, as she condemned the ferocity of Walsingham.

On the following morning Rosalie followed the Marquis to the chamber of the
invalid, whose impatience would not be pacified from embracing his child^
although the surgeon pronounced any irritation would increase his fever, and
protract the effect his aid tended to produce.

He was just risen when the lovely girl, scarce able to conceal her joy,
entered his chamber, and flying to embrace him, sunk on her knees; a copious
torrent of tears luckily relieved the full bosom of Walsingham, as he tenderly
raised and embraced her.

"Alas!" said he, "is it thus I fold to my heart the angelic image of a dearer
self? Here let me trace the blushing beauties of my sweet Lavinia, thou sole
blessed gift of Heaven: -- Oh! her expressive eye still beams in thine, her
dimpled smile yet lingers on thy rosy cheek, and thy soft dulcet voice recals
her animating tone. Distraction fires my brain -- come to my arms, my dearest
Rosalie, and let a father's penitential tear fall on thy bosom and erase the
sad impression his impetuous crime has deeply written there; forgive my love,
and deign to bless a miserable misguided father."

Rosalie clasped his hand, in silent agony, and pressed it to her bosom, "I
will be all obedience, all affection, dearest Sir," said she, "and may you long
live to trace in me the virtues of my honored mother," pointing to the
portrait, from which the distressed Walsingham hid his eyes.

"Talk not of injured innocence," cried he "for, alas! that conviction would
unman a stoic, much more a wretch like me."

The scene grew too affecting, and the Marquis begging Rosalie to retire, soon
after left him.

Three days elapsed, during which time Walsingham was confined to his bed, in
consequence of his irritation of mind having heightened the fever, and Rosalie
attended him with the most affectionate care: he had also solicited the letters
the Marquis had promised him, the effect of which so agitated him, he was
obliged frequently to lay them aside, at the request of the tender Rosalie*
whose tears flowed with equal poignancy as his own, and almost overpowered her
drooping spirits:

One page in particular, read by Rosalie, whose voice could scarce articulate,
almost drove him frantic; 'twas a full confession from Lady Lavinia, recounting
the reason of her meeting the Chevalier that fatal evening which terminated his
existence and her happiness.

Morency it seems, had used every seductive and adulative argument to induce
her to elope, supposing her ^art then entirely at her own disposal, and vowing
vengeance on Walsingham for his repeated and impertinent intrusions, little
suspecting the privilege he was entitled to usurp. Lavinia, terrified for the
safety of her husband, conjured him to banish the idea of revenge, and on pain
of her eternal displeasure ever to reveal, or cause Walsingham to suspect his
partiality, thinking* by this means to avoid the dreaded encounter of an
innocent, yet offended husband, and a furious and resolute lover, whom in
reality her soul abhorred; but her placid amiable disposition, ever void of
offense, strove if possible by gentle entreaty to prevail on Morency, while her
terror depicting every calamity from so fatal a determination, had, in order to
conceal it under the solemn threat she had made, met him on the terrace that
evening, to extort the performance of his promise, and by that means insure the
safety of her ever valued love, and what diabolical fiend could have discovered
the assignation, known only to themselves, was a mystery her utmost vigilance
could never develope.

This proof of affection stung Walsingham to the soul. "Is this the dreadful
truth?" cried he, "Fatal victim of credulity: Alas: how the frenzy of jealousy
veiled my senses: Yes, I heard her repeat every syllable this letter avows, but
deaf to reason or a moment's reflection, I construed every sentence in the most
different light, and can only recompense her wrongs by promoting the happiness
of my child, which shall be the study of my existence."

Rosalie now laid aside the papers, and Walsingham giving her the key of his
portmanteau, begged her to take out his pocket book for something he wished to
find, and turning over several letters a small piece of paper fell to the
ground, which Rosalie picking up presented to her father. "I do not recollect
what it can be," said he, "open it, my love*" Rosalie obeyed, but it instantly
fell from her hand and she turned pale. "Oh, it is the pearl cross," said
Walsingham, "the amiable Waldegrave's legacy: But observing the agitation of
his child, (who stood almost petrified, gazing alternately on him and then on
the bauble) he caught her hand, and inquired the cause of her astonishment.
"Only do me the favor, dear Sir, to inform me how you came in possession of
this trinket, and I will then answer any question you please to ask."

"I received it" said he, "from the hands of a Mr. Waldegrave, a handsome
comely youth who was unfortunately shipwrecked, but saved by the timely
assistance of our boat, he had floated four hours when he hailed our vessel,
and we happily preserved him, but a sever ensuing in consequence, a few days
terminated his existence: I must own I was particularly struck with his figure
and affable deportment, and never left his bed 'till he expired; a few minutes
before which he took from his bosom this cross, pressed it to his lip, and
beged me ever to keep it as the sacred relic of a faithful but unhappy lover.

"My story," said he, "like myself, will be consigned to oblivion, nor shall I
reveal the name of the angel from whose bosom I purloined this treasure, as it
is very improbable you should ever behold her, yet should chance so ordain it,
she will instantly recognize it when you repeat the hapless possessor of it was
Frederic Waldegrave."

Rosalie burst into tears. "Alas! cried she, "'it is mine: And did thou,
hapless Waldegrave, treasure to the last moment of thy existence, this humble
memorial of poor Rosalie?"

Walsingham soothed her, "More mysteries then have I elucidated," said he, "but
tell me, my lovely girl, the whole affair, in which your heart, alas! seems
deeply interested."

Rosalie obeyed, and repeated every minute circumstance, much to the
satisfaction of Walsingham, who was delighted with her prudence, while sweetly
blushing, she faintly acknowledged the prevalent partiality of Lord Edwin.

"A secreted passion was the source of your misfortunes," said the sweet girl,
"and heaven avert it should be mine; in your bosom I repose my confidence, and
earnestly solicit you will ever keep this little legacy in your own possession,
as I must never wear it more; its history would create alarm in the bosom of
Lord Edwin, and might throw a shade across my future happiness, although I
solemnly avow I never entertained a thought injurious to the love of Lord
Edwin, yet my bosom, ever alive to the sensations of friendship and compassion,
instigated me to retaliate lenient politeness and gratitude, where prudence
forbid a greater sacrifice; and sure the heart must be invulnerable to pity
that did not feel a pang for the sufferings of meritorious virtue, and
consecrate one tear to the hapless remembrance."

Walsingham then consigned it to his pocket book, embraced his child, and
promised inviolable secrecy of his treasured memorial.

CHAP. XXVI.
ON the day following he was permitted by his surgeon to leave his room, and
take his seat at the family table, where the glances of melancholy often
obtruded for it had occasioned great inquiry and surprise amongst the
household, although the affair had been smothered as much as possible, yet as
Rosalie had ever been declared an orphan, it was necessary to report the
decease of her father had been a fabrication, and he was now restored by an
unforeseen event, when in pursuit of his family and friends: Such was the
prevalent story, and curiosity was tolerably suppressed.

The Marquis now began to perceive with regret, the partiality of his son, and
taking him one day into his study, reprimanded his terror, on Rosalie's being
stung by a hornet, as it plainly discovered an unusual degree of alarm and
attention in the agitation of his anxious countenance, when Lord Edwin, unable
to conceal his sentiments, confessed his interviews at Chamouny, and solicited,
with the unfeigned tear of earnest love, his blessing and consent to an union
of heart and sentiment Heaven only could dissolve.

"Is it thus, Edwin, your duplicity has exulted?" asked the Marquis sternly,
glancing a look of ferocity on his son; "And has the fallacious snake I
fostered in my bosom thus planned its grateful retaliation, by leaving its
sting in the recess that protected it? Ah! Edwin, I much fear the whole blame
of this unfortunate attachment rests with you, for sure the heart of Rosalie is
too pure, too tender, to harbor a thought injurious to my peace; speak then,
confess yourself culpable, if you have led the little stray lamb from its
native vale, over each tempting flowery path, will you abandon it on a thorny
precipice, from whose impending cliff it must perish in the gaping abyss, or
gradually linger, like the stricken deer, forlorn and desolate, still bounding
from steep, to steep in search of comfort and protection, yet still augmenting
but its misery: Part of the tale is now explored that long concealed her fate,
but the clue is still tangled, and requires to be unravelled, and 'till
elucidation explores every particle of disguise, Edwin shall never be united to
Rosalie, for though I revere her virtues, and love her with the affection of a
parent, no stigma shall rest on the offspring of Tankerville, no calumniate lip
shall repeat corruptive censure, I therefore rely on your discretion, 'till a
farther explanation, and confess your temerity astonishes me; your indulging a
passion for an object totally unknown, and so humbly bred, must, if you had
reflected a moment, have convinced you of the impropriety of your conduct:
Supposing Rosalie had been the cottager in reality she was represented, would
your unbounded passion have gratified itself by subjoining the distaff with the
crested helmet of your illustrious ancestry?"

Lord Edwin paused, fearful of irritating the Marquis, who seemed to be
impatiently waiting his reply, and therefore summoning courage, and couching
his sentiments in the most submissive form, he thus replied.

"If you require me to express the real effusions of the sincerity I feel,"
answered he, "the virtuous soul, graceful amiability, and unfeigned gratitude,
I discovered in the lovely girl, had surely made me forget the properties of
nobility, and in her cottage the splendor of high life had, in comparison,
excited my pity and disgust, for I could there trace such interesting scenes of
nature in her boundless luxuriance, as would have expanded your heart with
every sublime inspiration it did mine. Chamouny was then to me a Paradise, and
Rosalie the benignant angel to guide and explain the mysterious powers of
creation, that raised my adorative ejaculation to the bountiful divinity, whose
prolific hand had thus raised the wonderful and admirative beauties of this
Elysian vale."

"You are mighty romantic," said the Marquis, "moralize no more, let prudence
seal your lip, you know my sentiments; for though Rosalie is a woman I think
perfectly formed to create happiness, yet, remember, consanguinity is my
aversion; however, I neither give nor extort a promise, for your happiness is
too nearly allied to my heart to wish ever to subvert it, retire then, and
leave me to my reflection, for my heart is at present too full to converse any
more on this subject."

Edwin bowed and was opening the door, as Rosalie gently tapped, unknowing the
Marquis was in conversation, much less conceiving she was the subject of the
tete-a-tete.

"I hope I don't intrude," said the lovely girl, the express picture of
beautiful innocence, with a small basket of roses, "Permit me to request your
acceptance of this charming rose, for I know it is your favorite flower as
well as mine: I have just gathered a few, and am come to place it in your bosom
as soon as I have divested it of its thorns," and seating herself on a duchess
by the side o^ of the Marquis, took out her scissars to clip them off.

The Marquis turned his eyes on Lord Edwin, who stood rapturously gazing on her
in the attitude of admiration, with the door half closed, who catching his
father's glance, silently pointed to Rosalie, pressed his hand to his heart,
and sighed as he reluctantly drew the envious blank between them.

Rosalie's hat shading her eyes as she was busily employed, had concealed the
reciprocal glance that had been exchanged, and she wondered at the Marquis's
unusually-cool reception. "Why so silent, dear Sir?" asked she, modestly
placing the rose in his bosom, and making a smiling courtsey.

May you, Rosalie, be ever as careful of planting a thorn in my bosom as you
have been to guard me from the wound of these; but retire, my love, I am
engaged with my writing, and cannot be interrupted; take charge of your present
again, and preserve it till we meet at dinner, when I shall be more at leisure
to admire it, and thank the attentive donor.

Rosalie sealed the pardon of her intrusion by kissing his hand, and wishing
him good morning, left him to his private meditations.

"What could the Marquis mean," thought she, as she stopped to admire the
geraniums in the gallery windows, "by bidding me be careful of implanting a
thorn! Yet, he did not angrily reprove me, and I am sure I am not conscious of
deserving his censure."

Such were her reflections, when her father passing through the antichamber,
disturbed her.

"Rosalie," said he, "I have just received letters from London, in answer to
those I wrote three days since, and am sorry to say, I have very unpleasing
accounts of a considerable debt, by the failure of a capital merchant, and must
in consequence set off tomorrow for the Metropolis, if the Marquis is in his
study I must speak with him, as the merchant is a friend of his, and he in
consequence, can advise me what measure is most expedient to adopt."

Rosalie expressed her concern, and Walsingham passed on to the study, where
delivering the letter he almost petrified the Marquis, who after deliberating
in the most judicious manner, determined to accompany him, and render every
possible service to both parties; his chaise and four was ordered by seven the
next morning, in which the travelers taking their seats drove off.

CHAP. XXVII.
LORD EDWIN had now opportunity to disclose his father's conversation to
Rosalie, and each secretly rejoiced at the favorable aspect of their future
hopes.

The Castle vacated by its senior inmates, the juvenility of the remaining
group formed numerous sprightly amusements, unbiassed by the contradiction of
Lady Mentoria, who, although too far advanced in years to join the festive
dance, still loved to preside and enjoy the delight they partook.

When the travelers arrived at the Hotel they retired to rest, and the next
morning proceeded to the house of Mr. Stanley, where the dreadful complication
of his affairs baffled all hopes of compositive adjustment, and at the suit of
a merciless peremptory creditor, he was seized, sent to a spunging-house and
all bail refused; thither they immediately repaired, and found the forlorn
object a prey to misery, severe reflection's accute pang, and the victim of
extortion.

The Marquis making himself known, offered bail, and a person was dispatched
with a note to the creditor begging the favor of half an hour's conversation.

During the interval of his absence a hackney coach drew up to the door, and a
number of vociferous tongues in the passage roused the Marquis's attention, and
he opened the door where he discovered several men inhumanly dragging a
genteel-looking female, who was struggling to draw the hood of her cloak over a
face that bore the vestiges of sorrow and oppression.

"Why, you need not be so fearful of showing your face," cried one of the
savages," "'twill be pretty well known in a few days at the prison, where it is
my thoughts you will be glad to make your market of it for a meal's meat, or egad
you will soon be starved."

"Never insult distress," said the Marquis, removing his huge paw from her
delicate arm. "Suffer me," continued he, "addressing the head officer, to
enquire the fate of this poor helpless creature."

"Why she is placed here for half a year's lodging, at the suit of her
landlord, answered he, and it seems no one can give bail for her, but its no
wonder, this is always the fruit of wicked deeds."

"Morality from a person of your description," rejoined the Marquis, "ill
suits, and I shall only form my opinion from the circumstances I collect from
her, whatever inference you may have drawn from them I am inclined to be
lenient, would you were also; however, let the coach wait half an hour, during
which time I will be answerable your prisoner does not escape dishonourably."

The officer bowed and conducted the female to a private apartment, the Marquis
and Walsingham followed, and the door was closed, when the female not wishing
longer to conceal her face, threw back her cloak, and to the fancy of
Walsingham discovered a set of features not totally unknown, though much
impaired by distress, nor could he at the moment recollect where they were once
so familiar to him."

"If an account of my unfortunate life can claim any pretension to your savor,
gentlemen," said she, "I shall conceive it an obligation which I owe to your
humane interference: Scarce need I say, I am enlisted on the page of
destructive error, as a wretched victim of shame and sorrow; I have seen
thirty-six years, half of which, alas! could not on retrospection afford one
instance of prudence, virtue, o^ honor: Deprived of my parents very early in
life, I was left to the care of a morose old Guardian, from whose severe
restriction I eloped with a young officer at the age of eighteen, and from that
hour I date the commencement of my sorrows."

"Abandoned by my friends and relatives I had no remaining source of
protection, and betrayed and involed in ruin, necessity compelled me to pursue
a course of life I once should have shuddered at. Innumerable have been my
transgressions, and once the impetuosity of real and fervent love instigated a
crime founded on jealousy, no penitence of mine can ever reclaim: Alas! had
Walsingham loved like me, the wretched Caroline had never practiced the cruel
scheme that eternally has banished his peace."

Here a flood of tears prevented her recital, while the Marquis and Walsingham
were r^vited to their chairs with astonishment.

"Answer wretched woman," said the latter, "if to the name of Caroline you
subjoin the title of Bertie?"

"I surely do," answered she*

"Oh God! reiterated W^ngham, the measure of my woes are then complete, can you
no^ ^n recollection trace on these sun-enbrowned feature^ the resemblance of
Walsingham?"

Miss Be^tie earnestly gazed on him uttered a shriek, and fain^ed ^ the
distracted inquiring Walsingham speedily revived her, while the agitated
Marquis awaiting the dreaded discovery, involuntarily drew his chair farther,
with a look of relentless abhorrence, on the torture of suspicion, and for a
moment compassion vacated the rec^ss of his bosom, while relieved by the
friendly effussion of composing tears, Miss Bertie thus continued.

"Heavens! am I again doomed to behold ^he victim of my ^uplicity? Yet, ever I
am conducted to my penitential cell, suffer me to repeat the cruelties I have
inflicted, and the innocence I have injured: Cha^, you well knew, first threw
me in your company at the Opera, and under your friendly patronage I subsisted
in elegance and happiness, for my heart at that time, though void of every
impr^ssion which tended to virtue, still f^^t the most ^rdent and sincere love
for you, but in three months you honorably quitted me, and left England, on a
sudden expedition with a friend. Six months after consigned me a new companion,
and with him I took a trip to Paris, where I soon beheld the beautiful and
justly adored Lady Lavinia; same soon spread the report of your mutual
attachment, and fixed with the frenzy of jealousy, (whose spark was again soon
sanned to a flame) I determined to plan a scheme of engaging the celebrated
Chevalier Morency to pass a few hours with me in the absence of my enamorato,
when I left no stratagem untried to spur his vindictive spirit, persuade him
Lavinia secretly adored him, though her prudery avoided an explicit confession,
and urged him, by every possible fallacy, to elope with her, and having learnt
from the domestics you was setting out for Versailles, I intimated an idea of
his supplying your situation, and begging half an hour's chat with Lady Lavinia
on the te^race, where should she repulse his addresses, a chaise and four was
the next evening to carry her artfully away* thus should I have thrown myself
in your way, kindly consoled your loss, and hoped once more to gain the
treasured heart I so sincerely adored, for the villainly of Morency, and
apparent compliance of Lavinia, would, I trusted, have totally eradicated every
impression her attractive charms had made, and Caroline Bertie have once more
been blessed with the affectionate attention and provision of the fascinating
Walsingham."

"The fatal billet of assignation I dispatched by a stranger, dressing myself
in man's apparel, previous to delivering it, to elude all possible discovery;
the effects it produced are alas! but too well known, and I learnt* too late! I
had injured the faithful wife, and not the mistress, as I then conceived her to
be. Alas! the merited vengeance of offended heaven has poured its devoted wrath
on this guilty head ever since: For three months ago I accepted the support of
a very genteel, sensible, and as I thought, honorable man, but, to my sorrow,
the saro-bank soon divested him of his ample property* and one unlucky night
the faithless dice immerged him in the ^ortex of destruction, to the amount of
3,000l. and unable to discharge the debt of honor, he privately and
precipitately left London, and has never been heard of since, which information
I received two days after by my landlord, who demanded immediate payment of me,
for lodging, and several debts contracted in different places. This was a
severe and unexpected st^ in the midst of apparent affluence, I had but five
guineas by me, and that, alas! was but a fortnight's pay."

"Instantly I dispatched several notes to various people in high life, who had
formerly favored me with their company, but like a real o^ld of misery, I
found no friendly hand to relieve an imploring wanderer: ^ne wa^ absent on his
travels, and his return uncertain* a second on important business at the House
of Commons; a third engaged with his own affairs, and did not wish to add to
the perplexities he was already immersed in; a fourth was deaf to the tale of
sorrow, whose self-gratification had lost the pleasure of enjoyment; and a
fifth replied, his memory did not furnish him with the recollection of the
unfortunate supplicant. Many more proofs of disappointment could I enumerate,
the ultimate of which was the seizure of my apparel, rapaciously torn from me;
and an immediate conveyance to this school of iniquity and extortion, and here
too I have parted with every superfluous covering to obtain the course and
scanty meal that supported my wretched existence, and I have no comfort left
but the hope of a speedy end to my woes, in the gloomy cell of a cheerless
prison."

"Adieu then, Mr. Walsingham, best, yet most injured of men, it is impossible I
can ever compensate the bitter pangs I have cost you, I shall now fly to the
arms of despair, a prey to the endless remorse of an evil conscience! Can
heaven inflict a severer punishment? Oh! no. Yet, I shall feel one faint
sensation of consolation, by having acknowledged my perfidy and removed the
weight of my crime from the bosom of some innocent suspected."

She then rose to depart, but the Marquis detained her by inquiring the amount
of her debts in general, to which she replied, "fifty guineas."

The Marquis then drawing a bank note from his pocketbook to that amount,
presented it to her." As the child of woe," said he, "I bestow my charity, but
as the murderess of life, peace, and happiness, I view you with an eye of
abhorrence; an injured brother cannot pardon a wretch like thee, but trusts he
possesses the requisite mercy of a Christian, by snatching you from that
infamous mansion of diabolical vice and destruction, whether those harpies were
dragging you, and if your contrition is real, and you would swear to lead a
life of penitence, I will provide for you in some solitary recess where your
errors may be buried in oblivion."

Miss Bertie overpowered by such unmerited generosity, fell at his feet, and
bathing them with her tears, promised the strictest obedience to his commands.
"I have," said she, " one friend still left, who resides in South Carolina, to
her I will immediately write, and if her friendship still glows, and she will
give me her protection, I will, with your permission, undertake the voyage,
there my character will be free from censure, and, I trust, by leaving the
scene of my iniquity, I shall also leave my vices, and flying thus determined
from the lures of temptation, regain once more the path of virtue, and procure
by my suitable ability some domesticated and genteel department in the circle
of some family, through the recommendation of my friend, where I may at least
become an industrious and useful member of society, for though I must ever
remain a fallen star, the effulgence of others may reflect, from their
unsullied ray, a feeble luster on my fainter gleam."

"Alas! the flowers of fancy, to my intoxicated sense, exhaled more fragrant
perfume in the delusive paths of dissipation, than in the tranquil shades of
virtue and wisdom, where a straggling thorn though inflicting but a trivial
wound, disgusted, and determined me to turn to path^ more seducing, and
apparently devoid of those injurious briars, where I too eagerly pursued the
magic winding, nor paused to reflect on the length of my ramble, 'till I found
myself in an inextricable labyrinth, surrounded by pernicious weeds exhaling
poison and infecting the very touch: I now shrunk with dismay, and vainly
endeavored to retrace my wandering steps, but the intricacy subverted my
design, no friendly clue was left to guide the wanderer back, and lost to every
hope of deliverance, my only remaining consolation was to join the deluded
group who soon surrounded me, and by their persuasive fallacy and advice I soon
conquered my aversion to this destructive path, and dared to smile like them,
defiance at morality,"

The Marquis, though repugnant to her character, listened with a degree of
satisfaction to her self-crimination: "I shall remain a week longer in town,"
said he, "therefore provide yourself a decent habitation 'till your friend's
letter arrives, enclose it under cover to me, and I shall then judge what
prospect of success you have in view, when, if your friend is willing to
receive you, I will empower my steward to conduct you safe on board the first
vessel that sails, and all the recompense I ask is to receive an annual letter,
informing me you merit my commiseration, by strictly adhering to your solemn
promise, of reforming your late dreadful conduct." He then added a present of
five guineas, and promised to furnish her equipment of necessaries during her
voyage.

"Walsingham's purse can never be authorized to relieve you," continued the
Marquis, "and mine only must be considered as bestowing its mite on a stranger;
for alas! though your crime be imprinted on the new fallen snow, and dissolved
by the first beam of compassion, should memory too busily renew the tale to the
attentive ear of justice, I fear the chill of horror soon would freeze the mass
'ere half dissolved, and the congesting traces re-appear; fly then, ill-fared
female, lose not a moment to redeem the virtues dread experience has taught you
so earnestly to preserve."

Miss Bertie now paid her grateful acknowledgements to the Marquis, but did not
dare meet the eyes of Walsingham; her release was immediately procured, and she
drove off in the coach to an obscure street in search of an abode during her
stay, promising to inform the Marquis of her situation, and every minute
particular he had enjoined her to observe.

By this time the servant returned with the irritated creditor, who after
repeating many invectives, accepted the bail, and the unhappy Stanley was
released, and restored to his dejected family, 'till his affairs could be
arranged, which detained the Marquis and Walsingham several days, during which
time, Miss Bertie begged* the honor of a call at her humble habitation, where
they found her industriously employed in an ample supply of needle work, and
situated in a neat and respectable family, yet Walsingham never saw her without
the most painful emotion.

"You have performed the duties of a Christian," would he often say to the
Marquis, "but alas! my heart rebels too strongly at present to ^hate good for
such unmerited evil, nor (...) urge one excuse in her behalf, while my
unconquerable aversion is continually reminding me of her cruel duplicity: and
I often wonder, noble friend, at the benign compassion you have shown my errors
also, which, thank heaven, are in some measure palliated by the discovery we
have lately made, and I trust you do not conceive me the culpable wretch you
was once taught to believe me."

CHAP. XXVIII.
ON the following evening they returned to the castle, where Miss Bertie's
relation was explained, pitied and condemned.

Mr. Walsingham now began to think of revisiting India, disposing of his
plantations, and returning to England, to spend the remainder of his days in
happiness and tranquillity in the enjoyment of his friends, and the affluence
of his ample possessions.

The dormant spark of Lord Edwin's passion for the beauteous Rosalie now
revived, and, half timid, half resolved, he took the first opportunity of
soliciting Walsingham's consent to his intended union, and begged him to urge
his influence with the Marquis.

Walsingham listened with delight, 'twas his heart's most earnest wish, and
would crown the summit of his future felicity, provided his noble friend
assented: He then accompanied Lord Edwin to the Marquis's chamber, and by the
persuasive eloquence of love, friendship, and honor, the Marquis banished his
objections, since the elucidation of the mystery, which would have been its
total prevention, and through the intercession of his family bestowed his
blessing and consent.

"Would she were not so near allied," did he often say, "but as the singer of
impropriety cannot sully the luster of this brilliant, it may as well grace my
Edwin's coronet as beam its envi^ble refulgence on a less worthy possessor; in
her I consign a treasure to your protection, and and be it your care to
preserve and improve its ^nestimable value."

Lady Mentoria expressed a fervent wish that the nuptials of her nieces might
be celebrated at the Castle, on the same day with Lord Edwin and Rosalie, as it
was her desire to attend the bridal trio to the alter, previous to Mr.
Walsingham re-visiting India, as fate might create a thousand intervening
preventions ever he again reached the shores of England; and the Marquis ever
ready to please and oblige his venerable aunt, agreed to her proposal, and
every preparation was immediately ordered for the splendid celebration.

The environs of the Castle rung with the joyful news, while the brains of half
the vicinity was turned with wonder and delight, and Lady Mentoria, as
directress, inspected every decoration and arrangement on the occasion, Lord
and Lady Lansdowne arrived three days previous to the celebration, and the
count and countess of Valletort, relatives of Lord Carlton, accompanied by the
Ladies Julia and Clara Fitzroy, sisters to the countess, who were deputed
bride-maids to the Ladies Adela and Louisa, while Lady Selina Courtney
officiated in the same character for Rosalie, and was acknowledged the most
graceful and elegant figure of the festive group.

Innumerable were the boxes of paraphernalia arriving at the Castle daily, for
the decoration of the bridal train, while the gentlemen amused themselves in
commenting on the current report of Miss Villars's elopement to Scotland, with
the little fribble Col. Ardvine, whose profligacy and gaming it was surmised
would soon reduce him to the lowest ebb of misery and destruction, as his
notorious character was too well known, and circulated with additional
aggravated vices amongst every class of public libertinism.

Alas! deluded and incorrigible Georgina, what desperate trials await thy
boasted stoicism; may thou be enabled to support them with a suitable degree
of firmness, nor the pointed finger of scorn thou have levelled at others
retaliate its dire direction toward thee, may thy example preserve others from
the same obstinate course, and thy misfortunes be softened by the lenient hand
of mercy. Such was the effusion of compassion from the fair inmates of the
Castle, whose bosoms deplored the errors and misfortunes of the misguided
Georgina.

Every domestic was risen on the nuptial morn by five o'clock: Le Brun was
flying with his usual agility up four stairs on a stretch with the Marquis's
cut-velvet suit, while Carlos was displaying to Agness Lord Edwin's diamond
buckles, and Gertrude inquiring if she could offer her assistance amongst the
ladies, as Andrew was viewing his new suit, and delighting himself with the
thoughts of the ingenious disposal he meant to make of some choice exotis and
roses, by the secret permission of Lady Mentoria.

"I know who will look handsomest," said he, as Wilson passed through the gallery
with Lady Louisa's robe.

"Why, my Lady to be sure," answered the pert attendant, perfectly
understanding his partial idea, and slamming the door, hurried away.

By eleven the elegant group had assembled in the drawing room, the blushing
brides wore each a dress exactly similar, a plain muslin robe loosely fastened
over white sarsenet, and long veils negligently thrown over their beautiful
ringlets, unsullied by powder, quite in morning dishabille by the Marquis's
desire, who arranged the procession to the chapel in the following order: Lord
Edwin and Rosalie led the way, Lord Carlton and Lady Adela followed, and Sir
Henry and Lady Louisa preceded the three bride-maids, and their respective
beaus, while the Marquis and Lady Mentoria, with the Count and Countess brought
up the rear, and the attendants closed the procession: The avenues of the park
were lined with villagers, and the chapel doors were thrown open to admit a
view of the ceremony; on the altar was spread a covering of white satin, edged
with silver fringe, while three chalices of gold contained the most beautiful
exotics, and from the center one blazed aromatic incense, and a wreath and
branches of roses intermixed with myrtle, richly waved in impending festoons
round the table, and formed a most beautiful appearance, while it delighted the
spectator, for Andrew alone had invented and arranged the charming decoration,
to please and surprise the party; three stools, covered with the same fringed
satin supported the adorative knee of each blooming bride; and returning to
the Castle, Andrew had again evinced his ingenuity by strewing the avenue with
blossoms.

This mark of attention pleased the Marquis, "Thou shall not go unrewarded,
Andrew," said he, as the grateful old man gently wiped a tear of heartfelt
satisfaction on his clea^ spotted silk handkerchief, drawn from its
long-hoarded recess on the present joyful occasion.

The brides soon after retired to dress for dinner. Rosalie's robe was of white
crape, spangled with silver, and the train looped with pearls, and encircled by
wreaths of yellow roses crossing the petticoat, fastened by silver cordage and
tassels of bullion. Lady Adela's dress differed only in the flowers; wreaths of
convolvulus festooned her petticoat, and a drapery sash of violet satin
crossed the train, depending from the shoulder and fastened in negligent
elegance on the left side: While Lady Louisa's fancy selected the pomegranate
blossom to adorn an exact similiar robe, and turbans of the same texture, with
elegant plumes of ostrich and paradise feathers, ornamented and constituted
their head dresses.

Lady Mentoria, before the charming brides left their dressing room exhibited
her generosity, by presenting a case of jewels, from which she distributed
elegant memorials of her affection; to Lady Adela she assigned a superb diamond
crescent for her turban; to Lady Louisa a diamond plume; and to her charming
Rosalie a brilliant bandeau of exquisite beauty for her hair, while the
generosity of her father had also exemplified itself in the choice of an
elegant pair of earrings and necklace, of beautiful pearls, with an enamelled
watch set with the same, and Lord Edwin fastened his own incomparable
miniature, set with brilliants, round the bosom of his lovely bride, when she
descended in full blaze of beauty to the drawing room.

The bridegrooms were elegantly dressed in embroidered suits, but Lord Edwin's
expressive and charming countenance added to his graceful form, rendered him
the most captivating object of admiration, nor had honest Andrew erroneously
adjudged the prize of beauty to Rosalie, who, indeed, far eclipsed the rival
sisters, and was uncommonly cheerful and enchanting the whole day, which has
passed in the highest festivity, and a sumptuous entertainment given to a
^erous and brilliant company, nor were the villagers exempt from sharing the
general bounty, as an ample and excellent dinner was provided them on the back
lawn.

Lady Mentoria's pensioners too, though sixty miles distant, had not been
forgotten, and the same festivity reigned in their tranquil village on the
occasion, while their evening concluded with dancing, bonfires, and a rustic
epithalamium, composed by Evelyn, and chanted by every villager, while those
who could not sing, readily and earnestly repeated it.

A private ball in the evening at the Castle which broke up at twelve,
completed the entertainment, when the Count and Countess of Valletort, with
Lord and Lady Carlton, and the Ladies Fitzroy, retired to Carlton Villa, about
five miles distant: Sir Henry and Lady Lansdowne to their seat also in the same
vicinity, accompanied by two of Sir Henry's intimate friends: and Lord Edwin
and Lady St. Laurens, with their elegant bride-maid, Lady Selina Courtney,
remained at the Castle where they continued about three weeks, when they set
off for their town residence in Grosvenor-square, and the delighted parent
undertook his voyage to India about a month afterward.

Miss Bertie fulfilled her promise of enclosing her friend's letter to the
Marquis the moment it arrived, and Monta^ne in return was dispatched to London,
with ora^s to ^upply her equipment, and see her safe on board, (...) ^e
Captain's protection, and the Marquis found (...) heart revive with an unusual
glow of satisfaction, as Montague related was last view of her, waving her
handkerchief from the vessel, and repeating a thousand grateful blessings and
prayers for the peace and happiness of the Marquis.

"You have surely, my Lord," added Montague, "saved the poor drooping creature
from the brink of destruction."

"Thy beneficent heart at least is willing to hope so," replied the Marquis,
"What good may result from my plan heaven knows, but I trust I have removed her
from iniquity, and prevented her ever doing more mischief in England, however
her propensities may be renewed in a foreign clime."

Lord and Lady St. Lauren's copying each other's virtues were the complete
patterns of connubial love, respected and revered by every class of society.

An uninterrupted bliss gilded the passing day: when a letter from the faithful
Madelon tended to prove the spark of grateful affection had not been
extinguished on the altar of munificence, and that memory would still
proportion the reward of merit: The letter was, as usual, fraught with every
sentiment of affection and respect, and communicated the news of Madelon and
Lindor's intended nuptials in a few weeks, from the time it left Chamouny; it
also expressed Giraldine grew infirm, and Reuben was subject to a fixed
rheumatic, so that Josephine now despaired of ever visiting England, as
attendant to her valued friend, for the marriage of Madelon would totally
confine her as nurse and manager of the cottage and it would remain for her
alone to smooth the pillow of infirmity, and support the crutch of decr^pitude.
Lindor too subjoined respectful remembrance, and hinted his approaching
happiness.

Lady St. Laurens read the letter with delight, and instantly penned one in
return, expressing her pleasure at the news of Madelon's happiness, and
desiring her to fix on the most pleasant and commodious vacant cottage, which
she requested might be furnished with every requisite convenience, to defray
which expense she enclosed a bank note, and a handsome present for Josephine,
whom she enjoined to be virtuous and dutiful, and added, she should ever
consider Reuben and Giraldine her pensioners, for whose support she should
faithfully transmit twenty pounds per annum, as a memorial of gratitude for
past kindness to herself and Lord Edwin.

The delight this letter gave the faithful cottagers is better selt than
described, and the Vale of Chamouny rung with the echoed praises of Lady St.
Lauren's generosity.

Carlos earnestly soliciting Marcella might preserve a station in the family,
received Lord Edwin's consent to send for her, and thus render every party with
whom he was formerly interested, if possible, as happy as himself, and as he
had witnessed the virtuous affection of Marcella, he did not hesitate to comply
with Carlos's request.

Mr. Walsingham, after a prosperous and pleasant voyage, settled his affairs,
and returning to England, presented his beloved daughter with a considerable
fortune, and became alternately an inmate of the Castle and Grosvenor-Square,
where he would often remark, with adoration to the Supreme Being, that the
sunshine of happiness gilded the close of life's evening, though the tempest of
misfortune had obscured the brightest tints of morning, that promised so fair
and unclouded a day; and he trusted the winter of life would be cherished by
the consolatory hope of an eternal spring, visiting his mouldering urn, and
renovating those blossoms of virtue in their glorious transplantation, that too
warm a sun had withered in their former bloom, and left them drooping and
forlorn to the direction of the impetuous tempest, whose ruder blast had torn
and devastated every trembling leaf.

Murmur not, thou victim of misfortune, for the hand that levels the shaft of
poignant agony can administer the antidotal balm, to extract the venom, as his
benignant mercy shall direct, and inculcate, by indubitable proofs, that the
mortal, h^e, severely afflicted, should never distrust Providence.

FINIS.

