THE CHIMERA; OR, EFFUSIONS OF FANCY: A FARCE IN TWO ACTS.

By Mrs. MARRIOTT, OF THE OLD AMERICAN COMPANY.

NEW YORK: Printed by T. and J. SWORDS, No. 167 William-Street. 1795.

PROLOGUE.
IN this fair land, where Love and Freedom reign,
Where smiling Plenty crowns each blooming plain,
The hallowed seat of sacred Liberty,
The natal spot, Great WASHINGTON, of thee --
Hail son of valor! in whose noble mind
Philanthropy, with courage is combined;
Oh! how intrepid in each glorious cause,
To guard his country from despotic laws,
He speaks the word, and ready to obey,
A thousand heroes throng bright Glory's way;
His presence bids tumultuous discord cease,
And lulls internal broils to infant Peace --
But, ah! how easy is it to control
Where virtue reigns in every patriot soul;
Where courage and humanity's combined,
With energetic power to sway the mind!
And, O America! these sons are thine,
These luminaries that will ever shine,
In many a future age and foreign clime,
Their names immortal through revolving time.
Ye kind supporters of the drooping muse,
Whose smiles to genius are nectareous dews,
Cheering each bud that else would fade and die,
From every clime to you she loves to fly;
You that can bid the tear of pity flow,
And raise the orphan drooping with her woe;
You that have caused the widow's plaints to cease,
And gave the soul of pain, the balm of peace;
You that the shafts of war successful wield,
And gain immortal honors in the field --
To you the Auth'ress flies, and asks by me,
The beamy smiles of heavenly clemency.
And you, ye fair, whose ever radiant eyes,
The beam refulgent of bright Sol supplies,
When the kind hero from the field returns,
Whose breast with love, as well as valor burns,
How can your smiles his every care beguile,
Enchant his soul, and banish every toil!
Ah! would you now bestow the wished for meed;
Then her endeavor doubtless would succeed.
THE CHIMERA, etc.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- A Chamber in Sir Lambert's House
Enter Sir Lambert and Miss Martin. SIR LAMBERT. O I Am ruined! I Am distracted!
I shall break my heart! My poor, dear child has lost her senses. These foolish
books, this poetry, this nonsense has turned her brain. What shall I do? Lord
Aberford will be here tomorrow; that noble Lord who intended to do my daughter
such honor, who intended to marry her: but it is all over now, for he never
could bear the name of poetry and inspiration, since one of these inspired
poetasters ran away with his only daughter. What will he say when he hears the
ravings of my child? Why, he will be off the match, to be sure, and then what
will she do? She must die an old maid, and I die of grief, I believe.


Miss Mart. What, Sir Lambert, should you die for grief, if your daughter
should resolve to follow my glorious example, and forever remain in a state of
dove-like purity?


Sir Lamb. Dove-like purity! ha! ha! ha! Why you know you are mad to be married
at this very moment. Did not I detect you writing a letter to your groom? Did
not I prevent you from running away with your footman? And this is dove-like
purity, is it! O give me patience, give me patience!


Miss Mart. Sir! Sir! I Am not to be treated with this incivility -- I, who am
chaste as Vesta's self -- What do I say! chaste as the virgins of Vesta, and am
worthy of being admitted into her temple, to trim her holy lamps.


Sir Lamb. What, is that ancient head of thine turned with romance too? Vesta
and her virgins! O Rhadamanthus! I shall soon be as familiar with all the gods
and goddesses, with their grand-sons, and their great-grand-sons, as I am with
farmer Gilbert and our old parson.


Enter John. John. Sir, my Lord Aberford is just arrived.


Sir Lamb. Arrived! just arrived! What shall I do? I Am in a fine state to
receive him! John introduce him. Exit John. What shall I do! Show him to this
room, and tell my daughter to prepare to receive him! -- What shall I do! what
shall I do.


Miss Mart. O heavens! had I but known of his coming today! I Am not fit to be
seen! O, this unbecoming dress! these intolerable ruffles! I shall faint to
appear before him.


Sir Lamb. Why, you make as much noise as if it was to (...) he intended his
visit.


Miss Mart. And why not to me? Let me tell you, brother, the elegancies of my
person are equal to those of your daughter, and will not be overlooked, I dare
say.


Sir Lamb. Dear sister, if you would pay more attention to the ornaments of
your mind, and less to those of your person; if you would strive to adorn that
with elegance, it would not be overlooked I Am sure.


Enter John. John. My Lord Aberford.


Enter Lord Aberford. Sir Lamb. My Lord, I Am sensible of the honor you confer
upon me by this visit, and shall ever gratefully remember it.


Lord Ab. It is an honor, I assure you, Sir Lambert Martin, for I have not
traveled ten miles before these ten years; since my daughter left me, there
was a grief -- O! had she married as I wished her, a man of your age, I might
now have been happy; but, as I said before, since she left me I have led a
retired life; but, thinking myself not old enough to relinquish all the joys of
this world, I Am resolved to marry, and when possessed of your charming
daughter, I shall be the happiest man, hey boy!


Sir Lamb. My Lord, my daughter is unworthy the honor of becoming your wife;
she is perverse; may, I believe her head is turned; for, ever since I informed
her that I was resolved you should be her husband, she has been seized with
wild extravagant fits. Aside I must tell him, and then I fear he wont have her.


Lord Ab. Fits! what sort of fits? O, it is her joy at the idea of becoming a
lady! let me see her -- I Will soon cure her of her fits.


Miss Mart. No, my Lord, you shall not be deceived; she is writing mad: if she
was to see you, old and lame as you are, she would fancy you to be the
beautiful Adonis -- but here she comes, and --


Enter Matilda. Miss Mart. Niece, I Am amazed at your dressing yourself in that
manner; those flowers are ridiculous.

Exit.
Mat. These flowers are sacred, they grew on the borders of the river
Permessus; Apollo and the muses sung whilst I gathered them: and O, the
transports that I felt to drink the immortal waters! inspiration, joy thrilled
my bosom! I feel it now, and now, and there Apollo sings.

Runs to Lord Aberford, who is frightened. There will I kneel! O blooming god
of day --
To thee alone will I my homage pay;
O bright Apollo! turn away thine eyes,
Or thy poor suppliant this instant dies.
Starts up. Hark, what heavenly sounds! it is the harp of Zetus. Now Triton
blows his silver sounding trumpet: and now it echoes over the foaming wave; and
now, and now --


Lord Aber. Lord have mercy on me! how she is frightened me! I shall be glad to
get away -- her looks are frantic -- don't you think she should be confined?

To Sir Lambert.
Sir Lamb. She is harmless, quite harmless -- Now are all my hopes destroyed.

Aside.
Lord Aber. If she is quite harmless, Sir Lambert, I might venture to take her;
three thousand a year might perhaps bring her to her senses.


Mat. O! I must do an act that will immortalize my name! What shall it be? Ah?
I have it -- I Will fly to Sol, and -- my knees implore, that he will let me
guide (...) flaming chariot of the sun; and then! and then! Phaeton like, I Will
set the world on fire.


Lord Aber. O, Sir Lambert, I dare not venture; she would set my house on fire,
and burn all my family pictures. O, I dare not venture, I dare not venture!
Lord, how she looks at me! don't let her hurt me -- O! I Am terrified.


Mat. I knew 'twas he -- his azure flowing vest, his joy inspiring face, his
flaming eye, it is Jupiter! O! how he smiles, and shining stars are round him! I
will, I will embrace him, though I share the fate of hapless Semele. Runs to
embrace him, he avoids her. Ah! he flies from me, and see he mounts in air!
borne on yon silver floating cloud, he mounts, and leaves me here to sigh and
mourn his absence.


Lord Ab. I am sorry for your misfortune, Sir Lambert; she is a fine girl, but
she is incurable; she ought to be bled, and put in a cold bath, and kept on
water gruel. I must be going, I dare not stop all night with you, for I Am
afraid that she will do something to immortalize her name.


Sir Lamb. My Lord, you must not go, the evening is too far advanced; depend
upon it, she will not hurt you -- she is harmless as yourself.


Lord Ab. O no, that she is not, that she is not! I expect her to fly at me
again in a moment.


Mat. Hark! it is Calliope calls me; and O how sweet, how heavenly are her
strains! celestial sounds break in upon my ear!

O inspiration blessed! O bliss divine!
Known but to few, but ah! that bliss is mine;
Look where she sits, and tunes her golden lyre,
And I must go to set the world on fire.
Exit.
Lord Ab. Do go after her, Sir Lambert, and see that she is confined, and does
no harm. I am happy to think my house is far enough from yours, or I should be
in perpetual fear -- I must not venture, I find I must not venture.

Exit.
Sir Lamb. What a miserable fellow I am! -- But this one daughter, and plague
me so! -- O! to think she loses three thousand pounds a year by her folly! -- I
shall run wild too, and fancy I Am in company with the Devil upon Two Sticks.

Exit.
SCENE
-- A Garden. -- Moonlight.
Enter Captain Rupert. Capt. Rup. By all that is unlucky, I Am the most
unfortunate dog in Christendom! Here have I been wandering about for these two
hours, and can neither see maid nor mistress. O Matilda! dear, cruel Matilda,
where art thou? Perhaps entertaining thy old lover with thy wild chimeras,
whilst thy youthful adorer is venting his sighs to the moon. -- I am all
impatience to hear how her scheme of madness has succeeded -- I hope she will
frighten the old Lord out of his matrimonial fit, and then she may be mine.
I Will venture under her window; perhaps I may make her hear me -- somebody
approaches, I Will retire.

Retires.
Enter Miss Martin. Miss Mart. O beauteous scene! -- O rapture breathing night!
-- Behold the moon, sublimely wandering through the gold and sable clouds! Ah!
how lovely she appears; but all her charms are lost on me, who am thus forced
to stray alone. O! for a youthful, rapturous, tender swain, to whom I could
impart my gentle thoughts, and on his shoulder fondly lean and talk of love,
and sigh, and blush, and -- Capt. Rupert coming down the Stage, and not seeming
to observe her. -- O heavens! a man! young and handsome! O! I shall die, I
shall faint! he does not observe me -- now, if I could fall into a charming
fit, that is, faint away with an elegant grace, it would have a most delightful
effect, it would make him mine forever. -- Oh! screams Oh! for assistance -- O!
I faint! Falling, Capt. Rupert catches her in his arms.


Capt. Rup. Now, I know my cue. Aside. How fair, how beautiful she looks; open
those sparkling eyes, thou loveliest child of beauty! What a heaven of charms
is here! Timandra was never half so bewitching; her fit lasts long; egad, I
shall be tired soon. Aside. Ah! she revives, and looks like the sun in a blaze
of charms, breaking through the gates of the morning. -- How fares the fairest
maid I ever gazed on?


Miss Mart. Oh, Sir! I am all confusion -- I am covered with blushes to think
what trouble I must have given you. O! I am still very faint, I shall fatigue
you with leaning on your arm; there is a chair in the next walk, if you will be
so tenderly obliging to lead me to it, I shall remain indebted to you forever.


Capt. Rup. Name it not, Madam! I shall think myself the happiest of mankind,
if I can be of service to so charming an object. -- Where could such perfection
hide itself? Behold, at your feet, the slave of your charms; nor will he rise,
till you give him leave to hope --


Miss Mart. My dear Sir, I beg you will rise; if you persevere in your
affection, I will give you leave to hope that I shall return it; for, with
blushes I own it, -- Hiding her face. -- you are the man I have long sighed for.


Capt. Rup. Pardon me, angelic sweetness! but I believe you never saw me before.


Miss Mart. Now, to display the beauties of my mind. Aside. No, Sir, but in
idea, I have often beheld you, conversed with you, walked with you, and O, Sir!
I have the most brilliant imagination in the world; my fancy is exquisite, and
my taste, was you to be acquainted with me, you would find to be elegantly fine
--

" Swifter than meteors glide on wings of wind,
" My nimble thoughts shoot through their whirling round."

Capt. Rup. O! thou art all accomplishment, all grace, all love; but are not
the sighs of Zephyrus, and the falling dews too cold for that soft frame? Come
let me attend you into the house? Why that sigh? Will my company be
disagreeable?


Miss Mart. Ah, no! Witness, the newly kindled flame, that warms my heart; but,
dear Sir, my brother may be offended.


Capt. Rup. Banish all fears, love surmounts every obstacle, braves every
danger, scorns every fear.

Come, then, thou fairest of ten thousand fair,
Exquisite beauties, play upon thy face;
Sweet blooming youth, and smiling love is there.
O! how replete with every winning grace.
Exeunt.
SCENE -- Another part of the Garden.
Enter Frolic. Frol. Great guns and small arms! Here Is a pretty time of night
to be kicking my heels and rubbing my hands under the mournful shades of the
weeping willow. My master, Captain Rupert, thinks every body is as warm as
himself; but faith he is mistaken. This love makes a person as hot in December
as in the middle of the dog days. -- Here I left him about an hour ago, sighing
and groaning for his Desdemona. Now, was I in his place, instead of
reconnoitering the out works, I Would storm the castle, force the battlements, and
carry off the prize triumphant -- None of your whining lovers for me -- I have
been bred up to the wars; my country is my mistress; my heart, my honor, my
life are here is; and like an ardent lover, I Would die to defend her -- Hey! who
comes here? Matilda's maid.


Enter Dolly. My charming, my delightful, enchanting Doll, give me a kiss. [
Runs up to her, and kisses her. Dol. La! Mr. Frolic, you are very rude; I
does not suffer such liberties to be taken with me, I assure you; I that am as
great a wirgin as a westal, as Miss Martin says -- Now, if ever you hopes to
win my affection, you must imitate the heroine of some great romance, such as
Don Quixote, for instance -- Why, I have heard how he conquered armies, subdued
towns, and fought giants to gain HIS Doll -- Cinca and I thinks, as I have
often thought, as how I am worthy of being traduced into some helegant novel;
am not I, my dear Frolic?


Frol. Why yes, Mrs. Dolly, the novel would be very fine to be sure, were you
the heroine; and to gain your heart, my charmer, I would do as much for you as
Don Quixote ever did for his Dulcinea.


Dol. Nay, but that is impossible.


Frol. By my soul it is true, for I Would rout every flock of sheep in the adjoining
common; and, with my sword drawn, I Would quarrel and fight with the first
windmill that chanced to place itself in my way.


Dol. Sheep and wind-mills, Mr. Frolic! ( passion) you mean this as an insult
upon my judgment! I that have received daily lectures from the learned Miss
Martin, who is the delight of Mal-pomene, Polly Hymnia, Call-ye-up, and the
distressing muse of tragedy, Thalia!


Frol. Come, my dear, learned Dolly, let us retire, or such a combination of
hard words will so bewilder my ideas, that I shall forget to call my master up.


Dol. Call your master up! Why, you illiteral man, you! I meant the muse
Call-ye-up.


Frol. Pausing O! O! I suppose you mean Calliope, the muse of eloquence; upon
my soul I don't wonder at the brilliancy of your expressions, now I find you
are under her influence; but I Am afraid, my dear Dolly, nature never formed you
for a votary to the muses.


Dol. Nature never formed me! so you mean it as a disparagement to my person;
-- let me tell you, that I am the toast of the village; that John, our footman,
is dying for me; and that Dick, the gardener, compared my neck to the full
blown sunflower, and my cheeks to the beautiful crimson of the opening poppy --
Nature never formed me, indeed! Well then, one of the graces did; and though
every one is in love with my wit, I Have more sense than to run mad, as my
Mistress Matilda has done: but, I supposes, it is because her father is going
to force her to marry an helpless old Lord, when she might have your master, a
smart young Captain; but he has no money, and so he dares not openly to
discover his passion. Well, for my part, I likes a young man that hasn't a
farthing, better than a rich old Lord with his weight in gold.

SONG.
Ah! give me the youth that is clever,
Though no wealthy possession he hold;
For I never could endure, O! no, never,
A lover though rich, when he is old.
For Hymen, he never intended
That youth to old age should be sold;
If June with December was blended,
Ah me! what extremes -- heat and cold.
Mine Is a true democratical motion;
Equality I Am for in age;
'Twas liberty gave me the notion,
Therefore 't must be good I Will engage.
Ah! give me the youth that is clever,
Though no wealthy possession he hold;
For I never could endure, O! no, never,
A lover though rich, when he is old.
Exeunt.
END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II. SCENE -- A Chamber.
Enter Lord Aberford. LORD ABERFORD. I Am quite a new man; wine has done
wonders, I Am now as bold as Hector. Matilda, I defy thee, and I Will marry thee
in spite of all thy vagaries -- Hem! hem! I Will let her see who shall be lord
and master.

Strutting.
Enter Matilda, wildly. Mat. Where is the hero I so long have sought? this
perjured, false, this unrelenting Jason? O tell me where he is, or by yon orb,
yon lucid orb, by every star that gems the face of night, by the dire gulf
that glows with endless fire, by all that is great and powerful do I swear, I Will
do a deed shall make pale nature tremble -- I Will rend, I Will rend, I Will rend --


Lord Ab. O Lord have mercy on me, how dreadfully she talks! my courage begins
to fail me; wine cannot save me -- how shall I make my escape! She stands
betwixt me and the door -- I cannot get by her -- O! what must I do? I expect
every moment that she will rend me! -- O! O! -- and not a soul in the room to
save me! --


Mat. Thou slave, avoid the fury of my rage -- This arm shall whirl thee low
upon the ground, shall tear thy treacherous heart; for thou art Jason, thou art
the false, the unrelenting Jason.


Lord Ab. No, no! I am not Jason -- indeed I am not Jason, and on my knees I
beg for mercy -- Falling on his knees -- Don't hurt me, for I am but a poor old
man -- O! I must cry out for assistance.


Mat. No, thou art young, thou art beautiful; but thou art false and cruel, and
now shall feel my vengeance; here is the weapon that must end thy treasons.

Taking out her fan.
Lord Ab. Hiding his face. O! I dare not look -- it is doubtless a dagger! Why
did I think of marrying! Why did I come here! Now must I die a timeless death
-- I that am innocent as a lamb, must be slaughtered. Falling on his knees with
his back toward her. Save my life, my precious life! do not, do not kill me!
--


Mat. Laying hold of his arm. Traitor, thou die this moment! Striking him on
the back with her fan.

Now the direful deed is done!
Now my vengeance is complete!
I must go and guide the Sun,
Burning all the world with heat.
Exit.
Lord Ab. O! I am mortally wounded! Help! murder! help! -- O! I am dying! --
Help! murder! help!


Enter Captain Rupert and Miss Martin. Miss Mart. My dear Lord Aberford, what
is the matter? Lord, I am frightened to death -- O! I shall faint with fear --
tell us, Sir, the cause of this alarm.


Lord Ab. Tell you! Ah! I have no time to lose -- I have but a moment to live
-- I, I have received a mortal wound; the dagger has certainly pierced a vital
part; and now I repent my ill usage to my nephew -- if I could but see him
before I die I should be happy.


Capt. Rup. Behold him here before you -- and indeed, my Lord, I pity the
deplorable situation I now see you in. But what has been the cause of this
dreadful calamity?


Lord Ab. I have no time to tell you; give me pen, ink and paper. Bringing him
pen, ink and papaper -- writing. There, I have now made amends. Giving the
paper to Captain Rupert. I shall die in peace; but I should have liked to live
a little longer.


Capt. Rup. Reading. What do I see! I here find myself endowed with two
thousand a year. O, my Lord, how shall I sufficiently thank you? But you may
yet recover.


Lord Ab. O! never, never! and if I do, I have more than enough to live retired
upon.


Capt. Rup. But, my Lord, you are going to marry the charming Matilda.


Lord Ab. I marry her! O! she is a devil! it is she has wounded me, nephew; avoid
her; she is mad, stark mad; and if I die, I beg that she may be brought to
justice. O! what a pain in my back! it is like a violent rheumatism -- do send
for a Doctor -- O! O! I die! I die! Falls on the floor.


Capt. Rup. As if understanding the joke. Ah! he is going, and I will never
cease to lament over him -- let me kiss his dear cold hand, and close his eyes
for ever! -- I Will go bespeak a coffin for him, that he may be interred with his
honorable ancestors. My dear, dear uncle! how miserable I am for the loss of
you! --


Miss Mart. And I Will sympathise in your misfortunes, join in your tears, and
give you sigh for sigh: I Will go and order the best room for him to be laid out
in -- Do not be too much afflicted, all will be shortly well again. Excuse my
absence, I Will soon return to give you comfort.

Exit.
Capt. Rup. And I Will go and bespeak his coffin, for he is certainly gone.

Farewell thou dear departed saint, farewell,
With sighs I soon shall hear thy passing knell.
Exit.
Lord Ab. Rising. Nephew, I am not dead, indeed I am not dead -- O Lord! O
Lord! here shall I be put into my coffin alive and well -- Nephew, why nephew,
I say I am not dead, indeed I am not dead!


Enter Sir Lambert. Sir Lamb. I see you are not dead; but what is the matter
friend? you seem very much alarmed.


Lord Ab. Dear Sir, have you not heard I Am wounded, mortally wounded? I am,
sure.


Sir Lamb. Wounded! and in my house! who gave you the wound? and where did you
receive it?


Lord Ab. O Sir! your daughter gave it me -- it is in my back, and I shall
shortly die.


Sir Lamb. My daughter! O heavens! let me look at the wound -- it is in your
back you say. Pulling off his coat. Why, here is not one speck of blood to be
seen; the waistcoat is quite entire: you must be wrong -- I Am sure she could
not hurt you.


Lord Ab. Now, if all this pain should be only the effects of fear! Aside --
Dear Sir Lambert, look again; I think I am wounded, at least I hope I am
wounded -- O! I would give my head to be wounded -- If I am not wounded, how
ridiculous I shall look.


Sir Lamb. My Lord you may make yourself perfectly happy, for I can assure you
that you are not wounded.


Lord Ab. Make myself happy! I shall never be happy any more -- Now would I
give a man one thousand pounds for a flight cut on the back -- How I shall be
laughed at! they will put me in the newspapers, and I shall be branded with the
name of coward as long as I live. I had better have died with a wound than of
grief.


Sir Lamb. Ha! ha! ha! I cannot help laughing -- ha! ha! ha! I beg your pardon,
but I cannot help it -- And so you fancied yourself mortally wounded! -- ha! ha!
ha! -- What weapon did she make use of to terrify you so?


Lord Ab. O, Lord, Sir, my fear would not let me look, but I believe it was a
dagger or a carving-knife: and she uttered such dreadful words that filled my
poor heart with horror; my fear was so great, that I supposed she had wounded
me; but I think she has not, I think she has not -- if I once get away from
this house I shall be happy. Have you seen my nephew, Sir Lambert?


Sir Lamb. No; why, is your nephew here?


Lord Ab. Yes, he came in just time enough to save me, or I should have
certainly died with fear, and I have rewarded him with two thousand pounds a
year for his trouble.


Sir Lamb. I shall be happy in having the pleasure to know him: I hear he is a
fine young man, and since you have rejected my daughter, I shall have no
objection to bestow her on him.


Lord Ab. He marry your daughter! No, no Sir, he will not marry a mad woman. O,
my poor back! it still aches with pain, as if there was a wound.


Sir Lamb. But, my dear Lord Aberford, my daughter was lately a charming,
sensible girl, and there is no doubt but she will speedily recover her senses,
for I begin to suspect that you was the cause of her madness.


Lord Ab. I the cause of her madness! How could I be the cause of her madness?
-- She Is nearly been the cause of my death I know.


Sir Lamb. My Lord, I pity, but I cannot help smiling at your misfortunes, and
you yourself own that they are very laughable.


Lord Ab. Well, well, I shall have no objection to give my consent to the
match, provided this affair be kept a secret; for if it is known, O! I shall be
caricatured; I shall be undone!


Sir Lamb. Depend upon it, it shall never be divulged.


Lord Ab. Well, then, if my nephew dares venture -- but I think he dare not --
he may marry her. But, Lord! Lord! he is gone to bespeak my coffin -- it is sure
to be known -- O! it is sure to be known.


Sir Lamb. To bespeak your coffin! ha! ha! ha! well, I Will take care that you
are not put into it, so don't frighten yourself.


Lord Ab. I should not be so much frightened at that neither, Sir Lambert.


Sir Lamb. You have more courage than I suspected, my Lord; there are few men
that would not be afraid of being put alive into their graves.


Lord Ab. Dear Sir Lambert, don't name it, it makes me tremble.


Enter Captain Rupert. Lord Ab. O! my dear nephew, sure you have not bespoke my
coffin!


Capt. Rup. No, my Lord; but the Doctor is below with his bag of instruments,
to probe the wound and see if it be mortal.


Lord Ab. Hush, don't speak so loud; I am not wounded, I only thought I was
wounded -- but indeed I wish I had been wounded.


Capt. Rup. Not wounded! heavens! what shall I say to the Doctor? But since you
so earnestly wish it, and as I am ever ready to oblige you, drawing his sword
I Will give you a slight scar on whatever part of your body you please.


Lord Ab. Running up the Stage Save me! heaven defend me! save me! put up your
sword, put up your sword, or I shall die this moment -- O dear! O dear! you are
all combined to frighten me out of my senses.


Capt. Rup. Dear uncle, I beg your pardon; it was only my desire to make you
happy.


Sir Lamb. Captain Rupert, I am glad to see you -- you have been the object of
our discourse, and we have just now agreed upon a very serious affair: if you
coincide with our wishes, you will make me very happy.


Capt. Rup. Now, if my wise uncle is going to marry me to the old virgin --
Aside.


Sir Lamb. Sir, Matilda, my daughter, has a handsome fortune, an agreeable
person, a --


Lord Ab. But, nephew, she is stark wild, stark mad; but if you wish to marry
her you may, that is all.


Capt. Rup. O! Sir Lambert, how shall I express my joy? -- My Lord, how shall I
thank you for your goodness? you have made me the happiest of mankind -- and
must the charming Matilda then be mine?


Lord Ab. Yes, and if you can cure her of her fits, she will be worth having.


Capt Rup. Leave that to me; but where is the charming maid!


Enter Miss Martin. Miss Mart. Oh! he doubtless means me -- Aside. I come, Sir,
covered with blushes; I come to own a mutual flame and make my lover blessed.


Sir Lamb. Hey day! what have we here? make your lover blessed! why, he is
speaking of Matilda, my daughter; you own a mutual flame! why, he means Matilda.


Miss Mart. Sir Lambert, I know who he means. No, no, Captain Rupert has more
discernment, more prudence, and more discretion than to make choice of one so
much my inferior in every respect.


Lord Ab. Nephew, is she your choice? Ha! ha! ha! I cannot help laughing in
spite of my misfortunes: well, you must confess that I have the better taste.


Sir Lamb. Captain, I shall be obliged to you for an explanation.


Capt. Rup. Pardon me, Sir Lambert, for indulging your sister's weakness, for
my intentions were laudable; I did it with a view to open her eyes, that she
might see the impropriety of her conduct. I found her breathing soft sighs to
the moon, and, in the language of romance, wishing for a youthful adorer.
Chance threw me in her way. She became enamoured with my person; but I believe
had it been my footman he would have been equally fortunate. I bestowed
encomiums on her, which might have flattered an angel; and she, supposing all a
just tribute to her beauty, eagerly believed them to be true. Forgive me,
Madam, for thus exposing your secrets; I hope it will warn you to be more
prudent in future. Believe me, Madam, I have a respect, nay, veneration for
you, because you are the aunt of my charming Matilda; but remember that your
person has long since lost its attraction, and I would advise you to lay by
those romantic notions, and become a useful member of society.


Miss Mart. Oh! I shall die with rage; I shall expire with vexation. Sir, you
are -- you are -- but my grief wont let me tell you what you are. Oh! --
Sobbing -- I shall never survive this disappointment -- O! you cruel, you
barbarous deceiver.

I Will fly your treacherous sex with just disdain,
Nor ever more will think on man again.
Exit.
Enter Matilda. Mat. Blow on thou eastern wind,
And fan my lovesick breast;
Ah! why is he unkind,
He that should make me blessed.
Heavens! what do I behold? Capt. Rupert!


Capt. Rup. You now behold the tenderest, truest swain that ever breathed
adoration at the shrine of love, and with my Matilda's consent, I shall be the
happiest votary Hymen ever could boast of.


Lord Ab. Yes, he shall be your husband, Matilda, if you will promise to
frighten me no more. But, Lord, Lord, I shall not recover this two months! how
could you do so you little jade?


Mat. My Lord, I beg your pardon for the fear I have given you; and as I have
frightened you into your senses, I am amply repaid for my trouble.


Sir Lamb. Come, my child, we shall now be happy; I here give you to an
honorable gentleman, one who will deserve all your affection.


Capt. Rup. And I receive her as the greatest blessing heaven could bestow.
Charming Matilda! I will do every thing in my power to deserve your warmest
love.


Mat. And to my Rupert, I will ever prove myself a duteous wife.

Chimera's wild no more will I pursue,
But dedicate my life to truth and you.

FINIS.

