THE TRIUMPHS OF LOVE; OR HAPPY RECONCILIATION.

Registered agreeable to law.

THE TRIUMPHS OF LOVE; OR, Happy Reconciliation. A COMEDY. IN FOUR ACTS.

Written by an American, and a Citizen of Philadelphia.

Acted at the New Theater PHILADELPHIA.

FIRST EDITION.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY R. FOLWELL, NO. 33, ARCH-STREET. SEPTEMBER 10, 1795.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Jacob Friendly, sen. Mr. Morris. George Friendly, sen. Mr. Whitlock. George
Friendly, jun. Mr. Moreton. Jacob Friendly, jun. Mr. Blisset. Major Manly, Mr.
Green. Peevish, Mr. Wignell. Trifle, Mr. Marshall. Careless, Mr. Frances.
Beauchamp, Mr. Cleveland. Patrick (a new comer) Mr. Harwood. Dick, Mr.
Mitchell. Sambo, Mr. Bates.
Watchmen, Constable, servants, etc.

WOMEN.
Hannah Friendly, Mrs. Rowson. Rachel, Mrs. Marshall. Mrs. Peevish, Mrs.
Whitlock. Jenny, Mrs. Francis. Clementina, Miss. Willems.
Maid servant.

SUBSCRIBERS' NAMES.
A.
Miss Jane Allison, 2 copies. Mr. Josiah H* Anthony.
B.
John B. Bordley, Esquire. 4 copies. Mr. Nathan Baker. Samuel Breck, 8 copies. John
Blakeney, 2 copies. Andrew Bayard, 4 copies. John Brown, 6 copies. William
Brown. D. Barry, 2 copies. Dr. Benson, Germantown, 2 copies.
C.
Tench Coxe, Esquire. 6 copies. Mr. Daniel Caldwell, 2 copies. John Caldwell, 4
copies. John Coals, 4 copies. Bartholomew Conolly, 4 copies. John Cummings, 4
copies. James Cummings, 8 copies. Stewart Cummins. James Crawford. Henry
Clymer, 8 copies. Master George Clymer, jun. 4 copies. Capt. Caldwell, 2
copies. Mrs. Chastwift, 2 copies.
D.
Robert H. Dunkin, Esquire. 4 copies. Mr. Robert Denison, 4 copies. J. Drelden.
E.
Mr. William Even, 2 copies. Henry Escher.
F.
Thomas Fitzsimons, Esquire. 4 copies. Mr. Samuel Folwell, 2 copies. William
Folwell. Richard Folwell, 12 copies. Thomas W. Francis, 20 copies. John Finley,
4 copies. Richard Footman, 2 copies. Alexander Foster. Joshua Fisher. John
Francis, Rhode Island, 20 copies. John Frazier, 2 copies.
G.
Col. Francis Gurney, 4 copies. Mr. Harry St. George, 4 copies. Charles
Goldsbury, Maryland, 6 copies. W. B. Goldthwait, 4 copies. David Graham, 4
copies. John Graham, 4 copies.
H.
Hon. Robert G. Harper, South Carolina, 8 copies. Mr. George Harrison, 20
copies. George H. Harrison, 4 copies. Mathias Harrison, 4 copies. William
Harrison. Henry J. Hutchins, 2 copies. Paschall Hollingsworth. Robert
Henderson, 4 copies. J. Hunter, 2 copies. Hugh Holmes, 2 copies. George Hughes,
4 copies. Wilson Hunt, 8 copies.
J.
Major W. Jackson, 20 copies. Mr. H. Jackson, 4 copies. Cantwell Jones, 20
copies. Charles Jarbrouse. George Jenkins.
K.
Mr. Stephen Kingston, 4 copies. John Knowles, 2 copies. John Knap, 4 copies.
William King. W. Knox, 2 copies. J. Ketland, 10 copies.
L.
George Latimer, Esquire. 2 copies. Mr. George Laurman, 4 copies. W. Levy, 2
copies. Robert Lee, 2 copies. L. Y. Lewis. Joseph S. Lewis. John Lisle, jun. 4
copies.
M.
Thomas Mifflin, Esquire. Governor of Pennsylvania, 4 cop. Mr. John F. Mifflin, 20
copies. Jonathan Mifflin, 4 copies. Thomas Mifflin, jun. Francis Markoe, 2
copies. J. Moore, 4 copies. James Moore, 4 copies. William Miller, 10 copies.
William Miller, jun. 6 copies. John Miller, jun. 6 copies. George Meade, 2
copies. Samuel Meredith, 8 copies. Thomas Morris, 20 copies. James Morris.
Joseph Morris. Israel W. Morris. Thomas Morris. J. Marshall, 20 copies. Abel
Marple. Alexander Murray. David M'Cormick, 4 copies. Archibald M'Call, 20
copies. George M'Call, 4 copies.
N.
Mr. S. Noailles, 4 copies.
P.
Charles Pettit, Esquire. 6 copies. Dr. James Proudfoot, 4 copies. Mr. Samuel
Potts. Thomas C. Potts, 2 copies. Henry Philips, 19 copies. John M. Price, 4
copies. Thomas Pollock, 2 copies. George Plumsted, 2 copies. Matthew Pearce, 2
copies. Mark Prager, jun. 2 copies. Norton Pryor, 4 copies. C. W. Peale, 4
copies.
R.
Dr. Benjamin Rush, 6 copies. Joseph Redman, 2 copies. Mr. Hugh Roberts. George
Roberts. Joseph Ross, 2 copies. John Read, jun. 2 copies. James Reynolds, 4
copies.
S.
Mr. Charles Smith, 2 copies. Thomas Smith. Robert Smith, 2 copies. Daniel
Smith, 4 copies. Joseph H. Seymour. John Shields, 4 copies. Skiffman Selby, 4
copies. John Savage, 2 copies. Samuel Sterrett, 20 copies.
T.
William Tilghman, Esquire. 8 copies. Mr. Joseph Taggert, 2 copies. A Friend to the
Drama, 10 copies.
V.
Mr. John Vaughan, 4 copies.
W.
Mr. William Williamson, 2 copies. Richard Willing, 4 copies. Simon Walker, 10
copies. Henry L. Waddel. Joseph Wynkoop. William Waln. Thomas Wharton. S. Watt,
4 copies. Benjamin West, 50 copies. George Worral. A Friend to the Drama, 4
copies.
Y.
Mr. James Yard, 10 copies.
TRIUMPHS OF LOVE.
Mr. Green as Major Manly, and Mr. Moreton as George Friendly Jun.

Major M. I glory in being an enthusiast, in the cause of liberty, and my
country!!



THE TRIUMPHS OF LOVE; OR, HAPPY RECONCILIATION,
ACT. I.
SCENE I. -- Jacob Friendly, sen's House.
Jacob and George Friendly sens. G. Friend. sen. YOU and I, brother, never did,
or ever will agree on this subject. You know the terms upon which I took your
son; I adopted him as my own child, and hold myself responsible for his conduct.


J. Friend. sen. Little do thou know his character, and much do I repent of
putting him under thy direction; it will be the ruin of him, soul and body.


G. Friend. sen. 'Sdeath, Jacob, what do you mean by such reflections? They are
enough to make one quarrel with you outright. After all the expense I have been
at, in giving him the first-rate education, don't he possess all those
necessary accomplishments which constitute the agreeable companion* -- and yet
you say I have ruined him, soul and body.


J. Friend. sen. What thou does call accomplishments, brother, are what lead
him the broadway to destruction; there is scarce a night but I hear of his
disorderly behavior; do thou not think that these reports hurt me, who am
the father of the young man?


G. Friend. sen. Parents often create themselves unnecessary trouble by being
too particular with their children -- you multiply all the foibles of your son
into vices, and make no allowances for the sprightly sallies of youth; we will
see which will turn out the cleverest fellow, him or your primitive son, whom
you are bringing up in the straight path. (Ironically.)


J. Friend. sen. Would that George was like unto Jacob! What a consolation
would it be to my mind! It would be a healing comfort, brother.


G. Friend. sen. And I am sure it would be mortifying to me if George was like
unto, Jacob; I mean him for a different sphere in life, and trust some of those
days he will make a figure; I know him -- the seeds of greatness are planted in
his breast, and time and reflection will make them blossom fair to the world.


J. Friend. sen. The great danger is, that the rank weeds of vice will overgrow
the seeds of virtue: thou have been too indulgent to him; and where thou have
been most to blame, was in making him too independent of thee.


G. Friend. Brother, these are narrow, contracted notions; it is destroying
every idea of independence to have a person hanging on one, a wretched
dependant; I have placed George in easy circumstances: I know he will be
grateful, and make use of his money like a gentleman; come let us go and see
Hannah and Rachel.


(Exeunt.) Scene. -- George Friendly, jun's lodgings.
G. Friend. jun. (looking over invitations.) Invitations upon invitations;
cards upon cards; I will be with ye ladies and gentlemen: Pleasure thou art my
goddess, and I Will pursue thee with unremitting ardour.


(Enter Jacob Friendly, jun. who gives his brother a note.) G. Friend. jun.
(Reads.) Very good; tell Rachel I will attend to it. How are all at home,
brother Jake?


J. Friend. jun. Bravely, I Am obliged to thee, brother George.


Enter Major Manly. Major Manly. Your servant, gentlemen.


G. Friend. jun. Manly, your most obedient.


J. Friend. jun. Farewell, brother George and friend Manly. Exit.


G. Friend. jun. There goes the hope of the family -- daddy's pet.


Major Manly. He is a good kind of a lad.


G. Friend. jun. A sly fellow, depend on it -- Harry, methinks you look very
brilliant; this has been a grand parade day -- a fine sparkling hilted sword --
now tell me truly is there not vanity in dangling that fine affair by your side?


Major Manly. No, George, not a particle; but I feel a conscious pride in
wearing it, for these reasons: -- it has been my trusty friend in the hour of
danger; and the first moment I girded it on this side, I subscribed my name to
our glorious independence, which I will support while I have breath.


G. Friend. jun. What a Don Quixote in politics! you were always an enthusiast
in that way, Harry.


Major Manly. I glory in being an enthusiast in the cause of liberty and my
country; and esteem it the most fortunate circumstance of my life, that I have
been instrumental in effecting a revolution which has given freedom to millions
living, and will secure it to millions yet unborn.


G. Friend. jun. A political prophet, too -- I hope you will not prove a false
one. Our national government has its enemies.


Major Manly. Not a great many: it is the nature of a popular government, like
ours, for party-spirit to prevail.


G. Friend. jun. Some will tell you it is the life and soul of a republican
government: it kept the lamp of liberty burning at Rome a long time, but,
unfortunately, extinguished it at last.


Major Manly. We have nothing of that kind to fear among us: a great majority
of the citizens of the united states are sufficiently enlightened to judge for
themselves: they will not be led away or imposed upon by designing men of any
description whatever: they, I trust, set a just value upon one of the best
constitutions that ever was framed for the government of man. What people on
earth, save ourselves, can boast of so free and equal a representation, or of
choosing their chief magistrate? What people under heaven enjoy civil and
religious liberty with that purity we do? With such advantages, and under such
a government, how can we but be happy?


G. Friend. jun. There is no doubt but we are, and may continue to be the
happiest people on the face of the globe; but let us throw politics aside, and
converse about the affairs of the world in general. Have you heard any thing
that is wonderful through the day?


Major Manly. Not a sentence: methinks the town seems very dull.


G. Friend. jun. Ha! ha! ha! dull indeed. Where have you concealed yourself? --
Here man -- see what a volume of invitations I have: I am engaged to dinners,
tea-parties, and balls, for the month to come.


Major Manly. Really, really, Friendly, you are in great demand; -- much in
fashion among the belles; I wonder you don't single out one from the fair flock
for matrimony.


G. Friend. jun. Matrimony, eh! -- no, no, Harry; -- as the song goes, (Sings.)
I Will kiss and hug,
And shake a brogue, (dances)
Like a merry, merry rogue,
But hang me if I marry.


No, no, Harry, hang me if I marry -- unless I could have a thousand wives.


Major Manly. What an extravagant rogue thou art! I should think myself
supremely blessed with one.


G. Friend. jun. Apropos, Major: how do you come on in that business? -- will not
father give consent?


Major Manly. He will not.


G. Friend. jun. Run away with her.


Major Manly. That would be dishonorable.


G. Friend. jun. Ha, ha, ha, honor indeed! do you talk of honor in love
matters? Love is not to be restricted.


Major Manly. Yes, rational love may be; though your sister is the dear and
first object of my affections, and one in whom all my earthly happiness is
centered, yet such are my notions of honor, that were she to put herself under
my protection, I think I could not basely steal her from her parents.


G. Friend. jun. Hark, Major, you have acquired much reputation under the
banner of Mars, but I am afraid you have too much honor to make any great
figure under that of Venus.


Enter Trifle hastily. Trifle. George, my worthy fellow, how are you? Major,
most noble Major, I kiss your hand. The news, gentlemen, tell me at once; I am
on the wing in pursuit of the finest girl that ever was viewed by mortal man.


G. Friend. jun. The Empress of Russia is dead.


Trifle. And her successor is glad of it; I am off gentlemen. (Exit.)


G. Friend. jun. What an oddity!


Major Manly. It Is a superficial animal. (looks at his watch) I had no
conception it was so late. I must be off too; adieu George.


G. Friend. jun. Fare you well Harry. ( Exit M. Manly.)


Enter Sambo. G. Friend. jun. Sambo, take this note to Mrs. Soapsuds.

Sings. Sweet let me trifle time away,
And taste of love 'ere I grow gray.

Exit. Sambo. Eh, eh, eh, dare he go sing like mockey bird. Massa George berry
fine young man; berry good to poor foke; he gib great deal money away; but he
drom rogue for gall; he keep he tings berry close too: he no tell Sambo he
secrets; but Sambo be drom cunning for all dat. Now I take dis to missey Sopey
Suds; berry well: den missey Sopey Suds gib it to somebody else; Sambo know all
about it: how Sambo wish he had a rich quare-toe old uncle, like massa George.
he be a drom rogue among fair sex too. ( Looks at himself in the glass.) I tink
I berry handsome fellow: -- look much like a gemmen; we negro improbe berry
much. ( Dances and sings.)

Sweet let me trife time away,
And taste of lub fo I grow gray. Exit.

Re-enter George Friendly jun. and Trifle. Trifle. I am in love, George, over
head and ears, by all that is charming in woman; deluged, inveloped, swallowed
up in the great gulf of love; -- and with whom do you think?


G. Friend. jun. Why, faith, that it is not easy to divine; but, as I know you
are fond of variety, I should guess it to be with a black damsel.


Trifle. No, damn it, not quite so strong a stomach; but, by the bye, it is
with one of those called people of color; the sweetest creature ever my eyes
beheld: do you know, Friendly, it is a complexion I think superior to all our
boasted fair whites and reds: it is a fine standing color: oh, such soft, such
sweet, languishing, melting, dissolving looks.


G. Friend. jun. Cease, thou rogue, and tell me where she is to be found.


Trifle. Such an elegant, such a graceful figure, such dear little feet, such
well-turned ancles.


G. Friend. jun. No, but prithee, Trifle, where is this yellow piece of
perfection to be seen?


Trifle. That is the devil of it: I don't know.


G. Friend. And what the devil, have you been talking about all this while?


Trifle. I lost her by the strangest accident that ever happened to man: I will
tell you the whole story. As I was addressing her in her own language, you know
I speak French very well, while I was holding her in conversation, a dog was
chasing a monstrous great hog, just out of the wallow, -- and what must the
damned brute do, but run between my legs, and throw me off my center, to the
great mirth of the spectators.


G. Friend. Ha, ha, ha: it must have been a laughable sight.


Trifle. That was a trifling mortification compared to the loss of her.
However, I Will try to fish her out. --


G. Friend. jun. And let me know.


Trifle. You are not to be trusted -- oh, damn it, I thought I had something to
ask you; do you set your face toward Mrs. Peevish's tomorrow night? I am told
there is to be a damned rout there. -- Mrs. Peevish is a sweet woman.


G. Friend. jun. She is perfection itself: I was once half in love with that
lady myself.


Trifle. It is said you are so yet, George.


G. Friend. jun. Whisper not such a word, Trifle. Exeunt.


SCENE. -- An apartment in Peevish's house.
Servants running to and fro. Enter Peevish. Peevish. A pack of pickpockets I
have about me: every one eating the bread of idleness. Patrick, you Patrick. (
Rings a bell in passion.)


Enter Patrick hastily. Patrick. Shir.


Peevish. Why did you not come before? one must be calling and ringing an hour
before you budge.


Patrick. I came as soon as I shaw you ring the bell, shir.


Peevish. You did not, sir: you are such a heavy-heeled fellow that you move
like an elephant: Did you attend to the horses last night?


Patrick. Yes, shir: I gave them as much oats as they could ate all night; --
and Dick looked as if he would burst this morning he was so fat.


Peevish. Oh, you blundering Irish fool: you have foundered my horses. It is
provoking to be plagued with such blockheads. I will send to England for
servants that I can depend on: I must go and look after my creatures myself: it
is mortifying that people of fortune and family should be treated in this way.
Exit.


Patrick. (Speaking ironically.) Fortune and family, by my shoul, I know his
inshides so well, that if he had all the riches in the world, he would be a
poor man; and as for family, I heard the paple spaking in the kitchen, that he
never had a fader, and that his mother was a fish woman, and sold tripes in the
market.


Enter Jenny peeping. Jenny. Is the old fellow gone?


Patrick. I, and the devil go wid him, I shay.


Jenny. You Will get used to him: -- don't be disheartened. How do you like this
country, Patrick?


Patrick. Why, I like it so well, that if I was once in dare Ireland again, the
devil burn me if I would be here.


Jenny. That Is certain -- if you was there you would not be here: -- you mean,
if you was once in your own country, you would not return to this country.


Patrick. Yes, honey: -- that is what I thought I shaid.


Jenny. I suppose you have got a sweetheart there.


Patrick. Upon my shalvation I have not.


Jenny. Was you ever in love, Patrick?


Patrick. Upon my word I am not quite shartin, -- but I think I have some such
disorder about me now.


Jenny. Do you think so?


Patrick. In faith I do.


Jenny. ( Eagerly) With whom? -- I hope it is with me. (Aside.)


Patrick. Why faith, to tell you the honest trute, it is with your dear shelf.


Jenny. With me, Patrick? You surprise me. -- I am pleased with the
declaration: it is a handsome good lump of an Irishman. (Aside.)


Patrick. You may belave me, when I tell you I love you above all flesh;
whenever I come nare you, I have odd thoughts and strange failings.


Jenny. How do you feel, Patrick?


Patrick. I will tell you, my jewel, and will call all the world to witness the
shincerity of my heart: when I come close to you, I fail a trembling all over,
and my shoul jumps about so in my body, I am afraid it will tumble out of my
mout.


Jenny. Strong symptoms of love; (Aside.) Suppose, Patrick, I was to listen to
your passion, and consent to be married to you, what would you do for me?


Patrick. In troth, I would use all my powers by day and night to sharve you.


Jenny. Ah, but we American girls run a great risk in marrying foreigners;
perhaps in a year or two, there would be an Irish wife coming to take you from
me.


Patrick. I would not lave you for all the wives in the world.


Jenny. (Hastily.) Then you are married!


Patrick. The devil burn me if I ever was, and (...) am willing to take my oat
of it before all the ^^^ists and justices in the whole world.


Jenny. What, made you say you would not ^ave me for all the wives in the world?


Patrick. Oh hone, my swate, how you take ^^e alarms for nothing at all at all:
what I did mane was, if I was married to all the women in the world, I would
never lave you.


Jenny. Here is our mistress coming.


Patrick. Pray, Jenny dare, let me be uppermost in your mind.


Jenny. Ah, ah, if you behave yourself perhaps you may. Exeunt severally.


Scene changes to another apartment.
Enter Mrs. Peevish. -- Rings a bell. Enter Jenny. Mrs. Peevish. Jenny, did you
call on mr. Last for my shoes?


Jenny. Yes ma'm: I have brought them, and he desired me to tell as how he
begged you a thousand pardons for not making them sooner.


Mrs. Peevish. It was of no great consequence I suppose he has been hurried.
Exit.


Jenny. (Solus) Considerate soul! most excellent woman! she is worth her weight
in gold -- the kindest, the best mistress that ever drew the breath of life.
Exit.


Re-enter Mrs. Peevish. -- Sets down to her harpsichord. Mrs. Peevish.
Melancholy I will force thee from me. (Plays and sings.)


Enter Rachel Friendly. R. Friend. Neighbor Peevish, I am come according to
promise -- don't let me interrupt thee -- thou know how delighted I am with
music -- I could hear thee the live long day.


Mrs. Peevish. ( Rises to meet Rachel Friendly.) -- Welcome my dear Miss
Friendly, I was waiting with impatience for your agreeable company -- sit down
my dear.


R. Friendly. I thank thee for thy friendship: and be assured, I find as much
pleasure in thy society, as thou can possibly have for mine. I should have been
here sooner, but for that plaguey creature, Manly.


Mrs. Peevish. Ah, ah, ah! The poor major has lost his heart; and don't diguise
it from the world, that you have got it.


R. Friendly. Who! me got his heart? How strange thou do talk, Betsey Peevish.


Mrs. Peevish. Come, come, Miss; you must not suppose the world does not know
you hold the major in chains: treat your captive at least with humanity.


R. Friendly. Why, to be frank with thee my dear, I confess that he is far from
being disagreeable to me; but prudence tells me, I must stifle a passion, that
if suffered to grow, will be a source of unhappiness to me.


Mrs. Peevish. Why so, Miss Friendly? are not Mr. Manly's connections
respectable: he is in easy circumstances; and as for character, there are few
men who stand higher in the opinion of the world.


R. Friendly. One would suppose he had employed thee as a counsel, to plead his
cause.


Mrs. Peevish. No: upon my word, I am quite disinterested: what I say upon the
occasion, is entirely upon the score of friendship.


R. Friendly. I am confident thou art actuated by no other motive. I am
sensible of Manly's worth; and was I at liberty to act for myself* he would be
my choice: but my parents are to be satisfied upon that point; and such are the
inflexible attachments my father has to the rules of our persuasion, that he
will not give his consent to my being married in any other way.


Mrs. Peevish. That is a bar, I never thought of.


R. Friendly. It is a bar I have not the courage to jump over; though it would be
into the arms of the man I love.


Mrs. Peevish. Jenny; inform Mr. Peevish, we expect the pleasure of his company
to tea.


Jenny. Yes, Ma'm.


Enter Mr. Peevish. Mr. Peevish. Your servant, Miss Friendly; I do not believe
there ever was a man in the world so ill used as I am.


Mrs. Peevish. Poh, poh, my dear; don't let such trifles ruffle your temper.


Peevish. Trifles do you call them? having my horses ruined; my fine greys,
that cost me three hundred dollars, by that Irish, buffle-headed blockhead, who
told me he understood how to take care of horses.


Mrs. Peevish. Perhaps they are not so injured as you apprehend: Patrick will
take more care in future: he is a good natured obliging creature, as ever we
had about the house.


Peevish. Ay, ay -- you women always spoil servants.


Mrs. Peevish. Come, my dear -- let us have your judgment upon this fresh tea.


Peevish. ( Tastes it.) It is horrid stuff; where did you buy it? -- what did
you give for it? -- what scoundrel imposed upon you.


Mrs. Peevish. I bought it from an honest Quaker lady.


Peevish. She is no lady -- she is a great cheat: it is bad tea.


Mrs. Peevish. You must not be judge and jury both; and condemn the poor tea,
unheard and untried: Now -- I think Miss Rachel and myself are the most proper
persons, to try, and pass judgment upon the merits or demerits of the said tea.
What do you think of it, Miss Friendly?


R. Friendly. (Tastes it) Why, I think, neighbor Peevish, it is delicious.


Mrs. Peevish. (Tastes it.) And I, also: -- It has a most charming flavor.


R. Friendly. There -- thou see thou have two to one against thee, friend
Peevish.


Peevish. And I think when a man has got the tongues of two women to contend
with, it is time for him to decamp: -- So, ladies, I leave you to sip your hot
water, and talk scandal as long as you please. Exit.


R. Friendly. I did not think thy husband had such an unhappy temper: I thought
thou was very happily married.


Mrs. Peevish. Ah! the world is sometimes deceived by appearances.


Enter Trifle. Trifle. Just in the nick of time, ladies: -- I have been
shooling this hour for a dish of tea.


Mrs. Peevish. Take a seat, Mr. Trifle: You shall be accommodated. (Pours out a
dish of tea.)


Trifle. (sips.) Devilish good faith: a piece of that dried beef, ma'm -- you
see I make free, Mrs. Peevish: Freedom is the life and soul of friendship; ha!
ha! ha! -- I Would thank you for another dish, ma'm; (drinks eagerly) another,
madam; (drinks it off,) that was damned hot: -- Enough, ma'm. Now, ladies, I
must feast my eyes. Mrs. Peevish, you look majestic. Miss Friendly, there is an
elegant neatness in your dress, that I extremely admire -- and, as you are not
forbidden fruit, I have a strong inclination to taste you. (Goes to salute her.)


R. Friendly. I protest thou shall not. (Runs from him.)


Trifle. I protest and swear I will. (Runs after her.)


Enter Major Manly. Manly. A truce -- a truce, Trifle.


Trifle. A truce in the moment of victory! -- You would make a bad commander in
chief, Major. (Kisses her.)


R. Friendly. I believe, Trifle, thou have more assurance than all the men in
the world put together.


Trifle. You mistake, my dear girl, it is confidence -- and I find it of
infinite use to me: there is no cutting any figure without it: it is that which
gives a man a certain consequence in himself. (struts about.) What say you,
Major?


Manly. Insignificant puppy. (aside.) As you ask my opinion -- I think I had
rather be more remarkable for my diffidence, than for my impudence.


Trifle. I hope you do not mean to apply that to me, Major?


Manly. Why -- will you put the cap on, Trifle? -- Mrs. Peevish, I believe I
have been so rude as not to enquire after your health: I hope I have the
pleasure of seeing you well, madam.


Mrs. Peevish. You are very excusable, Major: (looking at him significantly.) I
am well, I thank you, Sir.


Trifle. (Rachel Friendly going) -- Are you going, Miss Friendly: Shall I have
the pleasure of seeing you home?


R. Friendly. What a tormentor he is. (Aside.)


Manly. Officious coxcomb: (aside) Trifle, you will be so good as to let me
have that honor.


Trifle. Ecod, now I think on it; (pulling out his watch) I am, at this very
hour, engaged upon business of the utmost importance: -- the Major, Miss, will
afford himself the supreme felicity of waiting upon you, with all the honors
of war. Pardon me -- ladies, I am your slave: Harry, I am yours from the
highest to the lowest order of men and things. Exit.


R. Friendly. I am glad he is gone. (Aside) Betsey Peevish, I expect thee will
soon return this visit.


Mrs. Peevish. I will -- 'ere long. But why is this visit so short?


R. Friendly. I will give the reasons for it, when I see thee again. Farewell,
Betsey.


Manly. Madam, your humble servant. Exeunt.


Mrs. Peevish. Adieu -- amiable pair: -- may heaven smile upon your virtuous
loves.


Enter Peevish. Peevish. Madam, I think you are very deficient in point of
respect to me.


Mrs. Peevish. In what instance, my dear?


Peevish. In what instance? -- Why, this evening at tea you made me appear very
contemptible: -- If you had any sense of gratitude, Madam, you would behave
with more propriety to the man whom you owe all your consequence to.


Mrs. Peevish. Such language, Mr. Peevish, is as cruel as it is unjust: -- I
have always exerted myself in doing honor to the affairs of your house; and in
no way have I been wanting in affection and respect to you.


Peevish. I tell you, Madam, you have forgot yourself. ( Exit in a passion.)


Mrs. Peevish. Barbarous man: -- Ah! why did I sacrifice myself? (Weeps.)


Enter Jenny. Jenny. Don't cry, my dear mistress -- don't cry: I heard every
word he said to you -- and, indeed, Madam, I wonder you don't take up the
cudgel; and not suffer him to lord it over you so: -- If it was me --


Mrs. Peevish. Hold, Jenny: Don't you presume to reflect upon your master.


Jenny. I will not, Madam, if it is not agreeable to you. O lard -- she is the
most extraordinary wife I ever heard of: will not abuse her husband her^^^f nor
suffer any one else to do it: -- If Patrick uses me so, when we are married, if
I don't comb his head with a three-legged stool, there is no snakes in Ireland.
(Aside.) Exit.


Mrs. Peevish, solus. Hard -- hard is the lot of helpless women. When young --
exposed to the subtle arts of man -- who have a thousand ways to deceive our
unwary sex; instead of being our protectors, too, too often become our base
destroyers: and when once the marriage knot is tied, we become subject to their
arbitrary and capricious humors. Thus it is with me: allured by the wealth of
Mr. Peevish, and prompted by that vanity too common to our sex, of living in
all the fashionable parade of life, I gave my hand to the man, that I cannot
say I sincerely loved, but yet esteemed; and was in hopes that esteem would
have ripened into love: -- Alas! I fear it will never take place.


Exit. End of the First Act.
ACT II.
SCENE. -- A room in Jacob Friendly sen's House.
Enter George Friendly, sen. and Jacob Friendly, sen. G. Friendly, sen. I
insist upon it, brother, that parents have not a positive right, in every
instance, to cross their children in marriage matters: -- Here are two young
people whose affections are mutual; and who are ready and willing to pull off
their shoes and stockings together, and you will not let them.


J. Friendly, sen. Thou speak strangely, brother: -- If thou wast a parent,
thou would not support such sentiments.


G. Friendly, sen. Yes I would: zounds, what objection can you have? Is not the
man every way upon a footing with your daughter? Is it because he is not one of
us. ( ironically) I Will maintain it Jacob; and was going to say, it is a
devilish arbitrary law of your society, that you will not permit a connection with
other sects of christians.


J. Friendly, sen. It is in vain to reason with thee, brother -- thou art so
violent in what thou do undertake: our society has had its rules of long
standing; which have kept the church together, from generation to generation.


G. Friendly, sen. Psha, psha -- don't tell me about your generations and
generations: you are a virtuous, valuable people; but you should not set
yourselves up, in opposition to other people, so much.


Enter Hannah Friendly. H. Friendly. What aileth thee brother George? -- thou
looks as if something troubled thee.


G. Friendly, sen. Ah, ah, ah; yes, sister, I am very much troubled: it vexes
me to the heart, to find so much perverseness in your husband: I am sure, if it
depended upon you, it would soon be settled -- you are a woman of liberality.


H. Friendly. What is the business?


G. Friendly, sen. Why, to have your daughter and the major married, and Jacob
will not consent: -- Mind; I do not advise them to make a runaway match: but if
they do -- they will find an asylum at my country seat. Exit.


H. Friendly. I wish, Jacob, thou would be more accommodating to thy brother
-- thou know he is somewhat hasty, yet has got an excellent heart: --
Consider how much he is the friend of our family.


J. Friendly, sen. I know it, Hannah -- but I cannot be so accommodating as to
give up the prerogative of a parent.


H. Friendly. Indeed, husband, I think thou does sometimes carry thy
prerogative too far: for instance -- the other night thou did forbid George
from coming to our house.


J. Friendly, sen. My house shall never be for the reception of profligates.


H. Friendly. I do not view him as such: but even if he was -- remember he is
our child.


( Exit crying.) J. Friendly, sen. solus. Foolish, and too indulgent mothers!
it is owing to ye, that children too often take to improper ways: -- It is in
vain for fathers to precept, while mothers, by their too great indulgencies,
counteract all they do.

Enter Rachel Friendly. Rachel, come hither. Have I not always been a kind
father to thee?


R. Friendly. Thou have been one of the best of parents.


J. Friendly, sen. Then, why art thou ungrateful? -- Why will thou wring my old
heart? -- Why have thou suffered thy affections to be engaged to a man, so
every way a contrast to thyself?


R. Friendly. Ah, me! -- What reply shall I make? (Aside.)


Enter Jacob Friendly, jun. J. Friendly, jun. Father, there is a Friend wants
to see thee, upon some business of a very urgent nature. Exeunt.


R. Friendly, solus. O love! -- O tyrant love! -- Thou destroyer of my peace of
mind by day, and repose by night: but a little agone, my heart was as free as
air -- all men were alike to me: now, one object engrosses all my thoughts. In
vain I strive to banish him from my affections, and confine myself to the
guidance of my father -- whenever I see him, my resolution vanishes. Exit.


SCENE. -- An apartment in Peevish's House.
Enter Peevish and Patrick. Peevish. Patrick, my worthy fellow, you seem to be
much improved: -- Do you think you can keep a secret?


Patrick. By my shoul, I believe he is taking lave of his rason, be spakes so
shensible and shivil. (Aside) Upon my word I can Shir: I will only tell it to
Michael O'Gra, my comrade; he and I traveled over sa, in the same ship
together; he tells me all his sacrets, and I tell him all mine -- he is all one
as myshelf.


Peevish. But you must not tell anyone.


Patrick. Very well, Shir.


Peevish. I am going out of town. What I want you to do, is -- to take notice
what gentlemen come here while I am gone -- and who comes most frequently: in
particular, take notice if young George Friendly comes often.


Patrick. Very well, Shir.


Peevish. Here, Patrick -- be attentive. (Gives him money.) Exit.


Patrick. Now, the devil take me; if I will either kape your money or your
sacrets: the money I will give to the first poor crater I meet, and the sacret
I will give my mistress: I will tell her all, and more too: -- The old shinner
is jealous; I don't much wonder at it -- he must know in his own conshence, he
is not shutable for her: O, she is the swatest woman that ever was made -- she
is sho good and sho kind; -- whenever she wants any thing, she will shay --
Patrick, I will thank you to do this, or I would be oblaged to you to do that;
that makes one do things pleasantly; in fath, I would get up in my slape, any
hour in the night, to do her a good turn: -- As for him, I have not the last
liking for him; he goes snarling about the house, like an old mastiff; and
seems never better plased than when he is in a passion, scoulding us poor
sharvants. Upon my conshence, he made me sho angry the other day, that if I had
not been very much afrade I would have kicked him behind, before his face. --
Oh, here is the swate crater. Exit.


Enter Jenny, with a sweeping brush. Jenny. Heigho! This love has turned me
topsy-turvy; I hardly know what I am about; Patrick is always in my thoughts.
In putting water into the kettle, for tea -- instead of pump, I put it full of
rain water: and this morning, I put on my stockings wrong side out.


Re-enter Patrick. Patrick. Jenny, dare, have you shettled the matter wid
yourshelf. Will you have me or not?


Jenny. I am afraid to trust you, Patrick. ( I Will teaze him -- aside.)


Patrick. Then, as I cannot live without you -- I Will cut my own troat to shave
my wretched life.


Jenny. O lard, may be he will -- then I shall be made miserable.

Sings. O Patrick if I thought you would but be true,
There is no man in this world I Would prefer before you:
But there is a danger in trusting you Irish brogues,
You often turn out to be very great rogues.

Patrick. Sings. Try me, pray Jenny; try me my swate one do;
Though all may be false, yet Pat will prove true.
I am afraid even when I go to slape on my bed,
When I wake in the morning, I shall find myshelf dead.
So much do I grave after you, thou dare swate American girl;
O try me, pray Jenny, try me -- make me but your man:
What more can I do, than do all I can
To plase you, to plase you -- thou dare swate American girl.

Jenny. Then, Pat, I Will be thine to-morrow-come-two-weeks.


Patrick. I Am struck dumb: I cannot spoke for joy.

Sings. Let us sale with a kiss, ( kisses her.)
It Is unspakable bliss.
Now America is the best country in the world; and I Will fight for it, while I
have an inch of flesh. ( Takes her in his arms and runs off.)


Scene changes to George Friendly jun's Lodgings.
George Friendly with a letter in his hand -- opens and reads. "Sir -- If you
value my happiness and peace of mind, you will no longer visit our house.

"E. PEEVISH."


This is mysterious: -- Peevish is gone a journey. -- (pauses.) I have it: by
all my pleasures past, and joys to come, it is a gantlet for an assignation; now
for the plan of operation: we soldiers of Venus have a right to assume any
shape -- Peevish is out of town -- she don't want me to appear in the house as
young George Friendly. ( pauses) I have hit upon the mode --

Enter Beauchamp. Beauchamp. I come, my friend, to bid you farewell; I received
some bad news from my island; I am very sorry cruel necessity compel me to
leave this country -- that it also oblige me leave you, my very dear friend, to
whose politeness I am so much in debt.


G. Friendly, jun. My worthy friend, I am distressed at the occasion that
obliges you to leave our country; and lament, that I am to be deprived of your
society: I hope the accounts you have received, have been exaggerated.


Beauchamp. God know: I hope so. I request one thing of you, my dear friend. I
left behind one beloved sister; perhaps she is now on her way to this country:
should she arrive in my absence, I beg you will give her your protection. Here
is one letter for her, and there is her likeness.


G. Friendly, jun. Rest assured, should she come here, I will render her all
the services in my power.


Beauchamp. I go content: tomorrow I take stage for New York; there is one
ship there which sail direct for the Cape. God bless you, friend.


G. Friendly, jun. May heaven protect you; I hope you will find matters better
than you expect. Are you in want of cash? pray be frank with me; my purse is
entirely at your service.


Beauchamp. You discover your goodness. I have no need, though the obligation
is equally impressed: once more, farewell. (Shake hands.) Exit Beauchamp.


G. Friendly, jun. Of all the young foreigners I am acquainted with, that youth
I most esteem. There is a certain something in the physiognomy and address of
some men, that strike at first sight: I had not been an hour in young
Beauchamp's company before I became interested in him; and now feel as perfect
a friendship for him, as if I had been acquainted with him for many years. --
Now for the likeness of his sister: ha! the most lovely face I ever saw what
regular features. (Walks to end fro viewing the likeness).


Enter Major Manly ( unperceived by G. Friendly.) G. Friendly, jun. What
expression! ( Still looking at the picture.)


Manly. George, I have been weighing the matter well. ( Walks in great
agitation.)


G. Friendly, jun. It Is a most charming face.


Manly. I have reflected upon the consequences, and am come to a determination
to take your advice.


G. Friendly, jun. What elegant flowing hair.


Manly. What a contest I have had between love and honor, but love has
triumphed; -- ( Still walking agitated) I have resolved, Friendly, to put the
question to your sister for an elopement. Why George, don't you hear me speak?


G. Friendly, jun. ( looking round) Oh, Harry, are you there? When did you come
in?


Manly. Did you not see me come in?


G. Friendly, jun. Not I, upon my word. Manly, do you know that I am most
confoundedly in love? -- Young Beauchamp has taken his departure for
Cape-Francois, and left in charge with me, his beautiful sister: there is her
likeness -- did you ever see so beautiful a creature?


Manly. ( viewing the likeness) It is a handsome face, but I am acquainted with
one much more so -- I never heard he had a sister here: where does she lodge?


G. Friendly, jun. Lord, lord, where has my imagination carried me? I am
mistaken: she is on her way to this place; but, faith, I am out of my senses:
Harry, you have the advantage of me: you are in love with a substance -- I only
with a shadow. Beauchamp having received unpleasant news from the Cape, set off
immediately for New York, to take shipping for that place: on his departure, he
gave me this likeness of his sister, with a letter, requesting, at the same
time, if in his absence she should arrive here, I would take her under my
protection. Rouse, Manly! damn it, what makes you look so grave? you have lost
all your vivacity.


Manly. Ah, George, you are a happy fellow.


G. Friendly, jun. Happiness was made for man, but he is eternally breaking his
limbs over other people's faults, or planting thorns in his own road: well, how
do you come on, Hal? Have you made the proposition? try her; I Will engage she
will leave father and mother, and cleave unto you. You, that have assisted in
laying the foundation of a great and mighty empire, afraid of a woman! ha, ha,
ha.


Manly. It was the very business I came upon: I have now come to a serious
determination of appealing to your sister's affections for a private union.


G. Friendly, jun. Bravo, bravo! that will be acting like a soldier. Your hand,
Manly: by heaven it joys my heart, that I am to salute you by the name of
brother, and that my sister is to be so fortunate, as to fall in with a man of
your worth.


Manly. I thank you, my friend: if I should be so fortunate as to gain your
sister, I hope I shall prove myself deserving of so valuable an acquisition. I
am impatient to be gone, farewell. Exit Manly.


G. Friendly, jun. Farewell.


G. Friendly, jun. solus. Ha, ha, ha! what fools do these females make of us
lord-like creatures men! the brave, the gallant Manly, who has undergone all
the fatigues and hardships of war -- braved death at the very cannon's mouth --
might now be knocked down with a straw; a very slave, a supplicating lovesick
man; for my part, I am determined to be free. Now for Mrs. P. The dress will
answer very well which I had on in my other night's excursion.

( Goes to a closet, takes out a dress, and puts it on.) Sings. And a begging I
will go, will go, will go,
And a begging I will go.
In this garb I will find my way into Mrs. Peevish's house.


Enter Sambo. Sambo. How you cum here? Why you no tump at de door? Dat away you
beggar peeple teel in a house when you see nobody, den you tief.


G. Friendly, jun. O, Mr. black man, do not be so hard on a poor unfortunate
white man: I have a wife lying at death's door, and three small children down
with the smallpox.


Sambo. You tell true?


G. Friendly, jun. O, O yes.


Sambo. Where you lib?


G. Friendly, jun. I live a great distance from here.


Sambo. Cum here tomorrow: my massa's heart big for poor foke; he gib you
someting for you poor wife, and you poor leetel tings.


G. Friendly. jun. I will come tomorrow. ( going.)


Sambo. Tay -- ( wipes his eyes) poor souls -- ( takes money out of his pocket)
here -- ( puts it into G. Friendly, jun's hands) here, take dis: go home quick
to you wife and children, fo fere dey tarve or die fo you get dare.


G. Friendly, jun. I can hardly refrain from embracing him. ( Aside.) You are a
good black.


Sambo. I see you safe out of eh door. Exeunt.


SCENE -- A room in Peevish's House.
Enter Peevish. Peevish, solus. I have changed my plan: I was afraid to trust
that blundering Irishman, and thought it most advisable to assume this beggar's
dress: I have hung about my house in order to discover my wife's visitors, and
am pretty well convinced of the purity of her conduct, and the goodness of her
heart: none visited here but the wretched, and they left the house with tears
of joy.


Enter George Friendly, jun. G. Friendly, jun. Thus far on my important mission.


Peevish. Ha! there is something here: I will slip into this closet, where I
can see and hear all that is going forward. ( goes into the closet.)


Enter Mrs. Peevish. Mrs. Peevish. What are your wants, my friend?


G. Friendly, jun. Now for the wheedling tongue of a Richard, and the impudence
of a Sir Harry Wildair. ( aside; throws off his dress.) Madam, behold your
devoted slave.


Mrs. Peevish. ( shrieks) Protect me heaven! where am I?


G. Friendly, jun. ( Takes her in his arms) In the arms of the man who loves
you to distraction.


Mrs. Peevish. ( Recovers and disengages herself.) Audacious man, stand off.


G. Friendly, jun. Come, come, madam; this is carrying the joke too far* the
note, Mrs. Peevish, you sent me.


Mrs. Peevish. Presumptuous coxcomb; to hold you in conversation would be an
outrage upon chastity. Begone, ruffian; and in future learn to pay due respect
to virtue. (Looking at him with indignation, as she goes off.) Exit.


G. Friendly, jun. So, so, so, so; I have made a pretty hand of it; there is
some cursed mistake in this business: well, fortune -- legar, I must show my
generalship by making a good retreat. ( puts on his dress. As he is going off,
Peevish comes out of the closet and pulls off his hat, he in turn, pulls off
Peevish's bonnet.)


Peevish. Young rake-hell, have I caught you with intentions to dishonor me?


G. Friendly, jun. Ha! who the devil are you?


Peevish. I Will let you know, scoundrel. ( Rings the bell.)


G. Friendly, jun. 'Sdeath, it is Peevish; it is all legerdemain and
enchantment. ( Aside.)


Enter Jenny hastily. Jenny. Madam: Eh, eh, eh, mercy on me, two witches. (
Runs out.)


Enter Patrick. Patrick. Madam.


G. Friendly, jun. It Is time for me to make my escape. ( Exit hastily.)


Patrick. In the name of shaint Patrick, what are you?


Peevish. Never mind now; run, and seize that person who just now went out.


Patrick. On my life I will not; one bird in the bush is better than two out of
the hand. ( As I have a shoul to be shaved, it is my old scoundrel of a master;
the devil roast me if I will know him, aside.) Besides, it would be unmannerly
to lave you with nobody but yourshelf; and as you are a stranger, I sale a kind
of duty to provide lodgings for you for fare you might runaway from yourshelf,
and get lost in this great shity. ( takes hold of him.)


Peevish. Why Patrick, don't you know your master?


Patrick. You auld Beelzebub, my master is at last a thousand miles from here.


Peevish. I tell you, I am your master; I have changed my mind; I did not go
out of town.


Patrick. Arrah, don't be prating to me you ^ould crater. Enter Constable. Here
constable, take this old woman to the workhouse.


Peevish. O lord, O lord, how have I taken myself in. ( aside) Constable, I am
Mr. Peevish, I am the master of this house. Patrick don't you know my legs. (
shows them.) Hell and furies, what a situation have I reduced myself to?


Constable. O, it is a poor crazy woman, runaway from the hospital: see, her
head has been shaved; I will take her back, poor creature.


Peevish. O you devils, you are all combined against me. ( Constable takes hold
of him.)


Peevish. Oh! oh! oh! Murder! murder! Fire! fire! fire! murder! fire! murder!
murder! ( As they are carrying him off, Patrick laughs and speaks.) Ha, ha, ha,
this is what may be called shatisfaction. Exeunt.


Scene changes to G. Friendly, jun's Lodgings.
Enter George Friendly, jun. G. Friendly, jun. The indignant flash from her
eye, shot presumption dead. I have got myself into a pretty scrape: to what
lengths has my vanity carried me! by heaven it was ill done; a lady, who is a
pattern of virtue; one who always treated me with the utmost hospitality: what
the devil could possess me to put such a vicious construction upon her prudent
injunction. ( Walks in agitation) I see now the whole affair. Peevish has
become jealous of his wife, without just cause, I am sure. He, in order to come
at her supposed inconstancy, has affected to prosecute a journey, but in fact
has remained in town, and assumed the dress of a woman, lurked about the house,
to be a ready spy upon the actions of his lady. ( pauses) How am I to act in
this affair? I must write a penitent letter to Mrs. Peevish; but what the devil
shall I say to Peevish? I will go and beg his pardon for the dishonor intended
him. If he should require other satisfaction, I shall be rendered extremely
unhappy, though not afraid to meet him; yet as I have been the aggressor, it
would be adding injury to insult. Peevish is a man of understanding, though of
a fretful temper. I hope he will be satisfied with due concessions, and the
matter be hushed: thus I go on sinning and repenting, repenting and sinning.
Exit.


SCENE A Garden.
Enter Major Manly, and Rachel Friendly. R. Friendly. Henry, thou art fully
acquainted with my sentiments respecting thee; the only obstacle to our union,
is the want of my father's approbation, and I cannot marry without it.


Manly. But why, my love? ( takes her by the hand) be not offended at my
calling you by that endearing name: why should there be so blind a submission
to the arbitrary mandates of an unreasonable parent? Has there not been a due
respect paid to him?


R. Friendly. Would thou persuade me from my duty? that daughter, who would
be wanting in gratitude and obedience to her parents, will never make a good
wife.


Manly. I Will run the risk; say that you will be mine. ( Kisses her hand.)


R. Friendly. Ah! Whither would thou lead me?


Manly. To the altar of Hymen, my charmer, where we may be made the happiest
pair in the United States.


R. Friendly. Stay thee Henry -- that would be a step that might involve in it
very serious consequences to me. If thou should prove unkind, where should I
find a friend?


Manly. And can you, my adorable girl, have a doubt of the lasting sincerity of
my love, if the oath or the affirmation of a man of honor will convince you; I
declare, in the presence of that being, who knows the inmost recesses of all
hearts, that neither time nor circumstances shall abate my affection; and I
trust, my dear girl, you will never have cause to repent your partiality for me.


R. Friendly. Then, to thy honor I resign myself; and hope a little time will
reconcile us to my father.


Manly. (Salutes her.) I am now the happiest man on earth.


R. Friendly. I see my father coming this way -- we must not be seen together.
Farewell.


Exeunt. Scene changes to Peevish's House.
Enter Peevish. Peevish. Here am I, once more in my own house, after pursuing a
phantom created by infernal cursed jealousy; I am thoroughly ashamed of my
behavior: self conviction, thou reformer of the human mind; thou glass, in
which we see the vileness of our actions, and the impropriety of our conduct:
that I have grossly wounded the feelings of an amiable woman, is to me, a
matter of keen remorse. Here she comes: I must take every opportunity of
convincing her of my penitence.


Enter Mrs. Peevish. Peevish. ( Salutes her.) I hope, my dear, you have enjoyed
a good state of health since I left town?


Mrs. Peevish. This is strange double-dealing. (Bursts into tears.) Mr.
Peevish, Mr. Peevish, have I deserved such treatment?


Peevish. My dear love and wife, I am as convinced of your innocence, as I am
of my own guilt; and I humbly solicit your pardon.


Mrs. Peevish. Where there is repentance, there should be forgiveness.


Peevish. Do you really forgive me?


Mrs. Peevish. I do, I do: Oh! this is unexpected. To be re-instated in your
affections, is a piece of good fortune, I did not expect.


Peevish. Most deserving woman, henceforward we will live in the habits of love
and friendship, and all my future life shall atone for the past. Exeunt.


End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
SCENE. -- The Street.
Trifle running; G. Friendly, jun. with mask on, pursuing him. G. Friendly,
jun. Retournez vous en lache Americain, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ( takes
off his mask.) I have had a diverting scene of it. As I was strolling along, I
discovered Trifle sneaking about a door; I put this mask on which I sometimes
carry about me for my diversion; pointed my cane at him; spoke loud French, and
the fellow took to his heels and run as though he had a thousand Indians yelling
after him. I Will off to his lodgings, before he get there, in order to have a
full laugh at him.


Exit. Scene changes to Trifle's Lodgings.
Enter George Friendly, jun. running. G. Friendly, jun. Ha! I have got here
before him.


Enter Trifle, running, with a Sailor's jacket and cap on. Trifle. A curse on
all intriguing, I say -- O lard, I can scarce breathe -- eh, eh, eh.


G. Friendly, jun. Ha, ha, ha -- ha, ha, ha -- ha, ha, ha -- what a
metamorphosis. In the name of every thing that is extraordinary, how came you
in that dress, Trifle?


Trifle. In this dress? -- Why, this dress, George, has been the means of
preserving my life. You know, I told you, I would find out the beautiful must^e
-- I did; but had not been there long, before a damned great Frenchman, with a
nose as big as the man of Strasburgh, made at me, with a sword, as long as
himself. I parried him with a small cane-sword I had, till it broke into twenty
pieces -- then I was obliged to retreat; and if I had not been as nimble as a
monkey, he would have pinked me. I ran -- he pursued; I slipped into a
slop-shop, threw off my hat and fine coat; put on this sailor's jacket and cap,
and pushed out of a front-street door; by that means evaded the bloody rogue.


G. Friendly, jun. Ha, ha, ha, a narrow escape, upon my word. However, you had
this consolation -- you did not disgrace the name of an American. You say, you
fought with great bravery?


Trifle. Fought! I had no idea I could handle the sword so well; but a man
don't know what he can do, until he is put to the push. If that Frenchman was
here, and had any candor, he would acknowledge I behaved like a valiant man.


G. Friendly, jun. (puts on his mask.) Savez vous le nez. ( takes it off.) O
Jack! Jack! what a failing thou have, in deviating so often from the truth.


Trifle. (In a passion.) Sir, Sir, I don't understand such treatment. (Walks
about in a pet.)


G. Friendly, jun. Poh -- man: don't get into a pet about the matter: -- It was
quite an accidental affair.


Trifle. Damn it, here is somebody coming. I must change my dress. (Pulls off
his jacket and cap, and slips on a surtout.)


Enter Careless. Careless. Gentlemen, your most obedient.


G. Friendly, jun. Careless, your humble -- I have not seen you this age.


Trifle. Nor I. (to G. Friendly -- 0 them you -- aside.)


Careless. Your movements and mine, gentlemen, are very different. Your time is
dissipated in balls, tea, and card parties, etc. for my part, I am fond of my
case -- and study it before all the fashionable follies of life.


G. Friendly, jun. What materials are you made of, Careless. My happiness
consists in balls and routs: -- in being in the society of the female world. --
What a poor helpless animal man would be, if it was not for lovely, charming
woman?


Careless. Psha, psha, that is all stuff. I had as soon have a millstone tied
about my neck, and thrown into the Delaware, as to be obliged to dance
attendance after those she affairs.


Trifle. We will have him tried by a court martial of ladies, for supporting
such sentiments.


G. Friendly, jun. And condemned and guillotined in one day.


Careless. Hang me, if I care if it were so. I am almost tired of this (...)
world.


G. Friendly jun. Fie, Careless, fie -- rouse and shake yourself. What say you
to a social party tomorrow night? I am told Mr. M. has got some excellent
claret, and sparkling champaign -- there you will have an opportunity of
embracing the mistress you love.


Careless. With all my heart. There is something substantial in that kind of
pleasure.


G. Friendly, jun. Trifle, you are of the party.


Trifle. Oui, Messieurs. (And I Will try if I cannot make you devilish drunk -- so
as to make you commit some excess, by way of retaliation -- them you -- aside.)
I Will be at my post.


Careless. And I.


G. Friendly, jun. And I -- where corks will be drawn instead of daggers.
Exeunt.


Scene changes to G. Friendly, jun's Lodgings.
Enter Sambo. Who goes and views himself in the glass. Enter G. Friendly, jun.
(undiscovered by Sambo.) Sambo. Sambo, what a gal call a pretty fellow. (Sings
and dances -- tol lol de rel lol -- goes again to the glass.) Dis wool of mine
will curlee up so, cannot get him trait -- dat all de fashion among gemmen.
Sambo tink himself handsome. He berry complish'd to; he sing well; he dance
well; he play siddle well. Can tink so, so, pretty well. He tink; he berry
often tink why he slave to white man? why black foke sold like cow or horse. He
tink de great somebody above, no order tings so. -- Sometime he tink dis way --
he got bess massa in e world. He gib him fine clothes for dress -- he gib him
plenty money for pend; and for a little while, he tink himself berry happy.
Afterward he tink anoder way. He pose massa George die; den he sold to some
oder massa. May be he no use him well. When Sambo tink so, it most broke he
heart. Exit.


G. Friendly, jun. ( solus) Be softened as thou will, still, slavery, thy
condition is hard. The untutored, pathetic soliloquy of that honest creature,
has more, sensibly affected me, than all I have read, or thought, on that
barbarous, iniquitous slave trade -- and yet how many thousands of the poorer
class of whites are there, whose actual situation are vastly inferior to his:
he has no anxious cares for tomorrow, no family looking up to him for
protection -- no duns at his doors. Yet, still, still there is something
wanting. It is cruel. It is unjust, for one creature to hold another in a state
of bondage for life. Sambo, thou shall be free. ( Re-enter Sambo.) Sambo,
suppose you had your liberty, how would you conduct yourself?


Sambo. Ah, massa George, you no ax Sambo dat for true.


G. Friendly, jun. Yes, Sambo, I do; and from this moment you are free. You may
remain with me upon wages, or go where you may think yourself more happy.


Sambo. ( In a reverie -- then becomes extremely elated, jumps about; kisses
the skirt of his master's coat; -- kisses his hand.) O massa George, I feel how
I neber feel before. God bress you. (Cries.) I muss go, or my heart burst. Exit.


G. Friendly, jun. Tell me, ye sensualists, what are all your luxuriant
gratifications, compared with the exalted mental sensations of doing a generous
act? Would to heaven, I could as easy liberate our fellow-citizens, who are
slaves in Algiers. Exit.


Re-enter Sambo, (Singing and dancing.) Sambo. Now let Sambo dance and sing,
He more happy dan a king.
Now he fly about like be,
He enjoy sweet liberty.
When massa George ax me how I like go free, I tink he joke: but when he tell
me so for true, it make much water come in my eye for joy. I coud hardly peke a
word, and I tink he look like an angel. God bress him. Sambo hope he no be
sorry for make him he own massa. I sabe all my wages for buy my Sue free, and
make her my wife.

(Sings.) Den Sambo dance and sing.
He more happy dan a king.
He no fear he lose he head. He now citizen Sambo. Exit.


Scene a room in Major Manly's Lodgings. -- (Major Manly humming a tune in a
sprightly manner.)
Enter G. Friendly, jun. ( Singing and dancing.) G. Friendly, jun. Tol, lol de
lol. -- Major, I rejoice to see you. Harry, my heart is as light as a feather.
I have got over that rocky piece of business. The dear woman has forgiven me,
and Peevish and I are upon the best of terms. As it has happened, good has come
out of evil. It was a little unfolding scene, wherein Peevish discovered his
wife to be a truly virtuous woman. So, you see I have been the means of
promoting her domestic happiness.


Manly I am glad the affair has ended so well. I hope you will take care for
the future how you trespass upon hallowed ground. ( Enter Rachel.) Let me have
the pleasure of introducing Mrs. Manly to you.


G. Friendly, jun. Tantarara, brave boys. -- (Jumps about.) Rach. a bride's
kiss. (Kisses her.) The Triumphs of Love, Major -- ha, ha, ha -- soldier,
where is your honor? Your hands. (Joins them together.) Long may you live, and
be happy!


Manly. We are sure of your good wishes: -- and to complete our happiness, we
want those of your worthy father.


G. Friendly, jun. Patience, all will come right, by and by. My father no doubt
will feaze, and call you naughty names -- but you will find powerful friends in
my mother, and good uncle.


R. Manly. I wish, George, thou would go to father's house. Thou certainly
do wrong in staying away.


G. Friendly, jun. (Ironically.) I cannot find freedom in going. Thou know
how peremptorily he bid me be gone from his house, because I happened one night
to be a little mellow or so, romped with you; hussled Jake; cracked a joke upon
my mother; said a smart thing or two to him: In consequence of which, he
ordered me to depart his dwelling, and not to return again. When he desires me
to return, I will obey.


R. Manly. It is the duty of children always to give way to their parents.


Enter Trifle, in haste. Trifle. I catched the report flying, and was
determined to know the truth of it. It is so. -- ( Runs up to R. Manly.) I
always told you, you was a fly rogue. A bride's kiss. ( kisses her.) -- Major,
my gallant fellow, I give you joy. It affords me infinite pleasure, to find
that your victorious arms, has encircled the object of your wishes. I hope your
union will produce men as brave as the father, and women as beautiful as the
mother. Have you heard the news, gentlemen? There is news arrived, that the
people to the westward, are in arms against the laws of government. We are all
to turn out: I expect to have the command of a regiment.


G. Friendly, jun. And fight, till your sword is broke into twenty pieces: as
you did --


Trifle. Mum -- George.


Manly. Are you really serious, Trifle?


Trifle. Faith, I am. There has been five expresses come in within this hour.


G. Friendly, jun. At the old trade, Trifle -- of stretching? --


Manly. What does the report say, George? I have had anxious thoughts about
those infatuated people.


G. Friendly, jun. Only that they have been attacking the revenue officers. --
Burning and destroying private property. That is but a trifle for your liberty
boys. ( I Will put Harry Hotspur in a flame -- aside.)


Manly. (Walks in a passion.) Anarchy-boys, rather say. The genuine sons of
liberty will never disgrace themselves by such a conduct. But will ever be
obedient to the laws. ( Walking.) A government that is the admiration of the
world! That might be the great asylum of the unfortunate, and persecuted of all
the earth! -- The flattering prospects opening to our view! -- To have our
national character sullied by a --


G. Friendly, jun. Hold. -- These people say, they are deprived of their
rights, by being obliged to pay a tax on whiskey.


Manly. Very good, very good. So, they are to enjoy all the benefits of
government without contributing a single farthing toward its support! At the
very time, too, that its parental arm is extended for their protection. They
are ungrateful in the highest degree.


G. Friendly, jun. There are some worthy men in that country.


Manly. I know there are. Men, for whom I have the highest esteem. There are
others, again, who take the basest means of acquiring popularity. -- Oh! had I
but power to lash such scoundrels out of our country!


R. Manly. My dear Henry, thou do seem to be in much anger. I hope thou will
not go to fight these wicked people.


Manly. If there is occasion, my love, I will; and should think myself unworthy
of being your husband, and being called an American citizen, if I did not.


G. Friendly, jun. It is but a little human eruption -- it will soon be over.


Manly. It is one of those eruptions, George, that if not attended to in due
time, there may proceed a fire, that will consume the body politic.


G. Friendly, jun. How often do these things happen in Europe!


Manly. Why are we eternally confounding our situation with the governments of
Europe? There is no comparison. We are a distinct, heaven-favoured people. The
very nature of our government affords us an opportunity of establishing a
national character, superior to any people on the face of the earth.


G. Friendly, jun. Mayhap you rate the American character too high: -- Human
nature is much the same in every age. We are but mortals -- and it is the
nature of mortals to be restless and dissatisfied.


Manly. Never had mortals less cause to complain, than the people of the United
States. In no age, nor in any country, was ever human nature in so dignified a
state, as in ours. -- View our Congress assembled. See the representatives of
an extensive empire, clothed with the people's power, devising for their
general good! -- But, there is this to be observed: -- It is in vain for them
to legislate, if this fundamental principle is not sacredly adhered to: --
that, what the majority determine upon, shall be the law of the land. That is
the great rock, which our grand democratic republic is built upon. Destroy
that, and the beautiful fabric will crumble into atoms. If that principle is
kept alive, I will be bold to defy either the intrigues of foreign courts, or
the conclave machinations of our own citizens, to prevail against it.


Trifle. O damn it -- I am tired of hearing your politics. George, let us go.
You know our engagements. We are to sup tonight at M's. tavern.


R. Manly. O, brother George -- I wish thou would not go so often to taverns.
It is time for thee to think of settling thyself.


G. Friendly, jun. And it is time for thee to alter that Quaker tongue; and say
Yes Sir, and No Sir: Yes Ma'm, and No Ma'm. --

Sings. And get the barber to frizzle your hair, tol, lol, etc.
And O how the people will stare, tol, lol de dol, etc.
To see the Quaker turned into a fine frizzled lady.

R. Manly. Thou art too wild, George.


G. Friendly, jun. And thou art too tame Rach. Mayhap you will not always be so.
Like most wives, you will get into the habit of scolding by and by. Come,
Trifle, let us be gone. The animating Burgundy and sparkling Champagne call us.

Sings. To the copes, to the copes lead away.


Trifle. Sings. To the copes, to the copes lead away. Exeunt.


R. Manly. I wish, brother George would alter his course of life. I am
concerned about his evil doings.


Manly. There are few but have their failings, my dear. You will find some in
your husband, by and by.


R. Manly. I don't believe thou have one.


Manly. You are all innocence, with respect to George. Some vices he has; but
his good qualities vastly outweigh them. He possesses one of the most generous,
friendly hearts, that ever was centered in man. If we can but get him engaged
in the happy bonds of wedlock, I Will answer for it, he will become a new man.


Exeunt. Scene changes to Peevish's House.
Enter Patrick, (dressed in a new suit of clothes.) Patrick. Jenny would be for
making a gantleman of me. Shays she, Patrick, you must get a new shuit of
clothes, and have them made in the fashion. Shays I to her, the devil a
farthing has poor Pat to buy them. Then the good shoul inshisted upon rigging
me out at her own expense. ( looking at himself in a glass.) Upon my shoul, I
think Mr. Shars has has made them to fit me very nate.. ( struts about.) Fait,
I don't know how they do, who are fops and gantleman every day. I fale rather
unasy in this newfangled dress. Besides, there seems to be a strange
combustible in my head. I hope Mr. Puff has not put some many-fated craters in
it. All the time the fellow was taring my head, I expected he would pull every
hair out. But when I come to look at myshelf in the glass, I found he had put
millions more hairs in my head than I had before. ( Struts.) Now I am a fine
gantleman, I am led to think a little dape. Upon my honesty, I think it is a
comical quare world we are oblaged to live in. There is so many downs and ups
-- so many cross-ways in it, that one don't know which way to look. The oder
day, my master and mistress were very much at outs. He was as jealous of her as
the devil could make him, and now he is as fond of her as if she was not his
wife; and she hangs upon him as if she loved him from the bottom of her shoul.
All these things, I shay, puzzles my shenses. Fait, I believe, the best way to
have things come right in the end, is to do them wrong in the beginning.


Enter Jenny, ( unperceived by Patrick.) Jenny. What an elegant looking man he
is now he is dressed. How it delights me to look at him -- (aside.) Patrick, I
think your clothes fit you very well.


Patrick. Arra, my dare Jenny, are you there? Fait, I think so too. I was just
admiring myshelf, thanks to you, my dare: let me pay a tribute upon your swate
lips; ( kisses her.) and when I come to be your husband, I Will pay you many
fold. But why, my dare, will you push off the business so long? Had we not
better become two and one at once? As there are sho many unshartainties in this
life -- I do not expect you will decave me, yet I have my fares for all. I saw
English Dick, Mr. Bustle's man, close in wid you, last night. Now, if you were
once my wife, you would be quite clare of such rubbish. -- Why cannot you, my
dare shoul, bate the two wakes into tomorrow night, and make it the happiest
day of my life. ( kisses her.)


Enter Dick. Dick. Stop, Paddy-Whack -- you are on my premises. She has
promised herself to me.


Jenny. O lard, what shall I do with this fellow? ( aside.) -- It Is false; I
only gave you half a promise.


Patrick. Then I have the best right to her. She has only promised the half or
hershelf to you: but she has promished me her whole body and shoul, and every
part of her. And, shir Dick, if you call me Paddy-Whack again, I Will make you
fale the weight of an Irish fist upon your English pate.


Dick. If you are for that kind of work, I can give you the Mendoza tip in a
moment. ( makes motions to box.)


Jenny. Ah! me, what shall I do? they will get to fighting, and the whole house
will be in an uproar. ( aside.) O, Patrick, don't fight with him.


Patrick. Ha,ha, ha, fight wid him: the musherene is benathe me. For your sake,
I will not strike the crater; but I will give him a twirling. ( Takes hold of
Dick, and gives him a turn -- he turns round several times.) That was to the
right about. ( Gives him another turn.) That was to the left about. Now march
off, before I brake every bone in your skin.


Dick. No I will not -- ( Speaking loud,) without my wife, my promised wife.


Jenny. O, Dickey, let me beg of you to go away. You make so much noise, I am
afraid every moment, that Mr. and Mrs. Peevish will come in. (Was ever poor
girl in such a plight? I could poke my head into an augur hole. -- aside.


Dick. I want them to come in. ( Speaking louder.) I will make as much noise as
ever I can, to expose you; you deceiver. -- Hollo, hollo -- Paddy-Whack,
Paddy-Whack. Irish Pat! Irish Pat!


Patrick. It is too much for blood and flesh to bear. ( Runs after Dick, who
falls at his feet -- Patrick tumbles over him -- Dick gets up.)


Dick. Ha, ha, ha, Paddy-Whack, Paddy-Whack; Irish Pat. -- Hallo, hallo. ( Runs
out -- Patrick after him.)


Jenny. Oh! Oh! Oh! -- ( Follows crying.) Patrick, Patrick.


Scene changes to a Tavern.
G. Friendly, jun. Careless, and Trifle, at a table singing in chorus. Omnes.
And a hunting we will go -- and a hunting we will go.


Trifle. Damn your singing -- push about the bottle. All gone but we three: --
heighup. Friendly, I hope you are not flinching?


G. Friendly, jun. Not I. Heighup. I can drink the ocean dry. ( Takes the
glass, gets up, and reels.) Here Is to all generous souls. May they never know
distress. ( drinks.) Upon my honor, according to the common phrase, I believe I
am almost done over.


Trifle. ( gets up and reels.) O, damn it; you have no head at all. Heighup. I
could drink three or four bottles more. What, Careless asleep?


Careless. (gets up and rubs his eyes.) What the devil is the matter? --
heighup. ( tumbles on the table and throws down the glasses.) Was not that well
done? Put them all in the bin, landlord. Heighup.


Trifle. I am for a cruize -- down town -- or battle with the watchmen. Heighup.


Careless. ( gapes and stretches.) I believe I Will moor where I am.


G. Friendly, jun. No casting anchor here, Bob. While you have some sail set,
let us get under way. ( Pulls Careless along.) Hallo, hallo.


Exeunt omnes. Scene changes to the Street. -- Watchmen crying the hour.
Enter G. Friendly, jun. Trifle, and Careless, singing in concert. Omnes. And a
hunting we will go -- and a hunting we will go.


Watchman. O past twelf o'clock, and a moonlight morning.


G. Friendly, jun. You are mistaken old man, it rains furiously -- heighup. Go
back to the watch-house and get your coat.


Watchman. You are young plackguards, and I Will but you poth all three upon the
workhouse.


Trifle. Take us to the workhouse, you old scoundrel; mutter that again, if
you dare -- heighup.


Careless. Never mind them, never mind them, Watchman: they are, heighup, both
as drunk as David's sow.


Watchman. Out mitch you; you are all drunk: I Will but every one of you upon the
workhouse.


Trifle. Let me at him, heighup. Let me at the old scoundrel. ( makes up to the
Watchman -- who takes hold of him and throws him down.)


G. Friendly, jun. ( to Careless.) It would be a good piece of fun, to leave
Trifle with the watchman. (G. Friendly and Careless going.)


Trifle. Are you going to desert me, gentlemen? Heighup.


G. Friendly, jun. Ha, ha, ha, you are a valiant man; you can defend yourself.


Careless. Take good care of him, Watchman. Heighup. Exit Friendly and Careless.


Trifle. Oh them ye. I have fell into the pit I have been digging for Friendly,
heighup. Mr. Watchman* pray Sir, will you be so polite, heighup, as to see me
to my lodgings, Sir?


Watchman. To the tivel mitch you. It is now Mr. Watchman, and Sir. Pefore, I
was an old scoundrel. I will take you home, where you ought to be. Come, get up
mitch you.


Enter George Friendly, sen. and Jacob Friendly, sen. -- with fire-buckets. J.
Friendly, sen. It burned furious, but was soon extinguished. The people, much
to their honor, are always very active on such occasions.


Watchman. Come along mitch you. ( Pulls him along.)


Trifle. Murder! Murder!


G. Friendly, sen. What is all this? Goes up to the watchman. Watchman, don't
abuse the poor man.


Watchman. He has apused me peyond all pearing.


G. Friendly, sen. As I live, it is Trifle! -- Why, how came you in this
situation, Jack?


Trifle. Why, Sir, your nephew, George, Careless, and I -- heighup; were
walking very soberly along, and this old fellow attacked us without mercy.


Watchman. Now, it is old fellow again. He tells lies, Master Friendlys: tey
were all tree trunk; put he pehaved the worst to me.


G. Friendly, sen. Come, Mr. Watchman, I Will be his bril. See him safe to his
lodgings.


Watchman. Upon your account, Master Friendlys, I will. ( Takes Trifle off.)


J. Friendly. sen. There, thou does see what kind of company George keeps. That
is the way he is constantly debauching and dissipating his time.


Enter Jacob Friendly, jun. -- Reeling. J. Friendly, jun. Fire! Fire! Heighup.
The world is on fire: we shall all be burned! heighup.


J. Friendly, sen. What do mine eyes behold? Art thou my son Jacob?


J. Friendly, jun. I am not quite wise enough, heighup, to answer that question.


J. Friendly, sen. Oh! Heartbreaking fight! Where have thou been?


J. Friendly, jun. I Will tell you all about it; heighup. There was Joshua Meek,
Jeremiah Sleek, Tom Sly, heighup, and I. Tom Sly and all of us, went to the
sign of the goose and gridiron; where we had a grand supper, and excellent,
heighup, wine.


G. Friendly, sen. Heighup wine, in truth, ha, ha, ha. Verily, verily, thou art
a hopeful youth. I told you, brother, he would flip his bridle some time or
other. Yet, take my advice. Let him have more of the rein; dress (...);
associate with the girls; go to see a play now and then; and I will engage he
will do yet.


J. Friendly, sen. How have I been deceived in him? Come home, thou knave.
Exeunt.


Scene changes to a Room in Jacob Friendly sen's House.
Enter Jacob Friendly, sen. and George Friendly, sen. J. Friendly, sen. The
conduct of that boy has hurt me as much as the undutiful behavior of my
daughter. ( Walks to and fro in great passion.) I did once flatter myself, I
should enjoy a tranquil happiness, in the eve of my life; but my hopes are
every way blasted. My daughter stolen by a base, infamous villain; robber*
worst of robbers.


G. Friendly, sen. Where is your christian fortitude? Patience, man.


J. Friendly, sen. Talk not to me of patience. My afflictions are almost as
great as Job's.


G. Friendly, jun. You make the very worst of every thing, brother. Remember
the old saying: all is not lost which is in danger. You view every thing on the
dark side. Now, let me take a look at the light side. It is true, you have been
deceived in your younger son; but with prudent management, he may live to be a
comfort to you. Your daughter, make the very worst of it, has only taken a jump
over the pales of your church, and married a man who is an honor to his
country, and I am sure, will make her happy. As for George, depend upon it, he
will not eventually disgrace you, or dishonor me. Come, let us go to rest.
Keep up your spirits, and hope for the best.


Exeunt. Scene changes to G. Friendly, jun's Lodgings.
Enter Sambo, with two candles, reeling and singing. Sambo. Sings. Dans sons
carmagnole, etc. etc. Liberty and quality for eber and eber. ( Puts down one
candle.) You tan dear, sir. ( puts down the other.) And you tay dear, sir.
(Sings.) Liberty and quality, for eber and eber. Caesar, Pompey, and I, had
drom fine frolic upon a trent of our become free. Caesar massa, forget to put
him in a book dat make him free; and de good Quaker foke buy Pompey free. (
Reels.) Drom Caesar heart, he make me drink too muth. -- Sambo feel berry sick.
Eh, eh, eh -- house go round like a wholagig. ( Holds fast by the scene.)


Enter G. Friendly, jun. and Careless. G. Friendly, jun. Ha, ha, ha, we have
prayed Trifle a devil of a trick. I don't know how you feel, Careless, but I
feel a little sober to what I was.


Careless. The fumes of the wine have evaporated from me too.


G. Friendly, jun. You will lodge with me tonight, Bob?


Careless. With all my heart.


G. Friendly, jun. Sambo.


Sambo. Coming Sir. O me! (groans.)


G. Friendly, jun. What ails you, Sambo?


Sambo. O me, Sir. -- Got e gripe, Sir.


G. Friendly, jun. (mimicking.) Got e gripe, Sir. ( goes to him.) It Is so. A
situation I never saw him in before. You have got e gripe in e tomach. Sambo,
where have you been?


Sambo. Pompey.


G. Friendly, jun. Where?


Sambo. Caesar. Heighup -- wine.


G. Friendly, jun. Caesar -- Pompey -- wine. I can make nothing of that.


Careless. Why -- I suppose he has got drunk with Caesar and Pompey, who like
their name-sakes, no doubt, are two mischievous rogues. -- I am afraid our
friend Sambo, will make a bad use of his liberty.


G. Friendly, jun. Poor fellow, I hope not. -- ( rings the bell.)


Enter Servant. G. Friendly, jun. I Would thank you to get this unfortunate fellow
to bed. ( Servant takes hold of Sambo.)


Sambo. Tan off, you drom coundrel. ( Reels toward his master.) Massa George,
heighup, you are a drom cleber fellow. I know you well, Sir. Liberty and
quality for eber and eber.


G. Friendly, jun. Come, Sambo; I insist upon your going to bed.


Sambo. Yes, Sir. Massa George, you forgib Sambo. Sambo die for you. ( as he is
going, servant takes hold of him.) Tan off, I say; I say you coundrel tan off.
I go mysef. Liberty and quality, heighup, for eber. Exit.


Careless. So much for against liberating those people. The greatest number of
them, after they are set free, become vicious.


G. Friendly, jun. That, by no means, authorizes their being detained in a
state of slavery. Much is to be said in favor of them, for their want of
education.


Enter Servant. Servant. Gentlemen, do you wish to be lighted to your chambers?


G. Friendly, jun. We will attend you.


( Exeunt, following the Servant.) End of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
SCENE. -- Clementina's Lodgings. -- Ladies' Apartment.
Clementina, sitting in a dejected posture. Clementina. Be not offended heaven,
at my complaints. Surely it is the privilege of the wretched and unfortunate.
Which ever way I look, distress and sorrow mark the path. Oh, who is like unto
me -- in so short a time to experience such a reverse of fortune? Some few
months ago, I was in the full enjoyment of all the luxuries of life -- and in
one day, obliged to fly my country and possessions, with some few hundred
dollars: thought myself fortunate in getting a passage for this famed country
of liberty and tranquillity. But was arrested by the way, by cruel pirates, and
stripped of the remnant of my fortune, save a few dollars the relentful savages
left me: and here I am, a wretched refugee; reduced almost to the last
extremity. Oh! my brother, did thou but know my situation! -- ( Cries.)


Enter Servant. Servant. Madam, a gentleman requests to see you.


Clementina. To see me? Ah! who can want to see me? Show him in.


Re-enter Servant, with G. Friendly, jun. G. Friendly, jun. It Is she, by
heaven! the very same; the sister of Beauchamp. ( aside.) Madam, I just got
intelligence of your arrival. -- At the request of your brother, I am to do
myself the honor of paying you due attentions.


Clementina. My brother! Gracious heaven, where is he?


G. Friendly, jun. Not very distant. What a lovely creature. ( aside.) Here is
a letter he delivered to me to present to you, if you should arrive here. (
gives the letter.)


Clementina. ( Reads and kisses the letter.) It is his well-known hand. ( Reads
on -- looks pleasantly at G. Friendly.) He does mention you in most excellent
terms. Ah! my poor brother. I fear he is gone into the very jaws of death.


G. Friendly, jun. What a divine-looking creature. (aside.) No madam, he is not
gone. He was disappointed in his passage. Here is a letter I received from him
yesterday. (gives it to her.)


Clementina. (Reads.) I thank thee, my God. I shall see my brother. He mentions
he will be here very soon.


G. Friendly, jun. I will write immediately to your brother, to inform him of
your arrival. -- In the mean time, madam, I shall afford myself the pleasure of
personating him in his absence.


Clementina. Excellent stranger. Friendly America How shall I requite you for
your goodness?


G. Friendly, jun. It is all over with me. I am gone: -- Caught in love's trap,
at last. (aside. -- Takes her by the hand.) By giving me your heart. Lovely
woman, excuse the abruptness of my declaration. I have held you in adoration
from the moment I beheld your portrait. Your brother, at his departure,
presented it to me.


Clementina. (much agitated.) O, Sir, you do me too much honor. It gives me
pleasure to look at you. But you must not be deceived. -- You see before you, a
poor, unfortunate woman, who once possessed much wealth. But, alas! -- (weeps.)
cruel fortune has deprived me of it. I am now reduced to poverty.


G. Friendly, jun. Madam, cease to weep. The heaven-born act shall be mine, to
relieve virtue in distress. Your vicissitudes mark you as the greater object of
my affections. Thank heaven, I have a handsome fortune -- with great
expectations from a rich, and good uncle: and all I want to complete my
happiness, is to call you mine. At the same time, I wish not to take advantage
of your situation -- or, that necessity should force your inclinations. I will
leave you for a short time; with a request, that you will be so good as to make
up your mind on the subject. Whatever may be your determination, you may rely
on my tender friendship. Madam, your humble servant. (Kisses her hand with
extacy. As he goes off, looks at her with great tenderness. Exit.)


Clementina. solus. All-gracious heaven, how wonderful are thy ways! ( Pauses.)
What am I to do? I feel a partiality for this noble-minded American. Surely, it
is the interposition of heaven. ( Kneels.) I humbly thank thee, thou great
disposer of all things. I gratefully thank thee for thy goodness. That generous
youth, I will embrace as my lover -- my friend: and through thee, my guardian
angel. Exit.


Scene, G. Friendly jun's Lodgings.
Enter George Friendly, sen. and George Friendly, jun. in conversation. G.
Friendly, sen. My dear George, you are now arrived at that time of life, which
should teach you to set a just value upon time. You know I have never been a
spy upon your actions; nor never wish to cross you in rational pleasures. I
have heard of some of your excesses, which has given me uneasiness. Depend upon
it, too constant a repetition of those midnight revels, will neither promote
your health, nor establish you a fair reputation in the world. To be serious
with you, George, I wish you to enter into the banns of wedlock. Cast your eyes
around you. Single out some lady, whom you may think worthy of your affection.
It matters not, whether she has wealth, provided she has merit. For my part, I
would rather have you form a connection with a woman of a moderate share of
beauty, with good sense, and an amiable disposition, if she had not a second
change, than to one that would bring you thousands, and lead you a termagant
life.


G. Friendly, jun. Propitious to my wishes. -- ( Aside -- Kneels.) Best of
uncles and more than father.


G. Friendly, sen. Rise, George. Kneel to none but your God, or a woman. You
always have, and can be, sufficiently respectful standing.


G. Friendly, jun. ( Rises.) Was I wanting in respect to you, Sir, I should be
one of the most ungrateful wretches in existence. The obligations that I am
under --


G. Friendly, sen. Enough of that George. -- You are becoming too ceremonious.
Whatever obligations you may conceive yourself under to me, your manly and
grateful behavior, will be a convincing proof to the world, that I have
not-misplaced my patronage. I have deviated from some parents and preceptors;
for, whilst I fostered you as a child, I brought you up as my most particular
friend. However, to make every thing short, I want to see you settled in life.
I mean married.


G. Friendly, jun. Worthy Sir, at all times I am ready to comply with whatever
you may think proper to prescribe; but perhaps never did an injunction come so
opportunely. I was just upon the point of requesting your consent for an union
with a lady, wherein all my happiness in life is involved.


G. Friendly, sen. You were? (Hastily.) Who is she?


G. Friendly, jun. Sir, she is a foreigner; and I hope when I make you
acquainted with the circumstances of our acquaintance, and the situation of the
lady, you will neither condemn my conduct, nor disapprove of my choice. She is
the sister of my young friend, Beauchamp -- a young lady of most extraordinary
beauty and accomplishments.


G. Friendly, sen. Are you certain she is a woman of honor?


G. Friendly, jun. Yes, Sir; I can have no doubt of it.


G. Friendly, sen. How long have you been acquainted?


G. Friendly, jun. Sir, Sir -- our acquaintance is of no great length; but I am
convinced she is a woman of virtue -- and what is more, she is in distress.


G. Friendly, sen. Give me your hand, George. You have my consent. Your having
attached yourself to suffering virtue, has done you honor, whilst it is
extremely grateful to me. -- There cannot be a more god-like act, than for a
man to alleviate the misfortunes of a virtuous woman in adversity. (pulls out
his watch.) Meet me in about ten minutes at the coffee-house, and I Will go with
you to see the object of your love. Exit.


Enter a Child, (who gives G. Friendly, jun. a note. Opens it, and reads.) G.
Friendly, jun. Seize her goods! Take her bed from under her! Hell receive thee
for that, Gripus. May thou be damned beyond redemption; and when thy parched
tongue needs water, may no one be found to give thee any. If I had him here,
damme how I would maul him. (Clasps his hands in ejaculation.) Great Parent of
Nature, can there be a greater crime, except murder, than to oppress the poor,
poor forlorn widow. Long has this worthy woman been contending with the strong
current of adversity: now and then I have lent her a friendly hand: perhaps
never better timed than now. -- (Takes a note out of his pocketbook) -- Here,
my little innocent, give this to your mother -- it will relieve her present
necessities. -- Tell her I will call to see her tomorrow, and place her in a
permanent situation.


Child. ( courtesying.) Thank you, Sir. God bless you. (Kisses his hand.) Exit.


G. Friendly, jun. (Solus.) The man who cannot feel for the misfortunes or
afflictions of his fellow creatures, is unworthy of the common benefits of
human nature. Exit.


Scene, an apartment in Peevish's House. Mr. and Mrs. Peevish.
Enter Patrick, (looking grave.) Patrick. Now, Pat, you have got a wife. Though I
am made extramely happy by being married to Jenny; yet it occasions me some
sorrowful thoughts. Now, the great question is, how I am to kape her and the
children alive. By my shoul, I never wished to be rich before. -- I never did
like kaping company with those four-footed bastes: besides, it is a devil of a
hard life. One is oblaged to turn out in the snow and cold at very unshasonably
hours, and there is no grate dale got by it after all. One may be riding about
the whole yare, and at the end of it, be just where they walked off from,
without a farthing the better. Now, I think, if I had about three, or two
hundred dollars, I could shut up a grate store; and it appares clare to me, I
could make a grate dale of money. Jenny tells me, that many of my countrymen
came here very poor, and have made grate fortunes out of nothing at all at all;
and with the blessings of heaven, Pat will do it too. Exit.


Scene changes to another apartment.
Peevish and Mrs. Peevish. Peevish. They are married, my dear, you say; when
did that take place?


Mrs. Peevish. Last night, one of the servants informed me.


Peevish. Their courtship has been very concealed.


Mrs. Peevish. I had not the least suspicion of an attachment. I wish Jenny had
consulted me. I am afraid, poor girl, she has been rather hasty; though Patrick
appears to me to be a sober, well-intentioned young man; but he has not been in
this country a sufficient time to give full evidence of being worthy of her.


Peevish. He is sobriety itself, and that is a quality which generally is the
groundwork of prosperity. (Pauses.) I Will befriend them. Jenny I know has
claims on you. (Rings the bell.)

Enter Servant. Tell Patrick and Jenny I wish to see them.


Servant. Yes, Sir. (Exit.)


Enter Patrick and Jenny. Patrick. What can all this mane? (Aside. -- Makes a
respectful bow.)


Peevish. Well, Patrick, how do you like your new situation? You have kept your
courtship and marriage, very private.


Patrick. He has become the most shivel man in the world of late. (aside.) Why,
indade, dare shir, we were not long making the bargain at first: -- Jenny would
be for putting the marriage off for two wakes, but I pushed the matter so home
to her, that she consented to bate the two wakes into a shorter time, and the
good praist made us one last night.


Peevish. And you are now happy?


Patrick. As to happiness, I can shay, the more I Am acquainted wid her, the
more I love her; and in this blessed country, where my dare Jenny tells me,
paple are free before they are born, we shall be happy as long as we and the
world stick togeder.


Peevish. Well, Patrick, I am glad to see you impressed with such just
sentiments of our happy government. You have got a good girl for a wife, and
you live in a country, where, if you are virtuous and industrious, you will be
sure to thrive. Jenny, come here. (Jenny comes to Peevish, and makes a low
courtesy.) You have been a faithful girl to your mistress; you shall not go
from our house unrewarded. [To Mrs. Peevish.] I request, my love, you will
present Jenny with a sum adequate to purchase furniture for their house.


Jenny. (Courtesies.) Oh, Sir, I cannot express myself.


Patrick. How I have been decaved in him! --


(Aside.) Peevish. Patrick, you are a tolerable scholar. Suppose I was to set
you up in the grocery line, do you think it would answer?


Patrick. On my shoul, Shir, that was the very business I was thinking I could
make a fountain of money by.


Peevish. I will look out for a good stand for you*


Patrick. Blessings on you, Shir.


Jenny. (Makes a respectful courtesy to Mr. and Mrs. Peevish.) Dear master and
mistress, I gratefully thank you.


Patrick. (Goes up to Mr. Peevish, takes him by the hand.) Shir, I hope you
will not be affronted at my taking you by the hand. I fale more in my heart
than I can spoke wid my tongue. -- (Wipes his eyes.) Pat and his Jenny will
strive to deserve your friendship. -- Blessings on both your swate shouls. (
Exeunt Patrick and Jenny.)


Peevish. Well, my dear, with respect to the young couple, the plan is happily
concerted, and I hope will succeed.


Mrs. Peevish. He certainly cannot withstand all our importunities.


Peevish. This is about the time they are to be here. -- ( Pulls out his watch.)


Enter G. Friendly, sen. G. Friendly, sen. Mr. and Mrs. Peevish, your humble
servant. (Whispers to Mrs. Peevish.)


Mrs. Peevish. You surprise me. I am glad to hear it. ( Exit Mrs. Peevish.)


G. Friendly, sen. The secret must not be kept from you Mr. Peevish. My nephew
George is married: it was somewhat hasty, but may not be the worse for that. It
was my desire it should be so. I want to completely surprise my brother. Here
he comes.


Enter J. Friendly, sen. J. Friendly, sen. How do do, brother George? And
thou, friend, Peevish?


Peevish. All the better for seeing you. Please to take a seat, Sir. Have you
heard any thing new?


J. Friendly, sen. Nothing new? -- Did thou not send for me?


Peevish. I did. Mr. Friendly, I am informed you have a valuable tract of land
to dispose of; I have some inclination of making a purchase of you, if we can
agree about the price.


J. Friendly, sen. As for the price, thou shall not find me unreasonable. It is
considered by those who have seen it, as a very fine body of land.


Enter Mrs. Peevish, Hannah Friendly, Major and Rachel Manly. (Major and Rachel
Manly kneel to J. Friendly, sen.) Manly. Venerable Sir -- your children
supplicate your forgiveness, and beg your blessing.


H. Friendly. A wife and mother entreat thee to forgive them.


G. Friendly, sen. A brother, begs the same favor.


Peevish. Mrs. Peevish and I make the same request. Remember, you just said,
you would not be unreasonable about land matters: pray, be not so, about what
concerns the happiness of your children.


G. Friendly, sen. Brother, can you withstand all this? I wish I were in your
place, that I might have the pleasure of forgiving.


J. Friendly, sen. I am all amazement. Thou have taken me unawares, brother.
Rise my children. ( they rise.) Rachel, thou have not treated thy father well.
But still thou art my child. Parental affection must supercede resentment. Ye
have my forgiveness, and I pray heaven to bless ye both.


G. Friendly, sen. Tol, lol de roll. ( Dances.) I am twenty years younger. That
was acting like a christian and gentleman, brother. (Goes to the door --
returns with G. Friendly, jun. and Clementina) -- Ladies and gentlemen, I have
the pleasure of introducing Mr. and Mrs. Friendly to you. (All but Mr. and Mrs.
Peevish appear surprised. -- G. Friendly, jun. and Clementina make their
repects to the company.)


R. Manly. Brother George married! -- Strange. To whom, I wonder? (Aside.)


H. Friendly. Son George married. This is unexpected. (aside.)


J. Friendly, sen. George married! (aside.)


Manly. A singular circumstance. (goes up to Clementina.) I have not the honor
of being personally known to your lady, George, but I must have a bride's kiss.
( kisses her -- claps G. Friendly on the shoulder.) Ha, ha, ha, George! -- you
are at length reduced from one thousand, to one single object. Love has now its
bounds.


G. Friendly, jun. I stand a happy proselyte before the altar of Hymen. (
Whispers Manly.)


Manly. Is it possible?


G. Friendly, jun. The very same -- tol lol de roll. My heart is as blythe as a
lark's.


Manly. (Pulls G. Friendly, jun.) George, observe more decorum. Remember who
are present.


G. Friendly, jun. I thank you, Harry; I had forgot myself.


G. Friendly, sen. Come, brother, you must give another blessing. I make a
request for George and his wife.


J. Friendly, sen. To whom is he married?


G. Friendly, sen. A charming, though unfortunate French lady; one of the late
sufferers of St. Domingo. (G. Friendly and Clementina kneel to J. Friendly,
sen. and H. Friendly.)


G. Friendly, jun. My dear parents, I hope we shall have your blessings in turn.


J. Friendly, sen. I am all astonishment* I hardly know whether it is a dream
or a reality. -- George, thou have been very wild; but I hope thou art
convinced of thy follies and evil ways. Thou and thy wife have our blessings.
May ye enjoy uninterrupted happiness. I pray heaven to shower down its choicest
blessings on you all, my children.


Clementina. My parents! occurrences extraordinary in themselves, have
introduced me into your family, the history of which you will soon be
acquainted with. With a heart overflowing with gratitude, I will never cease to
be to you one dutiful daughter, and to your son, one faithful, affectionate
wife.


Enter Beauchamp, ( runs to Clementina and embraces her.) Beauchamp. My Sister!


Clementina. My brother, my brother -- do I embrace you once more. Mon Dieu je
suis content.


Beauchamp. Yes, my sister: and we cannot be too thankful to the great Supreme,
who has brought us together under such fortunate auspices. I have many
questions to ask you, but, for the moment, I must wave them. ( runs to G.
Friendly, jun. and embraces him.) My best friend, my brother. O mon Dieu, je
vous remercie.


G. Friendly, sen. I must honestly confess, I was not prepared for this scene.
( Wipes his eyes.)


J. Friendly, sen. ( Takes out his handkerchief and wipes his eyes.) The tears
of sensibility rolleth down my cheeks. It pleases me, that my son George has
contributed so much toward the happiness of these strangers. I have great
hopes he will become my principal comfort.


G. Friendly, jun. It shall constitute the principal part of my happiness to be
so. I acknowledge I have been thoughtless and imprudent; but, I hope, by
forming a connection with this amiable woman, that virtuous love will triumph
over what foibles and vices I may have had.

(G. Friendly, sen. goes up to Beauchamp, takes him by the hand.) I feel for
your peculiar situation, as I do for all your unfortunate country people, who
are in similar circumstances: If my purse could beat in unison with my heart,
I Would relieve ye all -- but you shall be my particular care.


Beauchamp. O, Sir, you are too good. I cannot be enough grateful. ( goes to J.
Friendly, sen. and H. Friendly.) I pay my respectful duty to the parents of my
friend. I hope my sister will be one dutiful child to you.


G. Friendly, sen. Yes, I Will engage she will. I see love, duty and affection
beaming through her charming face. Brother, you ought to think yourself the
happiest man in the world. I am made so, by effecting this Happy
Reconciliation. For love -- virtuous love, has here its triumph and reward.


THE END.
PRINTING DONE WITH EXPEDITION AND CARE, BY R. FOLWELL, NO. 33, MULBERRY-STREET.


