THE OCEAN SPECTRE, AN ENTIRE NEW GRAND MELO DRAME: IN FIVE ACTS. Intersperced
with Songs, Chorusses, etc.

"The critic's eye, that microscope of wit,
"Sees hairs, and pores, examined bit by bit;
"In Poets, as true genius is but rare,
"True taste as seldom is the Critic's share;
"Both must alike from heaven derive their light,
"Those born to judge, as well as those to write."
TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH OF LE SPECTRE DE L'OCEAN. WRITTEN BY FLAREAU.

Copy right secured according to law.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
LORENZO -- Son of Flavio, in love with Isabella. DON PEDRAS -- Captain of
Banditti, in l^ve w^ Florinda. Two American gentlemen in Italy.
WALTER, HENRY --
Two brothers.
FLAVIO -- Florinda's father, CELIO -- Isabella's father.
FRIAR LUCRE. FOOL, OBADIAH AMINIDAB BROADBRIM. BANDITTI, ASSASSINS, SERVA^
etc. ISABELLA -- In love with Henry. FLORINDA -- In love with Walter. LUCETTA.
FLORELLA -- The Ocean Spectre.
TYPOGRAPHICAL ERRORS
For leniament, read lineament -- exquesite, ex^site -- moment, moments --
imovable, immovable -- ^fections, affection -- witi^in, within.

THE OCEAN SPECTRE.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- VENICE. -- A Grotesque garden*
Enter HENRY. IT IS morn -- bright Phoebus from his ether throne refulgent
smiles; his magic light the earth illumines, drives sable night from view, and
shows all nature rich by his magnificence. Each dreary waste and dampen'd lowly
ground, reeking through heat, the sun exhaling dews to heaven's high summit. His
orient reflecting beams ineffably rich, surpasses human comprehension!

Enter WALTER. Wall. Ah my dear friend Harr^; melancholy!


Hen. Your absence was the cause, where have ^ou been? where past you the night
away?


Wall. At the feast of Venus and Cupid.


Hen. Explain.


Wall. When we parted last night by accident, I ^ravers'd streets, lanes,
crooked and strait to find ^ou, but in vain my search; the night being dark, I
^t my way; heavy clouds were rising with great ^elocity, and the hour being
very late I despaired of ^^nding my lodgings -- the warring elements thun^er'd
over my head! the rain in torrents fell -- the winds blew, as though boreas would
have spent himself in a single blast -- but oh, in the end what a lucky dog was
I!


Hen. Your luck, if by your wardrobe I may judge, has been in the swimming
line.


Wall. True Harry, true. Ha, ha. ha.


H^n^ You Are in good spirits faith.


Wall. I spied a head by the lightnings flash, a monastery decayed, and old, at
which I soon arrived; under that convent I stowed my half drowned body, I had
not long been there, ever I observed a black fellow with a lanthorn in his
hand, making toward me; the rain slackened, and I left the place to me^ him, in
hopes to gain from him information, that might find my home. He put his fingers
to his mout^ and whisteled very loud, I waited for a while, and he made a
second noise still louder than the former -- none answered him, and being
curious, thinking (...) a signal, made bold myself to answer it, being hood^ed
with my cloak, I came up to him, waiting the event; he told me "his mistress
was waiting im^patiently for my presence in her bed chamber, havin^ but now
hurried her gouty husband to bed." started at this so unexpected an event,
knowing n^ what to do -- he perceiving not his mistake, resolve me upon the
intrigue. I followed him first crou^ing a purse into his hand -- he led me
through an arch^ gallery, and several windings till I felt almost lost the superb
mansion; at length he opened a glass foldi^^ door, when an angel (for so I must
call her,) appear before me -- a satin night gown was all that veil^ her
heavenly form, the wanton tresses careless han^^ing on her alabaster neck,
pictured to me Venus h^^ self; oh Harry, Harry, my throbbing bosom most burst
-- I was then in Elysium, transported ^^^yond myself 'twixt love and hope!
recovering mys^^^ a little, the precious moment I improved, and extinguished
the waxen taper; at which she expressed surprise: I apologized in a quite low
whisper and clasped her in my arms -- Harry guess you the rest, for more I Will
not tell thee about tha^.


Hen. When will you leave off your rakish pranks?


Wall. When tongues forget to tell us love sick ditty's -- when eyes forget to
blandish languishing rays upon the heart -- In short when women think no more
of men, I Will hate them all, but not I Am sure till then.


Hen, Have you any thing more to expect from your fair dulcinea?


Wall. Nothing more from her I fear: but my rival! I have something to expect
from him, I Will tell you the sequel -- while I lay in amorous pastime, with this
Venus, encircling, in pops a stranger, not knowing who could thus intrude, I
requested of the lady ^o chide him; who, when she beheld shrieked aloud! he was
the very person she thought then in her arms. I sprung from my downy repast,
and bolted the door, which had been neglected; by my rival's assistance the
lady had partly recovered her scattered senses. The husband had thrice
thundered at the portal to know the c^use of the alarm. She entreated of us
both to make our escape, for fear we should be discovered, and put one way
there was left for flight.


Hen. Go on.


Wall. That was, taking a cold bath by a dangerous leap from the back window.


Hen. And did you so,


Wall. No option was left me -- I sprang in the water from the window, my rival
followed -- judge ^he transition, from a warm bath to a cold one.


Hen. Did you learn the name of your rival?


Wall. His name is Signior Lorenzo. When we reached the shore, he demanded
satisfaction; I told him I knew of now insult offered, I thought therefore no
satisfaction requisite; but that I would every day run the same risk, to be
rewarded thus at night.


Hen. Then you have promised to fight him?


Wall. This morning at six o'clock.


Hen. It Is a barbarous custom.


Wall. What serious again?


Hen. That honor sanctions, but morality more wise, more just, condemns. What a
mistaken sense of honor; what votary's of vice. What toil, what peril do
parents undergo for their progeny? Is this filial reverencial gratitude? the
pride of the fond doting sire, and matrons tender care; a mind of many years
cultivation; is matured to benefit society; for one rash step falls a voluntary
sacr^fice, and leaves to endless inconsolable misery the fountain of his
existence.


Wall. Think you Harry I am wrong? I am indeed sorry if you do, but I know you
are my friend, and would not willingly do me wrong. Think you I would
unnecessarily plunge myself in danger, or a living creature on earth? when
impetuous, foolish men for a trivial amor, will set a fellow creatures life in
an awful b^llance, which reclining either way, may prove fatal to one or both,
think you the omnipotent would prosper a wretch so baneful? Oh no indignant
fate would pronounce sentence aloud, and hurl the unnatural aggressor to
perdition.


Hen, That is weighty reasoning.


Wall. Could I with honor decline the combat, I would willingly indeed -- but
to be branded with a coward's name, I would not disgrace my country so. No
American yet has disgraced our annals by inglorious cowardice; nor shall it be
said, that one o^ Columbia's sons, though in a foreign land, did ever forget
the glorious inheritance of his ancestors.


Hen. It cannot be avoided always I confess, I will be your second.


Wall. Thank you my dear fellow, thanks; my conduct I cannot impeach as
criminal, I have only stolen that from him, that would have been stolen by
another. Come Harry we'll prepare and away; and as our cause is just so may it
prosper. ( Exeunt.)


SCENE II.
Enter LORENZO and DON PEDRAS in deep consultation. Ped. To avoid a combat so
dangerous to us both, my council if you take will profit much; ^ome resolute
Bravo's I will procure, myself at their head will unawares, murder them for
their presumption.


Lor. ( feigning a smile of indignation upon Pedras, as a cloak for his
acceptance.) If you are a man, that did not come from thy heart.


Ped. ( confused.) Signio^! friendship alone, and the preservation of thy life,
(which to me is more precious than my own,) urged thus far my proffered
kindness.


Lor. Friendship however great, when it promotes dishonor as a proof, debases
manhood.


Ped. Indeed thou wrong'st me, and for my friendship it is hard to be thus used,


Lor. Forgive me Pedias, but thy advice I cannot take.


Ped. Act as thy will directs -- here comes one whose martial front alone would
strike the chickens dead -- be prevailed upon Signior, he is coming quick upon
us -- should he procure the number requisite --


Lor. ( hesitating.) Well, well I consent. ( retires up the ground.)


Ped. Who goes there?


Enter RUFFIAN. Ruf. A friend to every villain -- I hope you are the same, then
you will be a friend to me.


Ped. By heaven it is one of my own band. ( aside. Fearful of being exposed,
comes up to the Ruffian and speaks to him in a low tone.) Hush!


Ruf. Why Captain! --


Ped. Push on your life, seem not to know me.


Lor. [comes down.] Art thou a deep read villain?


Ruf. As for reading I never knew much about it, I could write pothooks and
trammels once. But if you mean a fellow that does not fear the Devil,
inquisition, nor gog magog; if you mean one that never told the truth though it
suited him best, if you mean one that can stop a man's whistling pipes in a
twinkling; 'though I don't like to praise myself, I Am the very chap for your
money.


Lor. Could thou procure me a dozen?


Ruf. No^ that I can recommend ^o strong as myself -- I know indeed many that
pretend to rob, murder, ravish, and such petty tricks, but even in that, they
are ungentlemanlike bunglers, demme -- but for myself I have always had the
credit of doing any thing in that genteel way, with the best grace of any other
gentleman in all these parts. Why a night or two ago I made enough money to
keep me a month in idleness.


Lor. How?


Ruf. A mere trifle as a body may say, killing a bastard child, that is all.


Lor. Killing a child?


Ruf. Yes, as good luck would have it, my cellebrity that way being suspected,
I was sent for to do the job, the little nobody's child did squeak a^^ squall
most damnably -- fearful the little fellow might catch cold, I put my hat on
his head, and my cloak round him. What is to be done with this little fellow?
says I -- you must kill him says he, crouding a weighty purse into my hand --
it is done says I, putting it into my pocket. I left him -- pop't off in a boat,
hung an ornament round his neck, down he went to the bottom safe enough, and
never said a word. A hundred such jobs a week, would keep me in style in a
short time without any such labor.


Lor. Did't thou never know fear?


Ruf. Bless you Sir, very often; I am always afraid a man will never pay, that
does not pay beforehand, for such trifles are always cash jobs. ( pulls off his
hat, and holds out his hand.)


Lor. Take thou that, 'twill silence all thy scruples of conscience
effectually. ( gives a purse.)


Ruf. [puts it in his pocket, puts on his hat and makes a low bow.] I am your
slave. How many men, women* children, orphans, babes, old maids, and bastards
must I kill for this?


Lor. Bring with thee a dozen of the most daring villains thou know, and
meet me here immediately,


Ruf. When I find a person that is generous and tender hearted like myself, my
conscience pricks me if I do not do him justice, and be punctual to my word and
honor. [exit Ruf.]


Ped. Noble Signior, what think thou now?


Lor. O What a wretch is that! he seemed so sunk in villainy already the
goading stings of concience cannot reach him.


Ped. You seem moved Lorenzo.


Lor. Then I seem not more than what I really do feel.


Ped. Will It thou not tell thy faithful Pedras of the cause?


Lor. That would avail but little toward removing the weight upon my soul.
Murdering innocence! O lovely innocence!


Ped. Why harp you upon those words? sure you are not guilty.


Lor. D^d'st thou never before observe?


Ped. Often have I m^rk'd thy tardy steps, thy downcast eye, with folded arms,
and head reclining to the ear^h, and ever and ano^, a heavy sigh stole from thy
bosom, as if in that sigh you breathed your life away.


Lor. Alas! my heart and bosom have long been strangers!


Ped. And stranger yet it appears to me that I have not been entrusted with the
cause.


Lor. My heart's entom'd in the bowels of the watery gulf, 'twill never reign
within my breast again!


Ped. Then do not rob me of my share of grief; let me partake of thine.


Lor. I scruple not thy fidelity now, I think I may in safety breathe to thee,
the miseries with which my bosom's fraught. Six years have elapsed since in the
dead o^^ig^t, when on the seas all was tranquil as heaven's listening
cherubims; I was in possession of my love; my heart then was pure, then was
unpolluted; never since that cars'd night have I known rest; absorbed in sorrow
I have ever been, bu^ death alone can ease me of my pain; when on the vessel's
d^ck myself and Flo^ella stood, exchanging vows of constancy and love; when all
below was hushed, at the midnight hour; her accents ^o melodious dropped, she the
air pregnated with such salubrious breath, ambrosial sweets engendered on her
lips! Oh! with what transport I pressed my lips to here is; possessed ^t once of
all my hearts desire, created passions in ^e that grew mad! passions which
never before I ^elt so stubborn, engrossed with violence my trembling ^ame; my
panting breast grew wild, and like a ^antic man I clasped her in my arms,
resolved to enjoy ^y force those charms, which if patience had taken ^e rein,
but for a little while would have voluntarily ^ielded to me! -- sudden she
sprang from my embrace, ^^d threw her body in the foaming surge! Oh! then that
horror child my faultering soul! she sunk! she ^rowned! and with her all my
happiness forever!


Ped. Grieve not for the loss of her -- the beautiou^ ^^abella --


Lor. Sister to the unfortunate Florella.


Pen. Good heaven! thine own cousin?


Lor. Too true indeed -- my hopes are blasted there; ^uld I obtain her,
methought 'twould in part remove ^y melancholy. My last visit to Padua,
Isabella ^as the briliant meteor lighted me; her father tried to love her in my
behalf in vain, for cold indifference perused in every leniament. Here comes
the ruf^^an crew, fell hate, and fixed defiance on their brows ^^throned --
approach ye demons, ye whose damning ^oks would fright hell's cabinet, and fill
the world ^ith horror to behold thee.


Chorus of Assassins.
Outcast from all the world we are,
Against all human beings war,
Rapine or rape, it is all the same,
Plunder, and murder is our aim.
Incendiaries we are all,
The mother or the infants squall,
No weight impresses on our heart,
Though racks reward us with its smart.
Exeunt omnes. SCENE III. -- In Padua. -- A room in CELIO'S house.
ISABELLA. Sola. The stifling flame rekindles, quickened by sighs flashes through
my whole frame -- the time so slowly glide away -- each day to me is a year --
each hour a month Oh, Henry why do thou stay so long away? were thou fledged
with the plumes of love; swift as a beard^ed Flecta thou would fly into my
longing arms* But much I fear, when thou do return, my sire will not let thee
to my prison room.


Enter CELIO. Cel. Well my child, how passes time away?


Isab. Sadly indeed!


Cel. Right -- so should it pass indurance. Wha^ is the cause but thy
disobedience? consent, alone, t^ be Lorenzo's wife, shall ever set thee at
liberty.


Isab. Yes, death will set me free!


Cel. Fear not, thy death is not yet so near; the pretty face accords well with
drooping melancholy.


Isab. Lorenzo's my relative.


Cel. No nearer than a cousin. Florella, when b^ troth'd to him, made no such
peevish plea.


Isab. Oh my poor sister! for her untimely death grief finds its vent in tears!
( weeps^)


Cel. 'Twas heavens decree.


Isab^ Could heaven ordain, that to much pie^^ should be sacrificed? Lorenzo
himself, confessed, th^^ in the midnight hour, they alone, where on the vesse^
deck, when she by accident was drowned; this sto^^ does not link together well;
though none have y^^ spoke dubious of its truth, I most strongly think*


Celio. You do not think so! make him happy w^^ deserves thee; who deserved,
and wo^ Florella, b^ fa^e forbade their unity.


Isab. Though he were the only man on earth, never would call him husband.


Cel. Then shal't thou not call me father; hear my malediction! if thou still
art obstinate, by heaven, I Will cast thee off forever, nor will I own thee as my
child again.


Isab. That I could bear; but it is cruelty when ^arents for lucre, make a
traffic of their offsprings ^eace! cast me forth in the wide world alone; and
in ^ome wild I Would stalk with naked fee^, until with bri^rs and with splinters
torn, the gushing blood would ^eave a trail behind! some running stream would
moist my fever'd lips, and my parched tongue, would ^oon find great releif! at
night I would lay me down ^o rest, a stone my pillow, or the naked earth; no
^overing but the heavens to shield me! so each suc^essive day my time shall
pass, till nature wearied and exhausted quite, resign myself a willing martyr,
^ather than be wedded to Lorenzo!


Cel. I Have heard your resolution; now farewell!


Isab. ( detaining him) Yet one word more my ^ather! I had a mother! thou did
dearly love her.


Cel. ( affected) Why do thou bring to my mind fresh, the loss of that
precious treasure, which was dearer to me than my own existence?


Isab. Do thou remember her last dying words?


Cel. Her dying words? ( affected.)


Isab. A most affectionate, maternal, charge she gave me; and her last, last
words to thee were, give ^er to the man of her choice.


Cel. I must not hear you! ( going)


Isab. ( with increased emotion.) You must not leave me yet -- I see you are
moved -- tears from your eyes ^^art forth, pity's remonstrance! ( kneels and
takes ^old of his ^obe. His face averted.) as you loved ^er, and her last
words, when in yours, her most ^^feless hand you pressed; you did not answer,
for ^our heart was full, laboring for vent; but indeed, your eyes spoke, and
put the seal of heaven upon it.


Cel. Isabella! no more! --


Isab. I Will tell you all; then as a menial beggar, spurn me from you; my
plighted vow is given to another.


Cel. What say thou!


Isab. To that gentleman who saved me from the ruffian's arms. -- With what
valor did he face the cursed band and beat them down: then for the first time
love lighted his torch within my breast, and ever since has flamed unbounded;
you gave him welcome to your house, he left us, soon to return again; our
hearts in mutual contact beat, and in heavens register our faith's enrolled!
Gratitude --


Cel. Gratitude, might turn the balance in his favor were he of our country
born.


Isab. That matters not, the generous heart that beats with transport for a
fellow creature's welfare, the country to whom he owes his birth, is rich
indeed that can boast many such.


Cel. Your arguments are vainly used; you have nearly brought my feelings to an
ebb. -- But my will you have heard, if you love your father, be wise, and take
his council. -- Exit.


Isab. Stay yet a moment longer -- no, he is gone, and I am left more wretched
than before; should I remain here, when my Henry returns, farewell hope; then
despair to you I trust! -- Exit.


SCENE IV -- A grove, -- Enter WALTER and HENRY.
Walter. Here we are at last, and no sign of my antagonist yet; it is past the
hour appointed.


Hen. ( looking at his watch.) We have five minutes yet to spare. What think
you of the Italian ladies? you had a spec^men last night.


Wall. There is something in the Italian ladies so wanton, it sets me in a
blaze; the sight of one of them sets my heart thumping for an hour. [ Enter
LORENZO and PEDRAS with Assasins; they place them in ambush.] Gentlemen, your
most obedient, I think I have seen thy visage once before, Lorenzo?


Lor. Right.


Wall. Right or wrong you are determined to fight?


Lor. What think you I came for.


Wall. To ask my pardon for your unwarrantable challenge? but if I must send you
to explore the lower regions, draw quickly: for I have no time to lose.


Lorenzo whistles. Wall. Ha assassins! villain thou dy'st. ( Lorenzo and Walter
fight. Lorenzo is run through the body and falls, Assassins rush upon Walter
and Henry; during the contest several of them are killed, the rest fly; at that
moment the curtain drops. Music during this business.)


ACT II.
SCENE I. -- A room in FLAVIO's House.
FLAVIO Solo. Here have I wearied my aged limbs, pacing with anxious steps, in
expectation of my child's return; some accident sure has happened, she would not
have staid thus long else to torture her father's heart; some sad omen shakes
my decayed frame, and tells me we shall not meet again. Last night when rosy
slumbers stole upon my care-worn mind, methought Phoebus in splendour never had
shone so bright; all the earth seemed richen'd with his orient beams; when soon
and sudden, as if nature revolted and hurled black curtains 'twixt the sun and
earth, flashes of streaming fire burst through his contending screens, and
waters gushed, as if to drown the earth! the savage beasts for shelter ran
precipitate with horrid yell from place to place, and heaven's feathered
couriers with expanded wings floated breathless down the engulphed precipices!
-- A ship then appeared in view tossing among the billows, she dashed against
the rocks; in that dire moment the schrieking of the victims roused me from my
lethargy, and it struck so strong impression on my senses, that for some time I
thought 'twas real. Enter SERVANT hastily -- Why this haste?


Ser. I am sorry, but Florinda!


Flav. Speak, but say she is alive.


Ser. She is not dead.


Flav. Where is she? what has happened? instantly ease this anxious heart.


Ser. Florinda, and Celio your brother, after a narrow escape by the assistance
of two noble gentlemen have safely landed. I was dispatched to give you notice.


Flav. Speak! let me hear what has happened;


Ser. When gliding through the water with a gentle breeze, a cloud appeared,
but no danger seemed to threaten; and as it imperceptibly approached, an
envious flaw upset your Gondola, and all were threatened with a wa^^y grave.
Florinda then more frightened than the rest, being less able to support
herself, for some short time most pitiously shrieked aloud, imploring help; two
strangers from a boat close by, plunged into the water and arrived to Celio's
and Florinda's help, whose body's were disappearing; Florinda for a while was
lost, so was one of the strangers, he brought her from the bottom, I beheld her
in one arm quite lifeless borne; while the other gentleman assisted Celio, and
we were soon all taken on bo^rd our preservers boat.


Flav. Oh my prophetic dream! who are those strangers that thou talk of?


Ser. I cannot tell, they are not of this country born.


Flav. Whoever they are, this generous act does show their nobleness of soul,
and the preservers of my child and brother, shall find my gratitude will not be
bounded. ( Enter FLORINDA, CELIO, WALTER, HENRY, and Attendants. Florinda
rushes into Flavio's arms, they embrace in speechless rapture.) My child! my
Florinda! and do I then from the grave embrace my child. ( Turns to his
brother.) -- Celio what miracle has preserved thee?


Cel. Florinda and myself, to those worthy gen^lemen owe our lives; they leap't
into the jaws of death to save us.


Flav^ Welcome my friends, my preservers, for ^o I shall ever call ye; -- This
house is thine, and all that it contains. Which of those two gentlemen
pre^erved my child?


Wall. Neither; to providence who ever protects the innocent you are indebted,
not to us.


Flav. From your ready, ingenious, generous answer, you are the preserver of my
child. ( To Henry) You the preserver of my brother; my study shall be ^ver how
to cancel the debt of gratitude I owe you.


Wall. It Is already cancelled; for the joy, the heart felt joy of rescuing a
lovely female from de^truction, vibrates with such emotion in my breast, ^ feel
myself indebted for the opportunity.


Flav. Indeed you wrong yourself; but during our stay in Padua, my house must
be your home -- ^ cannot take a denial.


Wall. 'Twould be an ill compliment indeed for us to refuse your candid
invitation, I answer for my friend.


Flav. Gentlemen, you doubtless need refreshment, and likely you wish to be
alone, we'll therefore leave you for a short time together. -- Exeunt all but
Henry and Walter, Florinda last.


Hen. Well Walter we are in a devil of a predicament at present.


Wall. How so my friend?


Hen. Do you recollect my telling you of a beautiful lady to whom I had paid my
addresses in this place?


Wall. ( alarmed.) This is not I hope --


Hen. Why are you in love with her?


Wall. I knew what you would say, I now am the most miserable of mortals; were
any body my rival but yourself, I could have endured it with greater fortitude;
but she has your heart; whether or no, to you my friend I resign my claim; you
have the prior right.


Hen. Ha, ha. ha, -- Walter I did not think you had got touched so soon.


Wall. Don't laugh at me. ( looks dejected.)


Hen. You remember laughing at me on the same subject I suppose. -- But our
business is of a nature something serious, which when known may be attended
with dangerous consequences.


Wall. Oh that I had never seen her!


Hen. Then you would not have saved her.


Wall. That confutes me -- Oh love! love! how powerful is thy operation!


Hen. Did you ever see any thing that wore a petticoat but you fell immediately
in love with it?


Wall. That was love of a more vulgar specie, this is as different as daylight
and darkness -- full of the most tender refined feelings. Oh that you were not
my rival!


Hen. I am not your rival.


Wall. Is it not to her then that --


Hen. No on my soul.


Wall. [Exultingly.] Then I am completely happy; ^ay what you will you cannot
hurt me now. ( Enter waiter with wine.)


Hen. Before I proceed, a toast -- may America, whose basis is virtue, soar
uncontaminated above the ^actious enemies of its Independence. [drinks.]


Wall. [Drinks.] [ they fill again.) I should have ^oasted cupid; but I ought
never to forget the land of my nativity. I Will drink to the memory of America's
^^lustrious chief -- the immortal Washington! [ both ^rink.]


Hen. Now to my story. This Celio is father to Isabella, my fair enchantress;
he is brother to Flavio; and Flavio is father to Lorenzo, who fell beneath ^our
sword.


Wall. Good Heaven! [much agitated.]


Hen. I had no opportunity of telling you this before.


Wall. And I am the murderer of this good man's ^on, and shall the murderer find
refuge under the ^^thers roof?


Hen. You are no murderer! you saved his daughter!


Wall. O, had the son inherited one spark of the ^onor which blazons in every
word and action of his ^re, I would have been proud indeed, to own him for
brother, though in the grave; he was brother to Flo^^nda, him I have killed, and
her I have saved from ^eath. But for her to call me, by the tender name (...)
husband, that killed her brother, that can never be!


Hen. Consider of the vile cause in which he fell.


Wall. All, all I grant, and Flavio's pardon I ^^uld no doubt obtain, if he
should know the real ^^use, but for his, and his daughters sake, that must ^e
never known to him.


Hen. What Is to be done?


Wall. We'll leave the house immediately.


Hen. Let me advise; 'twould be better that we stay a few days, f^r fear of
suspicion; your ready acceptance of his invitation; our intention, stayin^ some
weeks in Padua, you told to Celio.


Wall. I am bewildered, do thou direct me.


Enter FLAVIO in tears, with a letter in his hand. Flav. Oh my son! my son
Lorenzo!


Wall. [aside.] It Is as I expected, the news ha^^ already arrived. Shall I
discover myself to him?


Hen. As you value your life do not.


Wall. I will. Let fate do with me what it may*


Flav. I have a son! excuse these tears; an unfortunate son! who fell by an
unknown person^ hand, nearly deprived of life.


Wall. [aside.] Then he is not dead! kind fortune, for that I thank thee. Is his
recovery expected*


Flav. Engaged in a duel, he received a deep though not a mortal wound, (it is
hoped^ from his adversary; should he recover, he will ^oon be here with Don
Pedras, his friend.


Wall. The person is now under your own roof, from whom your son received his
wound.


Flav. You astonish me! What do you mean?


Wall. I am that person; he received his woun^ from no hand but mine.


Flav. I cannot believe -- though I know not why you should tell me false.


Hen. Flavio you doubt. I was second to my friend on the unfortunate occasion.


Wall. I wish a hearing before you condemn me truth shall dictate my tongue. I
will tell the re^ cause without abatement of the smallest circumstanc^


Flav. Let us then to the adjoining chamber, a^^ there before my child and
brother relate the whole. Though death to my son had been the result of the
^^arrel, I must still have looked upon thee as the ^eserver of my child
Florinda.


^CENE II -- Severe lightening, Thunder, rain and high winds. -- Inside of a
ROBBER'S CAVE. A ^amp suspended by a chain, casts a dim light throughout the
gloomy cavern. Guns, Pistols, Swords, etc. ^a^e hanging in different parts of
this dreary vault. -- The Banditti drinking and carrousing.
A GRAND CHORUS BY THE BAND.
The whistling winds, the washing rain,
The distant thunders roar,
While we the traveller do ^btain,
To rob him of his store.
Though death surround us we'll not fear,
No danger do we know,
Priestcraft is treason to our ear,
We fear no future woe.
At midnight some will go to rest,
Stretched on a flinty stone;
The owl is screeching in her nest,
While others they are gone,
Exploring paths in woods to fright,
And plunder all they meet;
Though lightning's flash does dim our sight,
We none do fear we meet.
So now to rest our wearied bones,
We'll lay ourselves along,
Upon this vaulted cavern's stones,
To which we all belong,
^anditti lay themselves down in different parts of Cave.) Enter Don PEDRAS
very melancholy; arms folded, hi^ eyes bent to the ground; a dreadful crash is
heard be ^arts and looks round wildly. Ped. What a tremendous shock! What blue
vivid s^r^^ks of light! -- ( The storm abates.) -- To wha^ a desperate fortune
was I born! ( pauses.) The nigh^ is now far spent, the Wolf, in hungry tone for
prey is howling loud amid he tumultuous elements; the screeching owl upon the
leafless spray, in discor^ grates the ear; and, to imagination, the yawning
graves gape wide, and sepu^chres their gnashing spec^res send from worlds
unknown with horrible profusion! -- This rocky mansion, deep cavern'd in the
cliff, owns me for its master, and many dire villai^ with me leagued, from the
world outcast, inured (...) toil and barbarous assassination! -- Oh could I
retrac^ my steps! that is impossible. If like Byblis I could weep 'twould not
wash my sins away; 'twould only mock my own despair! If at this late period of
life heaven would forgive my sins, I Would yield my body (...) its mother earth,
and the most tormenting ^angs (...) death would be light to what I here on
earth endure* For eight long years have I been Captain of this cu^ throat
assembly; none yet has found me cut, not eve^ Lorenzo my bosom friend, have I
entr^sted. -- The storm is hushed; no more blue lightenings now wi^ thwart me
in my walk -- The verdant leaves upon t^^ towering oak row newly washed, will
give a whol^ some scent, and make meditation sweet. -- Exit.


A noise. Whis^le is heard. Part of the Band bei^^ upon a scout find OBADIAH
AMINIDAB BROA^BR^M, and bring him in the Cave. The band ^^ rise. 1 st. Robber.
Come along you hypocritical broa^brim shaker.


Ami. Yea; verily I say unto thee, I have no more ^ieces of silver.


2 nd. Damme but you have got gold mayhap, and ^^at will do as well. Come, come
don't be bashful ^ff with your clothes.


Ami. Would thou have me naked? then the wife ^f my bosom would know me not.


3 d. We'll leave you your shirt, for I like to be ^^cent d^mme.


Ami. I perceive thou do* -- thou art a decent ^^uth!


2 nd. Come come, off with your breeches, and ^our coat.


Ami. If thou layest violent hands upon my breech^^ thou will behold nothing
but nakedness; and when return unto Tabitha the wife of my bosom she would ^^ke
advantage of my lamentable situation, and smite ^e sore; which though against
my persuation would ^ake me to dance, yea verily outrageous would I ^ance to
Tabitha's music!


2 nd. Then I see force must be used.


Ami. Stay friend, stay, I have something to say ^o thee, will melt thy heart
to pity!


3 d. You Would be puzzled to do that.


Ami. "A man may catch cold while his breeches ^ mending," but if he waits
'till he gets a new ^ir 'twil^ give him a sore throat.


1 st. Come my hearties we'll give this chap a trial, ^ppoint a judge, and a
lawyer to plead on each side.


Ami. "You cannot make a silken purse out of a ^w's ear."


1 st. You shall be judge. ( To one of the Band.) -- You have got the biggest
belly.


Ami. "Fat paunches make lean pates," I choose ^hin, wise, discree^ man, that
will do justice. -- ( Points to one very emaciated.)


1 st. He has been sick for a month; he is nothing but skin and bone, he wont
speak ten words in an hour.


Ami. "Many words do not fill a bushel."


2 nd, A damned impudent quaker as ever I knew.


Ami. I talk of chalk and you of cheese.


4 th. I Will be your lawyer.


Ami. "Proffered service stinks," -- I Will plead my own cause.


1 st. I Will be lawyer in defense of the state, so no more of your jawing tacks
old fellow 'till we begin; big belly sit you there -- Broadbrim s^and you there
-- ( raises him on a stone, the Band arrange themselves on each side.) G^mmen
of the Jury --


Ami. "Every man thinks his own Geese Swans."


Judge. I believe it be my turn to speak first Mr. Lawyer. -- Gemmen of the
Jury, what do you think of this damned impudent fellow now before you?


Ami. That Is me. What do thou most honorable Judge and Jury lay to my charge?


2 nd. In the first place we robbed ^im.


Ami. "Give him rope enough and he will hang himself."


2 nd. But the heaviest charge your honor, is, after we took from him what
money he had, we could find no more.


Judge. Give me the sum. ( The money is given to him.)


Ami. "The receiver is as bad as the thief." -- Restore it unto me, restore it
to its rightful owner, and thou shall be rewarded tenfold. -- ( aside.) -- With
a halter each I verily hope. Then acquit the jury, "where vice goes before,
vengeance follows after."


Judge. How many were concerned in robbing this fellow?


2 nd. There were four of us.


Ami. "Many hands make light work."


2 nd. But I could have done it as easy alone.


Ami. Thou could not friend.


2 nd What! do you challenge me?


Ami. If I had thee alone with my money in thy ^^cket, I would struggle with
thee -- yea verily I ^ould struggle with thee hard!


2 nd. Mr. Judge do you hear this?


Judge. He is right.


1 st. I think for my part we ought to give him a ^^od flogging and let him go.


2 nd. I Will give it him alone.


Omnes. Bravo! bravo! come down, come down.


Ami. ( Appears very much terrifi^d.)
2 nd. ( Strips himself ready for fighting.) I like to have like a gemmen, I
take no advantage, you ^y strip likewise.


Ami. Most noble Judge, what will be thy sen^^^ce if I smite this Philistine;


Judge. Your money back, and go about your ^^^iness.


Ami. Then I will buffet with iniquity.


^ nd. [Is stripped.] Come make yourself ready, off (...) your coat.


Ami. I can smite thee sore with my robes wrapped (...) me.


^ nd. Come on then. [ Aminidab advances in a (...) pace, and turns one cheek
toward him, which ^trikes with his hand,]


^mi. The spirit begins to move. ( Turns the (...) cheek, which he strikes
likewise. AMINIDAB, (...) till now kept his hands before him, raises his right
(...) and with a severe blow fells him lifeless to the ground.)


judge. There is your money. ( throws the purse (...).) Banditi shout, Bravo!
bravo! bravo!


Ami. "Save a thief from hanging and he will cu^^ your throat." He did provoke
me to wrath, and I could not abide it. Exit.


Judge. He is not killed quite, is he?


3 d. Oh no! pour a b^ttle of rum down his throat, and he will come too in a
twinkling. ( Pour^ rum in his mouth.)


2 nd. ( rising.) Oh dam the Quaker! ( they carry him off. A whistle is heard.)


3 d. What somebody else* no more sanctification I hope.


Enter BANDITTI, dragging in LORENZO. 5th. Off with your clothes, you have more
money*


Lor. Who is your Captain!


5th. As brave a man as ever cut a throat.


Lor. Where is he?


5th. Nigh enough for you, my tight one. Yo^ unruly temper must be curbed; the
bastinadoes mus^ be your lot for supper. Comrades, suppose we tie hi^ up, and
give him a few stripes, 'twill do his bod^ good, 'twill allay his choler.


Omnes. Agreed! ( they attempt to seize him, (...) snatches a pistol from the
ground.)


Lor. Stand off! the man that stirs one step to^wards me dies!


6th. Have at you then, my tight lad. ( Lore^^^ kills him, and the rest rush
upon him.)


Enter DON PEDRAS. Ped. What alarm is this?


Lor. Surely I should know that voice.


5th. This villain has shot one of our best co^^rades dead.


Ped. Away with him to the rack! tear hi^ by p^ecemeal. How happen^d all this?


5th. Captain I Will tell you. As we were on o^ ^^out, not far from this, the
other side the hill, we ^ized him, got some money, suspecting he had more, ^e
were determined to bring him before your honor, ^^en soon as he entered, in a
devil of a fury, grap^ed one of the pistols, and said the first that ad^^nced
toward him should die upon the spot. When ^^bio, who long since has had the
credit of being ^e best Robber in our band, endeavored to seize (...), whom he
instantly shot dead.


Ped. Then let the rack appease our Fabio's manes: ^t tear out his tongue!


Lor. Can I believe my eyes? Can it be possible, ^n Pedras is captain here?


Ped. Away with him!


Lor. [With great emotion.] Yes away with (...)! tear out my tongue, quick!
Then place me on the ^eel! Let me be an age in torture! Let thy heavy ^ns break
the bones of him, whose friendship for ^e would never have ceased till death!
root out my ^s, and in their bleeding sockets pour hot burning (...)! then my
last dying groans, shall call down cur^on Don Pedras' head, with dreadful echo
through (...) dreary vault!


Ped. [Confused and abashed.] Lorenzo!


^or. You know me -- well enough you know me. (...) in this world my time is
short; to the last will prove thy treachery! Is this the friendship thou ^essed
for me? Here a Captain of Banditti, with (...) hired slaves to entrap thy
dearest friend. What (...) I done, Don Pedras, to merit this from thee?


^ed. I am all astonishment! Lorenzo I never ^ht thy life, but to the last
would have stood ^^xt thee and any harm, but --


^or. But, what? excuse not thy perfidy, ungrate^an.


^ed. Lorenzo, hear me; shou^dst thou condemn then I have done. ( to Banditti.)
Withdraw awhile, and leave to me this stranger. ( they with draw.) I knew not
that they had seized and brough^ thee hither, till thy declamatory speech --


Lor. Why are those base wretches under the command?


Ped. Thy friendship I esteemed, and looked upon thee as my only real friend;
but now to clear my self -- I must contaminate the air, with that which f^^
many years has been mouldering in my cankered brea^


Lor. What is it you mean? be quick to tell me.


Ped. Wonder not, should thou behold tears star^^ing from my eyes 'ere I have
done. Eight yea^ have now elapsed, since when all the world was (...) silence
bush'd, and none bore witness but the silv^^ moon, who trembling stood in
expectation the some favoring cloud would screen her from the ho^ sight! --
every night that I behold her now, she see^ to accu^e me. -- O! could I spare
myself the dread^ reci^al!


Lor. Go on. ( anxiously.)


Ped. I loved a maid, of parentage none m^ oppulent -- O faithless woman! each
moment I passe^ when not with her seemed to me miserable indeed. I had her
parents sanction to my love; likew^^^ here is -- the happy day was fixed -- the
night previ^ to performing the intended nuptial ceremony, I w^ to her father's
house, quite unexpected, for I had out to invite some friends, a little
distant, but (...) carriage breaking down, I perforce returned; innocent old
sire told me his daughter (...) a^one in the garden, taking the evenings
refre^^^ing breeze, and requested me to join her. For some time I paced the
garden round, and n^^ing could perceive, searching each arbor, hoping find my
love; at last I heard the voice of a man a low whisper; not even then did I
suspect Amen an answer from a female struck me dumb, and lik^ ^tue fixed, I
stood immovable knowing the voice ^be here is! soon as from my astonishment I
recovered, ^lowly crept, guided by their whisper, till I placed ^yself behind
the very bower where those two lovers (...); by the moons light, I behold them
lock^d in each ^ers arms, he stealing the nectar from off her ruby (...); she
told him the only cause why she gave her con^t to marry me, was that by him she
was pregnant, ^^^wing that each convenient time when I should be ^ent, to grant
him still the privilege he had (...) often taken! Oh! then what fiery
indignation (...) disgust possessed my every faculty! -- nor could I ^^rce
collect myself but to believe 'twas all a dream. ^is night said she, will be
the last that we'll be in^ate, until I lay in the arms of Don Pedras. Before
(...) eyes he clasped her round the waist, and tasted ^t bliss ineffable that I
so long impatient waited for; that dire moment, did I send them both to fathom^
perdition! I drew my sword, and with one thrust ^rced to the heart, my
faithless love, and by ad^g to my name, that of Fratricide, I have forfeited
(...) my peace of mind this side the grave, for he I (...) sacrificed, was my
only brother!


Lor. Did thou know him to be thy brother, thou did kill him?


Ped. No, not till after the fatal blow was struck. ^ that I had died, ever my
arm had been raised to ^mit so fell an act. I had the steel already raised,
(...) reeking with my brothers blood, and that of (...) more dear than life I
loved, to strike in my own ^om! but the almighty willed it otherwise -- my ^es
relaxed, and forgot their office -- I had not the ^er to revenge their deaths.
'Twas then I swore, ^e revenged on man; therefore, this band of ^oes have I
selected, where in this craggy cave I (...), with them at intervals, but, to
torment mankind (...) make them wretched as myself. You alone, do count my
friend, for you I Would lay down my life.


Lor. Did you never confess your guilt?


Ped. Never to a human being, until now, I alarm^ed the family; not the least
suspicion had they of (...) guilt: the old man ran mad, and expired in a fe^
days; her mother of a broken heart, died soon; a^ all were buried in one vault
together.


Lor. I wonder thou have never told me this bef^^^*


Ped. Finding in this wicked age such dishonest that angels face with a devils
heart; my own bro^^^^ to deceive me too; meth^ught then honesty a pl^ thing,
for saints to make a jest of. Can thou for give me.


Lor. An unmeaning insult forgives itself. (...) to see thee in a place like
this, afflicts me much.


Ped. All I grant, is infamous indeed. But ca^ thou still look upon me as thy
friend?


Lor. On one condition.


Ped. Name it?


Lor. That you desert these felons.


Ped. Should I do so, they would betray me, a^ a death of infamy, would be the
consequence.


Lor. I know not how to advise. We will confe^^ and on something determine,
e're we return fr^^ Padua. The wound I received is now so well I thi^^ I may
with safety venture.


Ped. We will loose no time in hastening o^ departure. ( Pedras sounds his
whistle. Banditti rise a^ come forward. An Earthquake is heard. Thun^^^ and
Lightning.) Hark! the storm again begins!

CHORUS.
The distant thunder's roaring, the blue lightnings vivid fl^
And ^ockey mountains fall from high, hark! hark! (...) dreadful crash;
The earth does tremble beneath us, oh! pardon us our si^
Oh ye G^ds! the caveit falls,
On our heads! oh! save our souls!
^^av^n have mercy! pardon our sins! Back part of the Cave falls, with a
dreadful (...); through the vacancy is seen a Vulcano, emitt^ fire, red hot
stones, sulphu^, etc.
(...) earthquake's uncap'd the mountain's top, see fire ^^rsting forth!
(...) burning lumps of sulphur are bel^h'd from out the earth,
(...) f^rmament seems all on fire, the red hot stones do fall,
Here and there, every where,
Whilst the earth en^ombs us all.
^The earth opens and swallows up part of the band; rest exit with Lorenzo and
Pedras.)
ACT III.
SCENE I -- Padua, a room in FLAVIO'S house.
FLAVIO and FLORINDA meeting. Flav. Now Florinda, what suit is this?


Flor. It Is a foolish one indeed, and I dare say ^en I tell you what it is,
you will only laugh at me my offici^usness.


Flav. Tell me.


Flor. I know you will say I am in love but I ^^w I am not.


Flav. What;


Flor. Do not look so severe at me.


Flav. Say on.


Flor. I only wish to intercede in behalf of your (...) guests, that on account
of the foolish quarrel they ^e had with my brother* they may not leave us ^n he
arrives.


Flav. Your brother Lorenzo, and his friend Don Pedras have arrived already,
and all is amicably settled.


Flor. Arrived! Oh when?


Flav. Even now. I left them in the adjoining chamber.


Flor. Is he quite recovered then?


Flav. His countenance is somewhat changed.


Flor. They now no more are enemies. I rejoice to hear it.


Flav. Lorenzo confessed himself in fault.


Flor. Let me hasten to congratulate him on his preservation.


Flav. Stay, they begged the time alone. Why should thou become the mediator
of those strangers?


Flor. Have I not a cause? Would it not be unkind to let them leave the house
'till they depart from Padua entirely?


Flav. ( aside.) I fear her interest is turned to something more tender -- It Is
gratitude you feel.


Flor. I don't know what it is, but I never felt so in my life before. I like
Henry --


Flav. I thought Walter --


Flor. I was going to say, I like Henry, and so I do Walter: but I think Walter
the handsomest.


Flav. I think not.


Flor. Henry preserved my uncle's life, for that, should I not be grateful?
when I look at Walter, I feel gratitude, and something else, but that something
is not love, for love they say, is a sensation of pleasure; now mine is
different, for my heart makes such a thumping, whenever he speaks to me, I
believe if he should talk long at a time, 'twould nearly kill me.


Flav. ( aside.) It Is as I suspected. But I will be sure, I Will try her
friendship toward Pedras. -- How do you like Don Pedras?


Flor. Not at all.


Flav. He that is come to take possession of your hand and heart?


Flor. You are not really serious.


Flav. Yes.


Flor. Fain would I think that you were not* you have often spoke of him, I
have as (...) that I detested even the sight of him.


Flav. I will not insist upon your marrying him.


Flor. Thanks! thanks my dear father, thanks!


Flav. But you must take your choice, marry him, or have to husband*


Flor, I will have no husband then.


Flav. Or go ^o a Nunnery.


Flor. To a Nunnery! ( affected.)


Flav. Pedras, or the Nunnery. Farewell, and remember Pedras is of high birth
and distinction; -- marry him and you will be ever happy, I Will send him to you.
-- Exit.


Flor. O do not! -- Well, I suppose he will come, and I must prepare to receive
him. -- How? in what manner? shall I entreat him not to persist in his
addresses? no, that will encourage him to continue, hoping in time to make a
conquest -- that will never do! -- When he comes I Will laugh at him, and then he
will be glad to make a speedy exit. Birth, and distinction! empty baubles, like
the dew, with the sunny beams, they waste away. Are we not all mortal? riches
purchase titles, but titles cannot purchase wisdom; titles are set as baits for
sycophants to bite at.


Enter DON PEDRAS. FLORINDA looks dejected with face averted. Ped. Why this
pensive, thoughtless, listless state my love? should thou not fly with the
wings of love, into thy Pedras' arms?


Flor. O, is it you? I was thinking of something of consequence.


Ped. Why so very grave?


Flor. It Is a way I have, when people become troublesome.


Ped. Surely you cannot mean me, somebody affronted you before I came into the
room.


Flor. You would wish to think so, no doubt.


Ped. I cannot think otherwise, for surely you would not wish to make a
sacrifice of him who lives but in thy smiles.


Flor. Could you not say something more flattering? could you not compare my
eyes to stars, my brows to the arched heavens, my cheeks and lips to the damask
rose; my teeth to ivory; my skin to monumental alabaster; my breath to
jessamine? -- Then you might have hopes. Ha! ha! ha!


Ped. Confusion!


Flor. ( mimmics him.) Confusion! make no apology. But why should so gallant a
man as you be confused? a real man of spirit never is. Why don't you begin with
your die-away speeches? lovers always pay compliments, deserving or not
deserving they think we take them all -- Ha! ha! ha!


Ped. I love you -- I sincerely love you.


Flor. ( with affected gravity.) Do you really love me?


Ped. By heavens!


Flor. How do you feel when you are in love?


Ped. I feel a peturbation, and uneasiness in mind.


Flor. ( very seri^us.) I am in love.


Ped. Angelic sound! with me?


Flor. By your description of the effects of love, ^t must be so, for I have
been uneasy since I first ^eard of your arrival, and still remain so; I shall
not ^el right I Am sure till --


Ped. Till when? [anxious.]


Flo. Till you leave the room.


Ped. Is this then my reception? is this the return passion from a woman, whom
I so sincerely loved?


Flo. No man on earth, do I more sincerely hate, ^an thee Don Pedras.


Ped. Damnation. [exit.]


Flor. Ha, ha, ha, since laughing has so good an ^fect, I will laugh him out of
one room into another, ^l at last, he will be very glad to quit the house
en^^rely. If my father insists upon my marrying him, that will become of me?
Oh, here comes Walter.


Enter WALTER. Wall. The quarrel between your brother and my^f, is fairly
settled.


Flor. The joyful tidings reached my ear before ^u came; my father --


Wall. Would that I had brought it first.


Flor. Wherefore?


Wall. It gives me pleasure to announce any thing ^t pleases you.


Flor. I think I like you better than I ever did.


Wall. What do I hear?


Flor. My father has been here; he says I must ^rry Don Pedras, or he will send
me to a nunnery. -- ^ould prefer you indeed.


Wall. Would you?


Flor. I think I should be always happy when you near me.


Wall. Florinda! [transported.]


Flor. The idea of leaving you, to be shut up in ^loistered convent, hurt me so
much, that when Don Pedras came a wooing to me, I affronted him, and he left
the room quite angry.


Wall. Is he then my rival? This candor compels me to tell you what a sacrifice
you have made since the first time your eyes beamed their kindness on me, my
heart within told me wherever I strayed, Florinda reigned sole umpire here. (
Lays his hand on his heart.) And never till now, have I more then vented my
passion with my sighs.


Flor. [nearly weeping.] Will you, will you, protect me!


Wall. Should your father persist; to me if you fly for refuge, my arms shall
open wide to give you welcome.


Flor. But not to be dishonored?


Wall. Witness for me heaven.


Flor. Whither would you conduct me?


Wall. To America, my love, my native land, where liberty and love reigns, with
uncontrouled dominion.


Flor. Though I love my reverend relatives much rather than forget you, I could
leave them all, and range the wild and desolate scorching sands, or tos^
forever on the foaming surge -- then in each storm when destruction arround us
threatens, and billow dash our shattered bark to pieces; in each others arm^
embracing death -- I would not envy any that I le^ behind.


Wall. O! exquesite transport!


Flor. Do not abuse my candor*


Wall. Abuse! forbid it heaven; every silver ton^ that has escaped thy lips, is
imperishably grafted i^ my heart.


Flor. I hear some one coming; farewell for the present, we will talk more
anon. -- ( Exit.)


Wall. Adieu my love.


Enter HENRY. Hen. Success, my dear fellow, has crowned my toil,
notwithstanding Celio has denied me his house. I am now happy as a prince.
Isabella has sent me a ^etter; here it is my dear boy. ( reads the letter.)

"Since your arrival, my father has confined me in a room, there to remain
'till I consent to marry Lorenzo; therefore come to my house at twelve this
night, and we will consult our future fortune. Behind the ^ouse there is a
ladder, by which means you may with ^afety enter my chamber; the window I will
leave ^pen to prevent mistakes. I would not put you to this ^rouble, could I
any other way admit you.

Yours 'till death, ISABELLA."


What think you, am I not before you?


Wall. Not you indeed, we are only even; for my ^harmer left the room as you
entered. I Have gained a ^omplete victory, she capitulated without a summons.


Hen. All honorable I hope.


Wall. Do you think that I mean otherwise.


Hen. Your meaning I do not doubt is honorable, ^ut it is necessary at times, a
gentle hint should be ^iven, lest hurried by youthful passions, the well
meaning may be plunged in guilt; though of a de^^ghtful moment duration, is a
sin of the greatest mag^itude committed by man.


Wall. I like your sentiments, though something of a ^^bertine myself; where I
have been I left no proofs ^ehind, that I could accuse myself of wronging the
^^nocent.


Hen. To take advantage of an innocent partiali^y, which being fanned by the
breath of affection, ^pens into that of love; the person so depraved, if he
casts a retrospective glance, on the beloved object who fell a victim to his
perfidy, left to buffet the harsh world alone, robbed of that precious jewel,
which all the riches of the eastern world could not purchase an equivalent,
must be a hardened villain indeed, whose conscience would not recoil upon
himself.


Wall. Enough of sentiment Mr. Moralist, if you please. Now for something of a
more lively turn. -- My Florinda has informed me Flavio insists upon her
marrying Don Pedras, but I have nothing to fear, she will go with me wherever
my will directs.


Hen. Are you sure of that?


Wall. Quite sure! her unaffected sorrow pierced my heart; the pearly drops
stole from her lovely cheeks, as she vowed eternal constancy and love.


Hen. I do not doubt the affections of Isabella, and let us speedy as posible
obtain their hands, and we will all embark for America together.


Wall. Does not your conscience which you so often speak of, prick you, when you
think of stealing Celio's daughter?


Hen. If I obtain her by her own consent, I have lawfully that, which I rescued
from the ravishers gripe. But though I saved Celio's life, he refuses me
admittance to his house, fearing his daughter most certain; many would accuse
me of ingratitude, but when I have possession of Isabella, the debt is
cancelled! will you accompany me with our servants at the hour appointed?


Wall. Ask what you will I am yours.


Hen. Armed with Cupid's dart, we fear no evil, From mortal man, or demi devil.


SCENE II. -- A room in FLAVIO'S House.
Enter LORENZO and PEDRAS, conversing. Lor. Thou counsellest well, but to
contrive their destruction --


Ped. They both shall die! I never will brook a rival.


Lor. Nor I. What had best be done?


Ped. Poison is safest.


Lor. We will keep up appearances of friendship. Rather overact our parts than
our sincerity should be doubted. The night when we attempted to take Isabella
by force, when so many of my friends were slain by this American, my rival,
lives implacable still in my breast, and fires me to my revenge. By his
interposition was I deprived of her. I had the good fortune to escape unknown,
and still live to plot more mischief -- to over turn their deep laid love plots
by a speedy murder. Then my friend to crown the work, Florinda shall be thy
reward, and Isabella mine.


Ped. Should I hope to gain her, I Would leave no plan unthought of, that might
border on success; her disdainful reception of me this morning, almost drives
me mad; and every idea is on Florinda and my detested rival. Farewell, I Will to
my chamber, and dream of mischief till the morning. (EXIT.)


Lor. [looking after him with a contemptous smile.] Sound may thou sleep, had
I my wish, indeed so sound, that thy immortal parts, the devil might call his
own, before the morrows dawn. My friend! it is well enough to call thee so, till
an opportunity invites to put it beyond thy reach to do me service or
disservice. Oh Pedras, unfortunate for thee, that I have found thee out^ I
loved thee once, it is true, but now my mind is much altered. Hate is imperious,
it scourges friendship from my bosom with a scorpion lash; and in its
legitimate natal palace, uprears his usurping disloyal diadem. Should we
succeed in exterminating our rivals; Don Pedras, I will take good care, shall
not outlive their deaths so long as to take my sister to his bed. -- The family
to be poluted by him! yet am I not equally as bad? aye worse, if possible! but
still unknown to all but Pedras. Truly, the two Americans have but little cause
to believe me honest, but for their own sakes, they will not tell how basely
they were treated by me. Don Pedras appears to me a faithful friend -- so do I
to him. He like myself, may wear the mask of friendship only, which now
necessity commands; be that as it may, I am resolved, fixed, and imovable --
though remorse increase, as sins accumulate, I cannot now avoid the worst.


Enter FLORINDA. ( anxiously.) Flor. My Brother! I have longed much to see you
-- you look quite altered.


Lor. I am out of all danger -- the wound I received, though deep, touched no
vital part; and by a Surgeon's timely aid I soon got better.


Flor. Indeed! I am rejoiced to hear it, I could not content myself 'till I had
seen you.


Lor. And I am happy, in seeing time, so favorably has wrought a lovely
impression on thy countenance.


Flor. I wish you to speak in my behalf; the joy of seeing you, put it almost
out of my head.


Lor. Any think in Lorenzo's power --


Flor. I do not doubt it. I wish you to pacify my father; and intercede for me
with him, He is very angry with me because I do not love Don Pedras, who I
think looks like a very wicked man.


Lor. Does he insist upon your marrying him?


Flor. Oh no, he does not insist, he gives me a choice.


Lor. Why, that is generous!


Flor. Don Pedras, or the Nunnery. Will you not disuade him from so severe a
sentence? I like your enemy, that was, very much.


Lor. For what do you love him?


Flor. Did he not save my life?


Lor. That is but gratitude, he raised his hand against mine.


Flor. You confessed yourself in error, and you now are friends*


Lor. I do not plead in Don Pedras's cause, I do not wish either to become thy
husband.


Flor. Hear then, the fate of the ill starred maid:

SONG -- FLORINDA.
IN Venice dwelt a peerless maid,
Her birth distinction did allow,
Her father fearful she would degrade,
His honored house by one too low;
He bent his mind, on one of birth quite great,
To be for life, his lovely daughter's mate.
Poor hapless girl, already she,
Had given her virgin heart to one,
Of Plebeian rank, and low degree,
But mind magnanimous had grown;
When to her father's ears, this marriage came,
He spurned her forth, to penury and shame.
In durance vile her husband sent,
In chains he pined his life away,
His wife now starving does lament,
And houseless walk the livelong day;
By charity alone she got her bread*
One morning in the street, she was found dead.
A living infant at her breast,
Was nurtured by the mother still,
Her father made of this a jest,
But he was punis'd, hear the will;
His house with elemental fire, was burned,
Among the ruins, he next day was found.

Exit. SCENE III -- (Time night.) The outside of CELIO'S House, very
magnificent. Iron fence, the large Iron gate wide open. Two lamps each side the
gate are lighted.
Enter WALTER and HENRY, with SERVANTS. Hen. Thus far all is safe enough -- the
gate is open, punctual to her word -- but I do not much like those lighted
lamps.


Wall. You need apprehend no danger of a discovery, for every thing is silent.


Hen. I perceive there are two windows open, likely they both lead into my
Isabella's chamber.


Wall. You mistake, for lo a light breaks through only one.


Hen. That must be here is, she has lighted the room for fear I should mistake.


Wall. It Would be a commical joke should it be old Celio's chamber.


Hen* What is the hour?


Wall. ( goes up to the lamps and looks at his watch.) It Is twelve by my watch
-- the city clock has not yet struck.

We will now search for the ladder she spoke of in her letter. ( Exit on the
opposite side that they entered.)


CELIO with nightgown and cap, appears at his window. Cel. Methought I heard
somebody's voice under my window, speaking in a low tone! it is somewhat strange
at this late hour! I see nobody! whoever they may be, they are after no good, I
will be sworn. ( looks round.) All is silent -- could I be deceived? could it
be fancy? it must be so, ( Celio disappears.)


ISAB^^LA appears at her window. Clock strikes twelve. Isa. The clock has
struck, and no appearance of my Henry ye^; could he have forgot the time? Oh!
should he not come to night, my hopes will be forever blighted! ( Celio appears
at the window.)


Cel. Isabella!


Isa. ( looking around alarmed.) Did you call? ( sees Celio.)


Cel. For shame child, you will be sick! shut ^he window and go to bed. The
night air is very bad.


Isa. It being so intensely warm I could not sleep, and therefore I opened the
window to enjoy the even^ngs refreshing air.


Cel. Exactly my case.


Isa. ( aside.) If my Henry should come now, ^twould ruin all. Had not you
better go to bed?


Cel. Go you to bed. I shall not, this hour.


Isa. Do you go to bed, I entreat. The evening ^amps, the wind wafts, and being
to their prejudice ^xposed, the relaxed fibers, sucks in the poisonous ^ir* and
shoot through the whole frame.


Cel. If so, let me ask why thou do at this late our, expose thyself?


Isa. ( aside.) How provoking! you should take more care than one that is young,
the vital spirits of ^ealthy youth renders the system impervious,


Cel. Why this anxiety? you were not wont to ^e so extravagant in your
arguments: you wish to be ^ntirely alone, I suppose, to indulge your romantic
^deas, and give room to your thoughts.


Isa. ( aside.) No, but I would wish to give thoughts to my room. -- I entreat
you to go in, it is indeed for your sake that --


Cel. Then for your sake shut the window, and go instantly to bed.


Isa. The heat is suffocating!


Cel. Methought I heard somebody under my window; some robbers may hap,
intending to run away with my estate, or ravish my daughter. In, in, I say!


Isa. ( aside.) Oh, misery! it must have been my faithful Henry that was here,
and now is gone for means to ascend. Oh, how I tremble, lest some mischance may
befall him.


Cel. In, in, I say, don't you hear?


Isa. I will, but do you go first.


Cel. I will not, until I see the last of you.


Isa. Unfortunate hour, good heaven protect my Henry. ( Isabella goes in, and
shuts the window.)


Cel. Isabella seems very strange and whimsical to night. Did I not know her
honest, and the iron gate being so strongly barred, I should suspect some
midnight visitors. ( Isabella opens the window slowly, Celio observes it.)


Cel. What, open again?


Isa. 'Twas the wind that forced it open, and to obey strictly your command, I
came to shut it. ( aside.) Oh, how I tremble. ( exit.)


Enter HENRY, WALTER and SERVANTS, with ladder. Cel. Ha! men with a scaling
ladder. I Will watch their motions. ( exit and leaves the window open after him.)


Hen. I am in luck to night. See, the other window is now shut, and none is
open but my fair Isabella's. Place the ladder under the opened window. ( they
place the ladder under the window.) Now come hither, ( all advance near the
front.) do you all withdraw with this my friend, and should any alarm be given,
then run to my assistance; this precaution is necessary, for fear of surprise.


Cel. ( appears with a gun at the window.) I think I will surprise some of you.
I Will give you a taste of my double barrel'd gun if you come here. ( aside and
withdraws.)


Wall. Success attend you my dear fellow.


Hen. I will not keep you waiting long: ( exit Walter and Servants.)


Henry goes to the ladder; attempts to ascend -- Celio presents his gun, and
fires, but misses him -- Celio cries, Thieves! Murder! Henry, alarmed at so
sudden an attack, springs from the ladder -- Servants rush out of Celio's
house, and attack Henry -- Walter and Servants come to Henry's relief -- drives
Celio's Servants off on one side -- they make a precipitate flight on the other
-- Isabela screaming from the window during the bustle -- Music through the
scene. ACT IV.
SCENE I. -- time Night -- the Sea Shore.
Enter LORENZO. Lor. Nights sable mantle now enrobes the world^ the dashing
waters seem to rip the shore, and ships deep freighted, plough the foaming
main; where many innocents have closed their eyes in seas unfathomable. But oh,
Florella! thy untimely death, would turn to tears, the flinty stones, and make
all honest men look pale with horror. In cupid's chains once more I Am fettered,
his magic shaft has pierced my heart so deep, naught but possession can
exterminate. My rival, ha! my successful rival; while he lives, Lorenzo dies --
dies piecemeal. The goading thought still harasses my soul, stirs up fiery
indignation strong within me, and flashes vindictive fury through my brain. One
way to escape the labyrinth is left, to Isabella's maid I Will give all powerful
gold, and she will aid me in my dark intent. At midnight, unexpected, to her
chamber I will steal, when if she reject my suit, loves furious passion will
thrice nerve my limbs, and she a victim to my love shall fall. ( exit.)


SCENE II. -- A room in CELIO'S House, in which ISABELLA is confined.
Enter CELIO. Cel. The risk we have run was great, therefore our gates shall be
double barred, that henceforth we may live free from the attack of midnight
russians, searching for their prey. Thy frght was great, but all is well again;
prithee cast off that mournful veil, which clouds thy countenance, and look
more lively, since the danger's over.


Isa. I cannot so soon get over the fear I had for your safety. [aside.] Henry
where art thou now? perhaps he has his mortal wound, and now expiring curses
the hour he listened to me.


Cel. Isabella do not turn from me, but attend to what I am going to say, with
an attentive ear, and mark me well -- for it concerns your quiet, ever after.


Isa. What is it?


Cel. Lorenzo loves you! the choice I did not intend to give you ever again. My
brother Flavio offered Florinda to marry Don Pedras, or go to a nunnery. Now I
give you your choice, to have Lorenzo, or go to a solitary convent, there to be
immured for life?


Isa. Dissembling is vain, and but increases --


Cel. What?


Isa. I cannot dissemble, I will never marry Signior Lorenzo.


Cel. Then to a nunnery you go.


Isa. ^e not so rash. -- Oh, for pity!


Cel. Yes, such pity as to the dogs I Would show; marry him, and you will be ever
happy -- his fortune is great -- a noble title too, which to posterity, would
be handed down, and be an honor to your ancestors.


Isa. My suit I Would move in Henry's favor, but that I know you would not hear me
speak -- he that saved me from the ruffians fangs, and likewise you from the
jaws of death, you cruelly forbid your house.


Cel. It Is because he loves you.


Isa. No stronger motive, nor so good a plea, can ever be found to make him
welcome.


Cel. This night is your last under my roof, it is no punishment to confine you
here, your disdain of Lorenzo when he came to visit you, with a lover's
fondness; you shall repent, and at last be glad to accept of his proffered hand!


Isa. Never would I have believed from any one else, though they had sworn it,
that you would thus have sacrificed my peace forever. Never! never, will I give
him my hand! sooner would I in charnel houses dwell, and rest my limbs upon the
worm-eaten bones of mouldering mortals; in preference to the embrace of a
loathsome man, who is an enemy to nature's sacred laws.


Cel. That is really as pretty a speech as though you had studied to make an
answer for me. Farewell; 'till the morning here you stay, after which you know
your doom. ( Exit.)


Isa What will now become of me? my Henry I Am thankful escaped unknown; I hope
unhurt; I will persuade my father to let me pass one day more under his roof,
promise to marry Lorenzo, get Henry to come at night when all is silent, once
more! Oh no, that is impossible now, the gates are doubly barred, and guarded
too! Well is there no other way? must I submit to waste my days in solitary
confinement, shut out forever from my Henry's sight? will heaven look on and
suffer this? -- ( weeps, after some time speaks again.) I think I have hit upon
a plan that may succeed; this room by that door leads into another; the windows
of which open in the garden, could I but bribe my maid to make interest with
the porter to leave the garden gate open -- I could that way easily admit him,
and he will release me from my prison. I will not loose a moments time --
Lucetta -- Enter LUCETTA. Lucetta, tomorrow I leave you, this night is my lust
in this house.


Luc. Whither are you going,


Isa. To a Nunnery!


Luc. Would I could help it.


Isa. You can.


Luc. Then tell me. If it is in my power depend upon my assistance.


Isa. Are you on good terms with the porter?


Luc. Good terms? I guess so indeed, for we are as intimate as man and wife, as
I may say.


Isa. Do you think? if you ask him, your influence is great enough to persuade
him to leave the garden gate open.


Luc. Influence indeed! -- what I ask of him he dare not deny, but I never
request more than modesty will justify.


Isa. Here is a purse for yourself, here another for the porter. -- Now I will
write a letter for you to carry to my Henry. ( sits down to write.)


Luc. ( aside.) Ecod I Will keep both purses, and make the porter do what I like
him to besides.


Isa. ( gives Lucetta the letter) Go now my faithful girl, deliver this to my
love, and return soon as possible; but be careful that you are not discovered
by any body.


Luc. You need not caution me, it is not the first time by many. [aside.] The
second bribe I have received this day; one from my lady, and one from Signior
Lorenzo, who is to come in her chamber soon; what is his business with her, is
none of mine, as long as I am paid -- but I Am afraid he will raise the devil with
her. [exit.]


Isa. Honest, faithful girl, I am now content, -- I Will dream of nothing but my
future happiness.

SONG
Oh time fly swiftly speed thy pace,
And usher in the light;
Then quickly Phoebus run thy rac^
Into the western night.
The silver moon will guide my love,
Safe in my longing arms;
He Will come like any turtle Dove,
Cooing with soft alarms.

( Isabella throws herself on the Couch and sleeps.) Enter LORENZO with light.
Lor. Lo, on the downy couch her charms! who ^ould resist so heavenly a form?
her heaving snowy ^reast might tempt a saint! Oh! that it were possi^le some
honest way to prove my true affections ^ut am I not compelled to this
extremity? has she ^ot treated me with deadly scorn? she has; and that ^o me is
excuse sufficient. When from her slumbers awaked, finding herself with me
alone, she may alarm the house, and I be caught in mine own snare -- I am
impatient, yet dread the encounter. The fatal moment has at last arrived, that
decides my happiness or my misery eternal -- [goes to the couch, takes her hand
and kisses it.] -- Oh! enthusiastic kiss! still. still asleep! -- [attempts to
kiss her lips, -- Isabella half rises up -- appears terified.]


Ias. What monster art thou?


Lor. No monster, but your willing slave.


Isa. [starting from the couch.] Then instantly leave me, or I will alarm the
house.


Lor. I will be civil.


Isa. Then show it by leaving me. How came you here?


Lor. Love's torch guided me hither. O God, what tortures are there, so
terrible, so tormenting, as uncontrouling passion?


Isa. Wretched Lorenzo!


Lor. I am indeed the veriest wretch that ever was created. Where you myriads
of miles distant from me, never would I rest, or know repose, till I had you in
possession. If you have the least pity or compassion, do not let me despair.


Isa. What Is your business with me at this late hour? It does not signify an
honest meaning -- your countenance betrays your intentions; whatever they might
have been, are now dishonorable and base; and had I ever harbored a thought to
encourage you in your suit, this one attempt to blast my honor, would banish
it forever from my bosom. [attempts to cross him to make her escape out of the
door which Lorenzo entered.]


Lor. Isabella, stay. [detains her.]


Isa. How, dare you stop me?


Lor. I cannot answer you -- I am so far advanced I cannot now retreat -- my
shame you will disclose -- my infamy, will be the sport of every bragadocia's
tongue, and every menial wretch will point at me as I pass.


Isa. If you do not let me depart, I will raise the house!


Lor. [Takes out a pistol and presents to her. Isabella bursts into tears.] If
you make the least noise, by which I shall be discovered, by heaven, you die.


Isa. What! would you have the heart to murder a defenseless woman? [after
looking sometime at each other.]


Lor. My fate is desperate! for a long time have I gazed upon those charms,
which has kindeled a flame that almost consumer me! my temper is as inexorable,
as the hyrcanian tiger. 'Twere best for you to save yourself! think of it well,
for if you refuse me now your love, this minute shall be your last.


Isa. ( Eyes him with terror, and kneels.) Now inhuman savage! glut yourself
with your own cousins blood.


Lor. [aside.] I cannot! I thought no deed too bloody for me, now to act. No I
will not kill thee; first will I improve the precious moment, then put a period
to my own existence. ( takes hold of her.)


Isa. Oh, for heavens sake, have mercy!


Lor. Your struggling is vain. Dare not to cry for help.


Isa. Kill me! Oh, kill me, but do not use me thus.


Lor. Mine you shall be, though this embrace should be my very last. I will not
loose this opportunity. -- ( clasps her.)


Isa. Oh, Henry! Henry, where art th^^ now?


Lor. Nay then! thus will I force you to my will. ( the ghost of Florella
appears, her face very pale, lips blue, her eyes appear sunk in her head. The
moment Lorenzo beholds her, he starts back, and is fixed like a statue of
horror, eyeing the Spectre with rivetted attention, his whole frame appears
convulsed, his breast thorbs quick -- after same time, speaks wildly -- music.)
How differen^ are mortals changed by death.


Isa. At what gaze you, with such attention?


Lor. Florella, thy sister! behold her palid cheek.


Isa. Your crimes have drove you mad! do not harm me.


Lor. I will not! pray leave me not alone. That face, that once astonished all
the world, with its incomparable vivid hue, is now turned pale. Those socke^s,
wherein brilliants darted their luster, and far out shone the chrysolite, I
behold no more. The felm curtain is let down. If they are in the bosom of the
ocean lodged, that vast fountain will never again know night. Thy lips, once
like the damask rose, is now the color of the hyacinth! Oh, does she no^ look
pityful? what flinty substance would not dissolve in teas to behold her?


Isa. What is the cause of this distemperature?


Lor. Why have thou come hither at this ^ture Oh tell me the cause? I have not
for six years ^ehel^ thee, until now. Isabella, speak to her.


Isa. I look, where you direct your eyes so steady but I see nothing.


Lor. What, not see her? can it be my fanc^ draws so perfect lineaments? Oh no,
it is impossible ( Florella disappears.) See where she goes! she is gone (
Lorenzo looks for sometime after the Spectre, the turns to Isabella.) I will
now depart, and leave y^ unmolested. Isabella, I have done thee wrong, cannot
repair thy feelings, so much injured by m^ But trust me, I am truly penitent.


Isa. Oh, leave me then!


Lor. I will. But let me take thy forgiveness with me?


Isa. I forgive you.


Lor. Will you never tell this strange adventure?


Isa. I never will.


Lor. Nor expose my rashness, in which passion, hurried me beyond myself?


Isa. I promise.


Lor. Then all good angels guard thy slumbers. ( exit.)


SCENE II. -- A room in FLAVIO's House.
Enter WALTER and HENRY. Hen. We had a cursed time of it, sure enough, but, as
we escaped with whole bones, we where lucky indeed. The letter I have now
received, unravels the mystery. She says, Celio sitting up late, discovered her
window open, which he commanded her to shut, but a few moments before we
arrived.


Wall. What more?


Hen. I had despaired, and given up all hopes, till I received this epistle. (
reads.)

"If you will come by the back way, through the garden, tomorrow night, at the
hour of twelve, bring with you some faithful friend, and a Friar, we may then
be united. Though tomorrow, my father has decreed that I shall go to a nunnery,
or accept Lorenzo's hand. I will dissemble, and chose the latter, to put off
the time. My window is directly over an old dry well, you cannot mistake it.

Yours till death, ISABELLA."



Hen. [drops the letter by accident.] What think you? have I not all sure now?


Wall. 'Egad I think so indeed, your window schemes I cannot say I am very fond
of, but I am at your service. Flavio is obstinately bent upon Florinda's
marrying Don Pedras or he will send her to a nunnery likewise. She has solemnly
promised to accept no hand but mine. You first make sure of Isabella, then will
I marry Florinda. We must both ^hare the same fate. I will wait for your
success.


Hen. I have spoke to a Friar, whom I expect here every minute, to look into my
wardrobe for a disguise, to prevent a discovery, which would prove fatal to the
poor Franciscan.


Wall. Should you fail in this attempt --


Hen. We cannot fail. -- But here comes the right reverend father.

Enter FRIAR. Welcome father, what news?


Fri. We have no time for politics now.


Hen. We will lose no time in equiping your holy ship, What masquerade, brave
father, suits you best?


Fir. Show me thy wardrobe, and out of it, I will select something of the holy
order.


Hen. ( opens closet.) Take your choice of my whole wardrobe.


Fri. ( in turning ^ver several dresses finds a Devils head with horns.) Surely
satan has been among you.


Hen. The best disguise in the world,


Fri. Fie, fie son, would you have one of the holy order of Francisco, where
the robes of the seducer of all -- for shortness called the devil. ( pulls out
the body, breeches with a tail, and cloven foot.) Oh, mercy, defend me! here is
all the devil, sure enough.


Hen. So the inside is pure when you put it on, the devil will do you no harm,
for it is only his skin.


Fri. Well son, if you will have it so --


Hen. Succeed in this and I will make your fortune old boy.


Fri. Well son, you must give me some assisance, for I have not dealt with the
^amily before.


Hen. Will you have the horns put on first?


Fri. Oh, fie, fie! the last thing. Horns are awkward things, and many wear
them, that would rather not. I have long suspected that I felt them growing. I
will wear the breeches first.


Hen. You need not try them on now, I do not doubt they will fit you very well,
there are strings behind, that will let out the dress. Remember, tomorrow
night, ready equiped, to meet me here at twelve. ( exit Henry and Walter.)


Fri. I will not fa^l. By our holy order this is not exactly right -- if I am
found out in this intrigue, 'twill be a ruinous stroke. ( exit*)


Enter DON PEDRAS, on the oposite side who picks up the letter. Ped. It Is well!
your plans, shall now be stoped after this night you breathe no more. [exit.]


SCENE III. -- Sea shore. -- LORENZO discovered sleeping on a rock -- Moon and
star light -- The horizon becomes obscured by degrees with heavy clouds.
Thunder and lightning, then a heavy crash -- The sea is envelloped in flames --
after which FLORELLA rises from the ocean. Music.
Flo. Sleep on Lorenzo, though I come for thee! I am Florella -- I am she who
to save me from thy sinful lust committed my body to the ocean. My immortal
parts are now in heaven, where thou can never come! Farewell, remember that I
came for thee. ( Angels decend from above, Florella ascends attended by them,
invisible spirits chaunt.)


SCENE IV -- A room in FLAVIO's House.
Enter DON PEDRAS* Ped. It Is strange; Lorenzo is no where to be found' -- This
letter may be of most essential service to us both, I have explored the garden
every part of it, not a room in the house, have I left unsearch'd, yet nothing
can I find of Lorenzo. -- Ha! yes, one there yet remains, one in which I have
not looked, but I cannot expect to find him there. ( Exit.)


SCENE V. -- Another room in FAVIO's House. -- LORENZO discovered lying on a
couch.
Enter DON PEDRAS. Ped. What ho! Lorenzo!


Lor. ( starting from his couch wildly.) Wait but a moment, I am not yet
prepared! -- ( his face is covered with a deadly paleness, the sweat appears
dropping from his face.)


Ped. For heaven's sake what alarms you thus?


Lor. Is it possible! or is it not? -- ( looks on Pedras with a frantic stare.)


Ped. What mean you?


Lor. Are we on earth, or in the infernal regions? who are you?


Ped. Pedras.


Lor. My eyes yet are dim! like hail, the cold sweat in large drops roll down
my icy cheeks! -- Art thou indeed my friend;


Ped. You have ever esteemed me such.


Lor. How can I repay thee!


Ped. For what?


Lor. Snatching me from purgatory! where are we now?


Ped. Under your father's roof.


Lor. Is it possible? give me thy hand! give me ocular demonstration! let me
feel some flesh that is mortal beside my own. ((...) Pedras reaches him his
hand.) It Is really so! I am more easy now, the convulsive spasms have almost
let me. Oh! ( sinks in Pedras's arms.)


Ped. Heavens! what can be the cause of this? awake; Lorenzo! -- rouse thee
from this torpid state.


Lor. ( recovers slowly.) -- Oh! I am very faint -- my slow return of pulse,
summons to their native spring my scattered senses! -- surely this is not the
place where but this moment legions of fiends were torturing my soul! -- and at
last 'twas but a dream!


Ped. But a dream.


Lor, Aye Pedras 'twas nothing but a mere dream! -- But oh! a dream so fraught
with terror, never visited the human frame before! it is almost impossible to
tell! description would but mock reality. 'Twas naught but a flight of ideal
fancy that quickened repose, and fastened the rocks of hell upon me, which I
now have scarce shook off!


Ped. Think no more of it. I pray you be calm.


Lor. Command the raging tornado be calm. Bid the dread thunder of immortal
Jove to cease threatening destruction, and the roaring winds to blow no more!
thou will be as soon obeyed!


Ped. Of what did you dream?


Lor. Methought I lay upon a towering rock, whose fathom base lodged in the sea
-- The silver moon unclouded, and the twinkling stars, looked more than common
brilliant -- when lo at distance a dark cloud with imperious frown advanced,
and veiled the heavens; the troubled ocean beat, and foamed against the rock on
which I lay -- when looking down into the watery steep I beheld Florella; she
spoke to me a dreadful summons. Then Angels from Heaven descended, in whose
arms her fleeting soul, majestically was born -- celestial strains accompanied
her to the realms of immortal bliss! -- She disappeared, the dashing waters
stilled, they turned to blood! and dire contention rose among the billows --
Blood turned ^o flames, and all was hell around me! -- She cast her yelling
evil spirits forth, who with menacing ghastly grins, seized me trembling,
convicted, and hurld'd me in the fiery gulf desponding! then in this vast
abyss I lay, ^tun'd by the violent shock; the tortures I endured, are not
describable!


Ped. The more you think of this, the less happy you will be.


Lor. Oh that I had waked even then! -- I was surrounded now on every side by
those dread wretches, in each their left hands was held a flambeau, and in
their right a forked spear; their jubilee at my being one of them, they
signified by gesticulation most horrid, and wildly dancing round me! -- of a
sudden all this ghastly band stood still, their eyes beamed terror and dismay,
and from out their mouths they deluged fire and smoke; I was seized, and dragged
from out this everlasting fire and placed on a river's bank below -- the waters
up and down -- far as my eyes could reach, on either side, were lined by those
that brought me thither -- on me all their basilisk eyes were rivetted -- I saw
on the opposite side a boat coming toward me, soon as it arrived, one voice
alone, aloud exclaimed -- for all on the instant spoke, "Follow us, and mingle
with the damned!" -- but with so terrible, and vaunting peals, my ears for some
long time fancied the sound of roaring thunder! -- almost petrified I stood --
they forced me in -- they then put off -- and when we gained the center of the
stygian flood, the tumultuous discord of those yelling fiends were horrible!
those who lined the river far and near now instant all assembled round,
menacing, with their flambeaus destruction, and belching flames! as though each
with the mineral combustion of mount Ae^na, or mount Vesuvius were pregnant;
the boat then sunk in a flame of fire, and I awoke from out that sleeping
torture, the effect of which though I were to live for ages, would never be
from memory eras'd.


Ped. This indeed is most wonderful!


Lor. O God! when will I have rest? -- What shall I do to shake this terror
off, that weighs so heavy on my soul? when ever I lay me down to rest -- 'stead
of repose; my couch is contaminated -- it is the rendezvous of friends, who wake
me frantic from my slumbers.


Ped. No more of this; think of your Isabella. I have been in search of thee,
but being taken so long a time, attentively to hear this ill vision, I had
forgot a letter I have found, directed to your rival, which he, I suppose by
accident has lost. From your Isabella.


Lor. My Isabella! what does it contain of moment?


Ped. Tomorrow night -- twelve o'clock is the hour appointed -- a Friar, with
Henry by the back way, through the garden ascends into her chamber, and he is
there to make them one. No doubt his friend goes with him.


Lor. We will counteract their project! we must be there before them. That name
was music to my ears. ( reviving.) But I cannot shake entirely off this dream
of futurity -- still it clings its iron gripe around m^, and hugs me to my
fate. Henry must die; so must his friend Walter, no other way is left.


Ped. Thus, by one fatal blow, we'll end at once those two destroyers of our
peace.


Lor. In truth my spirits are quite low, strength do not desert me now, hold up
my frame a little longer. Don Pedras we will consult, and advise the most
speedy, and surest method of revenge, But the sins I have already accumulated
on my head, dulls the edge of my resolution, that I cannot sheath my enmity in
the heart of my rival. ( exit.)


SCENE VI. -- A room in FLAVIO's House.
Enter HENRY and WALTER. Hen. I cannot think where I have lost the letter. But
never mind, so it does not fall into the hands of my rival, I have nothing to
fear. Are you still succesful with Florinda?


Wall. She has promised to go with me at a moments warning, wherever my will
directs. Flavio intends enclosing her in a nunnery tomorrow, should you not
succeed this night, they both will be placed in bondage together.


Hen. Reflection will but mar our hopes -- so, soon as possible we will be
ready -- take our Servants, and doubly arm ourselves. I like not the looks of
Lorenzo, nor his friend Don Pedras, though they have profer'd so much kindness;
there is a certain something still lurks behind their faces that warns me to be
wary, Lorenzo's jealousy of me, and love for Isabella, if the letter should
fall into his hands, would enrage him to that degree, our lives might be in
danger.


Wall. We will defy them, unless, assassin like, they sink beneath the brute
creation; though that they have done already.


Hen. Our time is short, we must depart immediately.

Come let us prepare, the minute's nigh,
With LOVE and LIBERTY away we'll fly,

( Exit.) SCENE VII. -- Time night. -- CELIO's garden, the rear of his house is
discovered, in the back ground. -- A well decayed and old stands under
ISABELLA's window.
Enter LORENZO and PEDRAS, armed. Lor. What hour now?


Ped. It Is near the time.


Lor. Our hiding places we must now seek out, or we may be discovered. Withdraw
behind that arbor -- I Will watch their coming. ( Pedras withdraws.) -- Let me
not reflect on what I have done, nor what I am about to do -- once done I Will
think no more -- but how can I forget? when the crimes I have committed,
freezes every nerve. Murder! Oh, to that sound am I inured, though never hear
it but my soul recoils! -- Ha! they come! the long wished for hour is come,
when to my hated rival I will guide the glittering steel, or leaden death quite
home to his heart. ( Exit behind the same arbor with Don Pedras.)


Enter WALTER, HENRY, and SERVANTS, afterward the FRIAR in a Devil's habit
Hen. The clock has struck, and no appearance of my charmer at her window yet.


Wall. ( To Servants.) Withdraw, should any alarm be given, immediately come to
this spot; to our relief. ( exit Servants.)


Hen. Now time and opportunity serve. ( Isabella appears at the window.)


Is^. Hist -- Henry is it you?


Hen. It Is the herald of immortal bliss^


Is^. O heavenly sound -- it is my Henry speaks.


Hen. If thou will it call him so, for that sweet ^ound to me is still more
pleasing than an angels ^hisper.


Isa. Where is the Friar?


Hen. He is at hand, to make us happy.


Isa. Think you not your steps are traced? that villain Lorenzo, much I fear
from him.


Hen. Be ^ot alarmed my love, this dear moment is most precious, let us lose no
time.


I^a. ( sighs.) Oh Henry!


Hen. Why that sigh, so deep?


Isa. Aye deep indeed -- it searched the inmost recess of my heart, something
that is ill divining, throb'd at my breast -- oh much I fear for you.


Hen. If it be like mine, it is the voice of love that wakens with the peal.


Isa. It may be so. To reach the window safely, here have I a ladder, made of
ropes. ( lowers the ladder out of the window.)


Hen. Be no^ alarmed my love. A Friar, masqued in the devils habit, I have
brought with me; fearing our in^ent might be discovered. I have brought with me
my friend Walter likewise, with our servants.


Isa. Come then be speedy. I thought I heard a noise.


Hen, Friar, mount you first.


Fri. After you is manners. I never did such a thing in my life,


Hen. Throw then, ceremony aside, and obey me.


Fri Well here I go, neck or nothing. ( Climbs the ladder. -- ^wo pistols are
fired, by Lorenzo and Don Pedras at them without effect. The Friar frighted at
the r^p^rt, falls into the well -- Servants rush on the stage -- Lorenzo and
Pedras fly -- Henry, Walter and Servants pursue them -- Music.)


ACT V.
SCENE I. -- A Wine cellar in CELIO's House. Several pipes and quarter casks
standing -- Bottles, demijons, etc.
SERVANTS drinking and carousing, nearly drunk. Fool. This is a happy country
-- he must be a fool who would not live in i^ -- what a pity it is we was'nt
b^r^ gentlemen, then we might be always drunk -- and not fear the devil.


1 st Ser No, ^or the devil fear us -- but I am always afraid of him.


Fool. That Is because you are a cowardly dog. But I care for no gentleman, no^
I -- getting a little tosticated, it makes a body feel so happy -- ha! ha, he!
he! -- Come, some more of the excellent campaign for me. -- Here is confusion
to the moorish laws. ( drinks.) Where is Lucett, my old piece?


1 st. Serve. I never knew you to drink, but you always thought of women.


Fool. Drinking is somehow like the priming of a gun -- but no more of that, it
hurts my delicacy.


1 st. Serve. Damn your delicacy say I.


Fool. And damn your impudence say I.


1 st. Serve. I meant no harm.


2 nd. Serve. No, no -- no harm was meant, we are all jovial fellows alike. I am
as good a man as any b^dy


F^ol. You are only a boy -- feel your face. -- To drown all amosity I Will give
you a song.


Omnes. Aye, aye, a song.

FOOL Sings. Since jollification is the word,
And all hearts true that is here Sir;
We'll enter without fire or sword
Into what we have got here Sir,
CHORUS.
Come, come, my lads, then let us drink*
We'll fill our glasses to the brink;
For Bacchus is a jolly soul,
The God of gods, so fill the bowl.
Of all the suction in the vault,
Give me good Champaign clear Sir;
I hate your liquor made of malt,
Oh! oh, damn your small bear Sir.
Come, come my lads, etc.
Since from our master we do steal,
While he is abed and sleeps sir,;
We'll drink his liquor 'till we feel,
Our eyes can hardly peep Sir.
Come, come my lads, etc.

Omnes. Bravo, bravo! --


1 st. Serve. He sings a good song.


Fool. A go^d song may be badly sung:


( During this scene, stones at different times fall into the cellar from the
well which the FRIAR is in, who by this time has opened a place large enough --
forces himself through -- the Servants seem in great con^ternation, tumbling
over each other drunk, and exit. FRIAR takes a bottle drinks, and exit. Music.
SCENE II. -- Inside of a Nunnery.
Enter ISABELLA and FLORINDA. Isa. Oh Florinda, snail-creeping time is tedious,
our mutual destiny we will with patience bear; let sorrow drink quite dry her
bitter cup* she her thirst may quench, that in after ages we may remain a great
memento of constancy and love.


Flor. Must we then forever here remain, never more to scent the fragrant
budding rose, or violets perfume; nor walter steal to these longing arms to
heal my wounded heart? my spirits ebb apace, and soon will I fall a sacrifice,
if not released from this drear solit^ry shrine -- Oh! is there no ho^e?


Isa. I cannot cheer thee with one ray of hope -- I cannot co^jure up one
phantom favorable, that I shall behold my love, or thee thy Walter in this
world again.


For. When time with wrinkled front steals over the Parents head, with hoary
locks most venerably 'thron'd -- when vital spirits have forgot to flow, they
of their former pleasures think no more, but doom with austere visage wrath
eclipsed their darling tender progeny, to everlasting wretchedness and woe!


Wall. ( Sings without.) Florinda dear, oh listen, listen do.


Flor. Merciful heaven! 'twas my Walter's voice. Did thou not hear?


Hen. [Sings without.] Isabella! dear, hear thy Henry too.


Isa. Oh blessed sound! how my heart beats? 'twas Henry's voice.

AIR -- WALTER, without.
Thy Walter though you are cag'd within these walls,
Immured by thy father's stern decree;
His love-rack'd soul, it so excessive galls,
He never will rest 'till you are at liberty.
FLORINDA.
My love is pure, as D^an's chaste,
No comfort in this world I Will know;
'Till I in Walter's arms am blessed,
Then banish every thought of woe.
HENRY, without.
Isabella still thy Henry is true,
His ardent passion trust me burns the same,
The loss of thee indeed he would sorely rue,
And death extinguish every vital flame.
ISABELLA.
Since thou art true as love can be,
And I unaltered still remain;
Invention soon shall set me free,
To see my Idol once again
Quarto -- HEN. WALL. ISA. FLOR.
Providence above, smiles on our love,
To that we'll trust our goodly cause;
We will fathers move, and to them prove,
If they infringe on nature's laws,
No power on earth will aid their cause.

( Exit omnes.) SCENE III. -- Outside of the Convent.
Enter HENRY and WALTER. Hen. Can we contrive no plan, whereby we may succeed
in liberating those lovely prisoners?


Wall. There is none that we can think of, but set a woman's ingenuity to work,
and if she does not succeed in any thing, no matter what it is, I would have a
poor opinion of her.


Hen. Then you trust to their extricating themselv^s.


Wall. No surer dependence rely on me -- a woman's invention never fails, backed
with love's passion -- no prison is strong enough -- No balwark, though environed
by barb^d steeds of chiva^ry, but the sex would sap; put two together, and the
devil himself would stand but a poor chance against them.


Hen. You seem lively notwithstanding our ill success last night.


Wall. That would be but trifling, had not Flavio and Celio put their daughters
in this monkish tabernacle.


Hen. Have you a suspicion who those bravo's were, by whom we were attacked
last night^?


Wall. That villain Lorenzo, and his good friend Don Pedras, I Will be sworn. They
must have found the letter you lost, which has betrayed us. We must pack up our
baggage, and be off from the house, however.


Hen. Whither shall we go?


Wall. To Pedrillo's in the next street, from thence after we have obtained the
objects of our adoration, we'll fly from those shores to our native land
America -- where the bright sun each morn beams freedom, and independence.


Hen. What has become of the unfortunate Friar?


Wall. I cannot tell. [looking off.] Ah! here he comes -- how he has made his
retreat good without a discovery is unaccountable.


Hen. By his walk he appears much fatigued.


Enter FRIAR. Still in disguise. Wall. Welcome! -- thrice welcome most
honorable, most venerable, mostt ragicomic father.


Fri. Oh, what a world of sin is this! what miserable sinners are we all!


Wall. With one exception father. You Are not a sinner, though by thy garb, and
outward 'meanour, thou art the father of all sin.


Fri. If it be so -- I think thou art the most devilish of all my children. O
wicked abominable world. O such a night, such a night was never passed in
purgatory,


Wall. You have then gone through your purgation Your sins are purged away.


Fri. My fat is purged away you mean. Last night pulled down my belly at such a
rate, 'twill take a wonderful deal to fill it to its original size.


Hen. Where have you been all night?


Fri. At the bottom of the sinful well -- which is under that abominable
window. Oh I have lost a deal of marrow fat. I am more hungry than a wolf --
put a quill down my throat, and blow in it you would puff me up like a bladder
-- Oh! for a bottle of sack!


Wall. How did you contrive to sack that strongly fortified well?


Fri. I took it by storm.


Wall. By storm!


Fri. Truly son I took it by storm, for it did rain most terribly before I got
out of it. Holy St. Francis only knows how long I was getting to the bottom,
but I believe I was not very tedious.


Hen. How did you escape from the well?


Fri. By crawling out at the bottom.


Wall. Ha, ha, ha, -- The top you mean.


Fri. I am right; the bottom -- there I lay stunn^ed by the violent fall -- and
then I began to dream -- I dreamed I was in purgatory, and there I was like to
stick, for I thought all poisonous hissing serpents were playing round about my
face; and lo! when I awoke, these serpents were nothing but frogs, "and by my
veracity one taking me to be a Frenchman had actually got into my mouth, and I
gave him a very hard bite before he found out his mistake" This sentence is not
the author's, but introduced by the translator.
-- I attempted after coming a little to myself to clamber out at the top,
which I had nearly reached when a stone on which my whole weight bore,
dislodged and down falls the stone, and myself to the bottom again. "I smash'd
some of the French diable gentry below, for they did croak most shockingly."
Introduced by the translator.



Wall. You have not yet got out, but just where you left off before.


Fri. But I am getting out as fast as my tongue will carry me. Most
unmercifully ^mitten, I attempted to rise again but had not strength. There lay
I bruised and jam'd in this hole -- I recomended my soul to the supreme, though
in truth good son I began to grow uneasy -- fearing he would not hear me. I
beheld a light through the hollow crevices of the stone wall, which I looked upon
as a warning to prepare for the other country -- I thought where my soul would
go! dying with so heavy a sin upon my head -- I heard some persons begin to
sing, when I found there was nothing but the wall between me, and Celio's wine
cellar, where his Servants were carousing -- I set to work with fresh spirits
-- I tumbled out the sto^es, till I had made a hole large enough for myself to
creep through -- the Servants seeing, as they thought, the devil, crawling out of
this ancient well, took to their drunken heels, and ran tumbling over each
other frightened as bad as --


Wall. You at the report of the pistols, last night.


Fri. I believe so indeed -- hem!


Hen. Here is that will lighten your heart, and weigh down your pocket. ( gives
purse.)


Fri. Thank you son. Come to my cell, and I Will give you absolution, gratis. But
I have not finished yet, my unfortunate story. Having got clear from the house
undiscovered, two great dogs standing in the street, fell foul of me -- thanks
to the rotten dress that saved my flesh -- I tore one of the horns from off my
head, and p^y'd about them lustily -- they was glad e^ough to quit -- every one
that see me ^tar'd. The women squall'd! among them I know not what mischief I
may have done, but my intentions were pure.


Wall. We have no doubt of the purity of your intentions, among the women,
father.


Fri. Wisely said indeed son. Farewell! If I can do any thing more in your way,
I am your humble Servant. [exit Friar.]


Hen. [to Friar.] Remember, and send home the dress. We will now to Flavio's,
take a round in his garden, bid him farewell, and leave his house. ( exeunt)


SCENE IV. -- Night. FLAVIO's Garden.
Enter LORENZO. Lor. The moon upon her other throne, darting pale illumine over
the frowning night! the winds gently disordering the verd^nt leaves, from which
the sweet scented air waf^s, seems to refresh my drooping melanc^olly. Isabella
much I fear to me is lost forever. Were my rival dead, some hope
^otwithstanding I am so stongly repulsed, might yet remain. Destiny bears his
shield now over his head -- but poison or daggers must, and shall, soon
terminate his life! though my ill fa^ed stars thwart me in every attempt, h^ must
at last fall a victim to my artifice.


Enter DON PEDRAS. Ped. Signior, well met.


L^r. Why this haste?


Ped. I bring thee news. Our rivals I have overheard. They suspect most
s^rongly you, and likewise me, being the persons by whom they were assailed,
last night -- they intend leaving the house, now is our only chance -- this
evening when they walk (which every night they do) into this garden, we will
unawares, unseen, spring on them both, and we will rid at o^ce the world ^f
those lo^th some weeds, then we will stand u^rivalled.


Lor. Well council'd Don Pedras -- it is near the time they walk. This, it
cannot fail. But I am too credulous -- I have before been as sure, and have
been defeated.


Ped. Think of nothing now, but success.


Lor. This is the main walk -- station yourself and wait their coming on the
left. Here on the opposite side shall be my po^t -- on their appro^ch plunge
home your stilletto to the hilt. I hear some noise, quick to your post. [Pedras
conceals himself behind the left arbor, Lorenzo the right.]


Enter from the top, WALTER and HENRY. Lorenzo and Pedras, spring at the same
instant, and pass at their different rivals. Hen. Assassins! thank heaven my
coat is more my friend than thou. [ draws and fights with Lorenzo. Walter
fights with Don Pedras, who w^unded mortally ^a^ls. Then runs to the assi^tance
of H^^ry. Lorenzo, wounded in the head, saves himself by flight. Music.]


Wall. I have made sure of Don Pedras. Exercise is good for the health.


Hen. My sword pierced Lorenzo's head; he staggered and made his escape. I
cannot but lament your c^ming to my aid, as I think he would not have fled but
being c^mpelled by superior strength.


Wall. I run Don Pedras through the gu^s, and I thought you might be in danger
from Lorenzo. An assassin should be shown no mercy.


Hen. Lorenzo will ^ccuse us of something criminal! I dread the consequence.


Wall. We must away imediately -- each moment longer that we stay is fraught
with danger. ( exeunt.)


LORENZO, with his head bound up in a handkerchief, enters cautiously, after
some time looking round speaks. Lor. They Are gone, and left Don Pedras
weltering in his blood -- surely they know me not. To good account my night's
work is turned at last, though not in faith the way I wished it. Mayhap he is not
yet quite dead, 'twill be a friendly office then to help him. What ho^! Don
Pedras!


Ped. ( recovers slowly* his vissage pale through loss of blood.) Oh thou
prophetic seer! ( wildly.)


Lor. Art thou then alive my friend?


Ped. Is it Lorenzo's voice?


Lor. It is.


Ped. Help me! help me quick away, or we shall be discovered! the alarm in the
house, ever this is given; quick, quick, for I am faint, very faint, through
loss of blood.


Lor. Thy death is certain. Thy wound is very deep.


Ped. Not mortal, do assist me.


Lor. While you live I will; but thou have not one minute of life.


Ped. I hope death is not so near.


Lor. ( aside.) If he lives, 'twill dicover my guilt. If he dies, to the world
once more I am innocent in their eyes* -- Never before did the pangs which now
I feel make such impression on me.


Ped. Thanks Lorenzo, thanks -- Thy strength but not thy simpathy can remove me.


Lor. Look up thou matyr'd friend; friendship now must undergo a wondrous test;
death now is only left to ea^e thy miseries -- Impulse to relieve the
suff^rings of my friend, to cut short the thread of life already str^nded,
laboring with conscience guilty and a mortal wound, forces me to this
extremety. ( stabs him.)


Ped. Hold, hold, have mercy! Oh God forgive my sins as I forgive my murderer!
( dies.)


Lor. Death now has grappled with thee close, and safety's reassumed his marred
throne, where guilt reigns umpire. Did I murder him? No, he was already killed,
and I but d^m'd him before his time. -- Shuddering conscience at such horrid
perpetrations recoil, but I am so inured now to scenes of horror, methinks I
could face unmoved the grim visag'd fronts of cockatrice eyed fiends, legions
on legions. ( seems for some time lost in thought.) I must remain no longer
here, but to a Surgeon; then contrive means to unload suspicion's weight. -- (
Exit.)


SCENE V. -- A room in CELIO's house.
Enter FLAVIO and CELIO. Flav. Our daughters are safe enough, the two Americans
to morrow leave us.


Cel. Where ^o go?


Flav. To an inn, in the next street.


Cel. Can you guess the cause?


Flav. The cause is obvious enough; no hopes has Walter of Florinda, he can
never extricate her from her prison, and Henry shares the fate of his friend.
Gratitude got them in my favor, I will bestow every thing but my daughter, she
must be married to Don Pedras.


Cel. And thy virtuous son to my daughter; -- when our children have been in
the Nunnery less than a week, with downcast eyes and virgin blushing cheeks,
they each will say, I Will marry whom you please. Then will my old heart dance,
and thine my brother will be transported too, we will feel young again, seeing
our children happy, once married, love comes of course.


Flav. Then will hours fly swiftly over our heads, as minutes did before; the
two Americans will reconcile themselves, and all will be happily settled.


F^ol. ( without.) Oh Sir, Sir, Sir --


Cel. What noise was that?

Enter FOOL. What is the matter Fool?


Fall. Your daughters both are happy as kings!


Cel. What mean you?


Fool. I mean nothing but what I have said.


Flav. But what have you said?


Fool. I have said enough, if you knew all. I Will tell you, but I Am sure you
will not have patience to hear so unreli^hious a story.


Cel^ Speak to the purpose, or I Will knock you through the wall.


Fool. Then there would be an end of the story. -- The short and longn^ss of
the whole is this -- Florinda and Isabella, both have flown away,


Flav. and Cel. What escaped?


Fool. Yes, and for consolation I tell you they are marricated by this time.


Cel. and Flav. To whom?


Fool. That they will tell you.


Flav. Oh cursed hour!


Fool. I Will tell you how all may yet be mamicably settled.


Flav. and Cel. ( earnestly.) Say how?


Fool. Leave 'em to themselves, and they will depent of their folly.


Flav. If my daugter is really married, then farewell comfort in this life
forever,


Fool. I guess they are comfortable enough, by this time.


Cel. Answer me, how made they their escape?


Fool. You Will laugh when you hear it, though now you look so plaguey grum. Ha, ha,
ha, who would a thought it -- the two fat Monks fast asleep in the two ladies
beds.


Cel. and Flav. What the Monks in bed with my daughter?


Fool. You put the worst destruction upon things; the two Monks are fast and
tight asleep snoring like hogs in a mudgutter.


Flav. Did you see our daughters in bed with them?


Fool. They didn't let me see that, ha, ha, ha, the snoring codgers, I believe
will sleep 'till after they are dead, if they don't mind what they are about;
they got asleep the sweetest way in the world -- eating sweetmeats, and now
they look as sour as vinegar. -- The Friars was striped as naked, as if they
had just come into the world, and put to bed by your daughters, who made their
escape with the Friar's scowls on, I think you call um -- and the Abbess took
'em to be the two Monks that now are snorting in bed*


Flav. Celio let us pursue them.


Fool. They will stay till you come. I pinched 'em, and kicked 'em, but I could
not wake um from their snortification. The Abbess guessed the ladies put lodrum
in their sweetmeats, makes um snort so.


Cel. I must learn the truth of this fool's story -- If it is so, by heaven,
I Will spurn her in the street, she dare approach me. ( exit with Flavio.)


Fool, Solo. ( takes out a pot of sweatmeats from his pocket and eats.)

SONG
Since eating of sweetmeats they say,
Makes Friars to snort and to snore Sir,
From the Monks I stole this to day,
As back fast asleep they did stare, Sir.
Now here will I stuff my guts* oh,
Now my ma^ter is gone away, Sir,
It Is better nor hickory nuts oh!
Or driving six horses and shay ^ir,
Now here is to the Monks asleep oh!
May they groan and grunt 'till they die, Sir,
It would never make me weep, oh;
Though they would make a fricasee fry Sir.

( Exit). SCENE VI and Last. -- A room in CELIO's House.
Enter FLAVIO and CELIO. Cel. Alas! ^o news of our disobedient children.
Foolish girls -- happy had I been to have seen my daughter a corpse, and ^o
stand on the brink of eternity myself, rather than have had my house
dishonored.


Enter FOOL. Fool. Sir, sir, there be sir, a man by the do^r. -- I ax'dum what
he wanted, and he said nothing, I told him he should have it, for he wanted to
see you a bit.


Cel. What appearance?


Fool. He looks for all the world like, I do'nt know what.


Cel. Conduct him in. ( exit Fool.)


Flav. Perhaps some news of our run away children.


Enter FOOL and GENTLEMAN. Gent. I come, Signior Celio and Signior Flavio, from
your daughters.


Flav. and C^l. Where are they. Are they both married?


Gent. They are.


Cel. Oh, cursed disobedience! Oh. ( weeps)


Flav. Oh, my lost child! ( weeps)


Gent. As friend and confid^nte of the two fond pair, I here stand before you
-- they are about to depart.


Flav. and Cel. Whither?


Gent. To America.


Flav. Tell Florinda to depart, I never will own her again.


Cel. And tell Isabella likewise, for me; a fathers malediction shall pursue
her through the wo^ld.


Gent. Think F^a^i^ -- Celio, think if you abandon your children; if you deny
natures b^unty, a parent's blessing, the omnipotent ru^^r of the universe would
double his malediction on that fathers head who unmoved, would hear a l^vely
suppliant child, sue to him for pard^n.


Enter SERVANT of FLAVIO. Ser. Don Pedras lays in the g^rden, dead.


Enter LORENZO. Flav. What new accident is? this


Lor. As Don Pedras, and myself, in the garden were taking our usu^l walk, we
heard a din of weapons, we ran to the spo^, and beheld the two Americans
fighting resolutely against midnight bravoes, on whom we instan^ly ru^hed --
Don Pedras received two mortal wounds and f^ll -- we three then remained to
co^b^t the ass^ssins, who fled. D^n Pedras in my arms expired, and his dying
breath blessed thee and Florinda.


Flav. Why is thy head bound up.


Lor. A slight wound I received in rescuing my friends.


Flav. Your sis^er's married.


Cel. And mine too Lorenzo, who was to have been thy wife.


Lor. ( wildly.) Ha, married! had thou laboriously studied f^r myriad^ of
years to end my life, thou needst but sum up all in two emphatic words,
Isabella's married! to send me to perdition. ( exit Lorenzo)


Flav. ( to Servant.) F^llow and stop him should he at empt his own life. (
exit Servant.) Don Pedras is dead. I forgive Florinda, ( to Gent.) tell her to
return to me with her husband, and I will grant my blessing to them both.


Cel. Tell Isabella from me the same. ( exit gent.)


Enter SERVANT showing in WALTER, FLORINDA, HENRY and ISABELLA^ Each kneel to
their respective Parents. FLAVIO and CELIO raises them, and unites their hands.
Flav. ( to Walter and Florinda.) Heaven bless you as I do.


Cel. I f^rgive you. ( to H^nry and Isabella.)


Flor. But why is thy blessing so coolly bestowed?


Flav. The severe wound my son received in his head last night, in those
gentlemen's defense, in which conflict Don Pedras was killed makes me feel
uneasy.


Wall. ( aside to Henry.) Since we are not accused we will not tell Lorenzo's
perfidy. 'Twould break Flavio's and Florinda's heart to hear the truth.


Enter SERVANT. Serve. I followed Signior Lorenzo, he took from out his pocket a
phial, which contained as I sup^^^^* some mortal dregs, he swallowed them
before I (...) prevent him. [Flavio sinks into the arms of Celio, who bears him
to a sopha.]


Enter LORENZO with countenance pale, eyes bloated, his ^air di^hev^ll^d
hanging on his shoulders the wound in his head bleeding -- he goes to Fl^vio,
kneels before him, takes his hand, puts it to his lips and kisses it -- Flavio
recovers, and throws himself on his son's neck in speechless agony. Music. Lor.
Farewell! for dread eternity and me are linked together. One short minute and I
am no more!


Flav. Oh my son, in my mind already dead!


Lor. Did thou know my unworthiness of life thou would not regret the los^
of me* ( appears at intervals convulsed.) The mortal draught will let me tell
no more.


Flav. Why w^rt thou so rash?


Lor. A enging heaven demanded, I have obeye'd. Were (...) my sins absol^ed,
I Would die i^ peace -- ( ^u^ns to Walter and H^nry.) It Is meet that I should die
with all my sins upon my head, but even then I could not suffer the pangs, that
I have immerged on my fellow creatures. I have no face to ask forgiveness, th^'
I have h^d the heart to p^rpetrate deeds too horrid ever to be named again.


Hen. You have my pardon.


Wall. And likewise mine.


Lor. [Looks doubtingly on Isabella.] You have no cause to pity me, my heart
has bee^ c^ld and invincible to the voice of nature and of virtue -- hard as
the adamantine rock -- I have been penitent, the next moment have sinned again!
were I new b^rn and innocent, I feel that now within me, tha^ nothing could
tempt me ever again to s^ray in the end^ess paths of vice.


Isa. I do pity and forgive you.


Lor. Though thou art all goodness, all purity, and matchless innocence, it is
more than I could have hoped, much more indeed than I deserve. My soul i^ much
lighter by thy pard^ns, wherein my sins were centered mos^ly. ( more
convulsed.) H^! what sudden bolt was that shot before my eye^, like a meteor's
long fiery trail? and now it leaves a pulse behi^d! Oh! the poison with
impetuous power rushes through every vein, each sinew artery! -- my tongue
cleaves to it is clammy roof! -- And now the ague's rack begins to ^hake my
joints -- the rolling ice, from off my forehead drops, and chattering teeth,
are prelud^s to usher in the shaft of death! -- my heart feels big within me,
it is ready to burst! -- It must have ven^ -- Oh! for a co^ling draught to
quench my burning tongue! -- my eyes grow big, and all around seems like a
crim^on cloud about me.


Flor. Heaven have mercy on my distracted brother.


Lor. Call not on heaven for mercy! -- I have too little deserved it -- Hark!
what noise was that I heard as though some sepu^chre, had opened its yawning
vault, grating the rusty hinges, leaving wide the en^rance to mortality? --
Hark! the tempest in my brain increases, does none hear the roar but me? the
clamorous discord! --


Flav. My heart is breaking.


Lor. The strings of mine are already stretched be^ond their natural compass!
-- Florella has the jesses in her hand, and gives them to the tormenting fiends
below! -- The gnashing Specter, hark how they yell and ghastly men^cing they
now begin to pull. My heart is rent in twain! -- ( Dies.)


FINIS.

