G. RICHARD' s DISCOURSE, on Thursday, Dec. 25 th, 1794.

The Cry of the Watchmen of Mount Ephraim! BEING THE SUBSTANCE OF A DISCOURSE,
DELIVERED AT The Universal Meeting House, IN Portsmouth, New Hampshire: ON
Thursday, Dec. 25, 1794: AND Now published at the request of the WARDENS, IN
Behalf of the Society, usually worshipping in said place.

BY GEORGE RICHARDS.

Fear not; for, behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be
to all people. For unto you is born this day, in the city of David, a Savior,
who is Christ the Lord.

The Angel Gabriel. PORTSMOUTH: PRINTED BY JOHN MELCHER, 1795.

DEDICATION.
To The UNIVERSAL SOCIETY, Portsmouth, New Hampshire,
THE FOLLOWING DISCOURSE IS VERY RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED,

BY THE SOCIETY'S, AFFECTIONATE FRIEND AND FAITHFUL SERVANT, Geo. Richards.

Men, Brethren and Fathers,
With all the Christian Charities most affectionately beloved! Give ear, I
beseech you, to the wise counsel of the Eldest of Apostles, who has directed
our attention to the more sure word of prophecy, whereunto we do well, that we
take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawn and
the day star arise in our hearts: And this word, which came not in old time by
the will of Man, but was spoken by Holy Men of God, who spoke as they were
moved of the Holy Spirit, has testified before hand, on this wise, in the 31st
Chapter of JEREMIAH and the 6th Verse.

-- THERE SHALL BE A DAY, THAT THE WATCHMEN UPON THE MOUNT EPHRAIM, SHALL CRY,
ARISE YE, LET US GO UP TO ZION UNTO THE LORD OUR GOD. 31st JEREMIAH, 6th Verse.
AND was there a day, when the Watchmen of Ephraim which is Israel, did cry, and
in the language of antecedent prophecy, say, arise ye, let us go up to Zion
unto the Lord our God? Yes, verily, there was; and of this day, emphatically,
it may be said, as David spoke in ancient time, behold, the (...) which the
Lord has made, let us rejoice therein, and be glad with exceeding great joy.
-- Indeed, it is the day of days, anointed with the oil of gladness above its
fellows, and infinitely more glorious than the day of creation, when the
morning stars sang together, and all the first born sons of immortality shouted
loud for joy. To this day, the day that we are now assembled to celebrate, the
day of the advent of Shiloh, Immanuel, God manifest in the flesh, our general
progenitors looked forward through an eye of faith, and worshipping the Bruizer
of the Serpent's head, as they leaned on the Staff of Hope, a better and a more
enduring Paradise, than that of Eden presented to view. -- This, also, was the
day which Abraham and his fellow heirs of the same promise, beheld afar off, as
in the visions of the Almighty, and rejoiced in spirit to see, although at two
thousand years distance; for the solemnity of an oath and the immutability of
Jehovah had not only promised, but on this day, more abundantly confirmed, all
spiritual blessings in heavenly places, in Christ Jesus, the Savior of the
World, to all the Nations of the Earth. -- Nor did the Patriarchs, who by faith
have obtained a good report, alone bear testimony to the dawn of the day spring
from on high. -- The Law which came by Moses, as the appointed shadow of good
things to come, was reflected from the body of Jesus, full of grace and of
truth; and all that was made according to the pattern showed on Mount Sinai,
exhibited in lively figures, the eternal purpose purposed in Christ, of whom
the whole family in Heaven and in Earth is named. -- Another, and a far greater
cloud of witnesses encompass us around: They are raised up from their beds
where they lie in glory, and being dead, they yet speak in the name of the
Lord: These are the Prophets, who diligently enquired concerning so great
Salvation, and prophesied of the exceeding abundance of the riches of Grace,
which from before the World began, was hid with Christ in God. The spirit of
all prophecy is the testimony of Jesus, the Wonderful, the Counselor, the
Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace; and the pens of these ready writers
have noted in the Scriptures of truth, the birth, the life, the sufferings and
the consequent glory of Messiah. How beautiful, ye Watchmen of Mount Ephraim,
encompassing the walls of Jerusalem, were your footsteps in every intermediate
age! Yours, in truth, were the feet of them, who brought good tidings of good,
glad tidings of great joy, being shod with the preparation of the glorious
Gospel of the Blessed; whilst your tongues, in the language of eloquent
oratory, publishing Peace and proclaiming Salvation, said, unto Zion, God even
thy God reigns, and cried, unto the ends of Earth, Behold, the Desire of all
Nations comes.

Amid this illustrious Assembly of glorified Elders, there appears One,
divinely exalted above his fellow servants. Lo, he descends on the
outstretched pinions of love: His garments are light, reflecting light
caelestial: It is Gabriel, who stands in the presence of God: Welcome, thrice
welcome, all hail, thou Angel of the Lord: Thou come as a ministering Spirit,
ministering unto Salvation's heirs: We know thee, who thou art, the highly
favored of the most Highest: It was thine, to administer those consolations
which are neither small nor few, to the Man greatly beloved in ancient days: It
was thine to gladden the heart of Zacharias, as worshipping on the right side
of the Altar of incense: It was thine to announce the rising of the Sun of
Righteousness, to the virgin daughter of the humblest tribe amid Judaea's
thousands: It was thine, to rejoice the spirits of adoring Shepherds by the
blessed tidings of a Savior, who is Christ, the Lord: It was thine, to lead
forth thy fellow watchmen, thrones, dominions, principalities and powers, when
every golden harp was tuned to notes of love, and tongues of Cherubim and
Seraphim in concert sang, Glory unto God in the heights of the highest, and on
earth, peace, good will toward men.

And did the four Spirits of the living God, who rest not day nor night, from
praise, keep jubilee on this auspicious morn? Did the Elders, seated round the
rainbow encircled throne, cast down their crowns, fall prostrate and adore? Did
the fullness of the hosts of heaven, ten thousand times ten thousand and
thousand of thousands worship the First Begotten when brought into the world?
And shall man, for whom this Child was born, shall man, to whom the Son is
freely given, refuse the homage of Caelestial Potentates? Nor to the Lamb made
known, ascribe all honor, blessing, might, dominion, majesty and strength,
whilst from his inmost soul, the ransomed of Heaven, redeemed from above, he
breathes amen, amen. Forbid it, gratitude for mercy undeserved! Forbit it love,
for love unmerited! Come, let us then arise, and going up to Bethlehem
Ephratah, see the place where the Lord is laid, and search out the habitation
of the Holy One of Israel. -- It is the voice of the Watchmen of Ephraim which
cries, arise, shine, for your light is come: His companions in bliss, to their
fellows cry, the glory of the Lord is revealed: And trumpet-tongued Heralds
respond, that all flesh shall see salvation together.

Men, Brethren and Fathers, wherewith shall we come before the King, the Lord
of Hosts on this morning, or bow ourselves in the presence of the most High
God? What thanks shall we render unto Him for his excellent loving kindness?
how shall we praise Him worthily for his unspeakable gift? The Spirit and the
Bride has said, come, and let him that hears say, come, and let whosoever
will, come up hither, and worship. May our hearts be deeply impressed, with a
solemnized sense of the gracious invitation, and every tongue adopting the
language of the Prodigal, answer aloud, I will arise and go up to my Father's
house. At a moment like this, the world and its fashion which are passing away
should have no charms. At an hour like the present, the lust of ambition, the
love of Mammon, and the zest for pleasures falsely so called, ought to be
extinguished, and the whole man, in body, in spirit and in soul, alive only
unto God. For this is the fullness of time, which Angels from everlasting girded
up the loins of their minds, with sobriety, steadfastly to gaze upon: And the
bringing in of the First Begotten into the world, shall henceforth be
celebrated in the many mansions of eternity, by the spirits of the just already
perfected, and the general assembly delivered from great tribulation. Arise,
therefore, ye that dwell in dust and sing. Awake thou, that sleep! leave the
cares of life, the deceitfulness of riches, the piercing sorrows of pleasure,
in the valley of Achor beneath; and towering on the wings of faith, ascend Mount
Zion's sacred top, for there has the Almighty set his own Anointed, the first
born of his strength, the man, my Fellow, says the Lord, and worship him, all
ye Gods, is the high command.

My Fathers, the chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof! My Brethren, in
the three fold cord of Adam, Solomon and Jesus Christ! My Sisters, accounted as
the glory of the man! indulge me, to persuade with all gentleness; suffer me,
to entreat as a Brother; permit, that I fervently beseech your undivided
attention, in the fellowship of the Spirit and the bond of Charity, whilst the
dignity of the brightness of the glory of God; the wonderful works of the
express image of his person; the beauty of the example set forth in his most
holy pattern, and the excellence of the commandment whereunto we are delivered,
shall energetically enforce the cry of the Watchmen of Mount Ephraim, who lift
up their voices tegether and say, arise ye, and let us go up to Zion, unto the
Lord our God, the God of Angels, and the God of men.

Who is the Savior born this day in David's city? What babe is that within the
manger laid? Whose are these swaddling clothes? Has the burning Seraphim put
off the body full of light? Has Gabriel come down to dwell in thick darkness?
Does Abraham the friend of God tabernacle with men? Is one of the old Prophets
born again? No, verily, no. -- Jesus, the Savior born to day, Christ the Lord
within the manger laid, the second Adam wrapped in swaddling clothes, is
exalted above all these names, is higher than every name that is named in
heaven, or in earth. -- Unto which of the Angels has it been said, at any
time, thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee? Who is the Patriarch, of
whom it is written, I will be to him a Father and he shall be to me a Son? To
which of the Prophets, is it spoken, sit thou on the right hand of the Majesty
on high? God at sundry times and in diverse manners, spoke in time past, unto
our fathers, by them. The vision of the ancients has failed. The prophesies of
the Prophets are sealed. The ministry of flames of fire is done away. He now is
come, who has by inheritance obtained a more excellent name, even the
appointed Heir of all things, by whom also the worlds were made, and unto whom
it is said, by Him, who gives not his glory to another, thy throne, O God, is
forever and ever; and, thou, Lord, in the beginning have laid the foundations
of the earth; and the heavens are the work of thine hands: They shall perish:
But thou remainest: As a vesture shall thou fold them up, and they shall be
changed: But thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail. It is the Lord
your Creator, the Creator of all things, whether visible or invisible, without
whom nothing was made, that is made, who is found in fashion as an infant: It
is He who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God,
and in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily, who has put on* the
similitude of a babe: It is He, whose gracious providence extends from the
rising of the sun, to the chambers of the west; whose dominion rules over all,
from the Ministering Spirit of the inner court, to the little sparrow nestling
on his altar, who has assumed the likeness of a child. -- The glorified with
glory before all worlds were, saw there was no man: The Alpha, the Omega
wondered there was no intercessor: The beginning, the ending, the Almighty
looked, there was none to help: The Lord, who was, who is, and who is to come,
beheld, and there was none to uphold: He therefore took upon himself the seed
of Abraham; and in as much, as the children were partakers of flesh and blood,
he also took part of the same: On his bosom is the breast plate of
Righteousness: Upon his head, is the helmet of Salvation: Faithfulness and
truth are the girdle of his reins: He is encompassed with the garments of
vengeance: He is clad with zeal as with a mantle: His right hand, most mighty,
bears the sword of the spirit: In his left hand, is the shield of the
unchangeable promises, yea and amen: And clothed upon with the whole armor of
God, He is divinely prepared, for the combat against principalities and powers,
against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness
in high places. No marvel indeed, that Israel's sweet Psalmist exclaimed, Lord,
what is Man that thou art so mindful of him, or the son of man that he is
visited thus? No wonder in truth, that the Apostle of the Gentiles copied the
words of the Royal Writer, when Jesus appeared a little lower than the Angels
of his power, and being made perfect in the sufferings of death, worked out the
far more exceeding and eternal weight of Salvation.

Respected as Fathers, beloved as Brethren, esteemed as Sisters, arise ye and
go up unto Zion with your fellow servants of the household of heaven. Let not
the Watchmen of Mount Ephraim plead in vain. The goodly company of Patriarchs
and Prophets, the holy fellowship of Apostles and Martyrs, the glorious Host of
the High Ones, on high, await your arrival: There is more joy in their
presence, over one, who comes up from the wilderness, leaning on the Beloved,
than over ninety and nine of the church of the First Born, already assembled in
the city of everlasting solemnities, the beautiful for situation, and the
praise of the whole earth. Verily, verily, the dignity of the brightness of the
glory of God, the all fullness of the Eternal, mysteriously veiled in the
express image of His person, is infinitely worthy of your most fervent
adoration, and highly meriteth the boundless hosanna of praise: For eye has
not seen, ear has not heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to
conceive, of all the glories of the divinity concentred in the adorable nature
of the great Redeemer, where, righteousness and truth have met together; where,
mercy and peace have embraced each other. Alas! O wretched men that we are!
The strongest powers of mortal vision, beholding through a glass darkly, are
inadequate to these Pisgah heights of sublimest contemplations: The most
enlarged faculties of the mind, obscured by a body of sin and death, are
incapable of fully comprehending the great mystery of Godliness, God manifest
in the flesh, seen of Angels, believed on in the world and received up into
glory. Such knowledge is too wonderful for us, in our present state of infancy.
The complete assurance of understanding is reserved, to enhance that joy which
is unspeakable, when these vile bodies shall be changed, by the mighty energies
of the Resurrection Morn, and fashioned like unto the Glorious Body, shown on
Mount Tabor. The deep things of God, which reason cannot by searching find out,
Revelation has made known in a measure of perfection. Take ye, therefore, the
volume of the book, as it is written, for your unerring guide. To the law and
the testimony, for the complex character of Immanuel, God with man. Search ye
the scriptures, these are they that testify of Jesus, most blessed forever: And
if every member of the one body of the Lord, does not see eye unto eye,
nevertheless, each one has abundant cause of gratitude and thanksgiving, in as
much as Divine Benignity, unparalled in condescension, has graciously
delineated the Angel of the great Counsel, the Mighty God and the Father of
every age, as the Son of Man, born of a woman, made under the law, and in all
things like unto his brethren, sin only excepted.

Mine Elders, with whom are the ancient of human days, my brethren kindly
affectioned in love, my sisters, hoping for the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ
unto life everlasting! At the footstool of the throne of Deity, high and lifted
up, let us worship and bow down and kneel together, giving thanks unto the Lord
our Maker, Preserver, and Redeemer, calling upon his name, and making known his
deeds among the people; for He being gracious, full of compassion, and great in
mercy, has holden his servant Israel, as he spoke unto their fathers, and
showed light unto the Gentiles, who sat in darkness and the shadow of death:
Having visited and redeemed the heathen his inheritance, and the uttermost
parts of the earth his possession: Raising up an horn of salvation in the house
of David, as witnessed by the mouth of his holy Prophets which have been since
the world began: And performing the promised mercy, even the oath, which he
swear unto Abraham, that he would deliver us out of the hand of our enemies,
and give the knowledge of salvation, by the remission of sins. These beautiful
outlines of grace, mercy and peace, from God our Father and the Lord Jesus
Christ, form only a part of the exceeding great and precious promises, which
received their accomplishment, as yea and Amen, in the man of God's right hand,
the man made strong for himself; those which remain are more than can be
numbered; the one half cannot be reckoned up in order. Here, therefore, we make
a solemn pause, calling upon our ransomed souls, and all that is immortal
within us, seriously to consider the fulfillment of the word of truth, that went
before the dawn of the day spring from on high: And being built on the
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, laying none other corner stone, than
that which is laid in Zion, may our eyes be blessed in beholding those things,
which many kings and righteous men desired to see and saw them not, and our
spirits rejoice with joy unspeakable in God our Savior, whilst all the
goodness, as all the glory of Jehovah passes onwards before us, in the
wonderful works of the arm of the Lord made bare, when the heavens were bowed
beneath the feet of Jesus, and the fairer than the sons of men, the chiefest
among ten thousands, was manifest in fashion as a man, rejoicing in the
habitable parts of the earth, having his delights with the children of Adam,
uttering the speech of benevolence from day unto day, showing forth the handy
work of beneficence from night unto night, and preferring the eternal
redemption of a guilty, rebel and apostate race, above the adoration of Angels,
the morning songs of the church first born, the noon tide shouting of the
spirits of the just, or the evening hallelujahs of the general assembly.

Increasing in wisdom and stature, and in favor with God and man, behold Jesus
ascends from Nazareth, toward the waters of Jordan, and is baptized of John,
the messenger of the Lord, sent to prepare the way, to make his paths straight,
and proclaim the coming of the mightier than himself, the latchet of whose
shoes, he was not worthy to stoop down and unloose. Immediately the heavens
were opened, the Holy Spirit descended like a dove, and there came a voice from
the most excellent glory, saying, this is my beloved son, in whom I am well
pleased. From this moment, the public ministry of the minister of the true
tabernacle commenced. From this hour, the once anoin^^d, covering Cherub, whose
dwelling in elder days was on the holy mountain, prepared himself for the
combat. Did the Captain of Salvation hesitate to go up from the swellings of
Jordan? Was Ariel dismayed as he entered on the habitation of the strong man
armed? No. Verily, No. Satan essayed his utmost powers. Thrice he turned the
battle to the gate: Thrice he was foiled in the daring attack. The Lion of the
tribe of Judah prevailed. The conqueror of Adam was conquered. Do we ask, why
the Son of God entered on the wilderness, abode with wild beasts, and was
tempted of the Tempter for forty days? Reason herself must respond, that this
could not be, to encircle the brow of the Celestial Warrior with the diadem of
personal victory; and Revelation answers aloud; on every page it is inscribed
in capitals.

For man, the combat was begun!
The battle fought, the victory, won!
Again, the Adversary comes on like a flood: He had only departed for a
season: In the hour and the power of darkness, all his strength is collected,
and the garden of Gethsemane exhibits the most awful contest, which had ever
been witnessed from the foundations of earth. The man of sorrows, and the
acquainted with grief, is exceeding sorrowful in soul, even unto death; but the
Prince of this world obtains not a momentary triumph: There is nothing in the
holy, the harmless and the undefiled, of which he can take hold. The
foreordained bruizer of the serpent's head, is more than conqueror: Even death
the last enemy, who hunted for the precious life, on the top of Mount Calvary,
returns back his sword empty from the slain: Himself is abolished: He that had
death's power is destroyed. The prey is taken from the mighty: The captives of
the terrible are delivered: Spoiled principalities made a show of openly, on
the morn of the resurrection: And the true Abinoam leading captivity captive
ascends victorious to our Father and to our God. -- Lift up your heads Oye
gates, and be ye lifted up ye everlasting doors, and the King of Glory shall
come in, is the Mandate of the Eternal, the Immortal, the Invisible. Who is
this King of Glory? The Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in battle, is
the solemn response. -- The gates of eternity lift up their heads. -- The
everlasting doors of the heavenly mansions are lifted up. -- The King of Glory,
the Lord of Hosts, the King of Glory enters: And the ransomed of Jehovah,
returning to Zion, with joy and gladness and everlasting songs of praise,
ascribe salvation unto the Lamb, and to Him that sits upon the throne,
forever and ever.

Men, Brethren and Fathers, with all the christian charities most
affectionately beloved! O sing unto the Lord a new song, for he has done
mavelous things; His right hand and his holy arm has gotten him the victory
over sin: He has broken the staff of death, and the scepter of the Ruler in
darkness. Apollyon, who smote the people in wrath, Abaddon who ruled the
nations in anger is persecuted* Lucifer, the son of the morning has fallen
from heaven: The man that made the earth to tremble is cut down to the ground.
The prisoners of hope are delivered from the pit in the which there is no
water: The captive exiles are loosed from the chains of death: They shall break
forth into singing, clap their hands together, and adoring, exclaim, thou, O
God, have rescued from the jaw teeth of the Lion: Thou have redeemed from the
low dungeon of the Destroyer. The sighing of the prisoner, the groaning of the
appointed to die came before Thee: According to the strength of thy power, thou
did break in pieces the gates of brass, and dissolve asunder the bars of
iron. Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, be the glory: Thou alone art worthy of
everlasting praise, and thine is the greatness, and the power, and the glory,
and the majesty of victory.

Again, the watchmen of Mount Ephraim lift up the voice, and earnestly entreat,
that ye arise, and go up unto Zion to the Lord your God. The Ruler in Israel,
whose goings forth have been of old, from the womb of the morn of eternity, is
gone up before you to Bethlehem Ephratah; he has returned in the power of the
spirit from the wilderness; and every moment of his life adds another seal to
his all glorious character; testifying that he is come, of whom Moses in the
law, and of whom the Prophets did write, even Jesus of Nazareth, the true
Messiah; Neither have we any reason to look for another, who can do more
miracles than he has done, or give higher evidence, than his works have given,
that indeed, he is the Christ of God. As eyes to the blind, hearing to the
deaf, speech to the dumb, feet to the lame, healing to the diseased, strength
to the weak, cleansing to the leper, bread to the hungry, drink to the thirsty,
life to the dead, and the gospel to the poor, his morning travel, noontide
journey and evening progress bear indubitable witness, that he is graciously
touched with the feeling of every human infirmity, prompt to relieve the
extremest misery, and able to save even unto the very uttermost. Behold, the
man who had been bound with fetters and chains, whose dwelling was among the
tombs, and so exceeding fierce that none could tame him; possessed with a
legion of those infernal spirits, who had entered by violence on the ruined
temple of the Holy Ghost, he is delivered in a moment, in the twinkling of an
eye, from their cruel, vindictive and malignant power: He is clothed of Jesus,
sits down calmly at his feet, and restored from outrageous phrenzy, to a right
mind, he is given back to his astonished friends, and tells how great things
the Lord had done for him. The unhappy lunatic, sore vexed, often times falling
in the fire, and often times in the water, is healed by the great Physician of
inestimable value. The withered arm feels a renovating energy dart along its
shrunken sinews, and is stretched forth strong as the other. The wretched
subject of the shaking palsy, borne on his bed by four attendants, rises up in
the presence of multitudes, and walks home unsupported. The born blind, who
never saw the human form divine, shut out from all the rich variety of nature's
works, beholds the Father's face In Jesus Christ. The dumb, whose tongue was
never loosed, whose tongue if loosed by human art, impediment had barred from
speech, now glorifies the Lord by offering praise. The deaf, is blessed with
salvation's welcome sound, the sweetest accent ever heard on earth. The
impotent, for thirty-eight long years, whom no kind friend baptized in the
troubled pool, is cured by the word of power. The maimed, wanting limbs,
receive new members for the body, from the Head of every man. The leper
dwelling in a several house abides no more alone; no longer cries unclean,
unclean: His skin is fresher than a child's: His flesh is fairer than the
babe's. The woman sore diseased, her living spent, her plague increased, needs
but to touch the garment's hem: Virtue goes forth and makes her straightway
whole. The crooked, bowed down for eighteen years, by Satan bound, is loosed on
the Sabbath Day. The dropsy quits the secret reservoirs of life: Its
overwhelming waters know their bounds: Thus far they come, and here, the rising
wave is stayed. The burning fever's parching heats are turned into grateful
moisture: Its momentary victim rises from the bed and ministers to Jesus. The
stormy wind, descending tempest, and the rolling billow hear the Sovereign
Mandate, peace, be still. The sinking Peter, confident in strength, is saved by
his Master's outstretched hand. The sinner listens to the soothing voice of
pardoning grace: Be of good cheer, the Savior says, thy sins are all
forgiven. A word, restores the servant sick at Capernaum. I will, and be thou
clean, completes all cleansing. The hungry multitudes, at evening's solitary
hour, amid the wilderness, the desert waste, are feasted at the table of the
Lord: His liberal soul devises liberal things: Thousands and tens of thousands
feed upon the bounties of their God: Men, women, children all are filled: Not
even one is deemed unworthy to partake. The Ruler's daughter is recalled to
life: Death renders up his prey to the Omnipotent Talitha Cumi. The weeping
widow, mourning for an only son, receives him from the dead: Almighty goodness,
unimplored, restores him to his mother's arms. Lazarus, though four days
buried, wakeneth at the joyous sound, Come forth: The Spirit breathes upon the
lifeless clay: He lives to wonder, worship and adore: Loose him and let him go,
is the divine command. The miracle of miracles remains as yet unnoticed: The
most stupendous work of Jesus' ministry, has not been told: It is the mystery
from ages, and from generations hid: The everlasting gospel freely preached to
the poor: The blessed tidings of salvation for the chief of sinners: The
gracious pardon of a reconciled God, proclaimed to a guilty world. Here rests
the hope of Israel, the consolation of the Gentiles, and the confidence of the
ends of the earth. In the fellowship of the mystery of the good pleasure of
Jehovah, prospering in the hand of Immanuel, is, the joy of Patriarchs, the
theme of Prophets, the rejoicing of Apostles, the victory of Martyrs, and the
praise of Angels. T^^ whole family of heaven and of earth, blessed with all
spiritual blessings in Christ Jesus, their Lord and ours; the watchmen of Mount
Ephraim, fellow-citizens in Jerusalem above; the glorified spirits of the
presence chamber of I AM; the twenty and the four, whose seats encircle the
throne of light; the twelve times twelve thousand, having their part in the
first resurrection; the innumerable company of Cherubim and Seraphim, and the
fullness of that assembly which no man is able to number, all these attune their
golden harps in unison, and with one voice and one speech, reverentially
acknowledge, that the Savior born to day, the Babe within the manger laid, the
Infant wrapped in swaddling clothes, is, of God, made unto them, wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption; for of him, and through him, and
to him, are all things, and unto him be glory forever, and ever. Amen.

Men, Brethren and Fathers, well beloved, highly esteemed, greatly respected!
Think not, I beseech you, that the sum of those things, whereof we have already
spoken, contains the perfect character of the Redeeming God. These, are only
a part of his ways. Not the pen of the ready writer, not the tongue of the
eloquent orator, can faithfully delineate, or fully make known, the glory that
remains and excels. Come, let us arise, and go up unto Zion to the Lord
our God, the great High Priest of our profession, the High Priest merciful and
faithful, who in the days of his flesh, offered up himself through the Eternal
Spirit, a living sacrifice for sin, holy and acceptable. It was of necessity,
says the Apostle, that the true Melchizedek should have somewhat to offer.
Sacrifice and burnt offering, as offered by the law, with thousands of rivers
of oil, or tens of thousands of rams, could not make Aaron who did the service,
perfect, as pertaining to the conscience. The blood of bulls, and of goats, and
the sprinkling of the ashes of an heifer, neither finished sin, made an end of
transgression, nor brought in everlasting righteousness. These rites,
ceremonies and cleansings, purified the pattern of the heavenly things: But not
the heavenly things themselves, which required a better sacrifice. Then, said
Jesus, lo, I come, in the volume of the book, it is written of me, to do thy
will, O God: The Lamb without blemish and without spot, bearing away the sin of
the world, has accomplished this will, by the which will, he has forever
perfected them that are sanctified: The iniquities of us all being caused to
meet upon him, his soul was made an offering for sin; and he who knew no sin,
became sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Jesus
Christ, the same yesterday, to day, and forever, without variableness of
turning, or shadow of change has obtained Eternal Redemption: As the Great
Shepherd and Bishop of souls he has entered into the Holiest of Holies; and
seated at the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens, he ever
lives to make intercession, being the Advocate if any man sin, and the mercy
seat for our sins, and not only for ours, but also for the sins of the whole
world: Hence the Apostle bears witness, that he has reconciled all things
unto himself, whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven, and argues
therefrom, in well grounded assurance of hope, not making ashamed, that in the
dispensation of the fullness of times, they shall be gathered together in one
Christ, the Head of the church, the Savior of the body, and the Ransom given
for all, who has blotted out the bill of book debt Dr. Harwood on Coloss.
II.13.
taking it out of the way, nailing it to his cross, and making in himself of
Jew and Gentile, one new man, reconciling both, in the unity of that body, not
a bone of which was broken, where, there is neither Greek, nor Scythian,
Barbarian, bond nor free, but all are as one recreated image of the second
Adam, to whom every knee shall bow in heaven, in earth and under the earth, and
every tongue confess that Jesus Christ, is the Lord, to the glory of the
Father; whilst the whole creation shall be heard ascribing, of blessing, and
honor, and glory, and power unto the Lamb that was slain, for he who has
redeemed unto God by his blood, who has delivered from the bondage of
corruption and translated into glorious liberty, is worthy to recieve riches,
and strength, and blessing forever and forever, Amen, and Amen.

Come then, and to thy many crowns,
Receive yet one, the crown of all the earth,
Thou who alone art worthy! It was thine
By ancient covenant, ere nature's birth,
And thou have made it thine by purchase since,
And over paid its value with thy blood. Cowper.

Watchmen of Mount Ephraim, on the hills of Bethlehem Ephratah! If ye had held
your peace on this day, the stones of the temple would have cried out, arise,
and go up to Zion, unto the Lord your God. Come, my brethren and my sisters,
let us arise and say with the venerable Patriarch, we will go up yonder and
worship. The ministry of Jesus in death, was glorious: It engraved as with the
graving of a signet, on the palms of his hands, the love wherewith God so loved
the world: But the ministration of the Spirit, in the power of the resurrection
shall be infinitely more glorious, and that love which has its abiding, when
faith is swallowed up of vision, and hope lost in joy unspeakable, will forever
surpass the height, the depth of finite understanding, and wrap even Angel
hosts, and Heaven's high courts, in solemn silence.

Christ has suffered all things that were written: The scriptures are
accomplished which spoke of his humiliation: He is about to enter into his
glory, and to see of the travail of his soul: He is loosed from the cords of
death: It is impossible that he could be holden of them. The Lord is risen
indeed, in the spirit and the power of an endless life: He has said unto
death, O death, I will be thy plagues: He has witnessed to the grave, O grave,
I will be thy destruction. The Conqueror over both has gone up with a shout:
The keys of death and of hell are in his hand. Lo, Jesus ascends on high: Far
exalted above all principality and power: Angels, authorities and the world to
come being in subjection, he sets on the throne of his holiness; and
reigns as a Prince and a Savior to give repentance and remission of sins:
The nations of the saved are the diadem of his beauty; a scepter of
righteousness is the scepter of his kingdom: His throne is upholden by mercy
and truth: In the multitude of people is the honor of the king: All kings, when
they hear the words of his mouth shall submit themselves. To him is the
gathering and obedience of nations: He shall rule from sea to sea, and from the
river unto the ends of the earth: It is a light thing that he should reign over
the house of Jacob forever; of the increase of his kingdom and of his peace,
there shall be no end. From the rising of the sun to the going down of the
same, prayer shall be made continually unto him; a pure offering of incense
offered in every place; and men shall call him blessed, because they are
blessed in him, from henceforth and forever, world without end.

Are the Watchmen of Mount Ephraim, silent? Do they cease to cry aloud, arise
ye, and go up to Zion unto the Lord your God? The Savior born to day, Christ
Jesus, the Lord, is not only the King of saints, King of nations, and King of
the whole earth, he also is the Great Prophet, to whom the Spirit was not given
by measure. The spirit of wisdom and of knowledge; of counsel and of might,
rests in all its fullness, on the Man Divine. We, therefore, do err
exceedingly, not knowing the scriptures, when our views of the prophetical
character of Christ are bounded by those predictions, which he delivered,
whilst tabernacling below. The lamp of ancient prophecy was light at the altar
of heaven. The Baptizer with the Holy Ghost in fire, as the Lord, the Spirit
kindled the living coal. All those glorious things, that are spoken of the
latter days, ought to be considered, as the faithful and the true sayings of
the faithful Witness on high; and every iota should be received by us, upon
whom the ends of the world are come, as if pronounced by an audible voice from
above. The good word of our God shall never fall to the ground: The hills may
depart, the mountains remove, and all these elements dissolve: But his promise
shall not return unto him void; it shall prosper whereunto it is sent, and
accomplish all the pleasure of Jehovah. Amid an infinite variety of sublime
passages, replete with the consolations of the Comforter, the Times of
Refreshing from the presence of the Lord, and the day of the Restitution of all
things claim a distinguished place. The finishing of the mystery, as declared
by all God's holy Prophets, is reserved for the sounding of the seventh
trumpet, when the rainbow crowned Angel, shall proclaim, that the kingdoms of
the world are become the kingdom of God and his Christ. Then, comes the end,
and the morning without a cloud, will reveal the Just, whose body the heavens
must receive until that period, in all his goodness, as all his glory: Sorrow
and sighing, and sickness and pain shall vanish as a dream, before the lifting
up of the light of his countenance: The vail that is spread over all nations,
the covering that is cast over all people, shall be destroyed: And death, the
last enemy, being perfectly swallowed up of victory, all tears shall be wiped
away, from off all faces, for the mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it.
Indulge me to close this faint description, of the exceeding abundance of the
riches of grace, as yet to be showed in the ages to come, by adopting the
beautiful language of the devout Cowper, whose harp of sacred poesy, is never
hung upon the willows, when he sings the song of Moses and the Lamb.

Task, Book vi. p. 181.
See Salem built, the labor of a God!
Bright, as a sun, the sacred city shines;
All kingdoms, and all princes of the earth
Flock to that light; the glory of all lands
Flows into her, unbounded is her joy,
And endless her increase. Thy rams are there
Nebaioth, and the flocks of Kedar there;
The looms of Ormus, and the mines of Ind,
And Saba's spicy groves pay tribute there.
Praise is in all her gates. Upon her walls,
And in her streets, and in her spacious courts
Is heard salvation. Eastern Java there,
Kneels with the native of the farthest West.
And Ethiopia spreads abroad the hand
And worships. Her report has traveled forth
Into all lands. From every clime they come,
To see thy beauty, and to share thy joy*
One song employs all nations, and all cry,
Worthy the Lamb, for he was slain for us.
The dwellers in the vales and on the rocks
Shout to each other, and the mountain tops,
From distant mountains catch the flying joy,
Till nation, after nation, taught the strain,
Earth rolls the rapturous hosanna round
And sees the measure of the promise filled.
Men, Brethren, Fathers and Sisters! The Watchmen of Mount Ephraim, beseech,
that ye arise and go up to Zion unto the Lord your God, for he has given you
an Example that ye should walk in his footsteps: He has set before you a
pattern, that ye should do in all things unto others, as he has done unto you.
Art thou a father, a husband or a son, a master, servant, ruler or subject?
Remember, I entreat thee, that a frequent recurrence to the example of thy
Lord, a constant imitation of his most holy pattern, is the best preservative
from error, the surest safeguard from vice, and keeps in safety from the
great transgression, when the pulses beat quick, the passions sound an alarm,
and temptations press; whilst ambition flatters, mammon spreads the gilded
bait, and pleasure points her serpent-sting.

Ye Watchmen, on the watch towers of Bethlehem Ephratah, what remains to be
added? See, that ye refuse not him who speaks from heaven, is their united
answer. A voice from the Most Excellent Glory has declared, this is my beloved
Son, hear him. Christ Jesus has graciously summed up the Law and the Prophets
in four comprehensive words, love God, love Man: These two commandments are not
grievous: They connect duty with interest, and interest with happiness. To love
our Creator, Preserver, Redeemer and Savior, is the requirement of a
reasonable service. To love our brethren, is inscribed upon the tablet of every
heart, as with the pen of a diamond: But the christian ought not to bound his
affections in the house of his friends. Our enemies are to be loved with all
fervor of charity. The love of Christ constrains us thus to judge; and his
precept has enjoined it as a duty, which is founded on his own example. Give
ye therefore all diligence to add unto your faith, virtue, and to virtue,
knowledge, and to knowledge, temperance, and to temperance, godliness, and to
godliness, brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness, love, even the love
of friends and of enemies, which is the fulfilling of the Royal Law, and the
bond of perfectness in heaven above and in earth beneath.

It is time, that we attempt to improve the subject before us, by a few
pertinent reflections, adapted to mutual edification.

I. The Apostle, writing unto the Hebrews, having set forth the dignity of the
Just God and the Savior, has exhorted, that we give the more earnest heed
unto the things which we have heard, lest at any time we let them slip. The
neglecting of so great salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by the
Lord in Paradise, and has been confirmed unto us, by the united testimony of
Patriarchs, Prophets, and Evangelists, with the trump of the Archangel, and the
voice of the whole Host of Heaven, will assuredly meet with a due recompense of
reward, for if he, who despised Moses' law was put to death, by the mouth of
two or three witnesses, of how much sorer punishment, shall he be thought
worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God, crucified him afresh, and
put him to an open shame. The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmities, but
a wounded spirit who can bear? Believe ye, therefore, in the Lord your God, so
shall ye be established; believe in his Prophets, so shall ye prosper. Without
faith it is impossible to please God. The fellow pilgrims, and sojourners in
this vale of tears, who were gathered unto their fathers, before Christ came in
the flesh, went on their way, rejoicing in the hope that was set before them,
beholding the fulfillment of the promises afar off, and being persuaded that He
who had promised was also faithful to perform, their faith was accounted unto
them for righteousness. God has graciously provided some better thing for us.
We have heard with our ears, we have seen with our eyes, we have looked upon,
and our hands have handled of the word of life. Those, upon whom the ends of
the world, are come, must be, of all men most inexcusable, if they close their
eyes against the clear shining of the true light, turn a deaf ear to the
Charmer ever charming wisely, and oppose a heart of adamant against the Lord
Christ. Let us, therefore, earnestly pray, that we may be delivered from the
sin of unbelief, which does so easily beset, and run with patience the race
that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the author, and the finisher of
faith, and thus cast anchor within the vail, whither the Forerunner has for us
entered.

II. At all times and in all places, it would be our wisdom, to remember the
years of the right hand of the Most High; his wonderful works from the days of
old: The heavens which declare his glory, and the firmament showing forth his
handy work, are witnesses on behalf of the Almighty, in every land, and their
silent language is worthy of being heard among all nations; for, the invisible
things of God are hereby clearly seen, being understood by the things that are
made, even his eternal power and God Head: But neither Creation, in all its
multiplied wonders, nor Providence, which is arrayed in greater glories than
Creation, so fully reveal the nature of the Divine Being, or so clearly
demonstrate his attributes, as the eternal purpose of grace in Christ Jesus
from before the world began: On this, the noblest work of God, the corner stone
of time was laid; and the top stone brought forth in eternity with shouting,
shall cry grace, grace unto it. In truth, this first, last, finished work, has
a claim to our constant remembrance. It deserves to be had in memorial, when
we lie down, what time we arise, whether we wake, or sleep, or live, or die:
For, for this cause, Christ Jesus both died and rose, and revived again, that
henceforth we should not live unto ourselves, but live unto him, who so loved
us, that he gave himself for our sins, that we might be delivered from this
present evil world, and translated from the kingdom of darkness, to an
inheritance incorruptible, undefiled and that fades not away.

III. Christ Jesus, our Lord, is not only worthy of being had in reverence,
because of his wonderful works in Creation, Providence, Redemption and
Salvation: But the beauty of his all perfect example ought to be devoutly
contemplated at evening, at morning and at noon. As the Father Everlasting, who
of one blood has made all nations, who dwell together upon the face of the
whole earth, how richly has he provided for the food, the habitation and the
clothing of his offspring! In the character of a Son, what strength of filial
affection, gratitude, obedience and love! The blessed among women, was tenderly
thought of in the last moments of life: His address on her behalf, to the
beloved Disciple, when treading the winepress alone, and tasting the bitterness
of death, is so exquisitely affecting, that even to read it without tears,
would argue the extremest insensibility. In brief, amid all the endearing, the
much loved relations of life, as a Parent, a Brother, a Friend, Jesus stands
greatly preheminent; and the word of the Savior, energetically heard in his
example, is, Go thou and do likewise.

IV. The new commandment whereunto we are delivered, ought to be adopted as the
rule of life. All its ways are pleasantness. The path of obedience is peace.
Permit me, therefore, to conclude in the language of an eminent, and a faithful
servant of the Lamb. Finally, Men, Brethren and Fathers, with all the christian
charities most affectionately beloved, whatsover things are honest, whatsoever
things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely,
whatsoever things are of good report, or, if there be any other virtue, or,
ought else deserving praise, as learned and received from the Lord Jesus, or as
practiced by the Apostles and Primitive Churches, think ye continually on these
things; and let your consequent good works, the evidence of faith in Christ, as
the adorning of the doctrine of the Savior God, furnish an answer unto every
man, of the reason of the hope that is within you. It is yet a very little
while, and the Watchmen of Mount Ephraim shall cry, arise ye from earth and
ascend to heaven. At this all important, heart affecting, soul interesting
moment, may the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the
fellowship of the Spirit, enable us to answer, we come unto Thee; for thou art
the Lord our God, the God of Salvation, our guide unto death and beyond it,
forever and for ever, Amen and Amen.


