THE SKY LARK: OR GENTLEMEN AND LADIES' Complete Songster. BEING A COLLECTION
OF THE MOST MODERN and CELEBRATED American, English AND Scotch SONGS.

"MUSIC has charms to soothe a savage breast,
To soften rocks, and bend the knotted oak."
Worcester: FROM THE PRESS OF ISAIAH THOMAS, jun. SOLD AT HIS BOOKSTORE AND BY
THE BOOKSELLERS IN BOSTON. -- 1795.

Contents.
A
PAGE. ADIEU! ye verdant lawns and bowers PAGE. 19 A beauteous Starling late I
saw, PAGE. 23 As on von village lawn I strayed, PAGE. 29 Alas! the battle's
lost and won; PAGE. 41 A cobbler there was and he lived in a stall, PAGE. 50
Adieu, ye jovial youths who join, PAGE. 54 As passing by a shady grove, PAGE.
85 As bringing home the other day, PAGE. 86 As Colinet and Phoebe sat, PAGE. 89
Ah! fashion wherefore do thou still, PAGE. 112 A sailor's life's a life of
woe, PAGE. 152 Across the downs this morning, PAGE. 157 All in the dawns the
fleet was moored, PAGE. 101 As Jamie Gay, gang'd blithe his way, PAGE. 185
Adieu, ye streams that gently flowing, PAGE. 190
B
By a murmuring stream, a fair shepherdess lay, PAGE. 46 Busy, curious, thirsty
sly, PAGE. 53 Banish sorrow, grief and fo^ly, PAGE. 66 Believe my sighs, my
tears, my dear, PAGE. 78 Beneath a green grove, a lovely young swain, PAGE. 84
By a whirlwind methought I through Ether was hurled, PAGE. 198
C
Come, sailors, be filling the can; PAGE. 37 Could you to battle march away,
PAGE. 38 Comely swain, why sitst thou so? PAGE. 42 Cease, rude Boreas
blustering railer! PAGE. 61 Charming village maid. PAGE 118 Contented I am, and
contented I Will be, PAGE. 126 Come now, all ye social powr's, PAGE. 165 Cupid
sent on a message one evening by Venus, PAGE. 174 Come care curing mirth PAGE.
200
D
Dear is my little native vale, PAGE. 35 Dear Clora, let us love, while in soft
wonton gales, PAGE. 113 Dear heart! what a terrible life am I led! PAGE. 128
Distress me with those (...) no more, PAGE. 228 Dame Liberty has sled (...)
^all; PAGE. 227
E
Eliza, once in prospect fair, PAGE. 120
F
Friendship to every willing mind, PAGE. 73 From the man that I love, though my
heart I disguise, PAGE. 76 From the book and the willow sorsaking the plain,
PAGE. 83 Farewell ye Greenfields and sweet groves, PAGE. 88 For various purpose
serves the fan, PAGE. 103 For a shape, and a bloom, and an air, and a mien,
PAGE. 111 For ages on ages by tyranny bound, PAGE. 203 Flora at her task one
day, PAGE. 216
G
Guardian angels now protect me, PAGE. 48 Go! tuneful bird, that glads the
skies, PAGE. 95 Gallants attend, and hear a friend, PAGE. 139
H
How happy a state does the miller possess, PAGE. 49 Hyla's the sweetest maid
on earth, PAGE. 69 Her sheep had in clusters crept close to a grove, PAGE. 79
How stands the glass around? PAGE. 80 How imperfect is expression, PAGE. 102
Hark! hark! over the plains what glad tumults we hear! PAGE. 122 How bright are
the joys of the table, PAGE. 145 How happy is the man, PAGE. 208 How blessed is
the bachelor's life, PAGE. 209
I
I Have kissed and I Have prattled with fifty fair maids, PAGE. 17 If your lovers,
maids, forsake you, PAGE. 41 I envy not the proud their we^th, PAGE. 55 I envy
not the mighty great, PAGE. 58 In good king Charles's golden days, PAGE. 59 In
Jacky Bull, when bound to France, PAGE. 65 I Delia's beauties would disclose,
PAGE. 67 In a mouldering cave, where the wretched retreat, PAGE. 72 I dreamt I
saw a piteous sight, PAGE. 97 I sigh and lament me in vain, PAGE. 99 In choice
of a husband we widows are nice, PAGE. 148 I thought our quarrels ended, PAGE.
155 In hist'ries of Heathens, by which tutors train us, PAGE. 171 I Have seen the
smiling of sortune beguiling, PAGE. 185 In Even Grove there dwells a maid.
PAGE. 196 I Will sing you a song, and I Will sing all about it, PAGE. 205
J
Jolly mortals, fill your glasses, PAGE. 136
L
Lovely nymph! O cease to grieve me, PAGE. 100 Lovely nymph now cease to
languish, PAGE. 101 Let school masters puzzle their brain, PAGE. 109 Little
muses come and cry, PAGE. 124 Let rakes and libertines, resigned, PAGE. 131 Let
poets praise the slow'ry mead, PAGE. 135 Look, dear ma'^m, I Am quite the thing,
PAGE. 144 Lord! what care I for mam or dad, PAGE. 150 Let shepherd lads and
maids advance, PAGE. 158 Leave neighbors your work, and to sport and to play;
PAGE. 159 Let us laughed at the common distinctions of state, PAGE. 179 Let
meaner bards in rapturous strain, PAGE. 225
M
My temples with clusters of grapes I Will entwine, PAGE. 91 My banks are
furnished with bees, PAGE. 125 Music, how paw'sful is thy charm! PAGE. 138 Mon
chere amie, let not despair PAGE. 189
N
No glory I covet, no riches I want, PAGE. 19 Nae mair ye bo^ny lasses ^^y,
PAGE. 30 No more I Will cour^^^ (...) bred fair, PAGE. 119 Now Is the time for
mir^n and glee, PAGE. 130 No care beyond the m^rrow! PAGE. 154 Now we are free
from college rules, PAGE. 177 Now, Joan we are married -- and now let my say,
PAGE. 214
O
On Richmond Hill, there live's a lass, PAGE. 11 On the green sedgy bands of
the sweet winding Tay, PAGE. 12 Over the vine covered hills, and gay regions of
France, PAGE. 24 Often as on Thame's banks I stray, PAGE. 32 O nightingale! best
poet of the grove, PAGE. 87 Over desert plains and rushy meers, PAGE. 98 Of all
the pretty flowers, PAGE. 151 One morning very early, one morning in the
spring, PAGE. 163 Once the Gods of the Greeks, at ambrosial feast, PAGE. 168
One evening Good humor took Wit as his guest, PAGE. 181 Over mooriands and
mountains, rude barren and bar, PAGE. 202 On Mira's toilet there was lain,
PAGE. 207
P
Papilio the rich in the hurry of love, PAGE. 183
S
Shepherds I have lost my love, PAGE. 13 Some how my spindle I mislaid, PAGE.
22 Spanking Jack was so comely, so pleasant^ to jolly, PAGE. 44 Since every
(...) on earth combined, PAGE. 63 Say, little, foollish, sluttering thing,
PAGE. 72 Says P^ato, why should man be vain, PAGE. 75 Sweet Body now employs my
pen, PAGE. 72 See rudy Aurora begins to appear, PAGE. 114 Sweet P^ly of
Piymouth was my dear, PAGE. 131 Such ^^t^es in view I, PAGE. 147 S^ (...)
nightingale! Queen of the spray, PAGE. 191
T
The d^sky night rides down the sky, PAGE. 13 'Twas on the morn of sweet May
day, PAGE. 16 The women all tell me I Am false to my lass, PAGE. 20 Trust not
man for he will deceive you; PAGE. 26 Trust not woman she will beguile you. --
ibid. The role that weeps with morning dew, PAGE. 27 The morning dew, that wets
the rose, PAGE. 31 There was a maiden in our town. PAGE 33 The wealthy fool,
with gold in store, PAGE. 53 The spring was advancing, and birds were
beginning, PAGE. 56 The ech^^ng horn calls the sportsmen abroad, PAGE. 64 The
fields were green, the hills were gay, PAGE. 70 The silver moon's enamored
beam. PAGE. 77 The' youth and beauty grace the fair, PAGE. ^1 The smiling m^^n,
the breathing spring, PAGE. 103 'Twas early on a holiday, PAGE. 105 There was a
frog lived in a well, PAGE. 107 The last time I came over the moor, PAGE. 132
To hear a sweet Goldfinch's sonnet, PAGE. 143 Three years a sailors life I led,
PAGE. 156 The topsail shivers in the wind, PAGE. 164 To fly like bird, from
grove to grove, PAGE. 195 Though grandeur fl^^^ my humble roof, PAGE. 201 The
sportive swain, with graceful p^^^e, PAGE. 217 The shepherd of fortune
possessed, PAGE. 223
U
Unfold, Father Time, thy long records unfold, PAGE. 219
W
When Del^a on the blain appears, PAGE. 18 Why heaves my long bosom, ah! What
can it mean? PAGE. 20 When I had scarcely told sixteen, PAGE. 28 When first on
the plain I began to appear, PAGE. 31 When the summer smiling bids the hills
PAGE. 39 When gentle love first fired my breast, PAGE. 40 Were I ^blig'd to beg
my bread, PAGE. 43 When Damon languish'd at my feet; PAGE. 52 Was I shepherd's
maid to keep, PAGE. 71 Well met, jolly fellows, well met; PAGE. 99 When I comes
to town with a load of hay, PAGE. 115 When duty called I sailed away, PAGE. 117
What is a poet Sir? you, Sir? no Sir PAGE. 124 When I was a young one, what
girl was like me? PAGE. 134 When blushes died the check of morn, PAGE. 137
While the lads of the village shall merrily ah! PAGE. 146 While some do love
full bowls of quaff, PAGE. 149 When trees did bud, and fields were green. PAGE.
167 With gloomy clouds of dismal dread, PAGE. 191 When Chloe tried her virgin
fires, PAGE. 218
Y
Young Teddy is an Irish lad, PAGE. 36 Ye virgins attend, PAGE. 81 Ye fair
possessed of every charm, PAGE. 129 Ye beauties, or such as would beauties be
famed, PAGE. 188 Ye dear pretty ladies, PAGE. 212
THE SKY LARK, etc.
Lass OF Richmond Hill.
ON Richmond Hill, there live's a lass,
More blithe than May day morn;
Her charms all other nymphs surpass,
A rose without a thorn.
This lass so neat,
With smiles so sweet,
Has won my right good will,
I Would crowns resign,
To call her mine,
Sweet lass of Richmond Hill.
Ye zephyrs gay, that fan the air;
And wanton through the grove;
Go, whisper to the charming fair,
I die for her I love.
This lass so neat,
With smiles so sweet,
Has won my right good will,
I Would crowns resign,
To call her mine,
Sweet lass of Richmond Hill,
THE Green Sedgy Banks.
ON the green Sedgy banks of the sweet winding Tay,
As blithe as the woodla^k that carols in May --
I past the gay moments with joy and delight,
For peace cheered the morn and content crowned the night:
Till love taught young hope, my youth to deceive,
What we wish to be true love bids us believe. --
Wherever I wander over hill, dale or grove,
Young Sandy will follow with sweet tales of love:
En^^^tur'd he vowed with a kiss and a sigh,
If J^^ny proves cruel, Alas! I must die.
A youth so engaging, with ease might deceive.
What we with to be true, love bids us believe.
He stole my fond heart then he left me to mourn.
For ^eac and contentment which never can return;
From the clown to the beau, the sex are all (...).
They complain of the wound, but we feel the smart;
We join in the fraud, and ourselves we deceive,
What we wish to be true, love bids us believe.
THE Banks OF THE Banna.
SHEPHERDS I have lost my love,
Have you seen my Anna?
Pride of every shady grove,
Upon the banks of Banna.
I for her my home forsook,
Near yon misty mountain,
Left my flock, my pipe, my crook,
Green wood, shade and fountain.
Never shall I see them more
Until her returning:
All the joys of life are over,
From gladness changed to mourning.
Whither is my charmer flown!
Shepherds' tell me whither!
Ah! woes me, perhaps she is gone
Forever and forever.
THE Dusky Night.
THE dusky night rides down the sky,
And ushers in the morn,
The hounds all join in jovial cry,
The huntsman winds his horn.
And a hunting we will go, etc.
The wife around her husband throws
Her arms to make him stay,
My dear it rains, it hails, it blows,
You cannot hunt to day.
Yet a hunting we will go, etc.
Sly Reynard now like lightning flies,
And sweeps across the vale,
But when the hounds too near he spies
He drops his bushy tail.
Then a hunting, etc.
Fond echo seems to like the sport,
And join the jovial cry,
The woods and hills the sound retort,
And music fills the sky,
When a hunting, etc.
At last his strength to faintness worn,
Poor Reynard ceases flight;
Then hungry homeward we return
To feast away the night.
And a drinking, etc.
Ye jovial hunters in the morn
Prepare then for the chase,
Rise at the sounding of the horn,
And health with sport embrace,
When a hunting, etc.
Song.
NO glory I covet, no riches I want,
Ambition is nothing to me,
The one thing I beg of kind heaven to grant,
Is a mind independent and free.
With passions unruffled, untainted with pride,
By reason my life let me square;
The wants of my nature are cheaply supplied,
And the rest are but folly and care.
The blessings which providence freely has lent
I Will justly and gratefully prize;
Whilst sweet meditation and cheerful content,
Shall make me both healthful and wise.
In the pleasures the great man's possessions
Unenvied I Will challenge my part;
For every fair object my eyes can survey display,
Contributes to gladden my heart.
How vainly through infinite trouble and strife,
The many their labors employ!
Since all that is truly delightful in life
Is what all, if they please, may enjoy.
Jockey TO THE Fair,
'TWAS on the morn of sweet May day,
When nature painted all things gay,
Taught birds to sing, and lambs to play,
And gild the meadows rare:
Young Jockey early in the dawn,
Arose, and tript it over the lawn;
His Sunday's coat the youth put on,
For Jenny had vowed away to run
With Jockey to the fair.
Jenny had vowed, etc.
The cheerful parish bells had rung,
With eager steps he trudged along,
With flowery garlands round him hung,
Which shepherds used to wear:
He tapt the window -- Haste my dear,
Jenny impatient, cried, Who Is there?
It Is I, my love, and no one near;
Step gently down, you have naught to fear,
With Jockey to the fair.
My dad and mammy's fast asleep,
My brother's up, and with the sheep;
And will you still your promise keep,
Which I have heard you swear?
And will you ever constant prove?
I will by all the powers of love,
And never deceive my charming dove:
Dispel these doubts, and haste, my love,
With Jockey to the fair.
Behold the ring, the shepherd cried,
Will Jenny be my charming bride?
Let Cupid be our happy guide,
And Hymen meet us there.
Then Jockey did his vows renew,
He would be constant, would be true:
His word was pledged -- away she flew,
With cowslips, tipped with balmy dew,
With Jockey to the fair.
In raptures meet the joyful throng,
Their gay companions blithe and young;
Each join the dance each join the song,
And hail the happy pair:
In turns there is none so fond as they,
They blessed the kind propitious day;
The smiling morn of blooming May,
When lovely Jenny ran away,
With Jockey to the fair.
THE Maid OF THE Mill.
WILLIAM. I HAVE kissed and I Have prattled with fifty fair maids,
And changed them as often do you see;
But of all the fair maidens that dance on the green,
The maid of the mill for me.

PHOEBE. There Is fifty young men have told me fine tales,
And called me the fair st she;
But of all the gay youths that sport on the green,
Young Harry's the lad for me.

WILLIAM. Her eyes are as black as the sloe in the hedge,
Her face like the blossoms in May,
Her teeth are as white as the new shorn flock,
Her breath like the new made hay.

PHOEBE. He Is tall and he is straight as the poplar tree,
His cheeks are as fresh as a rose;
He looks like a squire of high degree
When dressed in his sunday's clothes.

Delia.
WHEN Delia on the plain appears,
Awed by a thousand tender fears;
I would approach, but dare not move;
Tell me, my heart, if this be love?
When'er she speaks, my ravished ear
No other voice but here is can hear;
No other wit but here is approve;
Tell me my heart, if this be love?
If she some other swain commend,
Though I was once his sondest friend,
His instant enemy I prove;
Tell me my heart, if this be love?
When she is absent, I no more
Delight in all that pleased before,
The clearest spring, the shadiest grove;
Tell me my heart, if this be love?
When fond of power, of beauty vain,
Her net she spread for every swain,
I strove to hate, but vainly strove;
Tell me my heart if this be love?
Song.
ADIEU! ye verdant lawns and bowers,
Adieu, my peace is over;
Adieu, ye sweetest shrubs and flowers,
Since Delia breathes no more.
Adieu ye hills, adieu ye vales,
Adieu ye streams and floods:
Adieu sweet echo's plaintive tales,
Adieu ye meads and woods.
Adieu ye flocks, ye fleecy care,
Adieu yon pleasing plain!
Adieu thou beauteous blooming fair,
We never shall meet again.
Song.
WHY heaves my fond bosom, ah! What can it mean?
Why flutters my heart that was once so serene?
Why this sighing and trembling when Daphne is near,
Why this sighing and trembling, etc.
Methinks I forever with wonder could trace,
The thousand soft charms that embellish thy face:
Each moment I view thee, new beauties I find;
With thy face I am charmed, but enslaved by thy mind.
Each moment, etc.
Untainted with folly, unsullied with pride,
There native good humor and virtue reside:
Pray heaven that virtue thy soul may supply
With compassion for him, who without thee must die.
Pray heaven, etc.
THE Tipler's Defense.
THE women all tell me I Am false to my lass,
That I quit my poor Chloe, and stick to my glass!
But to you men of reason, my reasons I Will own,
And if you don't like 'em, why let them alone.
Although I have left her the truth I Will declare,
I believe she was good, and I am sure she was fair;
But such goodness and charms in a bumper I see,
That makes it as good and as charming as she.
My Chloe has dimples and smiles I must own;
But though she could smile, yet in truth she could frown;
But tell me ye lovers of liquor divine,
Did you ever see a frown in a bumper of wine?
Her lillies and roses were just in their prime,
But lillies and roses are conquered by time;
But wine, from its age such a benefit flows,
That I like it the better the older it grows.
They tell me in time that my love will be cloyed,
And that beauty is insipid when once it is enjoyed:
But in wine, I both time and enjoyment defy,
For the longer I drink the more thirsty am I.
Perhaps like their sex ever false to their word,
She had left me, to get an estate or a lord:
But my bottle regardless of titles or pelf,
Will stand by me when I cannot stand by myself.
She too might have poisoned the joys of my life
With nurses and children, and squalling and strife:
But my wine neither nurses nor babes can bring,
For a big bellied bottle's a mighty fine thing,
Then let my dear Chloe no longer complain:
She Is rid of her lover, and I of my pain;
For wine, mighty wine, many comforts I spy;
Should you doubt what I say, take a bumper and try.
SONG.
SOME how my spindle I mislaid,
And lost it underneath the grass,
Damon advancing, bowed his head,
And said, What seek you, pretty lass?
A little love, but urged with care,
Often leads a heart, and leads it far.
'Twas passing by yon spreading oak
That I my spindle lost just now,
His knife then kindly Damon took,
And from the tree he cut a bough:
A little love, etc.
Thus did the youth his time employ,
While me he tenderly beheld;
He talked of love, I leaped for joy,
For ah! my heart did fondly yield.
A little love, etc.
THE Starling.
A BEAUTEOUS Starling late I saw,
On lovely Sylvia's hand;
To check its flight, around its leg,
She ties a silken band.
In vain it flutters to be gone;
Confinement is its lot;
In vain it strives to break the band,
But cannot untie the knot.
"Cease, cease, she cried, here you shall feed
"And in my bosom reft."
No bird that ever winged the air,
Was half so much carest.
"If from my hand you should escape,
"You may perchance be shot;
"Then cease to peck, it is all in vain;
"You cannot untie the knot."
The bird contented grows at length,
While Sylvia strokes his plumes,
Erects his little crest, and, soon,
His former notes resumes.
From what he would heard the fair one say,
These words by rote he got,
And often repeated, every day,
You cannot untie the knot.
One evening youthful Damon sat,
With Sylvia by his side;
Reward my love, at last, said he,
Tomorrow be my BRIDE.
Her blushes in his favor rose,
Yet she consented not;
For, ere she spoke, the Starling cried,
You cannot untie the knot.
SONG.
OVER the vine covered hills and gay regions of France,
See the Day Star of LIBERTY rise --
Through the clouds of detraction unwearied advance,
And hold its new course through the skies.
An effulgence so mild, with a luster so bright,
All Europe with wonder surveys;
And from deserts of darkness and dungeons of night,
Contend for a share of the blaze.
Let BURKE, like a bat, from his splendour retire,
-- A splendour too strong for his eyes --
Let pedants and fools his effusions admire,
Entrap'd in his cobwebs like flies.
Shall frenzy and sophistry hope to prevail
Where REASON opposes her weight --
When the welfare of Millions is hung in the scale,
And the balance yet trembles with fate?
Ah! who 'midst the horrors of night would abide,
That could taste the pure breezes of morn?
Or who, that has drank of the crystaline tide,
To the feculent flood wood return?
When the bosom of beauty the throbbing heart meets,
Ah! who can the transport decline?
Or who, that has tasted of LIBERTY's sweets,
The prize, but with life, would resign?
But it is over! -- and high heaven the decision approves --
Oppression has struggled in vain --
To the hell she has formed superstition removes,
And tyranny bites its own chain.
In the records of TIME a new era unfolds --
All nature exalts in its birth!
Its creation begins! -- the CREATOR beholds;
And gives a new charter to earth!
O catch its high import, ye wind's as ye blow!
O bear it ye waves as ye roll!
From regions that feel the Sun's vertical glow
To the farthest extremes of the pole!
Equal RIGHTS, equal Laws to all nations around --
Peace and friendship their precepts impart --
And wherever the footsteps of Man shall be found,
MAY HE ^IN^ THE DECREE TO HIS HEART.
SONG.
TRUST not man for he will deceive you;
Preach'ry is his sole intent;
First he will court you, then he will leave you,
Poor deluded! to lament.
Formed by nature to undo us,
They escape our utmost heed:
Oh! how humble when they woo us,
But how proud, when they faceted!
So the Bird when once deluded,
By the fowler's artful snare;
Pines out life, in cage secluded; --
Fair ones, while you're young, beware!
PARODY.
Written by a Young Lady.
TRUST not WOMAN she will beguile you,
All her smiles are formed by art;
First she will flatter then exile you,
Sighing with a broken heart!
Formed by nature to pursue us,
They outstrip the fleetest men; --
Ah! how sweet they bill and coo us,
But how proud they triumph then!
So the FISH the bait admiring,
On the angler's fatal snare.
Gasps out life in pangs expiring; --
LOVERS, of the hook, beware!
Song.
THE rose that weeps with morning dew,
And glitters in the sunny ray,
In tears and smiles resembles you,
When love breaks sorrow's cloud away.
The dews that bend the blushing flower,
Enrich the scent -- renew the glow;
So love's sweet tears exalt his power,
So bliss more brightly shines by woe!
I never will be Married.
WHEN I had scarcely told sixteen,
My flattering telltale glass
Told me there seldom could be seen
A blither, bonnier lass.
Full twenty lovers round me bowed;
But high my head I carried,
And with a scornful air I vowed,
I never would be married.
Young Harry warmly urged his suit,
And talked of wealth in store;
While Jemmy thought to strike me mute,
And told his conquests over.
Each youth a different art essayed,
And still their arts I parried;
Believe me, Sirs, I laughing said,
I never will be married.
Then five revolving summers past,
While I the tyrant played,
Ah! then I feared 'twould be at last
My fate to die a maid:
Of all the lovers in my train,
There was but one that tarried;
I thought 'twas time to change my strain,
And we this morn were married.
Molly OF THE Mead.
AS on yon village lawn I strayed,
One morning in the spring,
Around the lambs all sportive played,
The birds did blithesome sing:
Upon a bank where willows grew,
I tuned my oaten reed.
How much I Am changed since first I knew
Sweet Molly of the mead!
Sweet Molly, etc.
No shepherd was so blithe as I,
No youth was ever so blessed;
In rapture sweet the time did fly.
For love then warmed my breast:
To please her was my sole employed,
To her I tuned my reed,
And morn and eve my only joy
Was Molly of the mead.
Sweet Molly. etc.
Soon as the fun resplendent rose,
One morn I took my way,
And eager sought some flagrant flower,
To make her look more gay:
Right well she saw my tender pain,
And soon my fate decreed:
And now I live the happiest swain,
With Molly of the mead.
Sweet Molly, etc.
Jockey OF THE Green.
A Favorite Scotch Song.
NAe mair, ye bonny lasses gay,
Your blithesome sonnets now display,
For Jem of Aberdeen;
But join your voices now with me,
And, as we gang along the lee,
Sing Jockey of the green.
His looks like any sun beams play,
When Phoebus gilds the first of May;
His face is ruddy seen;
And then he trips wi sic a grace,
All other lads to him give place,
Sweet Jockey of the green.
At kirk he says he will take my hand:
Who can his bonny suit withstand?
He smiles sae sweet, I ween;
I vow my heart cannot deny,
Wi his kind wish I shall comply,
My Jockey of the green.
She never thinks of Me.
THE morning dew that wets the rose,
Its blooming tints more lovely shows;
So on my Mary's face appears
The pearly luster of her tears,
When others' woes she weeps to see;
But ah! she never thinks of me!
When round the youths in transports gaze,
And Love forbids the power to praise,
While she with artless mein beguiles,
And sweetly wounds with fatal smiles,
Her triumph still I Am fond to see,
Although she never thinks of me.
Then go, fair hope, forever go;
Here will I nourish dearest woe;
For sorrow's self can sweets impart,
Sweet every pang that rends the heart;
And sweet to die 'twill surely be,
For her who never thinks of me.
I Will die for no Spepherd, not I.
WHEN first on the plain I began to appear,
And the shepherds to ogle and sigh,
They called me their dear, their delight and their joy;
But I heed no such nonsense, not I.
Not all their fine words, their flattery and love,
Though they swore, if I frowned, they should die,
Could bring me to like, to love or approve;
For I heed no such nonsense, not I.
But now in my turn, I Am in love too, I find;
Though believe I for grief should not die,
Were Jemmy as false as the wavering wind;
Oh! I heed no such nonsense, not I.
I think the lad likes me, and he may prove true;
And if so, I will love till I die;
But if he proves fickle, then I Will prove so too!
Oh! I Will die for no shepherd, not I.
William OF THE Ferry.
OFTEN as on Thames's banks I stray,
Where nymphs and swains appear,
From all their sports I turn away,
If William be not there.
The nymphs then laugh,
The swains all quaff
Their cider, ale and perry;
They nod and wink,
While health they drink
To William of the ferry.
When on the stream the youths attend,
Their manly skill to show,
With rival force the oar they bend,
And over the surface row:
But none, I Am sure,
Ever ply the oar,
Or steer so well the wherry.
As he who won
The prize alone,
Young William of the ferry.
Such bliss to me his smiles impart,
Whenever he talks of love,
That now I find my yielding heart
Does all his hopes approve:
So Hymen's bands
Shall join our hands;
Then I Will be blithe and merry,
And sing through life,
The happy wife,
To William of the ferry.
There was a Maid in our Town.
THERE was a maiden in our town,
With eyes as black as sloes;
Her hair it was a chestnut brown,
Her cheeks like any rose:
But then, I wist,
She Would not be kissed;
To struggle was her way;
And then she would cry,
"Begone, stand by,
'Od rabbit it I what do ye say?"
There was a shepherd in the place,
And Roger was his name,
Resolved to win her, in any case;
So he a wooing came:
He snatched a kiss --
She frowned at this,
And pushed him soon away;
With "Pray get out,
You saucy lout,
'Od rabbit it! what do ye say?
But Roger did not care a pin,
So laughed at what she said;
And boldly smack'd her lips again,
For he was not afraid:
He hugged her tight,
With all his might,
She could not get away;
Though still she tried,
And frowned, and cried,
"'Od rabbit it! what do ye say?"
The stoutest foe must sometimes yield,
And so it happened now;
For Roger fairly won the field,
You surely may guess how.
They Are wed, I wist,
And now she is kissed
By Roger night and day;
But words arise;
Then Roger cries,
"'Od rabbit it! what do ye say?"
Dear is my little Native Vale.
DEAR is my little native vale:
The ring dove builds and warbles there;
Close by my cot she tells her tale
To every passing villager.
The squirrel leaps from tree to tree,
And shells his nuts at liberty.
In orange groves and myrtle bowers,
That breathe a gale of fragrance round,
To charm the fairy footed hours,
With my loved lute's romantic sound;
Or crowns of living laurels weave,
For those that win the race at eve;
The shepherd's horn at break of day,
The mimic dance in twilight glade;
The rustic glee, the roundelay,
Sung in the silent woodland's shade;
These simple joys, that never fail,
Shall bind me to my native vale.
Dear is my, etc.
I Have lost my heart to Teddy.
A celebrated Irish Song.
YOUNG Teddy is an Irish lad,
So blithe, so tight, so merry,
And, when in scarlet beaver clad,
The pride of Londonderry.
Then, Teddy, shun the war for me;
Ah! Nerah, be but steady;
But arrah, now it cannot be;
I Have lost my heart to Teddy,
Oh! I Have lost my heart to Teddy.
When first we met, 'twould make you laug^
We looked so at each other;
But Cupid played too sure by half,
My heart was in a pother:
Ted seized my hand, and stole a kiss,
Indeed! said I, already!
Then forced a frown, but 'twas amiss;
I Would lost my heart to Teddy,
Oh! I Would lost my heart to Teddy.
Whe^e'er the creature meets me now,
It Is, love, when shall we marry?
I Am half inclined to keep my vow,
And that is, not to tarry:
Oh, it is so sweet to join the knot!
And hymen's always ready;
A husband is! what is he not!
I Have lost m^ heart to Teddy,
Oh! I Have lost my heart to Teddy.
We Conquer, Dear Girls, but for You.
COME, sailors, be filling the can;
The wind is beginning to blow;
We Have time to drink round to a man,
And then to weigh anchor must go.
What thousands repair to the strand,
To give us a cheering adieu!
It Is plain they believe on the land,
We conquer, dear girls, but for you.
When on the maintopmast yard,
The sailor is swung to and fro,
Let the tempest blow ever so hard,
He whistles defiance to woe.
The gale can but last for a while,
Is always the boast of the crew;
And then they reflect with a smile,
We conquer, dear girls, but for you.
The battle tremendous appears,
When blood stains the face of the main:
Though thunder resounds in his ears,
The sailor's a stranger to pain:
The thought with what rapture and pride
Each girl will her hero review,
It Is this makes him danger deride:
We conquer, dear girls, but for you.
Pauvre Madelon.
A favorite SONG and DUETT.
COULD you to battle march away,
Are leave me here complaining,
I Am sure 'twould break my heart to stay,
When you are gone campaigning:
Ah! non, non, non, pauvre Madelon
Would never quit her rover;
Ah! non, non, non, pauvre Madelon
Would go with you all the world over.
LA GLORY. Cheer, cheer, my love, you shall not grieve,
A soldier true you will find me;
I could not have the heart to leave
My little girl behind me:
Ah! non, non, non, pauvre Madelon
Shall never quit her rover:
Ah! non, non, non, pauvre Madelon
Shall go with me all the world over.
And can you to the battle go,
To women's fears a stranger?

MADELON. No fears my breast will ever know,
But when my love's in danger:
Ah! non, non, non, pauvre Madelon
Will never quit her rover;
Ah! non, non, non, pauvre Madelon
Will go with you all the world over.

THE happy Shepherdess.
WHEN the summer smiling bids the hills
With noontide fervours glow,
I lead my flocks beside the rills,
Which cheer the vale below:
Then elated with joy to the shade I repair,
For I Am sure the dear youth that I love will be there.
And when soft music over the plains
Proclaims the rural dance,
And blushing nymphs, and ardent swains,
In eager haste advance,
Then elated with joy to the dance I repair,
For I Am sure that the dear youth that I love will be there.
Whenever the cottagers appear
Upon the village green,
To celebrate the wake or fair,
And hail the charming scene.
Then elated with joy to the green I repair,
For I Am sure that the dear youth that I love will be there.
Kate OF Colebrook Dale.
WHEN gentle love first fired my breast,
I roved from fair to fair;
No shepherd swain was then so blessed,
Or so unknown to care.
Over heath, over hill I traversed wide,
And sought each verdant dale;
Yet still the lass of all my pride
Was kate of Colebrook dale.
How happy, sure, were then my days!
Such tranquil joys I knew;
Wherever I went, I spoke her praise,
I found her just and true;
For often, in yonder shady grove,
I told my ardent tale,
And whispered themes of softest love
To Kate of Colebrook Dale.
But ah! how fleeting was my bliss!
For I Would no wealth in store,
Her parents thought our love amiss:
We part, to meet no more.
But hope shall clear my tortured mind;
For what will tears avail,
Though thou were faithful, fair and kind,
Dear Kate of Colebrook Dale?
So would not I.
IF your lovers, maids, forsake you,
Would you pine, and sigh and die,
To your bed for grief betake you?
If you would, so would not I.
Would you dress your heads with willows,
Let your hair neglected fly,
Banish slumber from your pillows?
If you would, so would not I.
Should a faithless Swain perplex you,
Then for one more worthy try;
Would you let the false one vex you?
If you would, so would not I.
Men were sent, I Am sure, to please us;
Such their words, their looks, imply.
We were fools to let them teaze us;
If you will, so will not I.
The Soldier's Last Retreat.
ALAS! the battle's lost and won;
Dick Flint's borne off the field,
By death, from whom the stoutest run,
Who makes whole armies yield.
Dick well in honor's footsteps trod,
Braved war and its alarms;
Now Death, beneath the humble sod,
Has grounded his arms.
Dick's marched before us on a route,
Where every soldier's sent;
His fire is dead, his courage out,
His ammunition spent:
His form, so active, now a clod;
His grace no longer charms;
For death, beneath the humble sod,
Has grounded his arms.
Come, fire a volly over his grave;
Dead marches let us beat;
War's honors well become the brave,
Who sound their last retreat:
All must obey fate's awful nod,
Whom life this moment warms;
Death, soon or late, beneath the sod,
Will ground the soldier's arms.
Comely Swain, Why sit'st thou so?
COMELY swain, why sit'st thou so?
Fall lal lal, etc.
Folded arms are signs of woe.
Fall lal lal, etc.
If thy nymph no favor show,
Fall lal lal, etc.
Choose another -- let her go,
Fall lal lal, etc
But if she be kind to you,
Fall lal lal, etc.
To the rest still bid adieu,
Fall lal lal, etc,
Come, then, come, thy mirth renew,
Fall lal lal, etc.
Loose thy arms, thy love is true,
Fall lal lal, etc.
Somebody.
WERE I obliged to beg my bread,
And had not where to lay my head,
I Would creep where yonder herds are fed,
And steal a look at Somebody,
My own dear Somebody, my constant Somebody;
I Would creep where yonder herds are fed,
And steal a look at Somebody.
When I Am laid low, and am at rest,
And may be numbered with the blessed,
Oh! may thy artless feeling breast
Throb with regard for Somebody!
Ah! will you drop one pitying tear,
And sigh for the lost Somebody!
But should I ever live to see
That form so much adored by me,
Then thou wilt reward my constancy,
And I Will be blessed with Somebody;
Then shall my tears be dried by thee,
And I be blessed with Somebody.
THE Sailor's Consolation.
SPANKING Jack was so comely, so pleasant, so jolly,
Though winds blew great guns, still he would whistle and sing;
Jack loved his friend, and was true to his Molly,
And, if honor gives greatness, was as great as a king.
One night as we drove with two reefs in the mainsail,
And the scud came on lowering upon a lee shore,
Jack went up aloft for to hand the top ga'nt sail,
A spray washed him off, and we never saw him more.
But grieving's a folly; come, let us be jolly;
If we have troubles on sea, boys, we have pleasures ashore.
Whiffling Tom, still of mischief or fun in the middle,
Through life, in all weathers, at random would jog;
He Would dance, and he would sing, and he would play on the fiddle,
And swig with an air, his allowance of grog:
Longside of a Don, in the Terrible Frigate,
As yard arm and yard arm we lay off the shore,
In and out, whiffling Tom did so caper and j^g it.
That his ^ead was shot off, and we never saw him more.
But grieving's a folly, etc.
Bonny Ben was to each jolly messmate a brother;
He was manly and honest, good natured and free;
If ever one tar was more true than another
To his friend and his duty, that sailor was he.
One day with the David to heave the kedge anchor,
Ben went in the boat on a bold craggy shore;
He overboard tipped, when a shark, and a spanker,
Soon nipt him in two, and we never saw him more.
But grieving's a folly, etc.
But what of it all, lads -- shall we be down hearted,
Because that mayhap we now take our last sup?
Life's cable must one day or other be parted,
And death in fast mooring will bring us all up:
But it is always the way on it, one scarce finds a brother,
Fond as pitch, honest, hearty, and true to the core,
But by battle, or storm, or some damned thing or other,
He Is popp'd off the hooks, and we never see him more.
But grieving's a folly, etc.
Love IS THE cause OF Mourning.
BY a murmuring stream a fair shepherdess lay,
Be so kind, O ye nymphs I often times heard her say,
Tell Strephon, I die, if he passes this way,
That Love was the cause of my mourning.
False shepherds, that tell me of beauty and charms,
You deceive me, for Strephon's cold heart never warms;
Yet bring me this Strephon, let me die in his arms?
Oh! Strephon the cause of my mourning.
But first, said she, let me go down to the shades below,
Ere ye let Strephon know that I loved him so;
Then on my pale cheek no blushes will show
That Love was the cause of my mourning.
Her eyes were scarce closed when Strephon came by,
He thought she would been sleeping, and softly drew nigh,
But finding her breathless, Oh heavens did he cry
Ah! Chloris, the cause of my mourning.
Restore me my Chloris, ye nymphs use your art:
They sighing replied, 'Twas yourself shot the dart,
That wounded the tender young shepherdes's heart,
And killed the poor Chloris with mourning.
Ah then is Chloris dead,
Wounded by me? he said;
I Will follow thee, chaste maid,
Down to the silent shade:
Then on her cold snowy breast leaning his head,
Expired the poor Strephon with mourning.
Song.
GUARDIAN angels, now protect me,
Send me to the swain I love;
Cupid, with thy bow direct me,
Help me, all ye powers above.
Bear him my sighs, ye gentle breezes,
Tell him, I love and I despair;
Tell him, for him I grieve,
Say it is for him I live;
O may the shepherd be sincere!
Through the shady groves I Will wander,
Silent as the bird of night;
Near the brink of yonder fountain
First Leander blessed my sight.
Witness, ye groves and falls of water,
Echoes repeat the vows he swore;
Can he forget me,
Will he neglect me,
Shall I never see him more!
Does he love and yet forsake me,
To admire a nymph more fair?
If it is so I Will wear the willow,
And esteem the happy pair.
Some lonely cave I Will make my dwelling,
Never more the cares of life pursue:
The lark and philomel
Only shall hear me tell
What makes me bid the world adieu.
THE Miller.
HOW happy a state does the miller possess,
Who would be no greater, nor fears to be less?
On his mill and himself he depends for support.
Which is better than servilely cringing at court.
What though he all dusty and whitened does go,
The more he is powdered, the more like a beau:
A clown in his dress may be honester far,
Than a courtier who struts in his garter and star.
Than a courtier, etc.
Though his hands are so daubed, they are not fit to be seen,
The hands of his betters are not very clean;
A palm more polite may as dirtily deal;
Gold in handling will stick to the singers like meal.
What if then a pudding for dinner he lacks,
He cribs, without scruple, from other men's sacks:
In this of right noble example he brags,
Who borrow as freely from other men's bags.
Or should he endeavor to heap an estate:
In this too he mimicks the tools of the state,
Whose aim is alone their coffers to fill,
As all his concern's to bring grist to his mill,
He eats when he is hungry, and drinks when he is dry,
And down when he is weary contented does lie,
Then rises up cheerful to work and to sing.
If so happy a miller who would be a king?
THE Cobbler.
A COBBLER there was, and he lived in a stall,
Which serv^d him for parlour, for kitchen and ^all.
No coin in his pocket, nor care in his pate,
No ambition had he, nor duns at his gate:
Derry down, down, down, derry down.
Contented he worked and he thought himself happy
If at night he could purchase a jug of brown nappy:
How he would laugh then and whistle, and sing too most sweet!
Saying, just to a hair I have made both ends to meet:
Derry down down, etc.
But love, the disturber of high and of low,
That shoots at the peasant as well as the beau;
He shot the poor cobbler quite through to the heart;
I wish he had hit some more ignoble part:
Derry down down, etc.
It was from a cellar this archer did play,
Where a buxom young damsel continually lay:
Her eyes shone so bright when she rose every day,
That she shot the poor cobbler quite over the way:
Derry down down, etc.
He sung her love song as he sat at his work,
But she was a^ ^ard as a Jew or a Turk;
Whenever he spoke she would flounce and would sleer,
Which put the poor cobbler quite into despair:
Derry down down, etc.
He took up his awl that he had in the world,
And to make away with himself was resolved;
He pierced through his body instead of his sole,
So the cobbler he died, and the bell it did toll.
Derry down down, etc.
And in very good will I advise as a friend,
All cobblers take warning by this cobler's end;
Keep your heart out of love, for we find by what is past,
That love brings us all to an end at the last.
Derry down down, etc.
Song.
WHEN Damon languish'd at my feet,
And I believed him true,
The torments of delight how sweet?
But ah! how swift they flew!
The sunny hill, the flowery vale,
The garden, and the grove,
Have echoed to his ardent tale,
And vows of endless love.
The conquest gained he left his prize,
He left her to complain;
To talk of joy with weeping eyes,
And measure time by pain.
But Heaven will take the mourner's part,
In pity to despair:
And the last sigh that rends the heart,
Shall waft the spirit there.
Friend AND Pitcher.
THE wealthy fool, with gold in store,
Will still desire to grow richer,
Give me but health, I ask no more,
My charming girl, my friend and pitcher.
My friend so rare, my girl so fair,
With such, what mortal can be richer;
Give me but these, a fig for care,
With my sweet girl, my friend and pitcher,
From morning sun I Would never grieve,
To toil a hedger or a ditcher,
If that, when I came home at eve,
I might enjoy my friend and pitcher.
My friend so rare, etc.
Though fortune ever shuns my door.
I know not what can thus bewitch her;
With all my heart can I be poor,
With my sweet girl, my friend and pitcher.
My friend so rare, etc.
Song.
BUSY, curious thirsty fly,
Drink with me, and drink as I:
Freely welcome to my cup,
Could thou sip and sip it up.
Make the most of life you may,
Life is short, and wears away.
Both alike are mine and thine,
Hastening quick to their decline:
Thine's a summer, mine no more,
Though repeated to threescore;
Threescore summers, when they are gone,
Will appear as short as one.
Song.
A DIEU, ye jovial youths, who join
To plunge old Care in floods of wine;
And as your dazzled eye balls roll,
Discern him struggling in the bowl.
Not yet is hope so wholly flown,
Not yet is thought so tedious grown,
But limpid stream and shady tree
Retain, as yet, some sweets for me.
And see, through yonder silent grove,
See yonder does my Daphne rove:
With pride her footsteps I pursue,
And bid your frantic joys adieu.
The sole confusion I admire,
Is that my Daphne's eyes inspire:
I scorn the madness you approve,
And value reason next to love.
Retirement.
I ENVY not the proud their wealth,
Their equipage and sta^e:
Give me but innocence and health,
I ask not to be great.
I in this sweet retirement find
A joy unknown to kings,
For sceptres to a virtuous mind,
Seem vain and empty things.
Great Cincinnatus at his plough
With brighter luster shone,
Than guilty Caesar ever could show,
Though seated on a throne.
Tumultuous days, and restless nights,
Ambition ever knows,
A stranger to the calm delights
Of study and repose.
Then free from envy, care and strise,
Keep me, ye powers divine!
And pleased, when ye demand my life,
May I that life resign!
THE Banks OF Kentucke.
Tune -- Banks of the Dee.

THE spring was advancing, and birds were beginning
To sing on the boughs over each purling brook;
On the early green herbage at leisure reclining,
I was carelessly viewing the banks of Kentucke.
Hail stranger to song! hail deep channel'd river,
Thy prominent cliffs shall be famous forever,
Obscurely roll down through the banks of Kentucke.
Disgusted with idle, romantic pretensions,
The populous city I lonely forsook;
Delighting in nature with fond apprehensions,
I eagerly came to the banks of Kentucke.
O, never did art so much beauty discover,
To reward the long search of its most raptured lover,
As nature's luxuriant fancy spreads over
The gay fertile soil on the banks of Kentucke.
Here genius shall rove with an endless desire,
Improvements to make without learning or book:
While virtue and truth shall forever conspire,
To bless those that dwell on the banks of Kentucke.
Here, far from tyrannical power removed,
The spirit of freedom shall hap'ly be proved
The patriot shall by his country be loved;
And live without guile on the banks of Kentucke.
Here bigotry never shall raise its foul banner,
The basis of joy through all ages it shook;
The young and the aged in more happy manner
Than those shall improve on the banks of Kentucke.
In honest industry their time still employing,
With heart cheering mirth all their meetings enjoying,
With the blessings of friendship, and love never cloying
All ranks shall unite on the banks of Kentucke.
Rich plenty and health, with visage all glowing,
Invite and allure us with promising look;
Never more to regret other rivers long flowing,
Not such as glide down through the banks of Kentucke.
Pale sickness does pass through the land as a stranger,
No dreadful distemper here frightens the ranger,
As he passes through canebrakes and waters no danger
Expecting to meet on the banks of Kentucke.
Song.
I ENVY not the mighty great,
Those powerful rulers of the state,
Who settle nations as they please,
And govern at the expense of ease.
Far happier the shepherd's swain,
Who daily drudges ^n the plain,
And nightly in some humble shed
On rushy pillows lays his head.
No cursed ambition breaks his rest,
No factious wars divide his breast;
His flock, his pipe, and artless fair,
Are all his hope, and all his care.
THE Vicar OF Bray.
IN good King Charle's golden days,
When lovalty no harm meant,
A zealous high church man I was,
And so I got preferment;
To teach my flock I never missed,
Kings are by God appointed.
And damned are those that do resist,
Or touch the Lord's anointed.
And this is law I will maintain
Until my d^ing day, Sir,
That whatsoever King shall reign,
I Will be the vicar of bray, Sir.
When royal James obtained the crown,
And popery came in f^fhion,
The penal laws I hooted down,
And read the declaration.
The church of Rome I found would fit
Full well my constitution:
And had become a Jesuit,
But for the revolution.
And this is law, etc.
When William was our King declared,
To ease the nation's grievance;
With this new wind about I steered
And swore to him allegiance;
Old principles I did revoke,
Set conscience at a distance
Passive obedience was a joke,
And j^st was non-resistance.
And this is law, etc.
When gracious Anne became our Queen,
The church of England's glory,
Another face or things was seen,
And I became a tory;
Occasional conformest base,
I damned their moderation;
And thought the church in danger was
By such prevarication.
And this is law, etc.
When George in pudding time came over,
And moderate men looked big, Sir,
I turned a ^at in pan once more,
And so became a whig^ Sir;
And thus preferment I procured
From our new faith's defender;
And almost every day conjured
The Pope and the Pretender.
And this is law, etc.
The illustrious house of Hanover,
And Protestant succession;
To these I do allegiance swear --
While they can keep possession:
For in my faith and loyalty
I never more will faulter,
And George my lawful King shall be --
Until the times do alter.
And this is law I will maintain
Until my dying day, Sir,
That whatsoever King shall reign,
I Will be the vicar of bray, Sir.
THE Storm.
CEASE, rude Boreas blustering railer!
List, ye landsmen, all to me!
Messmates, hear a brother sailor
Sing the dangers of the sea;
From bounding billows, first in motion,
When the distant whirlwinds rise,
To the tempest troubled ocean,
Where the seas contend the skies!
Hark! the boatswain hoarsely bawling,
By topsail sheets, and haulyards stand!
Down top gallants quick be hauling
Down your stay sails, hand, boys, hand!
Now it freshens, set the braces,
The topsail sheets now let go!
Luff, boys, luff! don't make wry faces,
Up your topsails nimbly clew.
Now all you on down beds sporting,
Fondly locked in beauty's arms;
Fresh enjoyments, wanton courting,
Safe from all but love's alarms;
Round us roars the tempest louder;
Think what fears our minds enthrall;
Harder yet, it yet blows harder,
Now again the boatswain calls!
The topsail yards point to the wind, boys,
See all clear to reef each course;
Let the fore sheet go, don't mind, boys,
Though the weather should be worse.
Fore and aft the sprit-sail yard get,
Reef the mizen, see all clear,
Hands up, each preventure brace set,
Man the fore yard, cheer, lads, cheer!
Now the dreadful thunder's roaring,
Peal on peal contending clash,
On our heads fierce rain falls pouring,
In our eyes blue lightnings flash.
One wide water all around us,
All above us one black sky,
Different deaths at once surround us,
Hark! what means that dreadful cry?
The foremast's gone, cries every tongue out,
Over the lee, twelve feet 'bove deck;
A leak beneath the chest tree's sprung out
Call all hands to clear the wreck.
Quick the lanyards cut to pieces,
Come, my hearts, be stout and bold;
Plumb the well -- the leak increases,
Four feet water in the hold.
While over the ship wild waves are beating,
We for wives or c^ildren mourn;
Alas! from hence there is no reteating,
Alas! to them there is no return.
Still the leak is gaining on us;
Both chain pumps are choked below,
Heaven have mercy here upon us!
For only that can save us now.
Over the lee beam is the land, boys,
Let the guns o'erboard be thrown;
To the pump come every hand, boys,
See! our m^zen m^st is gone.
The leak we have found it cannot pour fast,
We Have lightened her a foot or more;
Up, and rig a jury foremast,
She rights, she rights, boys, we are off shore.
Now once more on joys we are thinking,
Since kind Heaven has saved our lives;
Come, the can, boys! let us be drinking
To our sweethearts and our wives.
Fill it up, about ship wheel it,
Close to our lips a brimmer join,
Where Is the tempest now, who feels it?
None -- the dangers drowned in wine.
Charms OF Liberty.
SINCE every charm on earth combined,
In Chloe's face, in Chloe's mind,
Why was I born, ye gods, to see
What robs me of my liberty?
Until that fatal hapless day,
My heart was lively, blithe, and gay,
Could sport with every nymph but she
Who robs me of my liberty.
Think then, dear Chloe, ere too late,
That death must be my hapless fate,
If love and you do not agree,
To set me at my liberty.
Now to the darksome woods I rove,
Reflecting on the pains of love,
And envy every clown I see
Enjoy the sweets of liberty.
We'll follow Hymen's happy train,
And every idle care disdain;
We'll live in sweet tranquillity,
Nor wish for greater liberty.
THE Echoing Horn.
THE echoing horn calls the sportsmen abroad,
To horse, my brave boys, and away;
The morning is up, and the cry of the hounds
Upbraids our too tedious delay.
What pleasure we find in pursuing the fox!
Over hill and over valley he flies;
Then follow, we'll soon overtake him -- huzza!
The traitor is seized on and dies.
Triumphant, returning at night with the spoil,
Like Bacchanals, shouting and gay,
How sweet with the bottle and lass to refresh,
And lose the fatigues of the day!
With sport, love, and wine, fickle fortune defy:
Dull wisdom all happiness sours:
Since life is no more than a passage at best,
Ler's strew the way over with flowers.
Jacky Bull FROM France.
IN Jacky Bull, when bound for France,
The gosling you discover;
But taught to ride, to fence and dance,
A finished goose came over.
With his tierce and carte -- sa! sa!
And his cotillion so smart -- ha! ha!
He charms each female heart -- oh, la!
As Jacky returns from Dover.
For cocks and dogs, see 'squire at home,
The prince of country tonies;
Returned from Paris, Spa, or Rome,
Our 'squire's a nice Adonis,
With his tierce and carte -- sa! sa!
And his cotillion so smart -- ha! ha!
He charms the female heart -- oh, la!
The pink of macaronies.
Wisdom's Fovourite.
BANISH sorrow grief and folly,
Thoughts unbend the wrinkling brow;
Hence dull cares and melancholy,
Wine and mirth unite us now.
Bacchus opens all his treasure,
Comus beings us wit and song;
Follow, follow, follow, follow pleasure,
And let us join the jovial song.
Life is short, its but a season;
Time is ever on the wing;
Lest the present moment seize on,
Who knows what the rest may bring?
All my time I now will measure,
All dull cares I now despise,
Follow, follow, follow, follow pleasure,
To be happy's to be wise.
Wherefore should we thus perplex us,
Why should we not merry be;
Since there is nothing here to vex us;
Drinking sets our hearts all free.
Let Us have drinking without measure,
Let Us have mirth what time we have;
Follow, follow, follow, follow pleasure,
There Is no drinking in the grave.
Delia.
I DELIA's beauties would disclose,
More blooming than the blushing rose,
And sweeter than the spring:
She fairest is of all the fair,
To every grove I Will this declare,
Of Beauty's queen I sing.
Aid then my song each smiling muse,
Your melody you cannot refuse
To celebrate her charms;
Inspire to praise in purest rhyme
Her -- whose mild beauties are divine,
And all my breast alarms.
Steal silent by ye murmuring streams,
Let echo swell the tender themes,
The themes her praise rehearse;
Her praise shall employ my breath,
And naught but all devouring death
Shall end the pleasing verse.
To paint the luster of her eyes,
An azure stolen from the skies,
Would need a Sapho's tongue;
Her shape, her tuneful voice that thrills,
And all the soul with rapture fills,
These must remain unsung.
Her gentle sympathetic heart,
Fond to assuage affliction's smart,
Can drop the crystal tear;
Like gracious Heaven she wears a smile
That would the fiercest pains beguile,
And soften rigid care.
Good sense and virtue, hand in hand,
The graces all, a genial band,
Upon her steps attend:
From charms so striking to the sight,
So pregnant with sincere delight,
What can the heart defend?
Her modest worth, no wily art,
Engaged my captivated heart
To cherish fond desires;
'Twas beauty taught me to admire,
But virtue's bloom that did inspire
These firm undying fires.
Supremely blessed in Delia's love,
From her embrace l'd never remove,
Nor ever inconstant stray;
But spending life in tranquil ease,
Make it my study how to please,
And blithsome pass each day.
Could we our joys and sorrows share,
Double each bliss, dissolve each care,
It Would sure transporting prove:
Together glide the sea of life,
Avoid ambition banish strife,
And seek immortal love.
Tear OF Compassion.
HYLA's the sweetest maid on earth,
No one could charm me so;
The tear proclaims her heavenly birth,
She weeps for others woe.
No gem, that glads the gaudy fair,
And sparkles to the sight,
Can with that crystal drop compare,
Productive of delight.
Compassion hail! enchanting power
To soften care you are giv'en:
Sweet soother of the sadden'd hour,
Blessed attribute of Heaven.
Fond Nature, with a kind intent
To cheer the drooping soul,
This sweet, amongst the dregs, has sent
Of life's distasteful bowl.
Offspring of universal love,
Spark of etherial fire,
Thy melting ardours, hearts improve,
And generous thoughts inspire.
My passions let thy influence bind
To emulate my fair,
For soft and pleasing pains attend
The sympathetic tear!
Young Colin.
THE fields were green, the hills were gay,
And birds were singing on each spray,
When Colin met me in the grove,
And told me tender tales of love:
Was ever swain so blythe as he,
So kind, so faithful, and so free,
In spite of all my friends can say,
Young Colin stole my heart away.
Whenever he trips the mead along,
He sweetly joins the wood lark's song;
And when he dances on the green,
There Is none so blythe as Colin seen:
If he is but by I nothing fear,
For I alone am all his care;
Then spite of all my friends can say,
He Is stole my tender heart away.
My mother chides whenever I roam,
And seems surpised I quit my home:
But she would not wonder that I rove,
Did she but feel how much I love;
Full well I know the generous swain
Will never give my bosom pain;
Then spite of all my friends could say,
He Is stole my tender heart away.
Song.
SAY, little foolish, fluttering thing,
Whither, ah! whither would you wing
Your airy flight?
Stay here, and sing
Your mistress to delight.
No, no, no,
Sweet Robin, you shall not go,
Where you wanton, could you be
Half so happy as with me.
Song.
WAS I a shepherd's maid, to keep
On yonder plains a flock of sheep,
Well pleased I Would watch the live long day,
My ewes at feed, my lambs at play.
Or would some bird that pity brings,
But for a moment lend its wings,
My parents then might rave and scold,
My guardian strive my will to hold:
Their words are harsh, his walls are high,
But spite of all away I Would fly.
THE Death OF General Wolf.
IN a mouldering cave, where the wretched retreat,
Britannia fat wasted with care;
She wept for her WOLF, then exclaimed against fate;
And gave herself up to despair,
The walls of her cell were insculptur'd around
With the exploits of her favorite son;
And even the dust as it lay on the ground,
Was engraved with the deeds he had done,
The Sire of the gods, from his chryftiline throne,
Beheld this disconsolate dame;
And moved with her fate, he sent Mercury down,
And these were the tidings that came.
Britannia forbear, not a sigh, nor a tear,
For thy Wolf so deservedly loved;
Your grief shall be changed into triumphs of joy,
For thy Wolf is not dead but removed.
The sons of the earth, the proud giants of old,
Have broke from their darksome abodes,
And such is the news as in heaven it is told,
They are marching to war with the gods;
A council was held in the chamber of Jove,
Where they came to this final decree,
That Wolf should be called to the armies above,
And the charge was entrusted to me.
To the plains of Quebec with these orders I flew;
He begged for a moment's delay,
He cried, Oh! forbear, let me victory hear,
And then thy commands I Will obey;
With a dark'ning film I encompassed his eyes,
And conveyed him away in an urn;
Lest the fondness he bore for his own native shore
Should persuade him again to return.
Friendship.
FRIENDSHIP to every willing mind
Opens a heavenly treasure:
There may the sons of sorrow find
Sources of real pleasure.
See what employments men pursue,
Then you will own my words are true:
Friendship alone unfolds to view
Sources of real pleasure.
Poor are the joys which fools esteem,
Fading and transitory:
Mirth is as fleeting as a dream.
Or a delusive story:
Luxury leaves a sting behind,
Wounding the body and the mind:
Only in Friendship can we find
Pleasure and solid glory.
Beauty, with all its gaudy shows,
Is but a painted bubble:
Short is the triumph, wit bestows,
Full of deceit and trouble:
Fame, like a shadow, flees away,
Titles and dignities decay:
Nothing but Friendship can display
Joys, that are free from trouble.
Learning (that boasted glittering thing)
Scarcely is worth possessing:
Riches, for ever on the wing,
Cannot be called a blessing:
Sensual pleasures swell desire,
Just as the fuel feeds the fire:
Friendship can real bliss inspire,
Bliss that is worth possessing.
Happy the man, who has a friend
Formed by the God of nature;
Well may he feel and recommend
Friendship for his Creator.
Then as our hands in Friendship join,
So let our social powers combine,
Ruled by a passion most divine,
Friendship with our Creator.
Plato.
SAYS Plato why should man be vain?
Since bounteous Heaven has made him great!
Why looks he with insolent disdain
On those undeck'd with wealth and state!
Can splended robes or beds of down,
Or costly gems that deck the fair?
Can all the glories of a crown,
Give health, or ease the brow of care?
The sceptur'd king, the burdened slave,
The humble and the haughty die:
The rich, the poor, the base, the brave,
In dust without distinction lie.
Go, search the tombs where monarch's rest,
Who once the greatest titles bore:
The wealth and glory they possessed,
And all their honors are no more,
So glides the meteor through the sky,
And spreads along a gilded train:
But, when its short lived beauties die,
Dissolves to common air again.
So it is with us, my jovial souls,
Let Friendship reign while here we stay,
Let Us crown our joys with flowing bowls,
When Jove commands we must obey.
Song.
FROM the man that I love, though my heart I disguise,
I will freely describe the wretch I despise;
And if he has sense but to balance a straw,
He will sure take the hint from the picture I draw.
And if he has sense, etc.
A wit without sense, without fury a beau;
Like a parrot he chatters, and struts like a crow;
A peacock in pride, in grimace a baboon;
In courage a hind, in conceit a gascoor.
A peacock, etc.
As a vulture rapacious, in falsehood a fox;
Inconstant as waves, and unfeeling as rocks:
As a tiger fer^^^ous, perverse as a hog;
In mischief an ape, and in fawning a dog.
As a tiger, etc.
In a word, to sum up all his talents together,
His heart is of lead, and his brain is of feather:
Yet if he has sense but to balance a straw,
He will sure take a hint from the picture! draw!
Yet if he has sense, etc.
Song.
THE silver moon's enamored beam
Steals softly through the night,
To wanton with the winding stream,
And kiss reflected light:
To courts be gone, heart soothing sleep,
Where you have so seldom been,
While I May's wakeful vigil keep
With Kate of Aberdeen.
The nymphs and swains expectant wait,
In primrose chaplets gay,
Till morn unbars her golden gate,
And gives the promised May:
The nymphs and swains shall all declare
The promised May when seen,
Not half so fragrant, half so fair,
As Kate of Aberdeen.
I Will tune my pipe to playful notes,
And rouse yon nodding grove,
Till new waked birds distend their throats,
And hail the maid I love:
At her approach the lark mistakes,
And quits the new dressed green:
Fond birds, it is not the morning breaks,
It Is Kate of Aberdeen.
Now blithe some over the dewy mead,
Where elves desportive play,
The festal dance young shepherds lead,
Or sing their loved tuned lay,
Till May in morning robe draws nigh,
And claims a virgin queen;
The nymphs and swains exulting cry,
"Here Is Kate of Aberdeen."
Song.
BELIEVE my sighs, my tears, my dear,
Believe the heart you have won:
Believe my vows to you sincere,
Or, Peggy, I Am undone.
You say I Am false, and apt to change
At every face that is new:
Of all the girls I ever saw,
I never loved one but you.
My heart was like a flake of ice,
Till warmed by your bright eyes,
And then it kindled in a trice,
A slame that never dies.
Then take and try me, you shall find
That I Have a heart that is true:
Of all the girls I ever saw,
I never loved one but you.
Corydon AND Phillis.
HER sheep had in clusters crept close to a grove,
To hide from the heat of the day;
And Phillis herself, in a woodbine alcove,
Among the sweet violets lay;
A young lambkin, it seems, had been stolen from its dam
('Twixt Cupid and Hymen a plot)
That Corydon might, as he searched for his lamb,
Arrive at the critical spot.
As through the green hedge for his lambkin he peeps
He saw the fair nymph with surprise;
Ye gods, if so killing he cried, while she sleeps,
I Am lost if she opens her eyes;
To tarry much longer would hazard my heart,
I Will homeward my lambkin to trace,
But in vain honest Corydon strove to depart,
For love held him fast to the place.
Cease, cease, pretty birds, what a chirping you keep,
I think you too loud on the spray;
Don't you see, foolish lark, that the charmer's asleep
You Will wake her as sure as it is day.
How dare that fond butterfly touch the sweet maid,
Her cheeks he mistakes for the rose,
I Would put him to death, if I was not afraid
My boldness would break her repose.
Then Phillis looked up with a languishing smile,
Kind shepherd, said she, you mistake;
I laid myself down for to rest me awhile,
But trust me I Have long been awake.
The shepherd took courage, advanced with a bow,
He placed himself down by her side;
And managed the matter I cannot tell you how,
But yesterday made her his bride.
Soldier's Song.
HOW stands the glass around?
For shame, ye take no care, my boys,
How stands the glass around?
Let mirth and wine abound.
The trumpets sound,
The colors they are slying, boys,
To fight, kill, or wound;
May we still be found,
Content with our hard fate, my boys,
On the cold ground.
Why, soldiers, why,
Should we be melancholy, boys?
Why, soldiers, why,
Whose business it is to die?
What sighing, fie!
Drown fear, drink on be jolly, boys,
It Is he, you, or I!
Cold, hot, wet or dry,
We Are always bound to follow, boys,
And scorn to fly.
It Is but in vain,
I mean not to upbraid ye, boys;
It Is but in vain
For soldiers to complain;
Should next campaign
Send us to him who made us, boys,
We Are free from pain!
But if we remain,
A bottle and kind landlady
Cure all again.
SONG.
YE virgins attend,
Believe me your friend,
And with prudence adhere to my plan;
Never let it be said,
There goes an old maid,
But get married as fast as you can.
As soon as you find
Your hearts are inclined
To beat quick at the sight of a man;
Then choose out a youth
With honor and truth,
And get married as fast as you can.
For age, like a cloud,
Your charms soon will shroud,
And this whimsical life's but a span;
Then, maids, make your hay,
While Sol darts his ray,
And get married as fast as you can.
The treacherous rake
Will artfully take
Every method poor girls to trepan;
But baffle their snare,
Make virtue your care,
And get married as fast as you can.
'And when Hymen's bands,
Have joined both your hands,
The bright flame still continue to fan;
Never harbor the stings
That jealousy brings,
But be constant, and blessed while you can.
Eloisa's Complaint.
FROM the brook and the willow forsaking the plain,
Eloisa came mournfully telling her pain;
On her trembling hand she reclined her sad head,
Nor pressed her pale cheek, for the color was fled:
Her languid eyes raised after many a groan,
And thus she began in a faultering tone.
Soft zephyrs and willow, kind brook, lend your aid,
Regard the complaint of an unhappy maid;
If the man whom I love should here chance to rove,
In murmuring sounds let the brook thus reprove:
The maid by persuasion and you, led astray,
Came to relate her sad story, one day.
For you every shepherd she used with disdain,
And pitched upon you for her favorite swain;
But when her fond heart you possessed, you forbore
The respect she had always commanded before;
For the sake of the nmyph whom you did ensnare,
Add a tear to this brook, and a sigh to this tear.
Brays OF Balendine.
BENEATH a green grove, a lovely young swain,
One evening reclined, to discover his pain,
So sad, yet so sweetly he warbled his woe,
The winds ceased to breathe, and the fountains to flow:
Rude winds with compassion could hear him complain,
But Cloe less gentle, was deaf to his strain.
How happy, he cried, my moments once flew!
When Cloe's bright charms first flushed in my view;
Those eyes then with pleasure the dawn could survey,
Nor smiled the fair morning more cheerful than they:
Now scenes of distress alone meet my sight,
I Am tortured in pleasure, and languish in light.
Then changes in vain for relief I pursue,
All else but conspire my grief to renew;
From sunshine to zephyrs, and shades we repair,
To sunshine we fly from too piercing an air:
But love's ardent fever burns always the same,
No winter can cool it, no summer inflame.
But see the pale moon all clouded retire,
The breezes grow dull, not Strephon's desire!
I fly from the danger of tempest and wind,
Yet nourish the madness that preys on the mind;
Ah wretch! how can life be worthy thy care?
To lengthen its moments, but lengthens despair!
THE LINNET.
AS passing by a shady grove,
I heard a Linnet sing,
Whose sweetly plaintive voice of love,
Proclaimed the cheerful spring.
His pretty accents seemed to flow,
As if he knew no pain,
His downy throat he tuned so sweet,
It echoed over the plain.
Ah! happy warbler, (I replied)
Contented thus to be;
It Is only harmony and love,
Can be compared to thee.
Thus perched upon the spray you stand,
The monarch of the shade
And even sip ambrosial sweets,
That glow from every glade.
Did man possess but half thy bliss,
How joyful might he be!
But man was never formed for this,
It Is only joy for thee,
Then farewell, pretty bird, (I said)
Pursue thy plaintive tale,
And let thy tuneful accents spread
All over the flagrant vale.
Song.
AS bringing home, the other day,
Two Linnets I had taken,
The little warbles seemed to pray
For liberty again:
Unheedful of their plaintive notes,
I sung across the mead;
In vain they tuned their pleasing throats,
And fluttered to be freed.
As passing through the verdant grove,
Near which my cottage stood,
I thought I saw the queen of love,
When Clora's charms I viewed:
I gazed, I loved, I press her stay,
To hear my tender tale;
But all in vain -- she fled away,
Nor would m^ sighs prevail.
Soon through the wound, which love had made,
Came pity to my breast;
And thus I (as compassion bade)
The feathered pair addressed:
"Ye little warblers, cheerful be,
Remember not ye flew;
For I who thought myself so free,
Am far more caught than you."
THE Shepherd's Complaint.
O NIGHTINGALE! best poet of the grove!
That plaintive strain can never belong to thee,
Blessed in full possession of thy love,
O! lend that strain, sweet nightingale to me.
O! lend that strain, etc.
It Is mine, alas! to mourn a wretched fate;
I love a maid, who all my bosom charms;
Yet lose my days without this lovely mate;
Inhuman fortune keeps her from my arms;
Inhuman, etc.
You, happy birds, by nature's simple laws,
Lead your calm lives sustained by nature's fare;
You dwell where ever roving fancy draws;
And love and song are all your pleasing care.
And love, etc.
But we, vain slaves of interest and of pride,
Dare not be blessed, lest envious tongues should blame:
And here in vain I languish for my bride!
O mourn with me, sweet birds, my hapless flame,
O mourn with me, sweet birds, my hapless flame!
Farewell ye Greenfields.
FAREWELL ye Greenfields and sweet groves,
Where Phyllis engaged my fond heart,
Where nightingales warble their loves,
And nature is dressed without art.
No pleasure they now can afford,
No music can lull me to rest,
Since Phyllis proves false to her word,
Young Strephon can never be blessed.
Often times by the side of a spring,
Where roses and lillies appear,
Gay Phyllis of Strephon would sing;
For Strephon was all she held dear.
So soon as she found by my eyes,
The passion that glowed in my breast,
She then, to my grief and surprise,
Proved all she had said was a jest.
Too late to my sorrow I find,
The beauties alone that will last,
Are those that are found in the mind,
Which envy or time cannot blast
Beware, then beware how you trust
Coquettes, who to love make pretense:
For Phyllis to me had been just,
Had nature but blessed her with sense.
Colinet AND Phoebe.
AS Colinet and Phoebe sat,
Beneath a poplar grove,
The gentle youth with fondest truth,
Was telling tales of love:
Dear blooming maid the shepherd said,
My tender vows believe,
Those downcast eyes and artless sighs
Can never my faith deceive.
Though some there are, from fair to fair,
Delights in wilds to rove,
Such change from me thou never can fear;
Thy charms secure my love.
Then Phoebe now approve my vow,
By truth and fondness pressed;
A smile assume, to grace thy bloom,
And make thy shepherd blessed.
A blush over spread her cheeks with red,
And half she turned aside,
With pleasing woos her bosom rose,
And thus the maid replied.
'Dear gentle youth, I know thy truth,
And all thy arts to please;
But ah! is this the time for bliss,
And themes so soft as these?
While all around we hear no sound,
But war's terrific strain,
The drum commands our armed bands,
And chides the tardy swain:
Our country's call arouses all,
Who dare be brave and free,
My love shall crown the youth alone:
Who save's himself and me.
It Is done, he cried, from thy dear side,
Now quickly I Will be gone,
From love will I to freedom fly,
A slave to thee alone:
And when I come with laurels home,
And all that freemen crave,
To crown my love, thy smiles shall prove
The fair reward the brave.
THE Disappointed Lover.
THOUGH youth and beauty grace the fair,
With every winning charm;
The grateful look and killing air,
That does my bosom warm.
Yet these are worthless things, and vain,
Where kindness has no part;
It Is sympathy excites the flame,
Yet warms the tender heart.
Fair Cloe once I much admired,
And tried her heart to move,
With pleasing hopes my breast was fired;
I hoped to win her love.
But ah! the frowning of the fair,
Perplexed my anxious mind:
Vexed with disdain I left her there,
And sought a maid more kind.
Fair Polly next my passions moved,
A maid both young and gay;
I gazed a while, and gazing loved:
And thus to her did say:
"Do not with killing srowns disdain,
The youth whose honest heart
Beats high with love, in hopes to gain
Those charms which cause the smart.
Though all the beauties crown thy face.
That Venus ever possessed:
Though each soft cha^^ and winning (...)
Lies sparkling in thy breast.
Yet these must fade and soon decay,
And yield to wasting time;
Then learn their worth, while fresh and gay,
Are blooming in their prime."
Thus at her feet I sighed a while,
Her cruel heart to move:
But could not gain that tender smile,
Which sooths the pangs of love.
Since pity's banished from their hearts,
My troubles here shall end;
I Will grieve no more, while I possess
A true celestial friend.
True love divine no frowns possess,
Nor angry passions hold;
Here I Will retire to seek redress,
For my bewildered soul.
Away ye fair, your beauties dust!
I Will have no charms from you,
No charms shall ever possess my breast,
But what is divine and true.
Collin AND Betsy.
SWEET Betsy now employs my pen,
The fairest nymph that trips the green:
Whose innocence young Collin stole,
then left her on the plain to strole:
In tears to mourn her cruel fate,
And seek relief a day too late.
To whom the injured fair with sighs,
Impatient turned her wishful eyes;
"Why will you break my tender heart?
Why from your sacred vows depart?
Oh! when will Collin bend his ear,
And turn to bless his Betsy dear?
When mountains bend their heads full low;
When vales surpass the mountains brow;
When fish no more shall cleave the sea,
And women's tongues shall cease to play:
Nor eagles lash the liquid air,
Then I Will return to thee my dear.
When fruit preceeds the blooming spring:
When birds in antumn learn to sing;
When witless young refuse their dams,
And savage tigers mate with lambs;
Or radient sol shall disappear,
Then I Will return to thoe, my dear.
When tombs resound with masquerades,
Vulcanoes teem with blooming maids:
When women keep secure their trust,
And harmony shall give disgust;
Or cannons please the ladies ear,
Then I Will return to thee, my dear.
SONG.
MY temples with clusters of grapes I Will entwine,
And barter all joys for a goblet of wine;
In search of a Venus no longer I Will run,
But stop and forget her at Bacchus's tun.
Yet why this resolve to relinquish the fair?
It Is a folly with spirits like mine to despair;
For what mighty charms can be found in a glass,
If not filled to the health of some favorite lass?
It Is women whose charms every rapture impart,
And lend a new spring to the pulse of the heart:
The miser himself (so supreme is her sway)
Grows convert to love, and resigns her his key.
At the sound of her voice, sorrow lifts up her head,
And poverty listens, well pleased, from her shed;
While age, in ecstasy, hobbling along,
Beats time with his crutch to the tune of her song.
Then bring me a goblet from Bacchus's board;
The largest and deepest that stands on the board;
I Will fill up a brimmer, and drink to the fair;
It Is the toast of a lover, and pledge me who dare.
SONG.
GO! tuneful bird, that glads the skies,
To Daphney's window speed thy way,
And there on trembling pinions rise,
And there thy vocal art display:
And if she deign thy notes to hear,
And if she praise thy matin song,
Tell her, the sound that soothes her ear,
To Damon's native plains belong.
Tell her in livelier plumes arrayed,
The birds from India's groves may shine
But ask the lovely, partial maid,
What are his notes compared with thine?
Then bid her treat yon witless bea^,
And all his flaunting race with scorn,
And lend an ear to Damon's woe,
Who sings her praise, but sings for^orn.
SONG.
WELL met, jolly fellows, well met;
By this bowl you're all welcome, I fwear;
See where on the table it is set,
And designed for the grave of our care.
From this social convention,
'T will drive all contention,
Save only who longest can drink;
Then fill up your glasses
And drink to your lasses,
The head ach take him that shall shrink.
Do but look at this glass! here boys, hand it around:
Why it sparkles like Phillis's eyes;
But it is better by far, boys; for when he^ eyes wound,
This balm to the wound will supply;
Then a fig for this thinking:
Fill, fill, and be drinking:
Let us drown all our cares and our sorrows:
Come, the toast, boys, the toast!
There Is no time to be lost,
For our cares will return with tomorrow.
Song.
I DREAMT I saw a piteous sight,
Young Cupid weeping lay,
Until his pretty stars of light,
Had wept themselves away.
Methought I asked him why he wept.
Mere pity led me on:
He deeply sighed and then replied,
Alas! I am undone.
As I beneath yon myrtle lay,
Close by Diana's springs,
Amintor stole my bow away,
And pinioned both my wings.
Alas! said I, where is then thy bow,
Wherewith he wounded me?
Thou art a god, and such a blow,
Could come from none but thee.
But if thou will revenged be
On that ambitious swain,
I Will set thy wings at liberty,
And thou shall fly again:
And all the service on my part
That I require of thee,
Is that you would wound Amintor's heart,
And make him die for me.
The silken fetters I untied,
And the gay wings displayed
He mounting gently fanned and cried
Adieu, fond foolish maid!
At that I blushed and angry grew,
I should the god believe;
But waking found my dream too true,
Alas! I was a flave.
Song.
OVER desert plains and rushy meers
And withered heaths I rove,
Where tree, nor spire, nor cot appears,
I pass to meet my love;
But though my paths were damask'd over
With beauties ever so fine.
My busy thoughts would fly before
To fix on thee alone.
Over desert plains, etc.
No fir crowned hills could give delight,
No palace please my eye;
No pyramid's aerial height,
where mouldering monarchs lie;
Over desert plains, etc.
Unmoved should easter kings advance,
Could I the pageant see,
Splendour might catch one scornful glance.
Nor Steal one glance from thee.
Over desert plains and rushy meers, etc.
Queen Mary's Lamentation.
I SIGH and lament me in vain,
These walls can but echo my moan;
Alas! it increases my pain,
When I think on the days that are gone.
Through the grate of my prison I see,
The birds as they wanton in air:
My heart, how it pants to be free,
My looks they are wild with despair!
Above, though oppressed with my fate,
I burn with contempt for my foes;
Though fortune has altered my state,
She never can subdue me to those.
False woman! In all ages to come,
Thy malice detested shall be;
And when we are cold in the tomb,
Some hearts shall still sorrow for me.
Ye roofs, where cold damps and dismay,
With silence and solitude dwell;
How comfortless passes the day!
How sad tolls the evening bell!
The owls from the battlements cry;
Hollow winds seem to murmur around:
O Mary! Prepare thee to die!
My blood it runs cold at the sound!
Song.
LOVELY Nymph! O cease to grieve me;
Cease to wound my tender heart;
For your frowns (you may believe me)
Prove the cause of all my smart.
Prove the cause, etc.
Deign, O Sylvia! to reward me;
With compassion view your swain:
Do not cruelly discard me:
Quickly case me of my pain.
Quickly case, etc.
Would you, Sylvia, would you render
Your adorer greatly blessed,
Of his heart accept the tender,
Then you will see his tortured breast.
Song.
LOVELY nymph now cease to languish,
Yield not thus thy mind to woe;
Look behind the cloud of anguish,
Chearing beams of comfort blow.
Chearing beams, etc.
Let enlivening hope elate thee,
Hope that points to fairer skies;
Think the tran^ent ills that wait thee
Are but blestings in disguise.
Are but, etc.
Be not by distress dej cted:
Shrink not from a^^^tetion's hand:
Falsehood is from truth detected,
By the kind enchantress' wand.
By the kind, etc.
Sage instructress, she shall train thee;
Steady virtue teach thy heart:
Sharp, but short lived, pains await thee;
Endless blessings to impart.
Endless blessings, etc.
How Imperfect is Expression.
HOW imperfect is expression,
Some emotions to impart,
When we mean a soft confession.
And yet seek to hide the heart.
When our bosoms all complying,
With enraptured tamults swell,
And beat, what broken, falt'ring, dying,
Language would, but cannot tell.
Deep confusions rosy terror,
Quite expressive, paints my cheek;
Ask no more, behold your error,
Blushes eloquently speak:
What, though silent is my anguish,
Or breathed only to the air;
Mark my eyes, and as they languish,
Kead what yours have written there.
O that you could once conceive me!
Once my soul's strong seelings view!
Love has bought more fond, believe me,
Friendship nothing half so true,
From you, I am wild, despairing:
With you, speechless, as I touch,
This is all that bears declaring,
And, perhaps, delares too much.
THE Fan.
FOR various purpose serves the fan,
As thus a decent blind,
Between the sticks to peep at man.
Nor yet betray our mind.
Each action has a meaning plain,
Resentment's in the snap;
A flirt expresses strong disdain,
Consent a gentle tap.
All passions will the fan disclose,
All modes of female art,
And to advantage sweetly shows
The hand if not the heart.
It Is folly's scepter, first designed
By love's capricious boy,
Who knows how lightly all mankind
Are governed by a toy.
THE Birks OF Invermay.
THE smiling morn, the breathing spring
Invite the tuneful birds to sing:
And while they warble from each lay,
Love melts the universal lay.
Let us, Amanda, timely wise,
Like them improve each hour that slies,
And in soft raptures spend the day
Among the birks of Invermay.
For soon the winter of the year,
And age, life's winter, will appear:
At this thy living bloom will fade:
As that will strip the verdant shade:
Our taste of pleasures then is over,
The feathered songsters are no more;
And when they droop and we decay,
Adieu the birks of Invermay.
The laverocks now with linnets sing,
The rocks around with echos ring;
The mavis and the blackbirds vie,
In tuneful strains to glad the sky.
The woods now wear their summer fuits:
To mirth all nature now invites:
Let us be blithesome then and gay,
Among the birks of Invermay.
Behold the hills and vales around,
With lowing herds and flocks abound;
The wanton kids and frisking lambs
Gambol and dance ab^ut their dames:
The busy bees with humming noise,
And all the reptile kind rejoice:
Let us like them, then sing and play
About the birks of Invermay.
Hark! how the waters as they fall,
Loudly, my love, to gladness call!
The wanton waves sport in the beams,
The fishes play throughout the streams:
The circling sun does now advance,
And all the planets round him dance;
Let us as jovial be, as they,
Among the birks of Invermay.
THE Harmless Shepherd.
'TWAS early on a holiday,
A harmless, shepherd chane'd to stray;
And wandering near a crystal brook,
He sat him down to bait his book,
Thus said the shepherd free from care,
If I this gudgeon could ensnare,
Or any of the scaly fry,
I Would envy none below the sky.
His sport was harmless as his mind;
Upon his hand his head reclined;
And listening to the woodlark's note,
He watched the motion of its float.
It scarce obtained a single swim,
Ere Cupid round the swain did skim,
With feathered wings extended wide,
And settled by the shepherd's side.
The swain had heard of bows and darts,
And Cupid's snare, that tortured hearts,
Became uneasy at the sight,
But artfully concealed his fright.
"O, pray thee Cupid! tell, I pray,
What brought thee here so soon to day?"
'In truth, said he, in sports like thine,
I thither come to waste my time.'
"If this be true, my pretty boy,
Then leave with me this glittering toy:
I mean the arrow in thy hand;
Then equally we'll share our stand."
'Shepherd, I Will give thee any thing;
Here. take it with my bow and string.'
The swain secure his cheek did stroke,
And slily Cupid's arrow broke.
But lo! an angel's voice he heard;
When soon an angel's form appeared,
With eyes so bright as poets say,
(Should Phoebus sleep) might rule the day:
The shepherd listened to her song;
In truth, I fear, he gazed too long;
For as her eyes their beams withdrew,
Her winning looks the shepherd slew.
At first he felt the uncommon smart.
And feared the boy had sent a dart;
Then faintly turning, child, said he,
"This fatal arrow came from thee,"
'Shepherd, I say, it is no such thing;
You had it with my bow and string:
But now, I guess, for whom you smart;
The nymph you saw has pierced your heart.
THE Frog AND Mouse.
A Satire on Italian Plays.

THERE was a frog lived in a well,
With a rigdam bulle met kimo,
And mistress mouse, she kept the Mill,
With a rigdam bulle met kimo:
Kimo kairo delto kaito kimo kairo kimo,
Strim stram pomme diddle larre bone,
Rigdam, rigdam bulle met kimo.
The frog would often a hunting ride, With rigdam With a rigdam, etc. is to be
repeated at the end of every line: -- And Chorus at the end of every verte.

With sword and pistol by his side.
He came unto the Mouse's hall;
And there he did both rap and call.
'Pray mistress mouse, are you within?'
Oh yes, kind sir, I sit and spin.
The Frog stepped in, and drew a chair,
And sat him down close by his dear.
Then he took her 'pon his k^^^;
'Pray, my dear, can you love me?
"Indeed, kind Sir, you flatter me:
"How can I but fancy thee!"
Just as they began to chat,
In comes honest uncle Rat.
The Frog arose and took his hat,
And placed a chair; then down they sat.
"Well, uncle Rat, says mistress Mouse,
"How do ye all at uncle's house?"
'The Rat replies, all well, my dear.
'Pray Mr. Frog, how came you here.
"My love, dear Sir, for your fair niece,
"Was all that brought me to this place."
'Why Mr. Frog, you honor me!
'I shall consent, if you agree.'
The Mouse with modest blushes said,
'If you consent, Sir, all is agreed.'
Old uncle Rat then rode to town,
And bought his niece a wedding gown,
And household stuff, in highest taste,
And then returned home in haste.
The Frog was dressed in a pea green:
The Mouse in silk, looked like a Queen.
The bride and bridegroom thus were dressed
And nuptial ceremonies past.
The wedding feast was then prepared,
And all things ready on the board.
But now alas! Oh sad to tell!
A cruel fate the three befell!
For just as they sat down to ^at,
In comes Miss Pussy with her Kit,
Puss took the Rat, the Kit the Mouse,
And then in triumph left the house.
The Frog, he swam across the lake.
And there was swallowed by a snake.
So here is the tragic end of three,
With a rigdam bulle met kimo,
The Rat, the Frog and Mouse, you see,
Kimo kairo, etc.
THREE Jolly Pigeons.
LET school masters puzzle their brain,
With grammar, and nonsense, and learning:
Good liquor, I stoutly maintain,
Give Genus a better discerning,
Let them brag of their Heathenish Gods,
Their Lethes, their Styxes, and Stygians:
Their Quis, and their Quaes, and their Quods,
They Are all but a parcel of pigeons.
Toroddle, toroddle, toroll.
When Methodist preachers come down,
A preaching that drinking is sinful,
I Will wager the rascals a crown,
They always preach best with a skinful.
But when you come down with your pence,
For a slice of their scurvy religion,
I Will leave it to all men of sense,
But you, my good friend, are the Pigeon.
Toroddle, toroddle, toroll.
Then come, put the jorum about.
And let us be merry and clever,
Our hearts and our liquors are stout,
Here Is the Three Jolly Pigeons forever.
Let some cry up woodcock or hare,
Your bustards, your ducks, and your widgeons;
But of all the birds of the air,
Here Is health to the Three Jolly Pigeons.
Toroddle, toroddle, toroll.
Song.
FOR a shape, and a bloom, and an air, and a mein,
Myrtilla was brightest of all the gay green;
But artfully wild, and affectedly coy,
Those her beauty invited her pride would destroy.
By the flocks as she strayed with the nymphs of the vale,
Not a shepherd but wooed her to hear his soft tale;
Though fatal the passion, she laughed at the swain,
And returned with neglect, what she heard with disdain.
But beauty has wings, and too hastily flies,
And love unrewarded soon sickens and dies.
The uymph cured by time, of her folly and pride,
Now sighs in her turn for the bliss she denied,
No longer she frolicks it wide over the plain,
To kill with her coyness the languishing swain;
So humbled her pride is, so softened her mind,
That, though courted by none, she to all would be kind.
THE Veil.
AH! fashion, wherefore do thou still
The female breast with anger fill,
And teach such cruel arts?
It Is thou that bid'st the fair conceal
Their glowing charms beneath a veil,
To tantalize our hearts.
O banish the bonnet, or draw up the veil,
And crown with simplicity each British fair;
No longer their smiles and their dimples conceal.
But let us behold them e'n just as they are.
Ah! fashion, it is thy ruthless power,
That midst the grove, and in the bower,
Often damps ecstatic bliss:
For when the nectar we should sip,
The cobweb flutters on the lip,
And blunts the amorous kiss.
O banish the bonnet, etc.
Oh! fashion, bid the curtain rise,
That we may feast our longing eyes
With dimples and with smiles;
Then every youth shall bless the sway,
And to thy precepts homage pay,
Dear goddess of our isles.
O banish the bonnet, etc.
THE Winter OF Age.
DEAR Clora, let us love, while, in sost wanton gales,
Blithe zephyrs disport upon Tweed's limpid stream,
Devoid of all guile to repeat our fond tales;
For pleasing is converse, when love is the theme,
O think, my fair maid, that, in life's budding spring,
In love it is the duty of all to engage;
That thence blooming summer may happiness bring,
To comfort the cold hoary winter of age.
Pomona choice fruits may abundantly yield,
Gay Flora spread carpets of roses around,
Or Ceres benign, as the yellow died field,
Make autumns rich harvest diffusive abound;
But these naught avail, if, in life's budding spring,
In tender affection we fail to engage;
That thence blooming summer may happiness bring,
To comfort the cold hoary winter of age.
On Tweed's flowery margin, where rosy faced health
Convenes ev'^y morning her sylvan levee,
^envy not pomp, nor the splendour of wealth,
Content, my dear Clora, possessing but thee.
Let love then, my charmer, in life's budding spring.
Our fondest regard to each other engage.
That like the kind ivy and oak we may cling,
From youth to the cold hoary winter of age.
See Ruddy Aurora.
SEE ruddy Aurora begins to appear,
And chaces from hence the duli night;
The huntsmen are up, and the hounds 'gin to cheer:
Ye gods, what a glorious sight!
Yoicks, Jowler and Sweetlips! hark forward, away!
Tantara, we'll hail the sweet morn.
To join in such pastimes no longer delay,
But follow the sound of the horn.
The fox is unearth'd and the chase is began;
Pursuing is each hound and steed;
He doubles, and tries by his cunning to shun
His fate, and now skims ^^er the me^^:
There closely pursued, by the river he aims
To escape to the other side lawn;
But alas! he is o'erta'n; and the huntsman proclaims
His death by the sound of the horn
Then while all your coxcombs and sweet scented beaux.
Who delight in the noise of the town,
Hunt fashion and folly, and such foolish shows,
In purfuit of which often they are thrown;
Like them where such stupid dull pastimes abound,
So idly to waste time we scorn,
But purlue rosy health, whilst with hories and hounds
We follow the sound of the horn.
THE Waggoner.
WHEN I comes to town with a load of hay,
Mean and lowly though I seem,
I knows pretty well how they figures away,
While I whistles and drives my team:
Your na^y sparks and slaiby dames
How I do love to queer!
I runs my rigs,
And p^tters, and gigs,
And plays a hundred comical games
To all that I comes near:
Then in a pet.
To hear them fret,
A mobbing away they go:
"The (...) undrel deserves to be horsewhipt:"
-- "Who, me Ma'am?"
Woe, Ball, woe!
So to mind them I never seem,
But whistles and drives my team.
So as I seems thinking of nothing at all,
And driving as fast as I can,
I pins a queer thing against the wall,
Half a monkey, and half a man!
The mob come round him, to put up his blood,
While he is trembling from top to toe;
My whip it goes spank,
I tips Ball on the flank;
Ball plunges, and paints him all over with mud,
Queers his stockings, and spoils the beau!
Then the sweet pretty dear
Ah, could you but hear!
"Od's curse you, I Will make you know, you infernal villain."
"Lord bless your baby face, I would not hurt your spindle shanks for the
world."
Woe, Ball, woe!
So to mind 'em I never seem.
But whistles and drives my team.
And so I gets the finest fun
And frisk that ever you saw;
Of all I meets I can queer every one
But your gemmen of the law:
Though they c^^ scarcely put me down;
Says I, to their counts when I Am led,
Where their tales of a pig
They hide with a wig,
How many ways in London town
They dresses a calf's head!
Then every dunce
To hear open at once,
Like mill clacks their clappers go,
"Oh, that is the fellow I saw grinning through the horse collar in the country."
"I fancy you're the fellow I saw grinning through the pillory in London."
Woe, Ball, woe!
So to mind 'em I never seem,
But whistles and drives my team.
Song.
WHEN duty called, I sailed away,
Still to my king and country true;
And nothing could my heart dismay,
But parting from my charming Sue.
With grief her tender heart was pressed,
And searcely could I bid adieu:
Her sorrows filled my constant heart,
For dear I love my charming Sue.
I kissed away the falling tear,
And vowed I ever would be true;
Then bid her hope, and banish fear,
To pacify my charming Sue:
She sighed, and wept, and sighed again,
But I was fore'd to bid adieu;
Yet, while I sailed upon the main,
I thought upon my charming Sue.
The whistling winds began to blow,
And dreadful rocks appeared in view;
Now up aloft, now down below,
Yet still I thought on charming Sue:
For three long years upon the main,
Each toil and danger I went through;
At length, quite tight, returned again,
I came, and found my charming Sue,
Constant my lovely girl I found;
To me she faithful was, and true;
And having failed the world around,
I Am safe in port with charming Sue:
Well rigged, to church we tripp'd away,
Surrounded by the jolly crew;
And I am bound to bless the day
I saw my lovely, charming Sue.
THE Charming Village Maid.
CHARMING village maid,
If thou will be mine,
In gold and pearls arrayed,
All my wealth is thine,
For gold is dross to me,
Even Nature's beauties fade,
If not enjoyed by thee,
My charming village maid!
Had I yon Shepherd's care,
Your lambs to feed and fold,
The dog star heat l'd bear,
And winter's piercing cold;
Or such my lot should be,
At harrow, flail or spade,
Well pleased I Would toil for thee,
My charming village maid!
This morn at gosly dawn
I had a hedge rose wild,
Its sweets perfumed the lawn,
'Twas sportive Nature's child;
To grace my gay Parterre,
Translated from the glade,
Sweet emblem of my fair,
My charming village maid.
O my bonny Bet.
NO more I Will court the town bred fair,
Who shines in artificial beauty;
Her native charms, without compare,
Claim all my love, respect and duty.
O my bonny, bonny Bet, sweet blossom,
Was I a king, so proud to wear thee,
From off the verdant couch I Would bear thee,
To grace thy lover's bosom.
Yet ask me where those beauties lie,
I cannot say in smiles or dimples
In blooming cheek, or radiant eye,
It Is happy nature, wild and simple.
O my bonny, bonny Bet, etc.
Let dainty beaux for ladies pine,
And sigh in numbers trite and common;
Ye Gods! one darling wish be mine,
And all I ask is lovely woman!
O my bonny, bonny Bet, etc.
Come, dearest girl, the rosy bowl,
Like thy bright eye, with pleasure dancing:
My heaven art thou, so take my soul,
With rapture every sense entrancing.
O my bonny, bonny Bet, etc.
Disappointed Affection.
^^^A, once in prospect fair,
I ^^^m'd thee mine alone;
Ther^ ^^^pect now more light than air,
(...) every comfort's gone!
Joys, that is flown on rapid wings,
Have lest sad care behind,
Empoison fierce affl^ction's stings,
And deeper wound the mind.
To me how dull the sky appears,
Though Sol in triumph reigns;
Denied the sad resource of tears,
How racking are my pains!
Our souls in one congenial mould,
Received their early form;
With thee through life though thunders rolled,
Well pleased I Would brave the storm.
Our little bark, till danger over,
Would shun the boistrous wave,
And keep along the peaceful shore,
That gentle waters lave.
Alas! how fair would fancy dress
The visionary lay:
But all in vain, for woes oppress,
And drive sweet hope away.
Those hearts that never with pity melt,
(As dew impearls the thorn)
Will smile at pangs they have not felt,
And treat my grief with scor^
But sure the mind, where se^^ (...) ^^ain
Her pleasing mild abode,
Will own we reach contentment's fane,
Through love's delightful road.
Song.
COLIN. HARK! hark! over the plains what glad tumults we hear!
How gay all the nymphs and the shepherds appear!
With myr^les and roses new decked are the bowers,
And every bush bears a garland of flowers,
I cannot for my life, what it means understand:
There Is some rural festival surely at hand:
Not harvest, nor sheep shearing, now can take place;
But Phillis will tell me the truth of the case.

PHILLIS. The truth honest lad -- why surely you know
What rites are prepared in the village below,
Where gallant young Thyrsis so famed and adored,
Wed Daphne, the fister of Corin our lord;
That Daphne, whose beauty, good nature and ease,
All fancies can strike, and all judgments (...) lease;
That (...) praise must be the matter (...) ^^r;
You known ^^at he is -- and I need say no more.

COLIN. Young Thyrsis too claims all that honor can lend,
His countrymen's glory, their champion and friend,
Though such slight memorials scarce speak his deserts,
And trust me, his name is engraved on their hearts.

PHILLIS. But hence to the bridal behold how they throng,
Each shepherd conducting his sweetheart along;
The joyous occasion all nature inspires
With tender affection and cheerful desires.

DUETTO. Ye powers that over conjugal union preside,
All gracious look down on the bridegroom and bride,
That beauty, and virtue, and valor may shine
In a race like themselves, with no end to the line:
Let honor and glory, and riches and praise,
Unceasing attend them through n^^^^ous cays;
And while in a palace fate (...) ^ir lot,
O! may they live easy as the (...) cot!

Song.
LITTLE muses come and cry,
Put your finger in your eye;
Join the macaroni kind,
Demn the weather, demn the wind.
Winds that rumple powdered hair,
Winds that fright the feathered fair,
Winds that blow our hats away,
And rudely with our ruffles play.
Winds that crown the gentle note,
Fritter'd through a gentle throat;
Winds that clouds around us throw,
And spoil the glitter of our show.
Damn the winds that thus have stirred,
On Friday June the twenty third,
To plague the macaroni kind:
Damn the rain, and damn the wind.
Song.
WHAT (...), Sir? you, Sir? no Sir? --
It Is (...) ^'d have you to know --
(...) ^mtly writing, Sir,
And his nails biting, Sir,
Oh, he is a wondrous fellow!
Now in the garret, Sir -- high, Sir -- high, Sir!
Now in the cellar below;
Sunshine and vapor, Sir --
Pen, ink, and paper, Sir,
Oh, he is a wondrous fellow!
His pockets to fill, Sir -- still. Sir -- still, Sir --
His noddle he empties -- O ho!
Scribbling and scrawling, Sir,
Starting and bawling, Sir,
Oh, he is a wondrous fellow!
Song.
My banks are furnished with bees,
Whose murmur invites one to sleep;
My grottoes are shaded with trees,
And my hills are white over with sheep:
I seldom have met with a loss,
Such health to my fountains bestow;
My fountains all bordered with moss,
Where the hare bells and violets grow,
Where the hare bells and violets grow.
I have found out a gist for my fair,
I have found where the wood pigeous breed,
But let me that plunder forbear,
She Will say 'twas a barbarous deed:
For he never could be true, she averred,
Who could rob a poor bird of its young:
I loved her the more when I heard
Such tenderness fall from her tongue,
Such tenderness, etc.
But where does my Phillida stray?
And where are her grots and her bowers?
Are the groves and the valleys as gay,
And the shepherds as gentle as ours?
The groves may perhaps be as fair,
And the face of the valleys as fine;
The swains may in manners conpare,
But their love is not equal to mine,
But their love is not equal to mine.
Song.
CONTENTED I am, and contented I Will be,
For what can this world more afford,
Than a girl that will sociably sit on my knee,
And a cellar that is plentiful stored?
My brave boys, etc.
My vault door is opened, descend every guest,
Tap that task, ay, that wine we will try,
It Is as sweet as the lips of your love to the taste,
And as bright her cheeks to the
In a piece of slit hoop I my candle have stuck,
'Twill light us each bottle to hand;
The foot of my glass for the purpose I broke,
For I hate that a bumper should stand.
Astride on a butt, as a butt should be strod,
I sit my companions among,
Like grape blessing Bacchus, the good fellow's god,
And a sentiment give, or a song.
We are dry where we sit, though the oozings drop^ seem
The moist walls with wet pearls to emboss,
From the arch moldy cobwebs in Gothic taste stream,
Like stucco work cut out of moss.
My cellar's my camp, my soldiers my slasks,
All gloriously ranged in review;
When I cast my eyes round, I consider my casks
As kingdoms I Have yet to subdue.
I charge glass in hand, and my empire maintain,
No ancient more patriot like bled;
Each drop in defense of delight I will drain,
And myself for my bucks I Will drink dead.
Sound that pipe -- it is in tune, and those bins are well filled,
View the heap of Champaigne in your rear;
Yon bottles are Burgundy, see how they are pil'd,
Like artillery, tier over tier!
It Is my will, when I die not a tear shall be shed,
No Hie jacet be engraved on my stone;
But pour over my coffin a bottle of red,
And write, that His drinking is done.
Song.
Sung by Mungo in the Padlock.
DEAR heart! what a terrible life am I led!
A dog has better that is sheltered and fed;
Night and day it is the same,
My pain is dear game;
Me wish to de Lord me was dead.
Whate'er's to be done,
Poor Blacky must run;
Mungo here, Mungo dear,
Mungo every where.
Above or below,
Sirrah, come, sirrah, go;
Do so, and do so,
Oh! Oh!
Me wish to de Lord me was dead.
Ye Fair Possessed.
YE fair possessed of every charm,
To captivate the will,
Whose smiles can rage itself disarm,
Whose frowns at once can kill:
Say will you deign ^he verse to hear,
Where flattery bears no part;
And honest verse, that flows sincere,
And candid from the heart.
Great is your power; but greater yet,
Mankind it might engage:
If, as ye all can make a net,
Ye all could make a cage.
Each nymph a thousand hearts may take;
For who is to beauty blind?
But to what end a prisoner make,
Unless you have strength to bind?
Attend the council often told,
Too often told in vain;
Learn that best art, the art to hold,
And lock the lover's chain.
Gamesters to little purpose win,
Who lose again as fast;
Though beauty may the charm begin,
It Is sweetness makes it last.
Song.
Now Is the time for mirth and glee,
Sing, and love, and laugh with me:
Cupid is my theme of story:
It Is his godship's fame and glory.
How all yield unto his law!
Ha! ha! ha! ha! ha! ha! ha!
Over the grave, and over the gay,
Cupid takes his share of play:
He makes heroes quit their glory:
He Is the god most famed in story:
Bending them unto his law!
Ha! ha! etc.
Sly the urchin deals his darts,
Without pity -- piercing hearts:
Cupid triumphs over passions,
Not regarding modes or fashions.
Firmly fixed is Cupid's law!
Ha! ha! etc.
Some may think these lines not true,
But they are facts -- 'twixt me and you;
Then, ye maids and men, be wary,
How you meet before you marry:
Cupid's will is solely law.
Ha! ha! etc.
Song.
LET rakes and libertines, resigned
To sensual pleasures, tange:
Here all the sex's charms I find,
And never can cool or change,
Let vain coquettes and prudes conceal
What most their hearts desire:
With pride my passion I reveal;
Oh! may it never expire.
The sun shall cease to spread its light,
The stars their orbits leave,
And fair creation sink in night
When I my dear deceive.
Song.
SWEET Poll of Plymouth was my dear
When for^'d from her to go,
Down her ckeeks rained many a tear,
My heart was fraught with woe:
Our anchor weighed for sea we stood,
The land we left behind:
Her tears then swelled the briny stood.
My sighs increased the wind.
We plowed the deep, and now between
Us lay the ocean wide;
For five long years I had not seen
My sweet my bonny bride;
That time I sailed the world around,
All for my true love's sake;
But pressed as we were homeward bound,
I thought my heart would break.
The press gang bold I asked in vain
To let me once on shore;
I longed to see my Poll again,
But saw my Poll no more.
And have they torn my love away!
And is he gone! she cried.
My Polly, sweetest flower of May!
She languish'd, drooped, and died.
Song.
THE last time I came over the moor,
I left my love behind me;
Ye powers! what pains do I endure,
When soft ideas mind me?
Soon as the ruddy morn displayed
The beaming day ensuing,
I met betimes my lovely maid
In fit retreat for wooing.
Beneath the cooling shade we lay,
Gazing and chastely sporting:
We kissed and promised time away,
Till night spread her black curtain.
I pitied all beneath the skies,
Even kings, when she was nigh me:
In raptures I beheld her eyes.
Which could but ill deny me.
Sold I be called where cannons roar,
Where mortal steel may wound me:
Or cast upon some foreign shore,
Where dangers may surround me:
Yet hopes again to see my love,
To feast on glowing kisses,
Shall make my cares at distance move,
In prospect of such blisses.
In all my soul there is not one place
To let a rival enter:
Since she excels in every grace,
In her my love shall center.
Sooner the seas shall cease to flow,
Their waves the Alps shall cover,
On Greenland's ice shall roses grow,
Before I cease to love her.
The next time I go over the moor,
She shall a lover find me;
And that my faith is firm and pure,
Though I left her behind me:
Then Hymen's sacred bonds shall chain
My heart to her fair bosom;
There, while my being does remain,
My love more fresh shall blossom.
Song.
WHEN I was a young one, what girl was like me?
So wanton, so airy, and brisk as a be;
I tat^led. I rambled, I laughed, and wherever
A fiddle was heard -- to be sure I was there.
To all that came near I had something to say;
'Twas this, Sir, and that, Sir, -- but scarce ever Nay:
And, Sundays, dressed out in my silks and my lace
I warrant I stood by the best in the place.
At twenty I got me a husband -- poor man!
Well, rest him we are all as good as we can;
Yet he was so peevish, he would quarrel for straws,
And jealous -- though truly I gave him some cause.
He snubb'd me and huff'd me -- but let me alone,
Egad! I Have a tongue, and I paid him his own:
Ye wives, take the hint, and when spouse is untowr'd,
Stand firm to your charter, and have the last word.
But now I Am quite altered, the more to my woe:
I Am not what I was forty summers ago:
This time'^ a sore foe; there is no shunning his ^^rt.
However, I keep up a pretty good heart.
Grown old, yet I hate to be sitting mum chance;
I still love atune, though unable to dance;
And books of devotion laid by on my shelf,
I teach that to others I once did myself.
Molly OF THE Mill.
LET poets praise the flowery mead,
The moss clad hill, the dale;
The shepherd piping on his reed,
The maid with milking pail:
The lark that soars on pinions high:
Or sweetly purling rill,
While I bicathe forth a tender sigh
For Molly of the Mill.
In vain to sing her charms I tay,
And all her beauties trace;
Such brilliancy informs hereye,
Such excellence her face;
Her easy shape engaging air,
My breast with transports fill,
No nymph so pleasing, or so fair
As Molly of the Mill.
It Is not her person charms alone,
The beauties of her mind;
Wit, sense, and sentiment, we own,
In her are all combined;
Such is the nymph who sways my heart,
And makes my bosom thrill,
Adorned by nature more than art,
Sweet Molly of the Mill.
Song.
JOLLY mortals, fill your glasses,
Noble deeds are done by wine;
Scorn the nymph and all her graces,
Who'd for love or beauty pine?
Look within the bowl that is flowing,
And a thousaud charms you will find,
More than Phillis has, though going
In the moment to be kind.
Alexander hated thinking,
Drank about at council board:
He subdued the world by drinking
More than by his conquering sword.
Song.
WHEN blushes died the cheek of morn,
And dew dro^s glisten'd on the thorn:
When sky larks tuned their carrols sweet,
To hail the god of light and heat;
Philander, from his downy bed,
To fair Lisetta's chamber sped,
Crying -- A wake sweet love of mine,
I Am come to be thy Valentine.
Soft love that balmy sleep denies,
Had long unveiled her brilliant eves,
Which (that a kiss she might obtain)
She artfully had closed again:
He sunk, thus caught (...) beauty's trap,
Like Phoebus into Thetis' lap,
And near forgot that his design
Was but to be her Valentine.
She, starting, cried -- I am undone;
Philander, charming youth, begone;
For this time, to your vows sincere,
Make virtue, not your love, appear:
No sleep has closed these watchful eyes
(Forgive the simple fond (...))
To generous thoughts your heart incline,
And be my faithful Valentine.
The brutal passion sudden fled,
Fair honor governed in its stead,
And both agreed, ere setting sun,
To join two virtuous hearts in one:
Their beauteous offspring soon did prove
The sweet effects of mutual love,
And, from that hour to life's decline,
She blessed the day of Valentine.
THE Power OF Music.
MUSIC, how powerful is thy charm!
That can the fiercest rage disarm,
Calm passions in a human breast,
And lull even jealousy to rest;
With amorous thoughts the soul inspire,
Or kindle up a warlike fire.
So great is music's power.
Amphion, with his tuneful lyre,
Coold rocks remove, and stones inspire;
Command a city to arise,
And losty buildings touch the skies;
While stones, obedient to his call,
Harmonious moved, and formed a wall.
Arion, from his vessel cast,
In safety over the seas he past,
For, mounted like the ocean's god,
Upon a dolphin's back he rode,
Whilst shoals of fishes flocked around,
Well pleased drank in the charming sound.
Sad Orpheus, through hell's dreary coast,
Was seeking for his consort lost,
His musie drew the ghosts along,
And furies listened to his song;
His song could Charon's rage disarm,
And Pluto and his consort charm.
Inflamed by music soldiers fight,
Inspired by music poets write;
Music can heal the lover's wounds,
And calm fierce rage by gentle sounds;
Philosophy attempts in vain,
What music can with ease attain.
So great is music's power.
THE Battle OF THE Kegs.
GALLANTS attend, and hear a friend,
Trill forth harmonious ditty:
Srange things I Will tell, which late befell
In Philadelphia city.
'Twas early day, as poets say,
Just when the sun was rising,
A soldier stood, on log of wood,
And saw a sight surprising.
As in a maze, he stood to gaze,
The truth cannot be denied, sir,
He spied a score -- of kegs or more,
Come flooting down the tide, sir.
A sailor too, in jerkin blue,
The strange appearance viewing,
First damned his eyes, in great surprise,
Then said -- some mischief's brewing.
These KEGS now hold the rebels bold,
Packed up like pickled herring:
And they are come down t'attack the town,
In this new way of ferrying.
The soldier flew, the sailor too,
And, seared almost to death, sir,
Wore out their shoes, to spread the news,
And ran till out of breath, sir.
Now up and down, throughout the town,
Most frantic scenes were acted;
And some ran here, and some ran there
Like men almost distracted.
Some sire cried which some denied
But said the earth had quacked:
And girls and boys, with hedious noise,
Ran through the town half naked.
Sir Wm. How.
Sir William he, snug as a slay,
Lay all this time a snoring,
Nor dreamt of harm, as he lay warm
In bed with Mrs. L -- g.
Now in a fright, he starts upright,
Awaked by such a clatter:
He rubs both eyes, and boldly cries,
'For God's sake what is the matter?'
At his bed side, he then espied
Sir Erskine Sir W. Erskine.
at command, sir,
Upon one foot, he had one boot,
And the other in his hand, sir.
Arise! Arise! Sir Erskine cries:
The rebels -- more's the pity --
Without a boat are all on float,
And ranged before the city.
The motly crew, in vessels new,
With Satan for their guide, Sir,
Packed up in bags, or wooden KEGS,
Come driving down the tide, Sir.
Therefore prepare for bloody war;
These KEGS must all be routed:
Or surely we despised shall be;
And British courage doubted.
The royal band now ready stand,
All ranged in dread array, Sir,
With stomach stout, to see it out,
And make a bloody day, sir.
The cannons roar, from shore to shore:
The small arms make a rattle:
Since wars began, I Am sure no man
Ever saw so strange a battle.
The rebel The British officers were so fond of the word rebel, that they often
applied it most absurdly.
vales, the rebel dales,
With rebel trees surrounded,
The distant woods, the hills, and floods,
With rebel echoes sounded.
The fish below swam to and fro
Attacked from every quarter:
Why sure, thought they, the dev'l's to pay,
Amongst folks above the water.
The KEGS, it is said, though strongly made,
Of rebel staves and hoops, sir,
Could not oppose their powerful foes,
The conquering British troops, sir.
From morn to night, these men of might
Displayed amazing courage;
And when the sun was fairly down,
Retired to sup their porridge.
An hundred men, with each a pen,
Or more, upon my word, sir,
It is most true, would be too low
Their valor to record, sir.
Such feats did they perform that day
Upon these wicked KEGS, sir,
That years to come, if they get home,
They Will make their boasts and brags, sir.
Song.
TO hear a sweet Goldfinch's sonnet,
This morning I put on my bonnet,
But scarce in the meadow, pies on it,
When the Captain appears in my view.
I felt an odd sort of sensation,
My heart beat an odd palpitation,
I blushed like a pink of carnation,
When, says he, "My dear, how do you do?"
The devil sure, says I, here has pop'd him,
I tried to slip by, but I stopped him,
So my very best curt'sy I dropped him,
With an air then he bobs off his hat.
He seemed with my person enchanted,
He squeezed my hand; how my heart panted!
He asked for a kiss, and I granted:
And pray now what harm was in that?
Says I, Sir, for what do you take me?
He said a fine lady he would make me,
No, them, him, he would never forsake me,
And then on his knee he flap'd down.
His handkerchief smelt lo sweetly,
His white teeth he showed so completely,
He managed the matter so neatly.
I never can be kissed by a clown.
Song.
LOOK, dear Ma'am, I Am quite the thing,
Natibus hey, tipity ho.
In my shoe I wear a string.
Plaidy my Tartan ho:
Cards and dice I Have monstrous luck;
Though no drake, yet keep a duck,
Though no Nimrod, yet l'm a buck,
Lantherum swash kickec.
I Have a purse well stocked with -- brass,
Chinckily he, chinckily ho;
I Have good eyes, yet cock my glass,
Stare about squintum ho.
In two boots I boldly walk,
Pistol, sword, I never baulk,
Meet my man and bravely talk,
Peppilus, pop, coupee;
Sometimes I mount a smart cockade,
Puppydum hey, struttl^dom ho,
From Hyde park to the parade,
Cockmacary kee:
As I pass a centy box,
Soldiers rest their bright firelocks,
E^ch about his musket knocks,
Ra^tl^dum slap to me.
In the mall miss gives her card,
Cashady me, kiss^dy she,
Set before the palace yard,
Leggerum lounge a row:
Prettiest things I softly say,
When I Am asked our chairs to pay,
Yes, says I, and walk away.
Pennybus, farthing ho.
Song.
HOW bright are the joys of the table,
I mean when the cloth is removed:
Our hearts are fast held by a cable,
While round the decanter is should:
The ladies all rise to retire,
We stand up, and look very grave,
A bumper: Then draw round the fire,
Determined like souls to behave.
My servant, he knows I Am a toper,
Clean glasses of wine a recruit,
He brings in a six bottle cooper,
And places it close to my foot:
I gingerly take up a bottle,
The saw dust I puff from his coat,
The cork out, he sings in the throttle,
But sweeter than Mara his note.
What gentlemen coffee now chooses,
The compliment come from the fair.
No gentlemen coffee refuses,
But not a man stirs from his chair;
Though Frenchmen may do so, I bar it,
With British politeness I think,
While Monsieur we thank for his claret,
He never shall teach us to drink.
Gay Hebe now shows in Apollo,
A struggle 'twixt claret and wit,
For Bacchus insists he shall swallow
Six bumpers before he may sit:
Ye fair, why so ill should we treat you,
Go part ere the bottle is won!
At supper Apollo shall meet you,
And show you what Bacchus has done.
Song.
WHILE the lads of the village shall merrily, ah!
Sound the tabors, I Will hand thee along,
And I say unto thee, that verily, ah!
Thou and I will be first in the throng.
While the lads, etc.
Just then when the swain who last year won the dower,
With his mates shall the sports have begun,
When the gay voice of gladness resounds from each bower
And thou long'st in thy heart to make one.
While the lads, etc.
Those joys which are harmless, what mortal can blame?
It Is my maxim, that youth should be free;
And to prove that my words and my deeds are the same,
Believe me, thou wilt presently see,
While the lads, etc.
Song.
SUCH beauties in view I
Can never praise too high,
Not Pallas's blue eye
Is brighter than thine.
Not fount of Susanna,
Nor gold of fair Danae,
Nor moon of Diana,
So brightly can shine.
Not beard of Silenus,
Nor tresses of Venus,
I swear by quae genus,
With yours can can compare.
Not Hermes Caduces,
Nor flower de luc^^,
Nor all the nine muses,
To me is so fair,
Oh! Moses, oh! Moses,
What posies, and roses to noses discloses,
Your breath all so sweet,
To the tip of your lip, as they trip the bees dip,
Honey sip like choice flip, and their Hybla forget.
When girls like you pass us,
I saddle Pegassus,
And ride up Parnassus,
To Helicon's stream.
Even that is a puddle,
Where others may muddle;
My nose let me fuddle
In bowls of your cream.
Old Jove, the great Hector,
Of gods the director,
May tipple his nectar,
And thunder above:
I Would quaff off a full can,
As Bacchus or Vulcan,
Or Jove the old bull cann,
To her that I love.
Oh! Moses, etc.
Song.
IN choice of a husband we widows are nice,
I Would not have a man who'd grow old in a trice,
Not a bear or a monkey, a clown or a fop,
But one that could bustle and stir in my shop.
A log I Will avoid, when I Am choosing my lad,
And a stork that might gabble up all that I had,
Such suitors I Have had, Sir, but off they might hop,
I want one that can bustle and stir in my shop.
The lad in my eye is the man to my mind,
So handsome, so young, so polite, and so kind,
With such a good soul to the altar I Would pop,
He Is the man that can bustle and stir in my shop.
Song.
WHILE some do love full bowls of quaff,
Some like a dog and gun O!
But I a cheerful hearty laugh,
Give me a bit of fun O!
For I Will smile and jest, and do my best,
While life's hour glass does run O!
And while I can, tho'an old man,
I Will have a bit of fun O!
I liked a lass both brisk and gay,
And after her did run O!
Then whispered something in her ear,
For I loved a bit of sun O!
So ripe for sport and bliss was she,
I thought the business done O!
But when I feign would happy be
Says she, you're making fun O!
So with laugh, and joke, and mirth and song,
At length her heart I won O!
And then to church we went along,
And at night we had some fun O!
Song.
LORD! what care I for mam or dad?
Why let them scold and bellow:
For while I live I Will love my lad,
He Is such a charming fellow.
The last fair day, on yonder green,
The youth he danced so well O!
So spruce a lad was never seen,
As my sweet charming fellow.
The fair was over, night was come
The lad was somewhat mellow,
Says he, my dear, I Will see you home --
I thanked the charming fellow!
We trug'd along the moon shone bright,
Says he, my sweetest Nello!
I Will kiss you here by this good light,
Lord! what a charming fellow!
You rogue, says I, you have stopped my breath
Ye bells ring out my knell O!
Again I Would die so sweet a death
With such a charming fellow.
Song.
OF all the pretty flowers
A cowslip's my delight,
With that I Would pass my hours
Both morning, noon and night,
To be sure I would, tol, tol, etc.
This cowslip smells so sweetly,
And looked so fresh and gay,
Says I you're dressed so neatly,
We'll have a little play.
To be sure we will, etc.
One evening, in the dairy,
'Twas lying on the shelf,
I kissed this pretty fairy,
And then lay down myself.
To be sure I did, etc.
This slower one morning early,
Upon a bed did rest;
I longed to pull it dearly,
And stick it in my breast.
To be sure I could, etc.
Song.
A SAILOR's life's a life of woe,
He works now late, now early,
Now up and down, now to and fro,
What then? takes it cheerly.
Blessed with a smiling can of grog,
If duty call,
Stand, rise or fall,
To fate's last verge he will jog;
The cadge to weigh,
The sheets belay.
He does it with a wish;
To heave the lead,
Or to cat head
The ponderous anchor fish.
For while the grog goes round,
All sense of danger's drowned,
We despise it to a man:
We sing a little, and laugh a little,
And work a little, and sweat a little,
And fiddle a little, and foot it a little,
And swig the flowing can.
If howling winds and roaring seas,
Give proof of coming danger,
We view the storm our hearts at ease,
For Jack's to fear a stranger.
Blessed with the smiling grog we fly
Where now below
We headlong go,
Now rise on mountains high;
Spite of the gale,
We hand the sail,
Or take the needful reef;
Or man the deck,
Or clear some wreck,
To give the ship relief:
Though perils threat around,
All sense of danger drowned
We despise it to a man:
We sing a little, etc.
But yet think not our case is hard,
Though storms at sea thus treat us!
For coming home, (a sweet reward!)
With smiles our sweethearts greet us.
Now too the friendly grog we quaff,
Our amorous toast,
Her we love most,
And gaily sing and laugh;
The sails we furl,
Then for each girl,
The petticoat display;
The deck we clear,
Then three times cheer,
As we their charms survey:
And then the grog goes round,
All sense of danger drowned.
We despise it to a man.
We sing a little, etc.
Song.
NO care beyond the morrow!
In heat or cold, in wet or dry,
I never grumbled, no, not I,
My wife, 'is true, loves words a few,
My wife, etc.
What then, I let her prate;
What then, etc.
For sometimes smooth and sometimes rough,
I found myself still rich enough,
In the joys of an humble state.
For sometimes smooth, etc.
But when with law I crazed my head,
I lost both peace and pleasure --
Long says to hear,
To search and swear,
And plague beyond all measure.
One grievance brought another on,
My debts increase, my flock is gone;
My wife, she says,
Our means 'twill raise.
What then? it is idle prate.
For sometime smooth, etc.
Song.
I THOUGHT our quarrels ended,
And set my heart at ease,
It Is strange you're thus offended;
You take delight to teize;
Yes, yes, you take delight to teize.
Dear sir, decide the strife,
Betwixt your child and wife;
Alas! the grief I feel,
I dare not to reveal.
I know that you believe,
For Frederic's loss I grieve,
Psho! psho! psho! psho! very well, as you please,
Very well, very well, think as you please.
In vain I Am always striving,
To make our difference cease,
If you're disputes contriving,
And will not live in peace,
No, no, you will not live in peace:
I Am vexed, dear sir, for you?
But say, what can I do?
To none I can complain.
I know that you believe, for Frederic's loss, etc.
Song.
THREE years a sailor's life I led
And plough'd the roaring sea!
For why her foes should England dread,
Whilst all her sons are free?
From France to Spain I earned my bread;
I thought it fair, do you see?
And if a shot had taken my head,
Why there was an end of me.
A medicine sure for grief and care,
I steered my course to find,
Thenceforth an casy sail to bear,
And run before the wind,
Their conj'ring skill let doctors boast,
And nostrums of their shop,
Wherever we search, from coast to coast,
There Is none like the golden drop.
For gold we sail the world around,
And dare the tempest's rage,
For when the sparklers once are found,
They every ill assuage.
'Twixt Jew and christian not a fig
Of difference here we find,
The Jew (...) loathing has to pig,
If it is of the guinea kind.
Song.
ACROSS the downs this morning,
As by times I chanced to go,
A shepherd lead his flock abroad,
All white as driven snow,
But one was most the shepherd's care,
A lamb, so fleek, so plump, so fair;
Its wondrous beauties in a word,
To let you fairly know,
'Twas such as Nelly from the fire,
Took off not long ago.
This lamb so blithe as midsummer,
His frolic gambols played,
And now of all the flock ahead,
The pretty wanton strayed.
A wolf that watched with greedy eyes,
Rushed forth, and seized the tender prize,
The shepherd saw, and raised a stone,
So round, so large, I vow,
'Twas like the cake that Nelly laid,
Upon the shelf just now.
This monstrous stone, the shepherd slung:
And well his aim he took
Yet scarce the savage creature deigned,
Around to cast a look;
But fled as swift, with footsteps light,
As he who brought the wine to night.
I tried to stop the thief! but he
Turned round in rage, good lack!
So mad the lawyer scarce can be
That Is hid in yonder sack.
Song.
MAGARETTA DOROTHY and CROP. LET shepherd lads and maids advance,
And neatly trim be seen;
To night we lead the merry dance,
In circles over the green.

LOUISA and FREDERIC. Beyond our hopes, by fortune crowned,
Here all our troubles cease;
Each year that takes its jocund round,
Shall bring content and peace.

MARGARETTA. And whilst we sport and dance and play.
The tabor blythe shall sound;
We'll laugh and chaunt our carols gay.
While merry bells ring round.

DOROTHY Now mirth and glee, and pastimes light,
The frolic hours shall share;
And sparkling eyes shall wake to night;
To morrow's time for care.
And whilst we sport and dance and play,
The tabor blythe shall sound,
We'll laugh and chaunt our carols gay,
While merry bells ring round.

THE Miller's Wedding.
LEAVE, neighbors, your work, and to sport and to play;
Let the tabor strike up, and the village be gay;
No day through the year shall more cheerful be seen,
For Ralph of the Mill marries Sue of the Green,
I love Sue, and Sue loves me,
And while the wind blows,
And while the mill goes,
Who Will be so happy, so happy as we!
Let lords and sine folks, who for wealth take a bride,
Be married to day, and to morrow be cloyed;
My body is stout, and my heart is as sound,
And my love, like my courage, will never give ground.
I love Sue, etc.
Let ladies of fashion the best jointures wed,
And prudently take the best bidders to bed;
Such singing and sealing's no part of our bliss,
We settle our hearts, and we seal with a kiss.
I love Sue, etc.
Though Ralph is not courtly, nor none of your beaus,
Nor bounces, nor flatters, nor wears your fine clothes,
In nothing he will follow the folks of high life,
Nor ever turn his back on his friend or his wife.
I love Sue, etc.
While thus I am able to work at my mill,
While thus thou art kind, and thy tongue but lies still,
Our joys shall continue, and ever be new,
And none be so happy as Ralph and his Sue.
I love Sue, etc.
Black Eyed Susan.
ALL in the Dawns the fleet was moored,
The streamers waving in the wind,
When black eyed Susan came on board,
Or where shall I my true love find?
Tell me, ye jovial sailors, tell me true,
If my sweet William sails among your crew?
William who high upon the yard,
Rocked by the billows to and fro,
Soon as her well known voice he heard,
He sighed, and cast his eyes below;
The cord glides swiftly through his glowing hands,
And quick as lightning on the deck he stands.
So the sweet lark, high poised in air,
Shuts close his pinions to his breast,
If chance his mate's shrill call he hear,
And drops at once into her nest.
The noblest captain in the British fleet
Might envy William's lips those kisses sweet.
O Susan, Susan, lovely dear,
My vows shall ever true remain;
Let me kiss of that falling tear;
We only part to meet again.
Change as ye list, ye winds, my heart shall be
The faithful compass that still points to thee.
Believe not what the landmen say,
Who tempt with doubts thy constant mind,
They Will tell the sailors when away
At every port a mistress find.
Yes, yes, believe them when they tell thee so,
For thou art present whereso'er I go.
If to fair India's coast we sail,
Thy eyes are seen in diamonds bright,
Thy breath is Afric's spicy gale,
Thy skin is ivory so white;
Thus every beauteous object that I view
Wakes in my soul some charm of lovely Sue.
Though battle calls me from thy arms,
Let not my pretty Susan mourn;
Though cannons roar, yet, free from harms,
William shall to his dear return:
Love turns asi e the balls that round me fly,
Lest precious tears should drop from Susan's eye.
The boatswain gives the dreadful word,
The sails their swelling bosoms spread;
No longer must she stay on board:
They kissed; she sighed; he hung his head;
Her lessening boat unwilling rows to land;
Adieu! she cries, and waved her lily hand.
Song.
ONE morning very early, one morning in the spring,
I heard a maid in bedlam, who mournfully did sing;
Her chains she rattled on her hands, while sweetly thus sung she,
I love my love, because I know my love loves me.
Oh cruel were his parents, who sent my love to sea,
And cruel, cruel was the ship that bore my love from me,
Yet I love his parents, since they are his, although ey've ruined me;
And I love my love, because I know my love loves me.
O should it please the pitying powers to call me to the sky,
I Would claim a guardian angel's charge, around my love to fly;
To guard him from all dangers how happy should I be!
For I love my love, because I know my love loves me.
I Will make a strawy garland, I Will make it wondrous fine,
With roses, lilies, daisies, I Will mix the eglantine.
And I Will present it to my love when he returns from sea.
For I love my love, because I know my love loves me.
Oh if I were a little bird to build upon his breast,
Or if I were a nightingale to sing my love to rest!
To gaze upon his lovely eyes all my reward should be;
For I love my love, because I know my love loves me.
Oh if I were an eagle, to soar into the sky!
I Would gaze around with piercing eyes where I my love might soy:
But ah! unhappy maiden, that love you never shall see,
Yet I love my love, because I know my love loves me.
THE Sailor's Farewell.
THE to^sail shivers in the wind,
The ship she casts to sea;
But yet my soul, my heart, my mind,
Are, Mary, moored by thee:
For though thy sailor's bound afar,
S^^ll love shall be his leading star,
Should landmen flatter, when we are sailed,
O doubt their artful tales;
No gallant sailor ever sailed,
If Cupid filled his sails;
Thou art the compass of my soul,
Which stears my hearts from pole to pole.
Sirens in every port we meet,
More fell than rocks and waves;
But sailors of the British fleet
Are lovers and not slaves.
No foes our courage shall subdue,
Although we have left our hearts with you.
These are our cares; but if you're kind,
We'll scorn the dashing main,
The rocks, the billows, and the wind,
The powers of France and Spain.
Now Britain's glory rests with you,
Our sails are full -- sweet girls, adieu!
Song.
COME now, all ye social powers,
Shed your infl'ence over us;
Crown with joy our present hours,
Enliven those before us:
Bring the flask, the music bring,
Joy shall quickly find us;
Sport, and dance, and laugh, and sing,
And cast dull care behind us.
Love, thy godhead I adore,
Source of generous passion;
Nor will we ever bow before
Those idols, wealth or fashion.
Bring the flask, etc.
Why the plague should we be sad,
Whilst on earth we moulder;
Rich or poor, or grave, or mad,
We every day grow older.
Bring the flask, etc.
Friendship! O thy smile's divine,
Bright in every feature;
What but friendship, love, and wine,
Can make us happy creatures.
Bring the flask, etc.
Since the time will steal away,
Spite of all our sorrow,
Let Us be blithe and gay to day,
And never mind to morrow.
Bring the flask, the music bring,
Joy shall quickly find us;
Sport, and dance, and laugh, and sing,
And cast dull care behind us.
Down THE Burn Davie.
WHEN trees did bud, and fields were green,
And broom bloomed fair to see,
When Mary was complete fifteen,
And love laughed in here'e;
Blythe Davie's blinks her heart did move,
To speak her mind thus free,
Gang down the burn, Davie, love,
And I shall follow thee.
Now Davie did each lad surpass,
That dwelt on this burn side,
And Mary was the bonniest lass,
Just meet to be a bride;
Her cheeks were rosy, red and white,
Her even were bonny blue;
Her looks were like Aurora bright,
Her lips like dropping dew.
As down the burn they took their way,
What tender tails they said!
His checks to here is heaft did lay,
And with her bosom played;
Till both at length impatient grown,
To be more fully blessed,
In yonder vale they leaned them down;
Love only saw the rest.
What passed, I guess, was harmless play,
And ^aething sure unmeet;
For ganging hame, I heard them say,
They liked a wa'k sae sweet;
And that they aften would return,
Sic pleasure to renew,
Quoth Mary, love, I like the burn,
And ay shall follow you.
Origin OF English Liberty.
ONCE the Gods of the Greeks, at ambrosial feast,
Large bowls of rich nectar were q^^ffing,
Merry Momus among them appeared as a guest.
Homer says the Celestials loved laughing.
This happened before Chaos was fixed into form,
While nature disorderly lay;
While elements adverse engendered the storm,
And uproar embroiled the loud fray.
On every Olympic the humourist droll'd,
So none could his jokes disapprove;
He sung repartee'd, and some odd stories told,
And at last thus began upon Jove:
Sire -- Mark how yon matter is heaving b^low,
Were it settled 'twould please all your court;
It Is not wisdom to let it lie useless, you know;
Pray people it, just for our sport.
Jove nodded assent, all Olympus bowed down,
At his Fiat creation took birth:
The cloud keeping Deity smiled on his throne,
Then announe'd the production was Earth.
To honor their Sovereign each God gave a boon;
Apollo presented it Light;
The Goddess of Childbed dispatched us a Moon,
To silver the shadow of Night.
The Queen of soft wishes, foul Vulcan's fair bride,
Leer'd wanton on her Man of War;
Saying, as to these Earth folks I Will give them a guide,
So she sparkled the morn and eve star.
From her cloud, all in spirits, the Goddess up sprung,
In cllipsis each planet advane'd;
Tune of the Spheres the Nine Sisters sung,
As round Terra Nova they danced.
Even Jove himself could not insensible stand.
Bid Saturn his girdle fast bind,
The Expounder of Fate grasped the Globe in his hand,
And laughed at those Mites called Mankind.
From the hand of great Jove into Space it was hurled,
He was charmed with the roll of the ball,
Bid his daughter Attraction take charge of the World,
And she hung it up high in his hall.
Miss, pleased with the present, reviewed the globe round,
Saw with rapture, hills, valleys and plains;
The self balanced orb in an atmosphere bound,
Prolific by suns, dews and rains.
With silver, gold, jewels, she India endowed,
France and Spain she taught vincyards to rear,
What was fit for each clime on each clime she bestowed,
And Freedom she found flourished here.
The blue eye'd celestial Minerva the wise,
Ineffably smiled on the spot;
My dear, says plumed Pallas, your last gift I prize,
But, excuse me, one thing is forgot.
Licentiousness Freedom's destruction may bring,
Unless Prudence prepare it is defense;
The Goddess of Sapience bid Iris take wing,
And on Britons bestowed Common Sense.
Four Cardinal Virtues she left in this isle,
As guardians to cherish the root;
The blossoms of Liberty gaily' began smile,
And English men fed on the fruit.
Thus fed, and thus bred, by a bounty so rare,
Oh preserve it as pure as 'twas given;
We will while we have breath, nay we'll grasp it in death,
And return it untainted to heaven.
Origin OF Faction.
In hist'ries of Heathens, by which tutors train us,
The salt water Sovereign is called OCEANUS;
His spouse was delivered, by man midwife Triton,
Of this sea girt island, his favorite Britain.
The Naiads were Nurses, old Trident declared,
To embellish his offspring no pains should be spared;
By flying fish drawn to Olympus he drove,
And petitioned the Gods, that his suit they would approve.
Quoth Jupiter, I Will make it King of the Sea:
Avast! replied Neptune, pray leave that to me:
I Will guard it with shoals, and I Will make their lads Seamen,
Strong Hercules hollowed out, I Will make 'em Freemen.
And what will you make, Venus whispered to Mars?
Why I Will make all soldiers that Nep. don't make Tars.
Momus smiled, as that droll always merrily means;
He begged they would go partners, and make 'em Marines.
Quoth Saturn, much time I Will allow 'em for thinking;
Buck Bacchus replied, no, allow it for drinking:
But Mercury answered, a fig for your wine,
The art of time killing by card playing's mine.
By Styx, quoth Apollo, but Hermes you're bit;
Against gaming I Will send them an antidote -- Wit:
In England, laughed Momus, Wit no one regards,
Save that sort of wit that is in -- playing your Cards.
Well, well, replies Phoebus, I Will mend their conditions,
I Will teach them to fiddle, and send them Physicians.
Among Fiddlers, quoth Momus, true Harmony's scarce;
And as to your Doctorship -- Physic's a farce.
Says Venus, I Will people this Island with Beauties,
And tempt Married men to be true to their duties. --
You to Married men's duty a friend! bawled out Juno,
You're a strumpet, you slut, and that I know and you know.
Then turning to Jove, who looked pale, she began --
I Will spoil your Olympical gis^ giving plan:
Herself not consulted, she vowed she would wrong us,
Blew a Scold from her month, and sent Party among us.
God Bacchus, to counterpoise Juno's rash action,
Commanded Silenus to seize upon Faction;
Swist slitted the Fiend, the old Toper out sped,
Whilst Semele's son sent a flask at his head.
The imp, by the blow, speechless fell to the ground;
May wine thus forever foul Faction confound:
Unamimity! that, that is the Toast of our hearts,
Though no Party man here, Here Is to all men of Parts.
Silenus AND Cupid.
CUPID sent on a message one evening by Venus,
As ill luck would have it was met by Silenus;
The big bellied Set asked the Urchin to play,
And the silly lad gam'd all Love's weapons away.
Derry down, etc.
His Bow from the bubble the old Gambler drew,
And into a crutch headed slick turned the Yew:
The string was tough catgut, Si. swore it was well,
A strong line he wanted to ring his bar bell.
Love's arrows were cane, he divided the joints,
Pipe stoppers the ends made, and pick teeth the points.
The feathers to brush down his tables were clever;
And to a tobacco pouch turned the boy's quiver.
For pipe lighting matches he chose billetdoux,
And away, at each puff, went the sonnetter's vows;
His tinder was drawn from the brains of the jealous,
And long bottled sighs he preserved for his bellows.
Hermes took the lad home, told the story to Venus,
She dashed down her tea cup and flew to Silenus:
Then threatened her captain should kick the old clown,
But he laughed, and he smoked, and he sung derry down.
She squeezed his hard hand, and his filthy beard stroak'd,
Nay kissed him, though with his tobacco fumes choked;
Then begged the boy's arms, but Si. swore with a frown,
He Would be damned if he would give them for her derry down.
She whipped her doves' back, vastly piqued you may guess,
In Synod Celestial demanded redress;
Jove laughed at the jest, and he vowed, by his crown,
When spouse railed hereafter, he would sing -- derry down.
MORAL.
Ye Husbands, too fond, who are Feminine fooled,
And tamely, by petticoat government ruled,
Resist your wive's railings, their shrill trebles drown,
By smoking and singing of -- down, derry down.
Dunc est Bibendum.
NOW we are free from college rules,
From common place book reason,
From trifling syllogistic schools,
And systems out of season;
Never more we'll have defined,
If matter thinks or thinks not;
All the matter we shall mind,
Is -- he who drinks -- or drinks not.
Metaphysic'ly to trace,
The mind, or soul abstracted;
Or prove infinity of space,
By cause on cause effected;
Better souls we cannot become
By immaterial thinking;
And as to space, we want no room,
But room enough to drink in.
Plenum, vacuum, minus, plus,
Are learned words, and rare too --
Those terms our tutors may discuss,
And those who please may hear too. --
A plenum in our wine we show,
With plus, and plus behind, sir,
And when our cash is minus, low,
A vacuum soon we find, sir.
Copernicus, that learned sage,
Dane Tycho's error proving,
Declares in -- I cannot tell what page --
The earth round sol is moving.
But which goes round, what is that to us?
Each is, perhaps, a notion;
With earth, and sun, we make no fuss,
But mind the bottle's motion.
Great Galileo ill was used,
By superstition's fury;
Antipodeans were abused
By ignoramus jury:
But, feet to feet, we dare attest,
Nor fear a treatment scurvy:
For when we are drunk, probatum est,
We Are tumbling topsy turvy.
Newton talked of lights and shades,
And different colors knew, sir:
Don't let us disturb our heads --
We will but study two, sir.
White and Red our glasses boast,
Reflection, and Refraction;
After him we name our toast --
"The Center of attraction."
On that Thesis we'll declaim,
With stratum, super stratum;
There Is mighty magic in the name,
It Is nature's postulatum.
Wine, in nature's next to love;
Then wisely let us blend 'em;
First though, physically prove,
That Nunc, nunc est bibendum.
Independence.
LET us laugh at the common distinctions of state,
When merely from title, men hold themselves great:
If merit wins honors, the wearer we praise,
But only the mean, homage heraldry's blaze.
If you are a lineal decendant from Adam,
Or spouse can collateral claim from his Madam;
Over acres of parchment, though pedigrees spread,
Boast not how you're born, sir, but show how you're bred.
You laurels display, which your forefathers won,
We allow they did great things, but what have you done?
The cover, the stubble, your conquest proclaim,
And your country's preserved -- by the laws of the game.
Ye lords of large manors, your flatt'rers disband,
What are ye but tenants for life to the land;
Your lakes, gardens, grots, temples, busts, pictures, plate,
Are things of the inn, where in life's stage you bait.
A while you the labors of luxury bear,
'Till time tells you out, to make room for your heir;
The same round of riot, he runs for his day,
His successor's summons, sends him the same way.
But He who exists in infinity's State,
Whose hand holds the sun, and whose fiat is fate;
To some has sent power, to others gives wealth,
And to us, who are humble, his, best blessing -- Health.
To the graces, we nightly, a sacrifice make,
Wit and humor, the chairs, as our toast masters take;
By their social converse, our time we improve,
While tenderness lends us the daughters of love.
Jolly welcome attends hospitality's call,
Common sense is our cat'ter in liberty hall;
For one dish dressed there, all court treats we resign,
Keep your distance, ye Kings! INDEPENDENT we dine.
Time's Defeat.
ONE evening Good humor took Wit as his guest,
By Friendship invited to Gratitude's feast;
Their liquor was c^aret, and Love was their host,
Laugh, song and droll sentiment garnished each toast.
While Freedom and Fancy enlarged the design,
And da^nties were furnished by Love, Wit and Wine;
Alarmed, they all heard, at the door a loud knock.
A watchman hoarse bawling, ' It Was past twelve o'clock.
They nimbly ran down, the disturbing dog found,
And up stairs they brought, the impertinent bound;
When dragged to the light, how much were they pleased,
To see 'twas the gray glutton Time they had seized.
His glass as his lanthorn, his scythe as his pole,
And his single lock dangled adown his smooth skull;
My friends, quoth he, panting, I thought fit to knock,
And bid ye be gone for it is past twelve o'clock.
Says the Venom toothed savage, on this advice fix;
Though Nature strikes twelve, Folly still points to six;
He no longer had preached, but no longer they would bear it.
So hurried him into a hogshead of claret.
Wit observed it was right, while we are yet in our prime,
There is nothing like claret for killing of Time;
Love laughing replied, I am pleased from my heart,
He cannot come and put us in mind we must part.
This intruder, rude Time, though a tyrant long known.
By Love, Wit and Wine, can be only overthrown;
If hereafter he is wanted on any design,
He Will always be found in a hogshead of wine.
Since Time is confined to our wine, let us think,
By this rule we are sure of our Time when we drink;
Henceforth, let our glasses with bumpers be prim'd,
We Are certain our drinking must now be well timed.
THE End.
PAPILIO the rich, in the hurry of love,
Resolving to wed, to fair Arabell drove;
He made his proposals, he begged she would fix,
What Maid could say no, to a new coach and six?
We'll suppose they were wed, the guests bid, supper done,
The fond pair in bed, and the stocking was thrown,
The bride lay expecting to what this would tend,
Since created a wife, wished to know for what end.
On the velvet peach, often as the gaudy fly rests,
The bridegroom's lips stopped on love's pillows, her breasts,
All amazement, impa^^ive, the heart heaving fair,
With a sigh seemed to promt him, don't slay too l^ng there.
Round her waist, and such a waist, circling his arms,
He raptures rehearsed on her unpossess'd charms,
Says the fair one and gaped, I hear all you prentend,
But now, for I Am sleepy, pray come to an end.
My love never shall end, 'squire shadow replied,
But still, unattempting lay stretched at her side,
She made feints, as if something she meant to desend,
But found out, at last, it was all to no end.
In disdain starting up from the impotent boy,
She, sighing, pronounc^d, there is an end of my joy,
Then resolved this advice to her sex she would send,
Never to wed till they are sure they can wed to some end.
And which end is that? why the end which prevails,
Ploughs, ships, birds, and fishes, are steered by their tails,
And though man and wife for the head may contend,
I Am sure they are best pleased when they gain the other end.
The end of our wishes, the end of our wives,
The end of our loves, and the end of our lives,
The end of conjunction 'twixt mistress and male,
Though the head may design, has its end in the tail.
It Is time though to finish, if ought I intend,
Lest, like a bad husband, I come to no end:
'The ending I mean is what none will think wrong,
And that is, to make now an end of my song.
THE Flowers OF THE forests.
I HAVE seen the smiling of fortune beguiling,
I Have felt its favors, and found its decay:
Sweet was its blessing, kind its caressing,
But now it is fled -- fled far away!
I Have seen the forest adorned the foremost,
With flowers of the fairest, most pleasant and gay,
Sae bonny their blooming, their scent the air perfuming;
But now they are withered and weeded away.
I Have seen the morning with gold the hills adorning,
And lou^ tempests storming before the mid day;
I Have seen Tweed's silver streams shining in the sunny beams,
Grow drumly and dark as he rowed on his way.
O! sickle Fortune, why this cruel sporting?
O! why still perplex us poor sons of a day?
Nae mair your smiles can cheer me -- nae mair your frowns can fear me,
For the flowers of the forest are withered away.
Jamie Gay.
AS Jamie Gay gan^'d blithe his way,
Along the banks of Tweed,
A bonny lass as ever was seen,
Came tripping over the mead;
The hearty swain, untaught to sain,
The buxom nymph i^^v^^'d,
And full of glec, as lad could be,
Bespoke the pre^ty maid.
Dear lassie tell, why by thine sell
Thou hast'ly wand'rest here;
My ewes, she cried, are straying wide,
Can tell me laddie where?
To town I hye, he made reply,
Some meikle sport to see;
But thou're so sweet, so trim and neat,
I Will seck the ewes with thee.
She gave her hand, nor made a stand,
But liked the youth's intent;
Over hill and dale, over plain and vale,
Right merrily they went;
The birds sang sweet the pair to greet,
And slow'rs bloomed all around;
And as they walked, of love they talked,
And joys which lovers crowned.
And now the sun had rose to noon,
The zenith of his power,
When to a shade their steps they made,
To pass the mid day hour.
The bonny lad rowed in his played
The lass, who scorned to frown:
She soon forgot the ewes she sought,
And he to gang to town.
Addice TO THE Fair Sex.
YE beauties, or such as would beauties be famed,
Lay patches and washes and painting aside,
Go burn all the glasses that ever were framed,
The gewgaws of fashion, and knicknacs of pride,
A nostrum to cull from the toilet of reason,
It Is easy, it is cheap, and it is ever in season,
When art has in vain her cosmeticks applied.
Good nature, believe me, is the smoothest of varnish,
Which ever be dimples the beautiful cheek;
No time, nor no tint can its excellence tarnish,
It holds good so long, and it lies on so sleek:
It Is more than the blush of the rose in the morning.
All accident proof, and all scrutiny scorning:
It Is ease to the witty, and wit to the weak.
It Is surely the girdle that Venus was bound with,
The graces, her handmaids, all proud put it on:
It Is surely the radient Aurora is crowned with,
Who, smiling, a^^ses and waits on the sun.
Oh! wear it, ye lasses, on every occasion,
It Is the noblest reproof, it is the strongest persuasion:
'Twill keep, nay, 'twill almost retrieve reputation:
And last, and look lovely, when beauty s gone.
Song.
MON chere amie, let not despair
Your bosom load with anxious care;
Whose heart so open, mind so free,
I Will think of him who thinks on me.
Mon chere amie, etc. etc.
Charge not a tender virgin's flame
With rudness to confess the same;
Oh pardon all the faults you see,
Still think on her who thinks on thee.
Mon chere amie, etc.
Then let us to the church incline
On Hymen wait, our hands to join;
Forever after happy be,
I blessed with you, and you with me.
Mon chere amie, etc.
Song.
ADIEU, ye streams that gently flowing,
Murmur through the flowery mead;
Vernal airs that softly blowing,
Rustle through the leafy shade!
Adieu, ye birds whose notes delighting,
Sweetly charm the rural scene;
Beauteous prospects all inviting,
Fields and meadows decked with green!
I could quit you unrepining,
Not a tear should bathe my eye,
Your enjoyments all resigning,
Nor my bosom heave a sigh.
But when cruel fate ordains me
From my lovely fair to part;
Oh, the separation pains me!
Deeply wounds my aching heart.
Falsehood and deceit despising,
O she is fairer than the morn!
When bright Phoebus just arising,
Strews with pearl the dewy lawn.
But her mind in charms surpasses,
Spotless as the solar ray;
While a thousand nameless graces
All around my fair one play.
When with her the sweet enjoyment
Crowns the day with fresh delight;
To chat with her the sweet employment
Gilds with joy the gloomy night.
But by fate compelled to leave her,
From my Julia fore'd to part;
Oh! the cruel word ' forever,'
Wounds afresh my bleeding heart!
Song.
SWEET nightingale! Queen of the spray,
Whose note is disturbed by our song,
Ah! stretch not thy pinions away,
Alarmed at the numerous throng;
But try thy sweet warble again,
And challenge thy hearers so fine,
Though the muses attend on their train,
To make such a concert as thine.
Song.
WITH gloomy clouds of dismal dread,
The horizon sullenly is bound:
The sun, obscured, weeps through the shade;
The zephyrs mourn along the ground.
Where darkness reigns,
Where woe's sad strains
Wind over the plains.
Vaulted with terror's sable veil,
Fringed with the sunbeam's glossy hue,
Deep lies the solitary vale,
Where round the groves a rural crew,
In smiling throng,
With sweetest song,
Charm time along.
Thus seated in the breezy shade,
Before them in the winding vale,
Appeared a sweetly pensive maid,
Whose silence spoke the melting tale,
Of one, who trod
From health's abode,
Misfortunes road.
From her sad eye the tear of grief,
Unknown, gushed silently along;
The swains were moved to her relief,
And pity wept amid the throng,
They thought their eyes,
Saw, in disguise,
One from the skies.
Lovely, as morn, who weeps in dews;
Mild as the fragrant breath of even;
Though streams of woe her eyes suffuse,
She shone the silver queen of heaven.
Dian her guide,
Fair beauty's pride
In sense outvi'd.
While thus the swains in rapture's trance,
Her lonely wandering steps surveyed,
The seraphs on the wing advance,
Contending for the heaven born maid.
So great the prize,
That even the skies
Viewed with surprise!
One of the seraphs thus began,
"My name is FAME on earth I sway,
The glory, pride, and boast of man,
The world's proud kings my voice obey.
From pole to pole,
My glories roll;
I rule the whole."
"Long have I made yon fair my pride,
The brightest gem my crown adorned;
Her name oblivion's power defied,
And all his low attempts has scorned.
Forbear your claim,
Never will her name
Descend from FAME."
"But say, if you can boast to share
The affections of yon turtle dove,
Why, will the storms of bleak despair
Do you afflict her from above?
To force is vain;
Wherever I reign,
No staves complain."
The angel sent from heaven replied;
"We doom the fair to mercy's road,
To wean her love from mortal pride,
To bliss supreme in heaven's abode,
To heaven restore,
A mind too pure
For earth's vile shore."
"Angels with envious eyes have seen,
Earth in her smiles supremely blessed."
He spoke, the swains beheld the scene,
And admiration swelled each breast.
Sweet queen of worth,
Heaven gave to earth
Thy angel birth!
Loud echo rent the joyful skies,
"Sweet visitant with us remain;
Wherever you smile, misfortune slies,
And heaven enraptures all the plain.
Hail, to thee, FAME,
Long may thou claim
The virtuous dame!"
They sung; the cloudy mists retire;
The azure skies in smiles expand;
Burst through the clouds, the solar fire
Flamed in wide luster round the land.
From sickly fears
The fair appears,
Hail, golden years!
Song.
TO fly, like bird, from grove to grove,
To wander like the be,
To sip of tastes and sweets of love,
Is not enough for me.
No slutt'ring passions wake my breast;
I wish the place to find,
Where fate may give me peace and rest,
One shepherd to my mind.
To every youth I Will not be gay,
Nor try on all my power;
Nor future pleasures throw away
In toyings for an hour.
I would not reign the general toast,
Be praised by all the town;
A thousand tongues on me are lost;
I Will hear but only one.
For which of all the flattering train,
Who swarm at beauty's shrine,
When youths gay charms are in the wane,
Will court their sure decline?
Then fops and wits and beaux forbear,
Your arts will never do;
For some fond youth shall be my care,
Life's checkered seasons through.
My little heart shall have a home,
A warm and sheltered nest:
No giddy flights shall make me roam,
From where I most am blessed.
With love, and only that dear swain,
What tranquil joys I see!
Farewell ye false, inconstant train!
For one is all to me.
THE Lass OF Eden Grove.
IN Eden Grove there dwells a maid,
Adorned by every grace;
The pearls that deck the dewy shade,
Confess her fairer face.
The sun has spots, the rose has thorns,
And poisons mix with love;
But every spotless charm adorns
The lass of Eden Grove.
The sparkling, soft, cerulean eye;
Bright virtue's starry zone;
The smile of spring's favonian sky;
These charms are all thy own.
The sun has spots, etc.
The frozen veins of age have felt,
New youth in Eden grove;
Thy smiles like Spring the frost can melt,
And warm the heart with love.
The sun has spots, etc.
The monarch quits his dazzling throne,
And seeks thy rural lot;
To find in these a richer crown,
A palace in a cot!
The sun has spots, etc.
While toy enamored eyes admire
The gaudy bubble fame;
Thy virtues brighter joys inspire,
And softer honors claim.
The sun has spots, etc.
Thy charms the noblest laurel prove,
The hero's meed out shine;
And round the brow of faithful love,
Perennial garlands twine.
The sun has spots, etc.
When Cupid all his darts has hurled,
From thee he draws supplies,
And Hymen's flambeau lights the world,
From thy resplendent eyes.
The sun has spots, etc.
To thee, sweet nymph, the captive soul,
Pours forth its votive lay;
It Is bliss to own thy soft control;
It Is rapture, to obey.
The sun has spot, the rose has thorns,
And poisons mix with love,
But every spotless charm adorns
The lass of Eden Grove.
THE Dream.
BY a whirlwind methought I through Ether was hurled,
Electric among spirits of air;
Upborn by the clouds, we looked down on the world,
And odd exhibitions spied there.
England's Genius was there, bearing Monarchy's crown,
In procession round Liberty Hall;
Faction seized her rich robe, Public Spirit pulled down,
And Folly broad grinn'd at her fall.
In weather house placed to denote foul and fair,
Two figures are veering about;
So pageants we saw, and we smiled at their glare,
As they turned, with the times in and out.
The Methodists masked with Hypocrisy's face,
Anathemas thundered aloud;
So Jack pudding joke, with distorted grimmace,
Benetting their gudgeons -- the crowd.
Wit and Humor were there, drove from Dignity's door,
That Stupidity's coach might have room:
Debauch we saw open Temptations base store,
And Disease taint Simplicity's bloom.
Stubborn Will against Prudence was waging a fight,
While Desire opposed Duty strong;
The Passions confessed Reason's dictates were right,
Though themselves still resolved to be wrong.
A wonderful troop toward Westminster bore;
What wonders there are among mankind?
In ^^lt chariots La^yers paraded before,
On foot Justice followed behind.
Church Preferments we saw -- but respect shall with stand
The abuse that is poured forth on the ^l^th;
Stock Jobbers and Stat^smen we saw (...) in hand,
And Pride stood at par between both.
Cent per Cent had laid siege to Integr^ty's head,
And Beauty was battering his heart;
East India success struck Hum^^ity dead,
And Title took ^anity's part.
Crafty Care and pale (...), two sleepless hags,
Wealth overwhelmed, yet untired with toil;
Their heir Dissipation we saw at their bags,
With Flattery sharing the spoil.
The myst'ries of trade -- but no longer I Will dwell,
On either the mighty or mean;
From an Emperor's court to a penitent's cell,
Life's all the same laughable scene.
It Is a pitiful piece, like a farce in a fair,
Where show, noise, and nonsense misrule,
Where tinsel paradings, make ignorance stare,
Where he who acts best is the Fool.
Here Goes.
COME care curing mirth
From Wit's bower forth,
Bring Humor, your brother, along,
Hospitality's here,
And Harmony near,
To chorus droll Sentiment's song.
In Comedy trim,
Joke, Gesture, and Whim,
With Trios will keep up the ball;
By order of Taste
We open the feast
Of Friendship in Liberty hall.
Who Will President be?
Unanimity, see
He Is ordered to sit as our host;
My Lord Common Sense,
With pains and expense,
Introduced him to give out the toast.
Though scandal we hate,
Only good we hold great,
Nor any for title's sake praise;
Unworthy that name,
No merit can claim,
But what genealogies raise.
In this Anno Dom. we
Would felicity see,
I Will demonstrate how easy we could:
Change fault finding elves
To mending ourselves,
Then things might soon be as they should.
Some wives read their mates
Curtain lecture debates.
And wonder they are not understood;
The Husband's perplexed,
And the Lady is vexed,
'Cause every thing's not as it should.
If pension, or place,
Is the gift of his Grace,
Refusal would be over nice,
Plumb pudding on board,
And pressed by my Lord,
Who would not come in for a slice?
Corruption's the cry,
Opposition runs high,
Yet who can help laughing to see,
Though Faction's so big
Ambo Tory and Whig,
In one part both parties agree.
For the kingdom of man,
Division's the plan,
By the laws of the Cyprian court,
The ladies must yield,
When our standard we wield,
And what we advance they support.
For a bumper I call --
Here Is the Sovereign of All,
The spring from which all honor flows,
From thence we all came,
So we go to that same,
Here Is to it, and to it, Here goes.
THE Fortunate Roam.
OVER moorlands and mountains, rude, barren and bare,
As wilder'd and wearied I roam,
A gentle young shepherdess sees my despair,
And leads me over lawns to her home.
Yellow sheaves from rich Ceres her cottage had crowned,
Green rushes were strowed on the floor,
Her casement sweet woodbines crept wantonly round,
And decked the sod seat at her door.
We sat ourselves down to a cooling repast,
Fresh fruits -- and she culled me the best;
While thrown from my guard, by some glances she cast,
Love slily stole into my breast.
I told my soft wishes -- she sweetly replied,
With a look and an accent divine,
I Have rich ones rejected and great ones denied,
But -- take me, fond shepherd, I Am thine.
Song.
FOR ages on ages by Tyranny bound,
The Genius of Freedom in fetters was kept,
Truth, reason and virtue reclining around,
Nor wondered religion, why liberty slept.
The regions of day whence that sol wheels his car,
Were lost to the splendours of life giving light:
And Europe herself though she beamed as a star,
Saw the portal of morn, often clouded by night,
At length from his chambers near Schuyl-kill's domain,
Burst forth on the world, in a moment of time,
The full sun of truth in the person of Pain,
And instant he sir'd all the westermost clime.
The lightning that streamed from his heaven formed eye,
As electrical fire soon melted each chain,
And blessed Independence the fourth of July,
On aquiline pinions swift spead over the main.
Old Europe astonished was smote with dismay,
Her tyrants turned pale as they read the decree:
While myriads of men who in slavery lay,
Exulting pronounced, "let us dare to be free."
Here Is a health to the morn -- it is marked as divine,
The noblest the grandest of works is begun,
And Pain in the zenith of glory shall shine,
Till nature's right hand aims a blow at the sun.
THE Origin OF Toll, Loll, Loll.
I WILL sing you a song, and I Will sing all about it,
Or in tune, or out on it, you need not to doubt it,
My tune is Toll, toll, toll, loll, loll.
Stocattos, Chromatics, Rests, Crotchets and Chords.
Deep Tenors, sharp Trebles, with fifths, eighths and thirds,
Are sounds without sense; common sense come before us,
So silence each solfa, let us Toll, toll, toll, chorus,
And nothing but Toll, toll, toll, toll, toll, toll.
If word gnawing critics grammattical bawl,
"Unde derivatur, Sir, this Toll, toll toll?"
I answer, from Loll, loll, loll, loll, loll, loll,
And pray what is Loll, loll, loll, perge, quoth pedant?
Prosecto continues he, I never read on it;
What part of speech are you, this Toll, loll, loll, making?
"The only part, sir, of the whole that is worth taking,"
Toll, loll, loll, etc.
The verb which love conjugates, Nature's the tutor,
Both active and passive, but sometimes stands neuter,
Toll, loll, loll, etc.
When wantonly wished for, optative mood makes i^;
When promised in future, Hope happily takes i^
Of all Terminations respecting the Tenses,
The present is always the best for the senses.
Toll, loll loll, etc.
But let us for once, though become something ser'ous;
The Black Joke's a tune, that mayhap is mister'us,
Who knows what is hid under Toll, loll, loll, loll,
What is under, or in it, or what is about it,
Perhaps has a meaning, perhaps is without it;
It may be thought wit, but that would be wonder!
It may be a single, or double Entendre.
Toll, loll, de roll, etc.
If you have, or if you have not, read History,
If you are Freemason'd, and understand Mist'ry,
Toll, loll, loll, loll, loll, is Loll toll, toll, toll.
If more may be made on it, I beg to know what,
It may be, or may not be, it can, or cannot;
For how be it, hereby, so be it, and so forth,
But good friends excuse me, indeed I must go forth.
Toll loll de roll, etc.
Song.
ON Mira's toilet there was lain
A beauteous base of rich porcelain,
'Twas filled with each sweet slow'r that grows,
Mixed with the rest, a damask rose,
The fairest of its kind;
Intent I viewed the charming sight,
The various shades of colors bright;
(Surpassing far the sparkling gem,)
The opening bud, the mossy stem,
Which on this flower we find.
Sudden the lovely rose grew pale,
Its glossy dye began to fail;
The scene my bosom filled with care;
When turning round the nymph stood there,
Smiling like beauty's queen.
But every care was soon subdued,
When her unnumber'd charms I viewed;
Convinced the bloom of Mira's face,
Had made the envious flower give place,
And caused the effect I Would seen.
THE Happy Man.
HOW happy is the man,
Who has a quiet home;
Who loves to do what good he can,
And hates the demon, Rum.
Whose house contains enough,
For him and all his folks;
Whose wife abhors a box of snuff,
And very seldom smokes.
Whose wife knows how to spin,
And loves to use the needle;
Who keeps herself and husband clean,
But never loved a fiddle.
Whose wife is like a tree,
That Is ever green and fair;
That ever in the bloom will be,
And yet will never bear.
Whose wife will rise in season,
Be weather hot or cold;
And always give sufficient reason,
If ever she chance to scold.
This man, while others roam,
Among the sons of strife,
Is always happiest when at home,
In converse with his wife.
THE Happy Bachelor.
HOW blessed is the bachelor's life,
Who constantly lives at his ease;
Never plagued by a proud scolding wise,
And no squalling children to teize.
He fears not the frowns of the fair,
He scorns the coquette with her art;
For love never fell to his share,
Its pains never tortured his heart.
But wedlock, O where are thy joys!
That man has perceived in thy state;
A scene of vexation and noise,
Which thousands have reason to hate.
To me, how detested the cries
Of children round, asking for bread;
Till I see the poor man advertise,
"That his wife has elop'd from his bed."
Yet single, a man may have bliss,
If he has but a grain of content;
Though once if he w^ds to a Miss,
He will find it too late to repent.
In friendship, and freedom, and ease,
The Bachelor's life rolls away;
For friendship and freedom can please,
When beauty is gone to decay.
Tim Crusty may tell of his pain,
"That his years all unhappily roll;
That single he lives but in vain,"
I despise his complaints from my soul.
Poor Crusty has whin'd for a bride,
His breeches and stockings to mend;
When his wants might as well be supplied,
If he had but a maid or a friend.
But the wretch who has never a friend,
Should sure never marry a maid;
For this would their wretchedness blend,
And their griefs be by sorrow repaid.
Yea, children to add to the gloom,
For mark what some clergymen tell
That infants receive their sad doom
When they die, to the dungeons of hell.
Avaunt, superstitious Divine,
If infants to misery go;
You never shall have children of mine,
To sentence to regions of woe.
If man is accursed from his birth,
And you scarce give him doctrines of peace,
Better send forth a sword on the earth,
And bid population to cease.
To me may no children be born,
Distress and misfortune to share;
But let me relieve the forlorn,
And banish the sigh of despair.
The children of sorrow I cheer,
The beggar is often my guest;
They smile and suppress every tear,
Their gratitude sweetens my rest.
It Is thus I dispose of my wealth --
My house is an inn for the poor;
I live in contentment and health,
I am happy, I wish for no more,
While I live, I will cherish content,
And love the old bachelor's life;
So never I Would need to repent,
Nor wish Betty Wrinkle my wife.
Domestic Felicity.
THOUGH grandeur flies my humble roof,
Though wealth is not my share,
Though lowly is my little cot,
Yet happiness is there.
A tender wife with mild control,
By sympathy refined,
When rage the tumults of the breast.
Becalms my troubled mind.
Three pledges of our mutual love,
Kind Providence has given,
And competence to nurse their hopes,
Is all we ask of Heaven.
Still from the little we enjoy,
A little we dispense;
And watch the buddings of their mind
Just blossoming to sense.
With arm entwined in arm we sit,
And join their hands to pray;
And teach the accents of their tongue,
To hail the rising day.
At eve again they kneel and bless
The hours, which now have past:
And hope their cherished virtues may
Prove happiness at last.
Accept, Great Father of us all,
Accept their little prayers,
And grant the nurslings of our youth,
May crown our silver hairs.
Let those, whose weak and infant limbs
With tenderness we guide,
Be props unto our age, when down
The steep of life we glide.
THE Flirtation.
YE dear pretty ladies,
Who now in your gay days,
So merrily take your diversion,
Sure there is no sporting
Compared unto courting,
And having a little flirtation.
And having, etc
What though now you call,
An assembly or ball,
A pleasant and sweet recreation;
How soon would you treat it,
As dull and insipid,
Had you not a little flirtation.
Had you, etc.
In church or in street,
Or wherever you meet,
The object of your inclination;
Oh! is it not pleasure,
Beyond any measure,
To have a dear little flirtation.
To have, etc.
There Is you, and there is you,
And there is you, madam too,
And there is you, in your sly situation,
Though you all look so shy,
Yet you cannot deny,
That you're fond of a little flirtation.
That you, etc.
Song.
NOW, Joan, we are married -- and now let me say,
Though both are in youth, yet that youth will decay;
In our journey through life, my dear Joan I suppose,
We shall often meet a bramble, and sometimes a rose.
When a cloud on this forehead shall darken my day,
Thy sunshine of sweetness must smile it away;
And when the dull vapor shall dwell upon thine,
To chase it, the labor and triumph be mine.
Let us wish not for wealth, to devour and consume,
For luxury's but a short road to the tomb:
Let us sigh not for grandeur; for trust me, my Joan,
The keenest of cares owe their birth to a throne.
Thou shall milk our ONE cow; and, if fortune pursue,
In good time, with her blessing, my Joan may milk TWO:
I will till our small field, whilst thy prattle and song
Shall charm as I drive the bright ploughshare along.
When finished the day, by the fire we'll regale,
And treat a good neighbor at eve with our ale;
For, Joan, who would wish for SELF ONLY to live?
One blessing of life, my dear girl, is to GIVE.
Even the red breast and wren shall not seek us in vain,
Whilst thou have a crumb, or thy Corin a grain;
Not only their songs will they pour from the grove,
But yield, by example, sweet lessons of love.
Though thy beauty must fade yet thy youth I Will remember.
That thy MAY was my own, when thou show DECEMBER:
And when age to my HEAD shall his winter impart,
The summer of LOVE shall reside in my HEART.
Nature's Blunder.
FLORA at her task one day
Pleased to grace her favorite May,
Labored hard with might and main,
Gay to deck the vernal plain.
At length fatigued by various toil,
And having finished off a foil,
Good mother Night, come here, says she,
A prettier leaf you never see,
I made it for the dogwood tree.
Quoth the old woman, it is well done,
And if you please, I Will stick it on,
For surely now you must be tired,
Though by your favorite spring inspired;
You Have toiled to make your meadows gay,
Since first Aurora waked the day.
This said the mystic gum she spied,
And where the discus should be tried,
The wrong end of the leaf applied.
Heavens, cried Flora, what you have done!
You Have stuck the wrong end of it on!
Quoth Night, no matter, pretty creature,
'Twill make variety in nature.
Delia.
THE sportive swain, with graceful pride,
Her snow white plumage laves;
Or, sailing down the crystal tide,
Divides the silver waves;
The tide, that soft meand'ring flows,
Sweet to the bird must be:
But not so sweet (blythe Cupid knows)
As Delia is to me!
A parent bird, in plaintive mood,
On yonder fruit tree sung;
And still the pendant nest she viewed,
That held the callow young:
Dear to the mother's fluttering heart
The gentle brood must be;
But no so dear -- the thousandth part --
As Delia is to me.
These roses round my temples twined,
I plucked in yonder dale;
Their damask sweet how soon declined!
Their vernal pride how pale!
So would my vital bloom be froze,
If luckless torn from thee;
For what the root is to the rose,
My Delia is to me.
Two doves I found, like new fallen snow,
So white the beauteous pair;
The birds to Delia I Will bestow,
They Are like her bosom fair:
And in their chaste connubial love,
My secret wish she will see;
Such mutual bliss as turtles prove
May Delia share with me.
Song.
WHEN Chloe tried her virgin fires,
And first her shafts let fly;
She filled my breast with vague desires --
-- I thought it was her eye.
When melting strains fell from her mouth,
Which gods might wish to sip;
When all was harmony and truth,
-- I thought it was her lip.
But when she danced, such air, such grace
What mortal could escape?
I looked no longer to her face,
I swore it was her shape.
When seen by chance her breast bespak^
The purity within;
Her snowy arm -- her ivory nock --
'Twas then her lovely skin.
Nor eye, nor shape, nor neck, nor face
My bosom did enthral:
-- 'Twas sense I found, the happy grace,
That gave a charm to all.
Song.
UNFOLD, Father Time, thy long records unfold
Of noble achievements accomplished of old;
When men, by the standard of liberty led,
Undauntedly conquered, or cheerfully bled;
But know 'midst the triumphs these moments reveal,
Their glories shall fade, and their luster turn pale;
Whilst France rises up and confirms the decree,
That tears off her chains, and bids millions be free.
As spring to the fields, or as dew to the flower,
To the earth parched with heat as the soft dropping shower;
As health to the wretch that lies languid and wan,
Or as rest to the weary is freedom to man:
Where freedom the light of her countenance gives,
There only he revels, there only he lives;
Seize then the glad moment, and hail the decree,
That bids millions rejoice, and a nation be free.
Too long had oppression and terror entwined,
Those fancy formed chains that enslave the free mind;
Whilst dark superstition with nature at strife
And locked up for ages the fountains of life:
But the demons are fled, the delusion is past,
And reason and virtue have conquered at last:
Seize then the glad moment, and hail the decree,
That bids millions rejoice, and a nation be free.
France! we share in the rapture thy bosom that fills,
Whilst the spirit of Liberty bounds over thy hills.
Redundant, henceforth, may thy purple juice flow,
Prouder wave thy green woods, and thine olive trees grow:
For thy brows may the hand of philosophy twine,
Blessed emblems! the myrtle, the olive and vine;
And Heaven through all ages confirm the decree,
That tears off thy chain, and bids millions be free.
The Rose Tree.
A ROSE Tree in full bearing,
Had sweet flowers fair to see,
One Rose beyond comparing,
For beauty attracted me.
Though eager once to win it,
Lovely, blooming, fresh and gay
I find a canker in it,
And now I throw it far away.
I find a canker, etc.
How fine this morning early,
The sun shining clear and bright
So late I loved you dearly,
But now l've lost each fond delight.
The clouds seemed big with showers,
Suny beams no more are seen,
Farewell ye fleeting hours,
Since your false heart has changed the scene,
Farewell ye, etc.
Song.
DOES Pity give, though fate denies,
And to my wounds her balm impart?
O speak! with those expressive eyes;
Let one low sigh escape thine heart.
The gazing crowds shall never guess
What anxious, watchful love can see;
Nor know what those soft looks express,
Nor dream that sigh is meant for me.
Ah! words are useless, words are vain,
Thy generous sympathy to prove;
And well, that sigh, those lips explain,
That Clara mourns my hapless love.
Sea Song.
DISTRESS me with those tears no more,
One kiss, my love, and then adieu!
The last boat destined for theshore
Waits, dearest girl, alone for you.
Soon, soon, before the light winds borne,
Shall I be severed from your sight;
You left -- the lonely hours to mourn,
And weep through many a stormy night.
When far along the restless deep,
In trim, away the ship shall steer;
Your form, rememb'rance still shall keep;
Your worth, affection still revere:
And with the distance from your eyes,
My love for you shall be increased;
As to the pole the needle lies,
And farthest off still varies least.
While round the bowl the jovial crew
Shall sing of triumphs on the main,
My thoughts shall fondly turn to you,
Of you alone shall be my strain.
And though loud winds the sea deform,
And fill each bosom with alarms;
A calm will sure succeed the storm,
In the sweet harbor of your arms!
Song.
THE shepherd of fortune possessed,
May scan if he please my poor cot,
May think in his wealth to be blessed,
But I never will envy his lot.
The pleasures which riches impart,
Are fleeting, and feeble when known,
They never give peace to the heart,
It scorns to be happy alone.
That shepherd true happiness knows,
Whose bosom by beauty is moved,
Who tastes the pure pleasure that slows,
From loving and being beloved.
It Is a joy of angelical birth,
And when to poor mortals it is given,
It cheers their abode upon earth,
And sweetens their journey to heaven,
How briskly my spirits would move!
What peace in his bosom would reign!
Were I blessed with the nymph that I love,
Sweet Delia, the pride of the plain:
Ye shepherds sho's fair as the light!
The critic no blemish can find;
And all the soft virtues unite,
And glow in her innocent mind.
Her accents are fitted to please,
Her manners engagingly free,
Her temper is ever at ease,
And calm as an angel's can be.
Yon lilly, which graces the field,
And throws its perfume to the gale,
In fairness and fragrance must yield,
To Delia, the pride of the vale.
She Is pleasant, as yonder cool rill,
To trav'llers who faint on the way;
She Is sweet, as the rose on the hill,
When it opens its bosom to day.
I ask not for wealth or for power;
Kind heaven! I these can resign;
But hasten, O hasten the hour;
When Delia shall deign to be mine.
O teach her to pity the pain
Of a heart, that if slighted must break;
O teach her to love the fond swain,
That would lay down his life for her sake.
Though poor, I will never repine,
Content that my Delia is true;
I Will press her fond bosom to mine,
And think myself rich as Peru.
With her I will stray through the grove,
And fondly I Will pour out my soul,
Indulge my effusions of love,
And think myself blessed to the full.
With flowers I Will crown her dear hair,
Then gaze on her beauties, and cry,
What nymph can with Delia compare!
What shepherd so happy as I.
Thus cheerful the moments shall roll,
Of all my fond wishes possessed,
And peace shall descend on my soul,
And make it her favorite rest:
Contentment my life shall prolong,
All trouble and sorrow forgot,
And time, as he hurries along,
Shall smile upon Corydon's cot.
SONG.
LET meaner bards in rapturous strain
Sing every charm of face and air;
On every verdant vale and plain,
Chaunt forth the triumphs of the fair:
With truth, with justice, I can tell,
Dear Peggy's still the Nonpariel.
Others may boast, with her, the praise
Of melting eyes and snowy breast,
Where each soft grace luxuriant plays,
And wanton Cupids fink to rest;
But who can such a mind reveal,
As Peggy, lovely Nonpariel?
Oh! witness each sequestered grove,
Witness each hill and dale around,
Good sense, with beauty, waked my love,
Witness, you have heard each gladsome sound,
Mellifluous sounds that grateful trill
From Peggy, dearest Nonpariel!
Such mental warmth, such flames divine,
Nor time, nor withering age decays;
Still more resplendent they shall shine,
"And flourish still by length of days:"
The soul with admiration fill,
Of Peggy, matchless Nonpariel,
Tell me, ye melting songsters say,
If all your fond ideal themes,
Your vocal snell, smooth roundelay,
In all your wanton amorous dreams,
Your fancied fairs can even excel
My Peggy, beauteous Nonpariel?
My Peggy's charms are lasting sure,
Her virtues shall forever bloom,
Celestial copy! -- still endure,
And mock the wrinkle and the tomb,
And even when death those eyes shall veil,
Record my wondrous Nonpariel.
Constitution Song.
DAME Liberty has sled to Gall;
Pray GOD she keeps her station;
Oh! may no despot ever enthrall
Her jocund inclination!
One William Pit has set John Bull
(Who always much did love her)
So ruffian like, from seat to pull,
And thence most rudely shove her.
On Stephen's Chapel let us bestow
Augean Reformation!
Sweep Placem^^ out -- the world shall know
The People are the nation!!?
Of life, the comely dame he would rob,
And worth their while to make it,
He bravoes hired, to do the job,
And some did undertake it.
For this John's yellow boys goes chink,
In royal German breeches;
And English youth! O grief to think!
Lie cold in Flanders ditches.
On Stephen's Chapel, etc.
Our native rose of Liberty
Is now a rare exotic;
Whilst Britons fancy they are free,
In government despotic.
In hair white dust I must not shake,
But walk out like a Quizzy;
My glass of wine I cannot take,
But Pit he makes me tizzy.
On Stephen's Chapel, etc,
Boys sit at home, nor cross the main,
A foreign foe to slaughter,
If here he comes why back again,
We'll dash him in the water!
On Stephen's Chapel, etc.
FINIS.

