THE SCRIPTURE DOCTRINE etc.

THE SCRIPTURE DOCTRINE OF Predestination, Election, AND Reprobation. TOGETHER
WITH FIVE ARTICLES OF CALVINISTIC FAITH. CONCLUDED WITH A DIALOGUE BETWEEN
PREDESTINARIAN AND HIS FRIEND.

-- CONTEND FOR THE FAITH WHICH WAS ONCE DELIVERED UNTO THE SAINTS.

JUDE. STOCKBRIDGE: PRINTED BY LORING ANDREWS. 1795.

TO THE PUBLIC.
THE Compiler of the following sheets, sensible that nothing new can be said
upon the following intricate doctrines of Predestination, Election and
Reprobation, has no design to impose upon the Public -- but in a plain, humble
and concise manner, republish those doctrines unveiled from that sophistry, art
and prolixity, so frequently experienced in modern publications of this kind,
from which the community at large can derive no benefit, for the want of time,
education and skill to trace the metaphysical subtilties of Calvinian writers.

Therefore, that the humble enquirer after the truth as it is in JESUS, may not
be lost in the di^ of human controversy, but may be led, by proper motives,
right views, upon rational principles, and by the plain declarations of God, to
believe, and practice in that unadulterated faith, once delivered to the
Saints, the following publication is offered to be tried by the touchstone of
Truth. And furthermore, that his fellow citizens may be secured, not only from
the errors and violence of sectarists and enthusiasts, but may escape the
vortex of infidelity, which, in the present age, like a Go^iah, comes forth
defying the SAVIOR of lost men. And painful it is, for the true Christian, to
hear "tyrannic dogmas" charged upon Christianity, that have no existence in the
oracles of God. -- To mention but one instance out of the many we have in a
late Deistical publication, from the French of Boulanger; Entitled,
Christianity Unveiled.
his words are as follows -- " The fatalism of the Grecian^, ^as been
transformed, in the hands of Christian Priests, in^^ Predestination. According
to this tyrannic dogma, the God of mercies has destined the greatest part of
mankind to eternal torments. He places them in this world that they, by the
abuse of their faculties and liberty, may render themselves worthy of the
implacable wrath of their Creator. -- "A benevolent and prescient God, gives to
man a free will, of which he knows Nay, fore-ordains that they shall.
they will make so perverse an use, as to merit eternal damnation."

That this kind of Predestination is the genuine offspring of heathenish
fatality, is too obvious to need illustration; See the great Palagian
controversy, in the 3d century, when Austin first introduced it into the
Christian Church, disputing with Palagius.
but it is false, and to the last degree cruel and absurd, when either called
the dogma or doctrine of the Christian Religion.

And, I pray God to enlighten the minds (of otherwise well m^^ning people) of
the followers of Calvin, and other Christian fatalists, that they may perceive,
while they are endeavoring to unit^ the decrees and foreknowledge of God, they
are rending Christ's seamless vesture in pieces, by destroying the unity of
faith, introducing Pagan Theology, opening the floodgates of Deism, and
hastening the awful period, when Christ shall scarce find faith on the earth!

Undoubtedly there will arise objections against this publication; some will
say the quotations are false -- that these words were not spoken by these
authors, or, at least not in this sense. But this may be easily determined by
reading those authors, where they all undeniably stand, and were taken and
defended in this sense, throughout the whole treatises, from whence they are
taken. See the Five Articles at the close of the Preface.
Others will say, that modern Divines, upon the Edwardean plan, do not hold nor
preach so. (The glaring absurdity of the doctrine, with its frightful
consequences* is so awful, that many have endeavored to soften their
principles, by the unexplained phrase, "moderate Ca^vinis^s.") But the
following quotation from Jonathan Edwards, D. D. An Ordination Sermon, preached
at Hambden, Connecticut, 1792, page 8.
compared with Mr. Hopkins's System of Divinity, and Doct. West, on Moral
Agency, will decide the matter. And, I charitably hope, undeceive the wandering
sheep, and bring them home, to the shepherd and bishop of their souls.

"The doctrine of the Divine Decrees, which is that God has for^-ordained
whatsoever comes to pass, is a profitable doctrine." "It would seem
unaccountable that God should build such a vast structure as that of the
created universe, and not fix the scheme of it in his own mind, before he
began; but should enter upon it without design, without plan, without system.
How could this be reconciled with even human wisdom, much more with divine,
which is infinite? It is curious to see the inconsistency of error: at one time
these Divines will not admit man's natural reason as any guide in Religion --
at another time will appeal to its acknowledged fallibility, to prove the
infallibility of God.
If a human architect, about to build, should collect materials of various
kinds and dimensions, but should collect them without design and without
determining their proper uses and applications, we should all agree to condemn
him either for his ignorance, or his negligence." Permit me to recommend to
these gentlemen and others, who reason after this manner, the following texts,
Ps. 50.21. Isa. 55.8, 9. Deuteronomy. 29.29. Job 11.7, etc.


Again, page 17. "Nor is the doctrine of total depravity less useful than
true." -- I observe, he who acknowleges total depravity, and that God
fore-ordains whatsoever comes to pass, must acknowledge and believe every
assertion hereafter mentioned; or deny that causes will produce effects.

But may we all remember that we are but finite creatures, prone to evil, at
our best estate but vanity, subject to prejudice and partiality; that we walk
by faith, not by sight, seeing as it were through a glass darkly. Then shall we
cease from the endless disputes about the Divine Decrees, lay aside the old
man, put on the new, and hereafter see also as we are seen. That this may be
the happy portion of all, let us lay down our spiritual weapons of hostility,
unite in one Faith and Baptism, and with one heart and voice, pray for the one
universal Church, that it may be so guided and governed by the one spirit, that
all who profess and call themselves Christians, may be led into the way of
truth, and hold the faith in unity of spirit, in the bond of peace, and in
righteousness of life.

THE COMPILER.
August 20th, 1795.
FIVE ARTICLES, Agreed to by the Synod of Dort, who were a representative Body
from all the Calvinistic Churches in Europe, except that of France, who met and
condemned Arminius.
See Heylyn's History of this controversy, P. 523.

Article I. OF DIVINE PREDESTINATION.
THAT God, by an absolute Decree, has elected to salvation a very small number
of men, without any regard to their Faith or Obedience whatsoever, and secluded
from saving grace, all the rest of mankind, and appointed them, by the same
decree, to eternal damnation, without any regard to their Infidelity or
Impenitence.

Art. II. OF THE MERIT AND EFFECT OF CHRIST'S DEATH.
THAT Jesus Christ has not suffered Death for any other, but for those Elect
only; having neither had any intent or commandment of his Father, to make
satisfaction for the sins of the whole world.

Art. III. OF MAN'S WILL, IN THE STATE OF NATURE.
THAT by Adam's Fall, his posterity lost their Free Will, being put to an
unavoidable Necessity to do, or not to do, whatsoever they do, or do not,
whether it be good or evil; being thereunto predestinate by the eternal and
effectual secret decree of God.

Art. IV. OF THE MANNER OF CONVERSION.
THAT God, to save his Elect from the corrupt mass, does beget Faith in them by
a power equal to that whereby he created the world, and raised up the dead;
insomuch that such unto whom he gives that grace, cannot reject it, and the
rest being reprobate, cannot accept of it.

Art. V. OF THE CERTAINTY OF PERSEVERANCE.
THAT such as have once received that Grace by Faith, can never fall from it
finally, or totally, notwithstanding the most enormous sins they can commit.

THE SCRIPTURE DOCTRINE, etc.
1. THE scripture says, Ephesians. i. 4.
God has chosen us in Christ, before the foundation of the world, that we
should be holy, and without blame before him in love. And St. Peter calls the
saints, 1 Pet. i. 2.
elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through sanctification
of the spirit, unto obedience. And St. Paul says unto them, 2 Thessalonians. ii. 13,
24.
God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation, through sanctification of
the spirit, and b^lief of the truth; whereunto he has called you by our
gospel, to the ob^^^^ing of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.

2. From all these places of scripture it is plain that God had chosen some to
life and glory before, or from the foundation of the world. And the wisdom of
all Christians is, to labor that their judgments may be informed herein,
according to the scripture. And to that end let us consider the manner of God's
speaking to the sons of men.

3. God says to Abraham, Romans iv. 17. As it is written, I have made thee a
father of many nations, before him who believed, even God who quickens the
dead and calls things that are not as though they were. Observe, God speaks
then, at that present time, to Abraham saying, I have made thee a father of
many nations, notwithstanding Abraham was not at that time the father of one
child, but Ishmael. How then must we understand I have made thee a father of
many nations?

4. The apostle tells us plainly, it was so, Before God who calls things that
are not as though they were. And so he calls Abraham, the father of many
nations, though he was not as yet the father even of Isaac, in whom his seed
was to be called.

5. God uses the same manner of speaking, when he calls Christ, Rev. xiii. 8.
The lamb slain from the foundation of the world; although indeed he was not
slain for some thousand years after. Hence therefore we may easily understand
what he speaks of electing us from the foundation of the world.

6. God calls Abraham a father of many nations, though not so at that time.
He calls Christ, The Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, though not
slain till he was a man in the flesh. Even so he calls men Elected from the
foundation of the world, though not elected till they were men in the flesh. --
Yet it is all so before God, who knowing all things from eternity, calls
things that are not as though they were.

7. By all which it is clear, that as Christ was called The Lamb slain from the
foundation of the world, and yet not slain till some thousand years after, till
the day of his death; so also men are called elect from the foundation of the
world, and yet are not elected perhaps till some thousand years after, till the
day of their conversion to God.

8. And indeed this is plain, without going farther, from those very words of
St. Peter, elect, according to the foreknowledge of God, through
sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience. -- For,

If the elect are chosen through sanctification of the Spirit, then they were
not chosen before they were sanctified by the Spirit. But they were not
sanctified by the Spirit, before they had a being. It is plain then neither
were they chosen from the foundation of the world. But God calls things that
are not, as though they were.

9. This is also plain from those words of St. Paul, God has from the
beginning chosen you to salvation, through sanctification of the spirit, and
belief of the truth. Now,

If the saints are chosen to salvation, through believing of the truth, and
were called to believe that truth by the hearing of the gospel, then they were
not chosen before they believed the truth, and before they heard the gospel,
whereby they were called to believe. For they were chosen through belief of the
truth, and called to believe it by the gospel. -- Therefore they were not
chosen before they believed; much less before they had a being, any more than
Christ was slain before he had a being. So plain is it, that they were not
elected, till they believed; although God calls things that are not, as
though they were.

10. Again, how plain is it, where St. Paul says, that they whom Ephesians. i. 11,
12.
God did predestinate, according to the council of his own will, to be the
praise of his glory, were such as did first trust in Christ? And in the very
next verse, he says that they trusted in Christ after they heard the word of
truth, (not before.) -- But they did not hear the word before they were born.
-- Therefore it is plain, the act of election is in time, though known of God
before; who, according to his knowledge, often speaks of the things which are
not, as though they were. -- And thus is the great-stumbling block about
election taken away, that men may make their calling and election sure.

11. The scripture tells us as plainly what predestination is; it is God's
fore-appointing obedient believers to salvation, not without, but according to
his foreknowledge of all their works, from the foundation of the world. And so
likewise he predestinates or fore-appoints all disobedient unbelievers to
damnation, not without, but according to his foreknowledge of all their works,
from the foundation of the world.

12. We may consider this a little farther. God from the foundation of the
world, fore-knew all men's believing or not believing. And according to this
his foreknowledge, he chose or elected all obedient believers, as such, to
salvation, and refused or reprobated all disobedient unbelievers, as such, to
damnation. Thus the scriptures teach us to consider election and reprobation,
according to the foreknowledge of God from the foundation of the world.

13. But here some may object, that I hold our faith and obedience to be the
cause of God's electing us to glory.

I answer, I do hold, that faith in Christ producing obedience to him is a
cause without which God elected none to glory; for we never read of God's
electing to glory, any who lived and died disobedient unbelievers. But I do not
hold, that it is the cause for which he elects any: the contrary of this is
easily shown thus:

Suppose my obedience is a cause of my election to salvation, What is the cause
of my obedience? Ans. My love to Christ.

But what is the cause of my love to Christ?

Ans. My faith in Christ.

But what is the cause of my faith in Christ?

Ans. The preaching of the gospel of Christ.

But what is the cause of the preaching of the gospel to us?

Ans. Christ's dying for us.

But what is the cause of Christ's dying for us?

Ans. God's great love of pity wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in
trespasses and sins.

14. Thus all men may see that I do not hold God (...) any man to life and
salvation for any good which he h^^ ^^^e, or for any which was in him, before
he put it there. And this I shall now show more at large from the oracles of
God.

1. God's great love of pity, where with he loved ^^^ons of men, even while
they were dead in trespasses and sins, was the cause of his sending his Son to
die for them; as appears from the following scriptures: John iii. 16.
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, to the end that
all who ^^eve in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. For Romans v.
6, etc.
when we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly.
And, God commends his love to us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ
died for us.

2. Christ's dying for our sins is the cause of the gospel's being preached to
us, as appears from those scriptures, Matt. xxviii. 18.
Jesus came and spoke unto them, saying, All power is given unto me in heaven
and earth. Go ye therefore and teach all nations. Mark xvi. 15.
Go ye into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature.

3. The gospel's being preached to sinners is the cause of their believing, as
appears from those scriptures, Romans x. 15, etc.
How shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? And how shall they
believe in him of whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a
preacher? So then faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.

4. Men's believing is the cause of their justification, as appears from those
scriptures, Acts xiii. 39.
By him all that believe are justified from all things. Romans iii. 26, etc.
He is the justifier of all that believe in Jesus. Therefore we conclude that a
man is justified by faith, without the deeds of the law. Romans iv. 3, 23, etc.
Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness. Now it was
not written for his sake alone, that it was imputed to him; but for us also to
whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on him that raised up Jesus from the
dead; who was delivered for our offenses, and rose again for our justification.

5. Our knowing ourselves justified by faith is the cause of our love to
Christ, as appears from those scriptures, 1 John iv. 10.
Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son
to be the propitiation for our sins. 1 John iv. 19.
We love him because he first loved us.

6. Our love to Christ is the cause of our obeying him, as appears from those
scriptures, John xiv. 1^, 21, etc.
If ye love me, keep my commandments. He that has my commandments, and keeps
them, he it is that loves me. And, If any man love me, he will keep my words.
1 John v. 3.
For this is the love of God, that we keep his Commandments.

7. Our obeying Christ is the cause of his giving us eternal life, as appears
from those scriptures, Matt. vii. 21.
Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven: but he that does the will of my father which is in heaven. Rev. xxii.
14.
Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the
tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city. And Heb. v. 9.
Christ being made perfect through sufferings, he became the author of eternal
salvation to all that obey him.

15. This may be more briefly expressed thus: 1. God's love was the cause of
his sending his Son to die for sinners. 2. Christ's dying for sinners is the
cause of the gospel's being preached. 3. The preaching of the gospel is the
cause (or means) of our believing. 4. Our believing is the cause (or condition)
of our justification. 5. The knowing ourselves justified through his blood, is
the cause of our love to Christ. 6. Our love to Christ is the cause of our
obedience to him. 7. Our obedience to Christ is the cause of his becoming the
author of eternal salvation to us.


16. These following things therefore ought well to be considered by all that
fear God.

1. There was a necessity of God's love in sending his Son to die for us,
without which he had not came to die. 2. There was a necessity of Christ's love
in dying for us, without which the gospel could not have been preached. 3.
There was a necessity of the gospel's being preached, without which there could
have been no believing. 4. There is a necessity of our believing the gospel,
without which we cannot be justified. 5. There is a necessity of our being
justified by faith in the blood of Christ, without which we cannot come to know
that he loved us and washed us from our sins in his own blood. 6. There is a
necessity of our knowing his love, who first love^ (...), without which we
cannot keep his commandments. 7. There is a necessity of our loving him,
without which (...) cannot keep his commandments. 8. There is a necessity of
keeping his commandments, without which we cannot enter into eternal life.
By all which we see, that there is as great a necessity of of our keeping the
commandments of God, as there was of God's sending his Son into the world, or
of Christ's dying (...) our sins.

17. But for whose sins did Christ die? Did he die for all (...), o^ but for
some?

To this also I shall answer by the scriptures, showing 1. The testimony of all
the prophets. 2. Of the angel of God. 3. Of Christ himself. And, 4. Of his
apostles.

First, the prophet Isaiah says thus: Isaiah liii. 4, 5, 6.
Surely he has borne our griefs, and carried our Sorrows: yet did we esteem
him stricken, smitt^n of God and afflicted. But he was wounded for our
transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of our
peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. And we like sheep, have
gone astray: we have turned every one to his own way; and the Lord has laid on
him the iniquities of us all. Thus Isaiah shows plainly, that the iniquities
of all those who went astray, were laid upon Christ. And to him the testimony
of all the other prophets agrees: Acts x. 43.
To give all the prophets witness, that through his name whosoever believes in
him shall receive remission of sins. The same says that great prophet, John
the Baptist, who John i. 7.
came to bear witness of the light, that all men through it might believe. --.
And again, Ibid verse 29.
Behold, says he, the Lamb of God, that takes away the sin of the world. Thus
have all the prophets, with one consent, testified that God laid upon Christ
the iniquities of all that were gone astray: that he is the Lamb of God which
takes away the sin of the world; that all men through him may believe: and
that through his name whosoever believes in him, shall receive remission of
sins.

Secondly, The angel of God testified the same thing, saying, Luke ii. 10.
Fear not; for I bring you glad tidings of great joy, which shall be to all
people, which was, that there was born unto them a Savior, even Christ the
Lord. By this also it appears, that Christ died for all men. For else it could
not have been glad tidings of great joy to all people; but rather sad tidings
to all those for whom he died not.

Thirdly, We come now to the words of Christ himself, who knew his own business
better than any man else; and therefore if his testimony agree with these, we
must needs be convinced that they are true. Now he speaks thus, John iii. 14,
etc.
As Moses lifted up the serpent in the Wilderness, even so must the Son of Man
be lifted up, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life. For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting
life. For God sent not his Son to condemn the world, but that the world through
hi^ might be saved. Thus we see the words of Christ agree with the words of the
prophets; therefore it must needs be owned that Christ died for all.

Fourthly, And now we will hear what the apostles say concerning this thing. 2
Cor. ^. 14, etc.
The love of Christ, says the Apostle Paul, constrains us, before we thus
judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead; and that he died for all
that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him
that died for them, and rose again. And to Timothy he says, 1 Timothy ii. 5, 6.
There is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus,
who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time. Again he says
to Titus, Tit. ii. 11.
The grace of God, which brings salvation is all men, has appeared. And yet
again to the Hebrews, Heb. ii. 9.
That he, by the grace of God, tasted death for every man. And to this agrees
St. John, witnessing, 1 John ii. 2.
He is the propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only, but also for the
sins of the whole world. -- And again, speaking of himself and the rest of the
apostles, he says, 1 John iv. 14.
We have seen and do testify that the Father sent the Son, to be the Savior of
the world. Thus we have the testimony of all the prophets, of the angel of God,
of Christ himself, and of his holy apostles, all agreeing together in one to
prove, that Christ died for all mankind.

18. What then can they, who deny this, say? Why, they commonly say, All men,
in these scriptures, does not mean all men, but only the elect; that every man
here does not mean every man, but only every one of the elect; that the world
does not mean the whole world, but only the world of believers: and that the
whole world, in St. John's words, does not mean the whole world, but only the
whole world of the elect.

19. To this shameless, senseless evasion, I answer thus:

If the scripture no where speaks of a world of believers or elect, then we
have no ground, reason, pretense, or excuse for saying, Christ d^ed only for a
world of believers or elect. But the scripture no where speaks of such a world.
Therefore we have no ground or pretense for speaking thus.

Nay, the scripture is so far from calling believers or elected persons, the
world, that they are every where in scripture plainly and expressly
distinguished from the world. John xv.
If ye were of the world, says Christ, the world would love its own; but
because I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you.

20. But let the scripture itself speak, what world Christ died for. Romans v. 6
-- 10.
When we were yet without strength, Christ died for the ungodly. While we were
yet sinners, Christ died for us. When we were enemies, we were reconciled to
God by the death of his Son. From all which we may clearly see, that Christ
died for the world of the ungodly, for the world of sinners, for the world of
his enemies; the just one for the world of the unjust. But the elect, as elect,
are not unjust. Therefore he died not for the elect, as elect; but even for
that world St. John speaks of, when he says, "The whole world lies in
wickedness."

21. If it be said, "The elect were sinners once as well others:" I answer,
true; but not as they are elect in Christ, but as they were out of Christ,
without hope and without God in the world. Therefore, to say that Christ died
for the elect, as elect, is absolute nonsense and confusion.

22. To put this matter out of doubt, I would commend these following
considerations to all sober-minded men.

1. The scripture says, "Christ came to seek and to save that which wa^^ost."

But the elect, as elect, were not lost.

Therefore Christ died not for the elect, as or because they were elect; for
that had been to seek and save what was found and ^^^^d before.

2. The scripture says, Christ died for the unjust.

But the elect, as such, are not unjust.

Therefore, Christ died not for the elect, as elect; for that had been to
justify them who were just before.

3. The scripture says, "He came to preach deliverance to the captives."

But the elect, as elect, are not captives; for Christ ha^^ set them free.

Therefore he died not for the elect, as elect; for that had been to set them
at liberty who were at liberty before.

4. The scripture says, "He quickens them who (...) dead in trespasses and
sins, such as were without Christ, ^lieus from the common wealth of Israel, and
strangers to the covenant of promise, without hope and without God in the world.

But the elect, as such, are not dead in trespasses and sins, but alive unto
God. Neither are they without Christ; for they are chosen in him; nor are they
aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers to the covenant of
promise. But they are fellow-citizens with the faints, and the household of God.

Therefore Christ died not for the elect, as or because they were elect. For
that had been to quicken them that were alive before, and to bring them into
covenant, who were in covenant before. And thus, by these means account our
Lord lost his labor of love, and accomplished A SOLEMN NOTHING.

23. Thus having shown the grievous folly of those who say, that Christ died
for none but the elect. I shall now prove by undeniable reasons, that he died
for all mankind.

Reas. 1. Because all the prophets, the angel of God, Christ himself, and his
holy apostles with one consent, affirm it. Reas. 2. Because there is not one
scripture, from the beginning of Genesis to the end of the Revelation, that
denies it, either negatively, by saying, that he did not die for all; or
affirmatively, by saying, that he died but for some. Reas. 3. Because he
himself commanded, that the gospel should be preached to every creature. Reas.
4. Because he calls all men, every where, to repent. Reas. 4. Because he
calls all men, every where, to repent. Reas. 5. Because those who perish are
damned for not believing in the name of the only begotten Son of God.
Therefore, he must have died for them. Else they would be damned for not
believing a lie. Reas. 6. Because they which are damned might have been saved.
For thus says the word of God. 2 Thessalonians. ii. 10.
"They received not the love of the truth that they might be saved. Therefore
God shall send them strong delusions, to believe a lie, that they all may be
damned." Reas. 7. Because some deny the Lord that bought them and bring upon
themselves swift destruction. But they could not deny the Lord that bought
them, if he had not bought them at all.
24. I shall now briefly show the dreadful absurdities that follow from saying
Christ died only for the elect.

1. If Christ died not for all, then unbelief is no sin in them that finally
perish? seeing there is not any thing for those men to believe unto salvation,
for whom Christ died not. 2. If Christ died not for all, then it would be a sin
in the greatest part of mankind to believe he died for them; seeing it would be
to believe a lie. 3. If Christ died not for those that are damned, then they
are not damned for unbelief. Otherwise, you say, that they are damned for not
believing a lie. 4. If Christ died not for all, then those who obey Christ by
going and preaching the gospel to every creature, as glad tidings of grace and
peace, of great joy to all people, do sin thereby, in that they go to most
people with a lie in their mouth. 5. If Christ died not for all men, then God
is not in earnest in calling all men every where to repent; for what good could
repentance do those, for whom Christ died not? 6. If Christ died not for all,
then why does he say he is not willing any should perish? Surely he is willing,
yea, resolved that most men should perish; else he would have died for them
also. 7. How shall God judge the world by the man Christ Jesus, if Christ did
not die for the world? Or how shall he judge them according to the gospel, when
there was never any gospel or mercy for them?
25. But, say some, "If Christ died for all, why are not all saved!"

I answer, Because they believe not in the name of the only begotten Son of
God. Because God called, and they refused to answer; he stretched out his hand,
and they regarded not; he counseled them, but they would none of his counsels;
he reproved them, but they set at naught all his reproofs; they followed after
lying vanities, and forsook their own mercies; they denied the Lord that bought
them, and so brought upon themselves swift destruction; and because they
received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved, therefore (if you
would know wherefore) God gave them up to believe a lie, and to be damned. How
often (says our Lord) would I have gathered you together, and ye would not. Ye
would not. Here is the plain reason, why all men are not saved. For God
promises no man salvation, whether he will or no; but, leaves them to
everlasting destruction, who will not believe and obey the gospel.

26. "O, then you are an Arminian! You are a free-willer, You hold free will in
man!"

I hold nothing but what the scripture says; and that you shall give me leave
to hold. I do not hold, that any man has any will or power of himself to do any
thing that is good; but by the grace of God we may do all things. I have
already shown, he has given Christ for all men. And he who spared not his own
Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him freely give us
all things? And what man knows not that if he make use of all the will and
power God has given him, God will double his talent and give him more? If any
therefore desire to have more, let him faithfully improve what he has. Likewise
what man is he, who does not know that he is not condemned for not doing what
he could not do, but for leaving undone what he could have done if he would.
Let any man deny it if he can.

27. "What, then, may all men be saved if they will?

Before I answer this question directly, I shall show that those who ask it,
are themselves compelled to grant as much freedom of will, as we desire to
plead for.

For 1. The Assembly of Divines, in their confession of Faith, c. 9. do
expressly say, God "has endowed the will of man with that natural liberty that
it is neither forced, nor by any absolute necessity determined to do good or
evil." -- 2. Mr. Baxter, in the preface of his call to the unconverted, says,
"That Calvin as well as Arminius, held free will, and that no man of brains
denies, that man has a will that is naturally free; it is free from violence,
it is a self-determining principle." Sure here is as much said for free will,
as any man need to say, and perhaps more. For,

The difference between us, is this. They say, "Man has a will which is
naturally free." We say, "Man has this freedom of will, not naturally, but by
grace."

We believe, that in the moment Adam fell, he had no freedom of will left; but
that God, when of his own free grace he gave the promise of a Savior to him
and his posterity, graciously restored to mankind a liberty and power to accept
of proffered salvation. And in all this, man's boasting is excluded; the whole
of that which is good in him, even from the first moment of his will, being of
grace and not of nature. And now we come directly to the question, whether all
men may be saved if they will?

28. To those who have considered what has been premised; I answer, 1. What
should hinder them, if they be willing? For, 2. God is not willing that any
should perish; yea, 3. He is willing that all men should be saved. And Christ
is willing; for he "came not to judge the world, but to save the world." And
how did he weep over Jerusalem! How often would he have gathered them together,
even as an hen gathers her chickens under her wings, but they would not? And
now that hinders men's salvation, but that same, they would not.

29. They would not; they will not come at Christ's call, and hearken to his
reproof, and wait for his counsels, and receive power from on high to live to
him who died for them, walking in all his commandments and ordinances
blameless, and following him whithersoever he goes. This way is so narrow that
few care to walk therein, and therefore they are not saved even because they
reject the counsel of God against themselves. They chose death; therefore they
perish everlastingly.

TO ALL PREDESTINARIANS.
1. I AM informed some of you have ^ai^ that the following Quotations are
false; that these Words were not spoken by these Authors: Others, that they
were not spoken in this Sense: And others, that neither you yourself, nor any
True Predestinarian ever did, or ever would speak so.

2. My Friends, the Authors here quoted are well known, in whom you may read
the Words with your own Eyes. And you who have read them, know in your own
Conscience, they were spoken in this Sense, and no other: Nay, that this Sense
of them is professedly defended throughout the whole Treatises whence they are
taken.

3. But be this as it may, do you indeed say, No true Predestinarian ever did
or would speak so? Why every true Predestinarian must speak so, and so must you
yourself too, if you dare speak out, unless they and you renounce your
fundamental Principle.

4. Your fundamental Principle is this, God from Eternity ordained whatsoever
should come to pass. But from this single Position undeniably follows every
assertion hereafter mentioned. It remains therefore that you choose which you
please (for one you must choose) of these Three Things; either, 1. To
equivocate, evade the Question, and prevaricate without End; or, 2. To swallow
all those Assertions together, and honestly to avow them; or, 3. To renounce
them all together, and believe in Christ the Savior of All.

A DIALOGUE between a PREDESTINARIAN and his FRIEND.
Friend. SIR, I have heard that you make God the Author of all Sin, and the
Destroyer of the greater Part of Mankind without Mercy.


Pred. I deny it; I only say Assembly's Chatechism, Chap. 3.
God did from all eternity unchangeably ordain whatsoever comes to pass.


Friend. Do you make no Exception?


Pred. No surely: For Calvin's Institutes, Book I. Chap. 16. Sect. 8.
Nothing is more absurd, than to think any Thing at all is done but by the
Ordination of God.


Friend. Do you extend this to the Actions of Men?


Pred. Without doubt: Ibid. sect. 3.
Every Action and Motion of every Creature is so governed by the hidden Counsel
of God, that nothing can come to pass, but what was ordained by Him.


Friend. But what then becomes of the Wills of Men?


Pred. Ibid. sect. 8.
The Wills of M^n are governed by the Will of God, that they are carried on
(...) to the Mark which he has foreordained.


Friend. I suppose you mean the Permissive Will of God?


Pred. No, I mean, Dr. Twiss, Vindicae Gratiae Potenstatis and Providentiae
Del. Editio Jansoniana. Part III. p. 19.
All things come to pass by the Efficacious and Irresistible Wi^^ of God.


Friend. Why then all Men must do just what they do.


Pred. True. Ibid. p. 10.
It is impossible that any Thing should ever be done, but that to which God
impels the Will of Man.


Friend. But does not this imply the necessity of all Events?


Pred. Calvin's Inst. b. 3. c. 24. sect. 8.
I will not scruple to own that the Will of God lays a necessity on all Things,
and that every Thing which he wills, necessarily comes to pass.


Friend. Does Sin then necessarily come to pass?


Pred. Undoubtedly, For Assem. Catechism, c. 5.
The Almighty power of God extends itself to the first Fall, and all other Sins
of Angels and Men,


Friend. I grant God foresaw the first Man would fall.


Pred. Nay, Calv. Inst. b. 3. c. 23. sect. 7.
God not only foresaw that Adam would fall, out also ordained that he should.


Friend. I know God permitted Adam's Fall.


Pred. I tell you, Calvini Responsio ad Calumnias Nebulonis cujusdam ad
Articulum pri^^^^.
or few not only by the Permission, but also by the Appointment of God. *He
sinned because God so ordained, Calv. Inst. b. 3. c. 24. s. 8.
because the Lord saw good.


Friend. But don't those who differ from you, raise many Objections against you
as to this point?


Pred. Yes, Ibid. b. 3. c. 23. s. 2.
These poisonous Deg^^^v^nut out many Things against God. Ibid. s. 7.
They deny that the Scripture says God decreed Adam's Fall. They say he might
have chose either to fall or not: And that God foreordained only to treat him
according to his Desire. As of God had created the noblest of all his
Creatures, without fore-^^^^^g what should become of him.


Friend. Did God then make Adam on purpose that he might fall?


Pred. Undoubtedly. Pisca^or Disput. Praedest. praef. p. 6.
God made Adam and Eve to tr^^ very Purpose, that they might be tempted and led
into Sin. And by (...) of his Decree, it could not otherwise be but they (...)
Sin.


Friend. But do not you ground God's decree on God's Foreknowledge rather than
his Will?


Pred. No. Pisca^. Disput. Praedest.
God foresees nothing but what he has decreed, and his Decree proceeds from his
Knowledge.


Friend. Well this may truly be termed A horrible Decree.


Pred. Calv. Inst. l. 3. c. 23. s. 7.
I confess it is a horrible Decree: Yet no one can deny, but God fore-knew
Adam's Fall, and therefore fore-knew (...), because he had ordained it so by
his own Decree.


Friend. Do you believe then that God has by his own positive Decree, not only
elected some Men to life, but also re^^^bated all the rest?


Pred. Most surely if I believe one, I believe the other. -- Call. Inst. b. 3.
23. s. 1.
Many indeed (thinking to excuse God, (...), and (...) Reprobation: But this is
quite silly and chi^^^sh. For without Reprobation, Election itself cannot
stand; whom God passe^ by, raise he reprobates.


Friend. Pray explain what you mean by Election and Reprobation.


Pred. With all my Heart. Ibid. c. 12. s. 1.
All men are not created for the same End: but some are foreordained to
eternal life; others to eternal Damnation. So according as every Man was
created for the (...) End or the other, we say he was elected or predestined
to Life, or reprobated, i. e. predestined to Destruction.


Friend. Pray repeat your Meaning.


Pred. ibid. s. 7.
God has once for all appointed by an eternal and unchangeable Decree, to whom
he would give Salvation, and whom he would denote to Destruction.


Friend. Did God make any Man on Purpose that he might be damned?


Pred. Did I not tell you before? Zanchius de natura Dei p. 553, 554.
God's first Constitution was, that some should be destined to eternal Ruin;
and to this End their Sins were ordained, and denial of Grace in order to their
Sins.


Friend. But is not God's predestinating Men to Life or Death grounded on his
Foreknowledge?


Pred. Calvin Inst. b. 3. c. 22. s. 1.
So the Vulgar think; that God as he force-sees every man will deserve, elects
them to Life, or devotes them to Death and Damnation.


Friend. And do you think that Reprobation, at least, is grounded on God's
fore-knowing Man's Sins?


Pred. No indeed. ibid. c. 13. s. 6.
God of his own good Pleasure ordains that many should be born, who are from
the Womb devoted to inevitable Damnation. If any Man pretend that God's
Foreknowledge lays them under no necessity of being damned, but rather that he
decreed their Damnation, because he foreknew their wickedness; I grant that
God's Foreknowledge alone lays no Necessity on the Creature; but eternal Life
and Death depend on the Will rather than the Fore-knowledg^ of God. If God only
fore-knew all. Things that relate to all Men, and did not decree and ordain
them also, then it might be enquired whether or no his foreknowledge
necessitates the Thing fore-known. But seeing he therefore fore-knows all
Things that will come to pass, because he has decreed they shall come to pass,
it is vain to contend about Foreknowledge, since it is plain all Things come
to pass by God's positive Decree.


Friend. But if God has positively decreed to damn the greater part of Mankind,
why does he call upon them to repent and be saved?


Pred. ibid c. 24. s. 12.
As God has his eff^^tual Call, whereby he gives the Elect the Salvation to
which he ordained them; so he has his Judgments toward the Reprobates, whereby
he executes his Decree concerning them. As many therefore as he created to live
miserably, and then perish everlastingly, these, that they may be brought to
the End for which they were created, he sometimes deprives of the Possibility
of hearing ^he Word, and at other Times, by preaching thereof, blinds and
stupifies them the more.


Friend. How in this? I say, if God has created them for never-ending Death,
why does he call them to turn and live?


Pred. ibid. Inst. b. 3. c. 24. s. 13.
He calls to them, that they may be more deaf; he kindles a Light, that they
may be more blind; he brings his Doctrine to them, that they may be more
ignorant; and applies the Remedy to them, that they may not be healed.


Friend. Enough, enough. Yet you do not make God the Author of Sin!


Pred. No certainly. Petri Martyris Vermilii Com. in Roman p. 413.
God cannot be termed the Authority of Sin, though he is the Cause of those
Actions which are Sins.


Friend. How is he the Cause of them then?


Pred. Two Ways: First, by his eternal, unchangeable Decree: Secondly, by his
present, irresistible Power.


Friend. Did God then fore-ordain the Sins of any Man?


Pred. Zanchius de pat Dei b. 555.
Both the Reprobates and the Elect were fore-ordain'd to Sin, as Sin, that the
Glory of God might be declared thereby. Piscator contra Tauss^um p. 47.
The Reprobates, more especially, who were predestined to Damnation, and the
Causes of Damnation, and created to that End, that they may live wickedly, and
be Vessels full of Dregs of Sin.


Friend. But surely the Sins of the elect were not fore-ordain'd!


Pred. Yes but they were. For Piscatoris Responsio ad amicum deplicationem
Conradi Vostrii. p. 176.
we neither can do more Good than we do, nor less Evil than we do: Because God
from Eternity has precisely decreed that both the Good and the Evil should so
be done.


Friend. I understand you, as to God's decreeing Sin. But how is his
irresistible Power now concerned in the Sins of Men?


Pred. Dr. Twis. Pars III. p. 21.
God is the Author of that Action, which is sinful, by his irresistible Will.


Friend. How do you mean.


Pred. Pis^at. Responsio ad Apologiam Bertii.
God procures Adultery, Cursings, Lyings. Pet. Martyr. Ver. Comment. in Romans b.
36, 42 3.
He supplies wicked Men with Opportunities of Sinning, and inclines their
Hearts thereto. He blinds, deceives and seduces them. He by his working on
their Hearts, bends and stirs them up to do Evil. And thus, Calv. Inst. b. 1.
c* 17. s. 5.
Thieves, Murderers, and other Malefactors are God's Instruments, which he uses
to execute what he has decreed in himself.


Friend. Do you not then charge God himself with Sin?


Pred. No. Twiss Vindiciae, Part III. p. 22.
God necessitates them only to the Act of Sin, not to the Deformity of Sin.
Besides, Zuingulius in Serun de Provid. c. 5. 6.
When God makes Angels or Men sin, he does not sin himself, because he does not
brake any Law. For God is under no Law, and therefore cannot sin.


Friend. But how does God make Angels or Men sin?


Pred. Calv. Inist. b. i. 17. (...). 11.
The Devil and wicked Men are so held in on every Side with the Hand of God,
that they cannot conceive, or contrive, or execute any Mischief, any farther
than God himself does not permit only, but command. Nor are they only held in
Fetters, but compelled also as with a Bridle, to perform Obedience to those
Commands.


Friend. This is true Turkish Doctrine, and ought so to be exploded as that
used to be in these Words:

"I do anathematize the Blasphemy of Mahomed, which says, that God deceives
whom he will, and whom he will he deals to that which is Good. Himself does
what he wills, and is himself the Cause of all Good and all Evil. Fate and
Destiny govern all Things." Nicetus Saracentia.


Pred. Nay our Doctrine is more ancient than Mahomed. It was maintained by St.
Augustine.


Friend. Augustine speaks sometimes for it, and sometimes against it. But all
Antiquity for the four first Centuries is against you, as is the whole Eastern
Church to this Day; and the Church of England, both in her Catechism, Articles
and Homiles. And so are diverse of our most holy Martyrs, Bishop Hooper and
Bishop Latimer in particular.


Pred. But does not Antiquity say, Judas was predestined to damnation?


Friend. Quite the Contrary. St. Chrysostom's express Words are, Judas, my
Beloved, was at first a Child of the Kingdom, and heard it said to him with the
Disciples, "ye shall sit on Twelve Thrones." But afterward he became a Child
of Hell.


Pred. However, you will own Esau was predestined to destruction.


Friend. Indeed I will not. Some of your own Writers believe he was finally
saved, which was the general opinion of the ancient Fathers. And that
Scripture, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated, plainly relates not to
their Persons, but their Posterities.

But supposing Esau or Judas to be damned, what are they damned for?


Pred. Without Question, for Unbelief. For as we are saved by Faith al^^e, so
Unbelief is the only damning sin.


Friend. By what Faith are you saved.


Pred. By Faith in Christ, who gave himself for me.


Friend. But did he give himself for Esau and Judas? If not, you say, they are
damned, for not believing a Lie.

This Consideration it was which forced Archbishop Usher to cry out.

"What would not a Man fly unto, rather than yield, that Christ did not die for
the Reprobates; and that none but the Elect had any kind of Title to him: And
yet many thousands should be bound to Conscience to believe that he died for
them, and died to accept him for their Redeemer and Savior? Whereby they should
have believed that which in itself is most untrue, and laid hold of that, in
which they had no kind of Interest."


Pred. But what then do you mean by the Words Election and Reprobation.


Friend. I mean this. Is It. God did decree from the Beginning to elect or choose
in (in Christ) all that should believe, to Salvation. And this decree proceeds
from his own Goodness, and is not built upon any Goodness in the Creature. 2^y.
God did from the Beginning decree, to reprobate all who should obstinately and
finally continue in Unbelief.


Pred. What then do you think of absolute unconditional Election and
Reprobation?


Friend. I think it cannot be found in holy Writ, and this is a Plant which
bears dismal Fruit. An instance of which we have in Calvin himself; who
confesses, that he procured the burning to Death of Michael Servantus a wise
and holy Man, purely for differing from him in opinion, in matters of religion.


Pred. But why do you call Servantus a Holy Man? does not Mr. Calvin himself
say, that he was an Heretic, a Blasphemer, an Atheist, a Devil.


Friend. Mr. Calvin himself does say so; and many others upon his Authority,
who were, in effect, both Evidences, Judge and Jury against him, after his
death, as well as before it. -- But, you must know, I cannot wholly rely on his
Authority, any more than theirs, who only retail his words. I require fuller
Evidence, a more impartial Jury, and a more Equitable Judge than Him, who had
no more compassion on his fellow servant, than he supposed God to have on
Infants of a Span long.


FINIS.

