JOHN TRUMBULL ESQUIRE.


M'FINGAL: A MODERN EPIC POEM, IN FOUR CANTOS.

BY JOHN TRUMBULL, ESQUIRE.

EMBELLISHED WITH NINE COPPER PLATES; DESIGNED AND ENGRAVED BY E. TISDALE.

THE FIRST EDITION WITH PLATES, AND EXPLANATORY NOTES.

Ergo non satis est risu diducere ^^ctum
Auditoris: et est quaedam tamem hic quoque virtu^,
Est brevitate opus ut currat sententia, neu se
Impediat verbis lassas onerantibus aures.
Et serm^ne opus est modo tristi, saepe jocoso,
De^endente vicem modo Rhet^ris, atque Poetae,
In^^^dum urbani, parcentis vi^ibus atque
Extenuantis eas consulto. Ridiculum ac^i
Fortius et melius magnas plerumque secat res.
Horat. Lib. 1. Sat. 10. NEW YORK: PRINTED BY JOHN BUEL, No. 132, FLY-MARKET.
M, DCC, XCV.

EDITORS PREFACE TO THE AMERICAN EDITION, WITH PLATES.
THE following Poem was first published in 1782, in the state of Connecticut,
where the Author was born, and received his education, and where he now
resides. It has passed through several impressions in this country, and
Great Britain, and has obtained universal celebrity.

In 1792 a splendid edition of it appeared in London, with explanatory notes.
So far as these notes contain facts, and serve to elucidate passages, which
would be otherwise obscure, they are (...) in this edition: But as that London
edition was published to answer the purposes of a party, and the Editor has
taken the liberty to misrepresent the views of the Author, the preface and such
of the notes as were inserted for that purpose, are here omitted. This is done
at the request of the author, with whose permission, this edition is offered to
the American public.

The design of the Poem will best appear from its general tenor. The Author, at
the time the opposition of America to the unjust claims of the British
Parliament, was maturing into system, lived in Boston with one of the principal
projectors of American Independence. He espoused the cause of his country, and
became intimately acquainted with the transactions of the early revolutionists,
and all the measures of the British agents, to counter-act the opposition. This
appears by a number of Anecdotes, very humorously related, in the course of the
Poem.

That the Author is a warm friend of American Independence, is obvious, from
the whole tenor of the work; and the principal scope of the Poem seems to have
been, to ridicule the claims of the British Parliament, and the measures
pursued to enforce those claims. At the same time, the absurdities and
misconduct of his own countrymen have not escaped his notice.

The Author is no friend to monarchy, nor aristocracy; nor is he a raving
democrat. He is a friend of republican government, and rational liberty -- that
liberty which is secured by just laws, and a steady administration of justice.
But it is not true that the Poem was written with the sole view to ridicule any
particular form of government.

The scene of the Poem is laid in Massachusetts, where the Revolution
originated. The time is in 1775. M'FINGAL the hero, is designed to represent
the tory faction in general: and HONORIUS, the whigs.

It is unnecessary to say any thing of the merit of the Poem. This is
universally acknowledged; and the Poem will continue to be read and admired,
while true taste and science adorn the civilized world. The Philosopher in his
closet, the traveller on his voyage, and the man of business at his fireside,
will always find M'FINGAL, an instructive friend, and a pleasant companion.

The Editors have taken particular pains, to render this edition, worthy of
public patronage. The explanatory notes will give this impression a great
advantage over any American edition. Indeed without them, many passages
alluding to local customs, or descriptive of local transactions, could not be
understood by a great proportion of readers.

But the Plates added to this edition, are an improvement on all former ones,
and cannot sail to give it a decided preference.

In every respect the Editors flatter themselves, the elegance of the work will
do justice to this admired Poem; and they confide in the liberality of their
countrymen, to give due encouragement to this specimen of American genius and
industry.

THE Notes in this Edition marked with inverted Commas, were inserted by the
Author in the first Edition; those that are not so marked, are principally
extracted and altered from a London Edition, Printed in the Year 1792.

M'FINGAL: CANTO FIRST. The Town-Meeting, A. M.
WHEN Yankies Yankies, a term formerly of derision, but now merely of
distinction, given to the people of the four Eastern States.
, skilled in martial rule,
First put the British troops to school;
Instructed them in warlike trade,
And new maneuvers of parade;
The true war-dance of Yankey-reels,
And manual exercise of heels;
Made them give up, like saints complete,
The arm of flesh, and trust the feet,
And work, like Christians undissembling,
Salvation out, by fear and trembling;
Taught Percy fashionable races,
And modern modes of Chevy-chases Lord Percy commanded the party that was first
opposed by the Americans at Lexington. This illusion to the family-renown of
Chevy-Chace arose from the precipitate manner of his quitting the field of
battle, and returning to Boston.
:
From Boston, in his best array,
Great 'Squire, M'Fingal, took his way,
And, graced with ensigns of renown,
Steered homeward to his native town.
His high descent our herald, trace
To "See Fingal, an ancient Epic Poem, published as the work of Ossian, a
Caledonian Bard, of the third century, by James M'Pherson, a Scotch ministerial
scribbler."
Ossian's famed Fingalian race;
For though their name some part may lack.
Old Fingal spelt it with a Mac;
Which great M'Pherson, with submission,
We hope will add the next edition.
His fathers flourished in the Highlands
Of Scotia's fog-benighted islands;
Whence gained our 'Squire two gifts by right,
Rebellion and the Second-sight.
Of these the first, in ancient days,
Had gained the noblest palms of praise,
Against Kings stood forth, and many a crowned head
With terror (...) its might confounded;
Till rose a King with potent charm
His foes by goodness to disarm;
Whom every Scot and Jacobite
Strait fell in love with -- at first sight;
Whose gracious speech, with aid of pensions,
Hushed down all murmers of dissentions,
And with the sound of potent metal,
Brought all their blustering swarms to settle;
Who rained his ministerial mannas,
Till loud Sedition sung Hosannas;
The good Lords-Bishops and the Kirk
United in the public-work;
Rebellion from the northern regions,
With Bute and Mansfield swore allegiance,
And all combined to raze as nuisance,
Of church and state, the constitutions;
Pull down the empire on whose ruins
They meant to edify their new ones;
Enslave the Amer'can wildernesses,
And tear the provinces in pieces.
For these our 'Squire, among the valant'st,
Employed his time and tools and talents;
And in their cause, with manly zeal,
Used his first virtue to rebel;
And sound this new rebellion pleasing
As his old king destroying treason.
Nor less availed his optic slight,
And Scottish gift of second-sight.
No ancient sybil, famed in rhyme,
Saw deeper in the womb of time;
No block in old Dodona's grove,
Could ever more orac'lar prove.
Nor only saw he all that was,
But much that never came to pass;
Whereby all Prophets far out-went he,
Though former days produced a plenty:
For any man with half an eye,
What stands before him may espy;
But optics sharp it needs, I ween,
To see what is not to be seen.
As in the days of ancient fame
Prophets and poets were the same,
And all the praise that poets gain
Is but for what the invent and feign:
So gained our 'Squire his fame by seeing
Such things as never would have being.
Whence he for oracles was grown
The very "The Tripod was a sacred three-legged stool, from which the ancient
priests uttered their oracles."
tripod of his town.
Gazettes no sooner rose a lie in,
But strait he fell to prophesying;
Made dreadful slaughter in his course,
O'erthrew provincials, foot and horse;
Brought armies over by sudden pressings,
Of Hanoverians, Swiss and Hessians;
Feasted with blood his Scottish clan,
And hanged all rebels to a man;
Divided their estates and pelf,
And took a goodly share himself This prophecy, like some of the prayers of
Homer's heroes, was but half accomplished. The Hanoverians, etc. indeed, came
over, and much were they feasted with blood; but the hanging of all the Rebels,
and the dividing their estates, remain unfulfilled. This, however, cannot be
the fault of our Hero, but rather the British Minister, who left off the war
before the work was completed.
.
All this, with spirit energetic,
He did by second-sight prophetic.
Thus stored with intellectual riches,
Skilled was our 'Squire in making speeches,
Where strength of brains united centers
With strength of lungs surpassing Stentor's.
But as some muskets so contrive it,
As often to miss the mark they drive at,
And though well aimed at duck or plover,
Bear wide, and kick their owners over:
So fared our 'Squire, whose reasoning toil
Would often on himself recoil,
And so much injured more his side,
The stronger arg'ments he applied;
As old war elephants, dismayed,
Trod down the troops they came to aid,
And hurt their own side more in battle
Than less and ordinary cattle.
Yet at town-meetings every chief
Pinned faith on great M'Fingal's sleeve,
And, as he motioned all by rote
Raised sympathetic hands to vote.
The town, our Hero's scene of action,
Had long been torn by feuds of faction;
And as each party's strength prevails,
It turned up different heads or tails;
With constant ratt'ling, in a trice
Showed various sides, as often as dice:
As that famed weaver, Homers Odyssey
wife t'Ulysses,
By night each day's-work picked in pieces;
And though she stoutly did bestir her,
Its finishing was never the nearer:
So did this town with steadfast zeal
Weave cob-webs for the public weal,
Which when completed, or before,
A second vote in pieces tore.
They met, made speeches full long-winded,
Resolved, protested, and rescinded;
Addresses signed, then chose Committees,
To stop all drinking of (...)-teas One of the subjects of dispute, which
brought on the war was a tax laid upon tea, on its importation into the then
Colonies. And, therefore, one of the weapons of opposition, made use of by the
people, was a universal agreement, not to drink any Tea until the act should be
taken off. The Committees, here referred to, were called Committees of Safety;
part of their business was to watch over the (...) of the voluntary regulations
made by the people in the (...) towns.
;
With winds of doctrine veer'd about,
And turned all Whig-Committees out.
Meanwhile our Hero, as their head,
In pomp the tory faction led,
Still following, as the 'Squire should please,
Successive on, like files of geese.
And now the town was summoned, greeting,
To grand parading of town-meeting;
A show, that strangers might appall,
As Rome's grave senate did the Gaul.
High over the rout, on pulpit-stairs In country-towns the town-meeting is
generally held in the Church.
,
Like den of thieves in house of prayers
(That house, which loath a rule to break,
Served Heaven but one day in the week,
Open the rest for all supplies
Of news and politics and lies,)
^^ood forth the constable, and bore
His staff, like Merc'ry's wand of yore,
Waved potent round, the peace to keep,
As that laid dead men's souls to sleep.
Above, and near the Hermetic staff,
The Moderator is the name commonly given to the chairman or speaker of the
town-meeting. He is here seated in the pulpit.
moderator's upper half,
In grandeur over the cushion bowed,
Like Sol half-seen behind a cloud.
Beneath stood voters of all colors,
Whigs, tories, orators, and bawlers.
With every tongue in either faction,
Prepared like minute-men Minute-men were that part of the militia of our
country who, being drafted and enrolled by themselves, were prepared to march
at a minutes warning, where ever the public safety required.
, for action;
Where truth and falsehood, wrong and right,
Draw all their legions out to fight;
With equal uproar, scarcely rave
Opposing winds in Aeolus' cave;
Such Dialogues, with earnest face,
Held never Balaam with his ass.
With daring zeal and courage blessed
Honorius first the crowd addressed;
When now our 'Squire, returning late,
Arrived to aid the grand debate,
With strange sour faces sat him down,
While thus the orator went on:
" -- For ages blessed, thus Britain rose,
The terror of encircling foes;
Her heroes ruled the bloody plain;
Her conquering standard awed the main;
The different palms her triumphs grace,
Of arms in war, of arts in peace:
Unharrass'd by maternal care,
Each rising province flourished fair;
Whose various wealth with liberal hand,
By far o'er-paid the parent-land.
But though so bright her sun might shine,
'Twas quickly hasting to decline,
With feeble rays, too weak to assuage,
The damps, that chill the eve of age."
"For states, like men, are doomed as well
The infirmities of age to feel;
And from their different forms of empire,
Are seized with every deep distemper.
Some states high fevers have made head in,
Which naught could cure but copious bleeding;
While others have grown dull and dozy,
Or fixed in helpless idiocy;
Or turned demoniacs to belabour
Each peaceful habitant and neighbor;
Or vexed with hypocondriac fits,
Have broke their strength and lost their wits."
"Thus now while hoary years prevail,
Good Mother Britain seemed to fail;
Her back bent, crippled with the weight
Of age and debts and cares of state:
For debts she owed, and those so large
That twice her wealth could not discharge;
And now 'twas thought so high they would grown,
She Would break, and come upon the town To come upon the town, that is to become a
public charge. This remark will serve to explain many other allusions to
town-regulations in the course of this Poem.
;
Her arms, of nations once the dread,
She scarce could lift above her head;
Her deafen'd ears ('it was all their hope)
The final trump perhaps might open,
So long they would been in stupid mood,
Shut to the hearing of all good;
Grim Death had put her in his scroll,
Down on to the execution roll;
And Gallic crows, as she grew weaker,
Began to whet their beaks to pick her.
And now, her powers decaying fast,
Her grand climact'ric had she past,
And just like all old women else,
Fell in the vapors much by spells.
Strange whimsies on her fancy struck,
And gave her brain a dismal shock;
Her memory fails, her judgment ends;
She quite forgot her nearest friends;
Lost all her former sense and knowledge,
And fitted fast for Beth'lem college:
Of all the powers she once retained,
Conceit and pride alone remained.
As eve when falling was so modest
To fancy she should grow a goddess;
As madmen, straw who long have slept on,
Will style them, Jupiter, or Neptune:
So Britain, 'midst her airs so slighty,
Now took a whim to be almighty;
Urged on to desperate heights of frenzy,
Affirmed her own Omnipotency See the act, declaring that the King and
Parliament had "a right to bind the colonies in all cases whatsoever.
;
Would rather ruin all her race,
Than 'bate Supremacy an ace;
Assumed all rights divine, as grown
The church's head, like good pope Joan:
Swore all the world should bow and skip
To her almighty Goodyship;
Anath'matiz'd each unbeliever,
And vowed to live and rule for ever.
Her servants humor'd every whim,
And owned at once, her power supreme,
Her follies pleased in all their stages,
For sake of legacies and wages;
In "* The Parliament House is called by that name."
Stephen's Chapel then in state too
Set up her Golden calf to pray to,
Proclaimed its power and right divine,
And called for worship at its shrine,
And for poor Heretics to burn us
Bade North prepare his fiery furnace;
Struck bargains with the Romish churches
Infallibility to purchase;
Set wide for Popery the door,
Made friends with Babel's scarlet whore,
Joined both the matrons firm in clan;
No sisters made a better span.
No wonder then, ere this was over,
That she should make her children suffer,
She first without pretense of reason,
Claimed right whatever we had to seize on;
And with determined resolution,
To put her claims, in execution,
Sent fire and sword, and called it, Lenity,
Starved us, and christened it, Humanity.
For she, her case grown desperater,
Mistook the plainest things in nature;
Had lost all use of eyes or wits;
Took slavery for the Bill of Rights;
Trembled at whigs and deemed them foes,
And stopped at loyalty her nose;
Styled her own children, brats and caitiffs,
And knew not us from the Indian natives."
"What though with supplicating prayer
We begged our lives and goods she would spare;
Not vainer vows, with sillier call,
Elijah's prophets raised to Baal;
A worshipped stock, of god, or goddess,
Had better heard and understood us.
So once Egyptians at the Nile
Adored their guardian Crocodile,
Who heard them first with kindest ear,
And ate them to reward their prayer;
And could he talk, as kings can do,
Had made as gracious speeches too."
"Thus spite of prayers her schemes pursuing,
She still went on to work our ruin;
Annulled our charters of releases,
And tore our title-deeds in pieces;
Then signed her warrants of ejection,
And gallows raised to stretch our necks on:
And on these errands sent in rage,
Her bailiff, and her hangman, Gage General Gage, commander in chief of the
king's troops in North America, was appointed in 1773 governor and vice admiral
of Massachusetts, in the room of Hutchinson, who had been the most active agent
of the Minister, in somenting the disputes which brought on the war.

The character and conduct of Gage is described with great justice in the
subsequent part of this speech of Honorius.


,
And at his heels, like dogs to bait us,
Dispatched her Posse Comitatus."
"No state ever chose a fitter person,
To carry such a silly farce on.
As Heathen gods in ancient days
Received at second-hand their praise,
Stood imag'd forth in stones and stocks,
And deified in barber's blocks;
So Gage was chose to represent
The omnipotence of parliament.
And as old heroes gained, by shifts,
From gods, as poets tell, their gifts,
Our General, as his actions show
Gained like assistance from below,
By Satan graced with full supplies,
From all his magazine of lies.
Yet could his practice never impart
The wit, to tell a lie with art.
Those lies alone are formidable,
Where artful truth is mixed with fable;
But Gage has bungled often so vilely,
No soul could credit lies so silly;
Outwent all faith, and stretched beyond
Credulity's extremest end.
Whence plain it seems, though Satan once
O'erlook'd with scorn each brainless dunce,
And blund'ring brutes in Eden shunning,
Chose out the serpent for his cunning;
Of late he is not half so nice,
Nor picked assistants, 'cause they are wise.
For had he stood upon perfection,
His present friends had lost the election,
And fared as hard in the proceeding,
As owls and asses did in (...)."
"Yet fools are often dangerous enemies,
As meanest reptiles are most venomous;
Nor ever could Gage, by craft or prowess,
Have done a whit more mischief to us,
Since he began the unnatural war,
The work his masters sent him for."
"And are there in this freeborn land
Among ourselves, a venal band,
A dastard race, who long have sold
Their souls and consciences for gold;
Who wish to stab their country's vitals,
If they might heir surviving titles;
With joy behold our mischief brewing,
Insult and triumph in our ruin?
Priests, who if Satan should sit down
To make a Bible of his own,
Would gladly for the sake of mitres,
Turn his inspired and sacred writers;
Lawyers, who should he wish to prove,
His title to his old seat above,
Would, if his cause he would give'em fees in.
Bring writs of Entry sur dissesin,
Plead for him boldly at the session,
And hope to put him in possession;
Merchants, who for his kindly aid,
Would make him partner in their trade,
Hang out their signs with goodly show,
Inscribed with " Beelzebub and Co."
And judges who would list his pages,
For proper liveries and wages,
And who, as humbly cringe and bow,
To all his mortal servants now.
There are, and shame with pointing gestures,
Marks out the Addressers and Protesters The ADDRESSERS were those who
addressed General Gage with expressions of gratitude and attachment, on his
arrival with a fleet and army to subdue the colonies. The PROTESTERS were those
who protested against the measures of the first Congress, and the general
resolutions of the country.
:
Whom following down the stream of Fate,
Contempts ineffable await,
And public infamy forlorn,
Dread hate and everlasting scorn."
As thus he spoke, our 'Squire M'Fingal
Gave to his partisans a signal.
Not quicker rolled the waves to land,
When Moses waved his potent wand,
Nor with more uproar, than the Tories
Set up a general rout in chorus;
TOWN MEETING.


Laughed, hissed, hemmed, murmured, groaned,
Honorius now could scarce be heard*
Our Muse amid the increasing roar,
Could not distinguish one word more:
Though she sat by, in firm record
To take in short hand every word;
As ancient Muses wont, to whom
Old bards for depositions come;
Who must have writ 'em; for how else
Could they each speech verbatim tell's?
And though some readers of romances
Are apt to strain their tortured fances,
And doubt when lovers all alone
Their sad soliloquies do groan,
Grieve many a page with no one near 'em,
And naught but rocks and groves to hear 'em,
What sprite infernal could have tattled
And told the authors all they prattled;
Whence some weak minds have made objection,
That what they scribbled must be fiction;
It Is false, for while the lovers spoke,
The Muse was by with table book;
And, lest some blunder might ensue,
Echo stool clerk, and kept the cue.
And though the speech ben't worth a groat,
As usual, 'tisn't the author's fault,
But error merely of the prater,
Who should have talked to the purpose better;
Which full excuse, my critic-brothers,
May help me out as well as others;
And it is designed, though here it lurk,
To serve as preface to this work.
So let it be -- for now our 'Squire
No longer could contain his ire;
And rising 'midst applauding Tories,
Thus vented wrath upon Honorius.
Quoth he, "'It Is wondrous what strange stuff
Your Whigs-heads are compounded of;
Which force of logic cannot pierce
Nor syllogistic carte and tierce,
Nor weight of scripture or of reason,
Suffice to make the least impression.
Not heeding what ye raised contest on,
Ye prate, and beg or steal the question;
And when your boasted arguings fail,
Strait leave all reasoning off, to rail.
Have not our High-Church Clergy made it
Appear from scriptures, which ye credit,
That right divine from heaven, was lent,
To kings, that is, the Parliament,
Their subjects to oppress and teaze,
And serve the Devil when they please?
Did they not write, and pray, and preach,
And torture all the parts of speech;
About Rebellion make a pother,
From one end of the land to the other?
And yet gained fewer pros'lyte Whigs,
Than old "The stories of St. Anthony and his pig, and St. Austin's preaching
to fishes, are told in the Popish legends."
St. Anth'ny amongst the pigs;
And changed not half so many vicious
As Austin, when he preached to fishes;
Who thronged to hear, the legend tells,
Were edified and wagg'd their tails;
But scarce you would prove it, if you tried,
That ever one whig was edified.
Have ye not heard from "High-Church Clergymen, one at Boston, and one at New
York."
Parson Walter
Much dire presage of many a halter?
What warnings had ye of your duty
From our old Reverend "High-Church Clergymen, one at Boston, and one at New
York."
Sam. Auchmuty?
From priests of all degrees and metres,
TO our fag-end man poor "Peter's, a Tory-Clergyman in Connecticut, who after
making himself detestable by his inimical conduct, absconded from the contempt,
rather than the vengeance of his countrymen* and fled to England to make
complaints against that colony* Cooper, a writer, poet, and satyrist of the
same stamp, President of the college at New York; Seabury, a clergyman of the
same Province."
Person Peter's?
Have not our Cooper and our Seabury
Sung hymns, like Barak and old Deborah;
Proved all intrigues to set you free,
Rebellion against the powers that be;
Brought over many a scripture text
That used to wink at rebel sects;
Coax'd wayward ones to favor regents,
Or paraphrased them to obedience;
Proved every king, even those confessed
Horns of the Apocalyptic beast,
And sprouting from its noddles seven,
Ordained, as bishops are, by Heaven,
(For reasons sim'lar we are told,
That Tophet was ordained of old;)
By this lay-ordination valid
Becomes all sanctified and hallowed,
Takes patent out when Heaven has signed it,
And starts up strait the Lord's anointed?
Like extreme unction, that can cleanse
Each penitent from deadly sins,
Make them run glib, when oil'd by priest,
The heavenly read like wheels new greased,
Serve them like shoeball, for defenses
Against wear and tear of consciences:
So king's anointment cleans betimes,
Like fuller's earth, all spots of crimes;
For future knav'ries gives commissions,
Like Papists sinning under license.
For heaven ordained the origin,
Divines declare, of pain and sin;
Prove such great good they both have done us,
Kind mercy 'twas they came upon us:
For without pain and sin and folly
Man never were blessed, or wise, or holy;
And we should "See the Modern Metaphysical Divinity.
thank the Lord, it is so,
As authors grave wrote long ago.
Now Heaven its issues never brings
Without the means, and these are kings;
And he who blames when they announce ills,
Would counteract the eternal counsels.
As when the Jews, a murmuring race,
By constant grumblings fell from grace,
Heaven taught them first to know their distance
By famine, slavery, and Philistines;
When these could no repentance bring,
In wrath it sent them last a king,
So nineteen, it is believed, in twenty
Of modern kings for plagues are sent ye;
Nor can your cavillers pretend,
But that they answer well their end.
It Is yours to yield to their command,
As rods in Providence's hand;
And if it means to send you pain,
You turn your noses up in vain:
Your only way's in peace to bear it,
And make necessity a merit.
Hence sure perdition must await
The man who rises against the state,
Who meets at once the damning sentence,
Without one loop-hole for repentance;
Even though he gained the royal see,
And rank among the powers that be:
For hell is theirs, the Scripture shows,
Whoever the powers that be oppose,
And all those powers (I am clear that it is so)
Are damned forever, ex officio."
"Thus far our Clergy; but it is true,
We lacked not earthly reas'ners too.
Had I the "Virgil's Aeneid, 6th book, line 6 25."
Poet's brazen lungs
As sound-board to his hundred tongues,
I could not half the scribblers muster
That swarmed round Rivington The Editor of the Royal Gazette in New York; a
paper which answered very well to its title, it being filled with those
impositions and falsehoods, which are deemed necessary to the support of
Royalty, in any country where printing is tolerated.
in cluster;
Assemblies, Councilmen, forsooth;
Brush, Cooper, Wilkins, Chandler, Booth,
Yet all their arguments and sap'ence,
You did not value at three halfpence.
Did not our Massachusettensis 'See a course of essays, under the signature of
Massachusettensis.'

For your conviction strain his senses?
Scrawl every moment he could spare,
From cards and barbers and the fair;
Show clear as sun in noonday heavens,
You did not feel a single grievance;
Demonstrate all your opposition
Sprung from the "Committees of Correspondence are the foulest and most
venomous serpent, that ever issued from the eggs of sedition," etc.
Massachusettensis.
eggs of foul sedition;
Swear he had seen the nest she laid in,
And knew how long she had been sitting;
Could tell exact what strength of heat is
Required to hatch her out Committees;
What shapes they take, and how much longer's
The space before they grow to a Congress?
New white-wash'd Hutchinson, and varnished
Our Gage who'd got a little tarnish'd;
Made 'em new masks, in time no doubt,
For Hutchinson's was quite worn out;
And while he muddled all his head,
You did not heed a word he said.
Did not our grave "Attorney General of Massachusetts Bay, a Judge of
Admiralty, Gage's chief Advertiser and Proclamation-maker, author of a farce
called the Americans Rouzed, and of a great variety of essays on the
Ministerial side, in the Boston newspapers."
Judge Sewall hit
The summit of news paper wit?
Filled every leaf of every paper
Of Mills, and Hicks, and Mother Draper:
Drew proclamations, works of toil,
In true sublime, of scarecrow style;
Wrote farces too, against Sons of Freedom,
All for your good, and none would read 'em;
Denounced damnation on their frenzy,
Who died in Whig-impenitency;
Affirmed that Heaven would lend us aid,
As all our Tory writers said;
And calculated so its kindness,
He told the moment when it joined us.
"'It Was then belike, Honorius cried,
When you the public fast defied,
Refused to Heaven to raise a prayer.
Because you would no connections there:
And since with reverend hearts and faces,
To Governors you would made addresses,
In them who made you Tories, seeing
You lived and moved and had your being;
Your humble vows you would not breathe
To powers you would no acquaintance with."
"As for your fasts, replied our 'Squire,
What circumstance could fasts require?
We kept them not, but 'twas no crime;
We held them merely loss of time.
For what advantage firm and lasting,
Pray, did you ever get by fasting?
And what the gains that can arise
From vows and offerings to the skies;
Will Heaven reward with posts and fees,
Or send us Tea, as Consignees Alluding to the famous cargo of tea, which was
sunk in Boston Harbor, the Consignees of which were the tools of General Gage.
,
Give pensions, sal'ries, places, bribes,
Or choose us judges, clerks, or scribes,
Has it commissions in its gift,
Or cash to serve us at a lift?
Are acts of Parliament there made,
To carry on the Placeman's trade?
Or has it passed a single bill
To let us plunder whom we will?
And look our list of Placemen all over;
Did Heaven appoint our chief judge Oliver,
Fill that high bench with ignoramus;
Or has its councils by mandamus?
Who made that wit of "A proper emblem of his genius".
water gruel,
A Judge of Admiralty, Sewall?
And were they not mere earthly struggles,
That raised up Murray, say, and Ruggles?
Did Heaven send down, our pains to medicine,
That old simplicity of Edson;
Or by election pick out from us,
That Marshfield blund'rer Not. Ray Thomas:
Or had it any hand in serving
A Loring' Pepp'rell, Brown, or Erving?"
"Yet we have some saints, the very thing,
We'll put against the best you will bring.
For, can the strongest fancy paint
Than Hutchinson a greater saint?
Was there a parson used to pray
At times more reg'lar, twice a day;
As folks exact have dinners got,
Whether they have apetites or not?
Was there a zealot more alarming
Against puplic vice to hold forth sermon,
Or fixed at church, whose inward motion
Rolled up his eyes with more devotion?
What Puritan could ever pray
In Godlier tone, than Treas'rer "Treasurer of Massachusetts Bay, and one of
the Mandamus Council."
Gray,
Or at town-meetings speechify'ng,
Could utter more melodious whine,
And shut his eyes and vent his moan,
Like owl afflicted in the sun?
Who once sent home his canting rival,
Lord Dartmouth's self, might out-be-drivel."
"Have you forgot, Honorius cried,
How your prime saint the truth defied The detection of falsehood in Governor
Hutchinson, here alluded to, is a curious little history. It is told at large
in the Remembrancer, published by Almon, V. I.
,
Affirmed he never wrote a line,
Your charter'd rights to undermine;
When his own letters then were by,
That proved his message all a lie?
How many promises he sealed
To get the oppressive acts repealed;
Yet once arrived on England's shore,
Set on the Premier to pass no more?
But these are no defects, we grant,
In a right loyal Tory saint,
Whose Godlike virtues must with ease
Atone such venal crimes as these:
Or ye perhaps in Scripture spy
A new Commandment, "Thou shall lie;"
And if it be so (as who can tell?)
There Is no one sure ye keep so well."
"Quoth he, For lies and promise breaking
Ye need not be in such a taking,
For lying is, we know and teach,
The highest privilege of speech;
The universal Magna Charta,
To which all human race is party;
Whence children first, as David says,
Lay claim to 't in their earliest days;
The only stratagem in war
Our Generals have occasion for;
The only freedom of the press
Our politicians need in peace:
And it is a shame you wish to abridge us
Of these our darling privileges.
Thank Heaven, your shot have missed their aim,
For lying is no sin, or shame."
"As men last wills may change again,
Though drawn in name of God, Amen;
Besure they must have much the more,
Over promises as great a power,
Which, made in haste, with small inspection,
So much the more will need correction;
And when they have careless spoke, or penned 'em,
Have right to look 'em over and mend 'em;
Revise their vows, or change the text,
By way of codicil annexed,
Turn out a promise, that was base,
And put a better in its place.
So Gage, of late agreed, you know,
To let the Boston people go;
Yet when he saw, against troops that braved him,
They were the only guards that saved him,
Kept off that Satan of a Putnam General Putnam of Connecticut, who had gained
great reputation, as a Partizan officer, in the war before last, came forward
with activity in the beginning of the war of independence; but his age and
infirmities obliged him soon to quit the field.
,
From breaking in to maul and mutt'n him:
He Would too much wit such leagues to observe,
And shut them in again to starve."
"So Moses writes, when female Jews
Made oaths and vows unfit for use,
Their parents then might set them free
From that consc'entious tyranny:
And shall men feel that spir'tual bondage
Forever, when they grow beyond age;
Nor have power their own oaths to change?
I think the tale were very strange.
Shall vows but bind the stout and strong,
And let go women weak and young,
As nets enclose the larger crew,
And let the smaller fry creep through?
Besides, the Whigs have all been set on,
The Tories to affright and threaten,
Till Gage amidst his trembling fits,
Has hardly kept him in his wits;
And though he speak with art and finesse,
It Is said beneath duress per minas.
For we are in peril of our souls
From feathers, tar, and lib'rty-poles:
And vows extorted are not binding
In law, and so not worth the minding.
For we have in this hurly-burly
Sent off our consciences on furlow:
Thrown our religion over in form,
Our ship to lighten in the storm.
Nor need we blush your Whigs before;
If we have no virtue, you have no more."
"Yet black with sins, would stain a mitre,
Rail ye at crimes by ten tints whiter?
And stuffed with choler atrabilious,
Insult us here for peccadilloes?
While all your vices run so high
That mercy scarce could find supply:
While, should you offer to repent,
You Would need more fasting days than Lent,
More groans than haunted churchyard valleys,
And more confessions than broad-alleys Alluding to church-dicipline, where a
person is obliged to stand in the i will of the church, called the broad-alley,
name the offense of which he has been guilty, and ask pardon of his brethren.
.
I Will show you all at fitter time,
The extent and greatness of your crime,
And here demonstrate to your face,
Your want of virtue, as of grace,
Evinced from topics old and recent:
But thus much must suffice at present.
To the after portion of the day,
I leave what more remains to say;
When I Have good hope you will all appear,
More fitted and prepared to hear,
And grieved for all your vile demeanor:
But now it is time to adjourn for dinner."
END OF THE FIRST CANTO.
M'FINGAL: CANTO SECOND. The Town-Meeting, P. M.
THE Sun, who never stops to dine,
Two hours had passed the midway line;
And, driving at his usual rate,
Lashed on his downward car of state;
And now expired the short vacation,
And dinner done in epic fashion;
While all the crew beneath the trees,
Eat pocket-pies or bread and cheese;
Nor shall we, like old Homer, care
To versify the bill of fare.
For now each party, feasted well,
Thronged in, like sheep, at sound of bell,
With equal spirit took their places;
And meeting opened with three Oh yesses:
When first the daring Whigs to oppose,
Again the great M'Fingal rose,
Stretched magisterial arm amain,
And thus assumed the accusing strain.
"Ye Whigs attend, and hear, affrighted,
The crimes whereof ye stand indicted;
The sins and folly past all compass,
That prove you guilty, or non compos.
I leave the verdict to your senses,
And Jury of your consciences;
Which though they are neither good nor true,
Must yet convict you and your crew,
Ungrateful sons! a factious band,
That rise against your parent-land!
Ye viper race, that burst in strife,
The welcome womb that gave you life,
Tear with sharp fangs, and forked tongue,
The indulgent bowels, whence you sprung;
And scorn the debt of obligation,
You justly owe the British nation,
Which since you cannot pay, your crew
Affect to swear 'twas never due.
"Did not the deeds of England's Primate The persecutions of the English Church
under Archbishop Laud, are well known to have been the cause of the peopling of
New England.

First drive your fathers to this climate,
Whom jails, and fines, and every ill
Forced to their good against their will?
Ye owe to their obliging temper
The peopling your newfangled empire,
While every British act and canon
Stood forth, you causa sine qua non.
Did they not send you charters over,
And give you lands you owned before,
Permit you all to spill your blood,
And drive out heathen where you could;
On these mild terms, that, conquest won,
The realm you gained should be their own?
Or when of late, attacked by those,
Whom her connection made your foes The war of 1775, between the English and
the French was doubtless excited by circumstances foreign to the interests of
the colonies which now form the United States. The colonies, however, paid more
than their proportion of the expense, and the balance was repaid by the British
government, after the war.
,
Did they not then, distressed in war,
Send Generals to your help from far,
Whose aid you owned in terms less haughty,
And thankfully o'erpaid your quota?
Say, at what period did they grudge
To send you Governor or Judge,
With all their missionary crew The Missionaries were clergymen, ordained by
the Bishop of London, and settled in America. These in the Northern Colonies
were generally attached to the Royal cause.
,
To teach you law and gospel too?
Brought over all felons in the nation,
To help you on in population,
Proposed their Bishops to surrender,
And made their Priests a legal tender,
Who only asked, in surplice clad,
The simple tithe of all you had:
And now to keep all knaves in awe,
Have sent their troops to establish law,
And with gunpowder, fire, and ball,
Reform your people one and all.
Yet, when their insolence and pride
Have angered all the world beside,
When fear and want at once invade,
Can you refuse to lend them aid;
And rather risque your heads in fight,
Than gratefully throw in your mite?
Can they for debts make satisfaction,
Should they dispose their realm by auction;
And sell off Britain's goods and land all
To France and Spain by inch of candle?
Shall good king George, with want oppressed,
Insert his name in bankrupt list,
And shut up shop, like failing merchant,
That fears the bailiffs should make search in it;
With poverty shall princes strive,
And nobles lack whereon to live?
Have they not wrecked their whole inventions,
To feed their brats on posts and pensions,
Made even Scotch friends with taxes groan,
And picked poor Ireland to the bone;
Yet have on hand, as well deserving,
Ten thousand bastards left for starving?
And can you now, with conscience clear,
Refuse them an asylum here,
Or not maintain in manner fitting
These genuine sons of Mother Britain?
TO evade these crimes of blackest grain,
You prate of Liberty in vain,
And strive to hide your vile designs,
With terms abstruse, like school-divines.
"Your boasted patriotism is scarce,
Your country's love is but a farce:
And after all the proofs you bring,
We Tories know there is no such thing;
Our English writers of great fame
Prove public virtue but a name.
Has not "Ministerial Pensioners."
Dalrymple showed in print,
And "Ministerial Pensioners."
Johnson too, there is nothing in it?
Produced you demonstration ample,
From other's and their own example,
That self is still, in either faction,
The only principle of action;
The loadstone, whose attracting tether
Keeps the politic world together:
And, spite of all your double-dealing,
We Tories know it is so, by feeling.
"Who heeds your babbling of transmitting
Freedom to brats of your begetting,
Or will proceed as though there were a tie,
Or obligation to posterity?
We get 'em, bear 'em, breed and nurse;
What has post'rity done for us,
That we, lest they their rights should lose,
Should trust our necks to gripe of noose?
"And who believes you will not run?
You're cowards, every mother's son;
And should you offer to deny,
We Have witnesses to prove it by.
Attend the opinion first, as referee,
Of your old General, stout Sir Jeffery,
Who swore that with five thousand foot
He Would rout you all, and, in pursuit,
Run through the land as easily,
As camel through a needle's eye.
Did not the valiant Col'nel Grant
Against your courage make his slant,
Affirm your universal failure
In every principle of valor,
And swear no scamp'rers ever could match you,
So swift, a bullet scarce could catch you?
And will ye not confess in this,
A judge most competent he is,
Well skilled on runnings to decide,
As what himself has often tried?
'Twould not, methinks, be labor lost,
If you would sit down and count the cost;
And e're you call your Yankies out,
First think what work you have set about.
Have ye not roused, his force to try on,
That grim old beast, the British Lion?
And know you not that at a sup
He Is large enough to eat you up?
Have you surveyed his jaws beneath,
Drawn inventories of his teeth,
Or have you weighed in even balance
His strength and magnitude of talons?
His roar would turn your boasts to fear,
As easily as sour small-beer,
And make your feet from dreadful fray,
By native instinct, run away.
Britain, depend on it, will take on her
TO assert her dignity and honor,
And e're she would lose your share of pelf,
Destroy your country, and herself.
For has not North declared they fight
To gain substantial rev'nue by it,
Denied he would ever deign to treat,
'Till on your knees, and at his feet?
And feel you not a trifling ague,
From Van's Delenda est Carthago Alluding, as is supposed, to a speech in the
British Parliament, in which "delenda est Carthago" was applied to America.
?
For this, now Britain has come to it,
Think you she has not means to do it?
Has she not set to work all engines
To spirit up the native Indians,
Send on your backs a savage band,
With each a hatchet in his hand,
TO amuse themselves with scalping knives,
And butcher children and your wives;
That she may boast again with vanity,
Her English national humanity?
(For now in its primaeval sense,
This term, human'ty, comprehends
All things of which, on this side hell,
The human mind is capable;
And thus it is well, by writers sage,
Applied to Britain and to Gage.)
And on this work to raise allies
She sent her duplicate of Guys,
To drive at different parts at once, on
Her stout Guy Carleton and Guy Johnson;
To each of whom, to send again ye
Old Guy of Warwick were a ninny;
Though the dun cow he felled in war,
These kill-cows are his betters far.
"And has she not assayed her notes,
To rouse your slaves to cut your throats,
Sent over ambassadors with guineas,
To bribe your blacks in Carolinas?
And has not Gage, her missionary,
Turned many an Afric slave to a Tory,
And made the Amer'can Bishop's see grow,
By many a new-converted Negro?
As friends to gov'rment did not he
Their slaves at Boston late set free?
Enlist them all in black parade,
Set off with regimental red?
And were they not accounted then
Among his very bravest men?
And when such means she stoops to take,
Think you she is not wide awake?
As Eliphaz' good man in Job,
Owned numerous allies through the globe;
Had brought the The stones, and all the elements with thee
Shall ratify a strict consed'racy;
Wild beasts their savage temper shall forget,
And for a firm alliance with thee treat: etc.
BLACKMORE'S PARAPHRASE OF JOB.
stones along the street
To ratify a covenant meet,
And every beast from lice to lions,
To join in league of strict alliance:
Has she not cring'd, in spite of pride,
For like assistance, far and wide?
Was there a creature so despised,
Its aid she has not sought and prized?
Till all this formidable league rose
Of Indians, British troops, and Negroes,
And can you break these triple bands
By all your workmanship or hands?"
"Sir, quoth Honorius, we presume
You guess from past feats, what is to come,
And from the mighty deeds of Gage,
Foretell how fierce the war he will wage.
You, doubtless, recollected here
The annals of his first great year:
While wearying out the Tories' patience,
He spent his breath in proclamations;
While all his mighty noise and vapor
Was used in wrangling upon paper;
And boasted military fits
Closed in the straining of his wits;
While troops in Boston commons placed,
Laid naught but quires of paper waste;
While strokes alternate stunned the nation,
Protest, address, and proclamation;
And speech met speech, fib clash'd with fib,
And Gage still answered squib for squib.
"Though this not all his time was lost on,
He fortified the town of Boston;
Built breast-works that might lend assistance
To keep the patriots at a distance;
(For howsoe'er the rogues might scoff,
He liked them best the farthest off;)
Of mighty use and help to aid
His courage when he felt afraid;
And whence right off in manful station,
He Would boldly pop his proclamation.
Our hearts must in our bosoms freeze
At such heroic deeds as these."
"Vain, quoth our 'Squire, you will find to sneer
At Gage's first triumphant year;
For providence, disposed to teaze us,
Can use what instruments it pleases.
To pay a tax at Peter's wish,
His chief cashier was once a Fish;
An Ass, in Balaam's sad disaster,
Turned orator, and saved his master;
A goose placed sentry on his station
Preserved old Rome from desolation;
An English bishop's "See Bishop Atterbury's trial."
Cur of late
Disclosed rebellions against the state;
So Frogs croak'd Pharaoh to repentance,
And lice reversed the threatening sentence:
And Heaven can ruin you at pleasure,
By our scorned Gage, as well as Caesar.
Yet did our hero in these days
Pick up some laurel-wreathes of praise.
And as the statuary of Seville
Made his cracked saint an exc'llent devil;
So though our war few triumphs brings,
We gained great fame in other things.
Did not our troops show much discerning,
And skill your various arts in learning?
Outwent they not each native noodle
By far, in playing Yankey-Doodle YANKEY-DOODLE, as M'Fingal here relates, was
a native Air of New England, and was often played in derision by the British
troops, particularly on their march to Lexington. Afterward the captive army
of Burgoyne was obliged to march to this tune in the ceremony of piling their
arms, at Saratoga. In the course of the war it became a favorite air of
Liberty, like the present CA IRA of France. It is remarkable that after the
taking of the Bastile, and before the introduction of CA IRA, the Paris guards
played YANKEY-DOODLE.
;
Which, as 'twas your New England tune,
'Twas mavelous they took so soon?
And ere the year was fully through
Did not they learn to foot it too;
And such a dance as never was known,
For twenty miles on end led down? This is Lord Percy's modern Chevy-chace; in
which his lordship and his army were chased from Concord to Boston.

Was there a Yankey trick you knew,
They did not play as well as you?
The YANKY CHASE.


Did they not lay their heads together,
And gain your art to tar and feather,
When Col'nel Nesbitt through the town
In triumph bore the country-clown?
Oh, what a glorious work to sing
The vet'ran troops of Britain's king.
Advent'ring for the heroic laurel,
With bag of feathers and tar-barrel!
To paint the cart where culprits ride,
And Nesbitt marching at its side In the winter of 1774 and 1775, the British
army had been stimulated by their officers and the Tories to an ardent desire
to see hostitities commence. But the instigators wishing the Americans to be
the aggressors, used the following stratagem to complete their purpose.

On the first of May, 1775, the king's standard was to be erected at Worcester,
fifty miles from Boston, when Lieutenant Colonel Nesbitt immortalized himself
by executing this plan to promote the quarrel, and give the army an opportunity
of their desired revenge.

A soldier, according to his directions, sold an old rusty musket to a
countryman for three dollars, who brought vegetables to market. This could be
no crime in the market-man, who had an undoubted right to purchase, and bear
arms. He was, notwithstanding, immediately seized by Nesbitt, and conveyed to
the guard-house, where he was confined all night. Early the next morning they
stripped him naked, covere him with warm tar, and then with feathers, and
conducted him to the north end of the town, then to the south end, and as far
as Liberty-Tree, where they dismissed the man, through fear of the people, (who
by this time had collected in large numbers,) and made a retreat to their
barracks.

The party consisted of about thirty grenadiers of the 47th regiment with fixed
bayonets, 20 drums and fifes playing the rogue's march, headed by Nesbitt with
a drawn sword.

The magistrates of the town waited on General Gage with a complaint of this
outrage; he pretended disapprobation; but took no steps to censure the conduct
of Nesbitt, or to do justice to the man who had suffered the violence.


,
Great executioner and proud,
Like hangman high on Holborn road;
And over the bright triumphal car
The waving ensigns of the war!
As when a triumph Rome decreed,
For great Calig'la's valiant deed,
Who had subdued the British seas,
By gathering cockles from their base;
In pompous car the conqu'ror bore
His captived scallops from the shore,
Ovations gained his crabs for fetching,
And mighty feats of oyster-catching:
Over Yankies thus the war begun,
They tarr'd and triumphed over one;
And fought and boasted through the season,
With might as great, and equal reason.
"Yet thus tho skilled in victory toils,
They boast, not unexpert in wiles.
For gained they not an equal fame in
The art of secrecy and scheming;
In stratagems showed mighty force,
And moderniz'd the Trojan horse;
Played over again those tricks Ulyssean
In their famed Salem-expedition?
For as that horse, the Poets tell ye,
Bore Grecian armies in his belly;
Till, their full reckoning run, with joy
Their Sinon midwif'd them in Troy;
So in one ship was Leslie ^^ld
Crammed with three hundred men in hold,
Equipped for enterprise and sail,
Like Jonas stowed in womb of whale.
To Marblehead, in depth of night,
The cautious vessel winged her flight.
And now the sabbath's silent day
Called all your Yankies off to pray;
Removed each prying jealous neighbor,
The scheme and vessel fell in labor;
Forth from its hollow womb poured hast'ly
The Myrmidons of Col'nel Leslie:
Not thicker over the blackened strand
The "See Homer's Battle of the Frogs and Mice."
Frogs' detachment rushed to land,
Equipped by onset or surprise
To storm the entrenchment of the Mice.
Through Salem strait without delay,
The bold battalion took its way,
Marched over a bridge in open sight
Of several Yankies armed for fight,
Then without loss of time, or men,
Veer'd round for Boston back again;
And found so well their projects thrive,
That every soul got home alive.
"Thus Gage's arms did fortune bless,
With triumph, safety, and success:
But mercy is, without dispute,
His first and darling attribute;
So great, it far outwent and conquered
His military skill at Concord.
There when the war he chose to wage
Shone the benevolence of Gage;
Sent troops to that ill-omen'd place
O^ errands more of special grace,
And all the work he chose them for
Was to "See Gage's answer to Governor Trumbull."
prevent a civil war:
And for that purpose he projected
The only certain way to effect it,
To take your powder, stores, and arms,
And all your means of doing harms:
As prudent folks takes knives away,
Lest children cut themselves at play,
And yet, though this was all his scheme,
This war you still will charge on him;
And though he often has swore, and said it,
Stick close to facts, and give no credit.
Think you, he wished you would brave and beard him?
Why, 'twas the very thing that scared him.
He Would rather you should all have run,
Than stayed to fire a single gun.
And for the civil war you lament,
Faith, you yourselves must take the blame in it;
For had you then, as he intended,
Given up your arms, it must have ended.
Since that is no war, each mortal knows,
Where one side only gives the blows,
And the other bears 'em; on reflection
The most you will call it, is correction.
Nor could the contest have gone higher,
If you had never returned the fire;
But when you shot, and not before,
It then commenced a civil war.
Else Gage, to end this controversy,
Had but corrected you in mercy:
Whom mother Britain, old and wise,
Sent over the Col'nies to chastise:
Command obedience on their peril
Of ministerial whip and ferule;
And since they never could come of age,
Governed and tutored them by Gage.
Still more, that this was all their errand.
The army's conduct makes apparent.
What though at Lexington you can say
They killed a few they did not fancy,
At Concord then, with manful popping,
Discharged a round, the ball to open?
Yet when they saw your rebel-rout
Determined still to hold it out;
Did not they show their love to peace,
And wish, that discord strait may cease,
Demonstrate, and by proofs uncommon,
Their orders were to injure no man;
For did not every Reg'lar run In the ancient wars in America, the term REGULAR
was applied to British troops, to distinguish them from the Provincials, or new
levies of the country. At the commencement of the late war, the same terms of
distinction were used.

As soon as ever you fired a gun:
Take the first shot you sent them greeting,
As meant their signal for retreating;
And fearful if they staid to sport,
You might by accident be hurt,
Convey themselves with speed away
Full twenty miles in half a day;
Race till their legs were grown so weary,
They Would scarce suffice their weight to carry?
Whence Gage extols, from general hearsy,
The "Too much praise cannot be given to Lord Piercy, for his remarkable
activity through the whole day." Gage's Account of Lexington Battle.
great activ'ty of Lord Piercy;
Whose brave example led them on,
And spirited the troops to run;
And now may boast at royal levees
A Yanky-chace worth forty Chevys.
Yet you as vile as they were kind,
Pursued like tigers, still behind,
Fired on them at your will, and shut
The town, as though you would starve them out;
And with (...) ^^eposterous parade of military arrangement (...) the army
besieged." Gage's last grand Proclamation.
parade prepost'rous hedged
Affect to hold them there besieged;
(Though Gage, whom proclamations call
Your Gov'nor and Vice Admiral,
Whose power gubernatorial still
Extends as far as Bunker's Hill;
Whose admiralty reaches clever,
Near half a mile up Mystic river,
Whose naval force commands the seas,
Can run away whenever he please,)
Scared troops of Tories into town,
And burnt their hay and houses down,
And menaced Gage, unless he would flee,
To drive him headlong to the sea;
As once, to faithless Jews a sign,
The de'el turned hog-reeve, did the swine.
"But now your triumphs all are over;
For see from Britain's angry shore
With mighty hosts of valor join
Her How, her Clinton, and Burgoyne.
As comets through the affrighted skies
Pour baleful ruin, as they rise;
As Aetna with infernal roar
In conflagation sweeps the shore;
Or as "* He was a representative of Marshfield, and employed to carry their
famous town-resolves to Boston. He armed himself in a ridiculous military
array, as another Hudibras, pretending he was afraid he should be robbed of
them."
Abijah White, when sent
Our Marshfield friends to represent;
Himself while dread array involves,
Commissions, pistols, swords, resolves,
In awful pomp descending down,
Bore terror on the factious town:
Not with less glory and affright,
Parade these Generals forth to fight.
No more each Reg'lar "* This was a fact. Some British officers, soon after
Gage's arrival at Boston, walking on Bacon-Hill after sunset, were affrighted
by noises in the air (supposed to be the flying of bugs and beetles) which they
took to be the sound of bullets, and left the hill with great precipitation:
Concerning which they wrote terrible accounts to England of their being shot at
with airguns, as appeared by one or two letters, extracts from which were
published in the English papers."
Col'nel runs
From whizzing beetles, as air-guns,
Thinks horn-bugs bullets, or through fears
Muskitoes takes for musketeers;
Nor escapes, as though you gained allies
From Belzebub's whole host of flies.
No bug their warlike heart appalls;
They better know the sound of balls.
I hear the din of battle bray,
The trump of horror marks its way.
I see after the sack of cities,
The gallows strung with Whig-committees;
Your Moderators tric'd, like vermin,
And gate-posts graced with heads of Chairman;
Your Generals for wave-offerings hanging,
And ladders thronged with Priests haranguing.
What pill'ries glad the Tories' eyes
With patriot-ears for sacrifice!
What whipping-posts your chosen race
Admit successive in embrace,
BRITISH HEROISM.


While each bears off his crimes, alack!
Like Bunyan's pilgrim, on his back!
Where then, when Tories scarce get clear,
Shall Whigs and Congresses appear?
What rocks and mountains shall you call
To wrap you ever with their fall,
And save your heads in these sad weathers,
From fire and sword, and tar and feathers!
For lo, with British troops, tar-bright,
Again our Nesbitt heaves in sight!
He comes, he comes, your lines to storm,
And rigg your troops in uniform!
To meet such heroes, will ye brag,
With fury armed and feather-bag;
Who weild their missile pitch and tar,
With engines new in British war?
"Lo, where our mighty navy brings
Destruction on her canvas wings;
While through the deeps her potent thunder
Shall sound the alarm to rob and plunder!
As Phoebus first, so Homer speaks,
When he marched out to attack the Greeks,
Against mules sent forth his arrows fatal,
And slew the auxiliaries, their cattle;
So where our ships shall stretch the keel,
What conquered oxen shall they steal!
What heroes rising from the deep
Invade your marshalled hosts of sheep!
Disperse whole troops of horse, and pressing
Make cows surrender at discretion;
Attack your hens, like Alexanders,
And reg'ments rout of geese and ganders;
Or where united arms combine
Lead captive many a herd of swine!
Then rush in dreadful fury down
To fire on every seaport town;
Display their glory and their wits,
Fright unarmed children into fits,
And stoutly from the unequal fray,
Make many a woman run away!
And can ye doubt whenever we please
Our chiefs shall boast such deeds as these?
Have we not chiefs, transcending far
The old famed thunderbolts of war;
Beyond the brave romantic fighters,
Styled swords of death by novel-writers?
Nor in romancing ages ever rose
So terrible a tier of heroes,
From Gage, what flashes fright the waves!
How loud a blunderbuss is Graves Admiral Graves and Captain Wallace lay before
the town of Newport a long time, and by their "Deeds above heroic," merited all
the praises that the discerning M'Fingal has here bestowed upon them.
!
How Newport dreads the blustering sallies,
That thunder from our pop-gun, Wallace Admiral Graves and Captain Wallace lay
before the town of Newport a long time, and by their "Deeds above heroic,"
merited all the praises that the discerning M'Fingal has here bestowed upon
them.
!
While noise in formidable strains
Spouts from his thimble-full of brains!
I see you sink with awed surprise!
I see our Tory-brethren rise!
And as the sect'ries Sandimanian The religious sect of Sandimanians, have
singular ideas of the Millennium. Their political religion during the
Revolution was Toryism.
,
Our friends, describe their wished Millennium;
Tell how the world in every region
At once shall own their true religion;
For Heaven with plagues of awful dread
Shall knock all heretics of the head;
And then their church the meek in spirit,
The earth, as promised shall inherit,
From the dead wicked, as heirs-male,
And next remainder-men in tail:
Such ruin shall the Whigs oppress!
Such spoils our Tory friends shall bless!
While confiscation at command
Shall stalk in horror through the land,
Shall give your Whig estates away,
And call our brethren into play.
"And can ye doubt or scruple more,
These things are near you at the door?
Behold! for though to reasoning blind,
Signs of the times ye sure might mind,
And view impending fate as plain
As ye'd foretell a shower of rain.
"Has not Heaven warned you what must ensue,
And providence declared against you;
Hung forth its dire portents of war,
By "* Such stories of prodigies were at that time industriously propagated
among the Tory-party in various parts of New England, to terrify and intimidate
the superstitious."
signs and beacons in the air;
Alarmed old women all around
By fearful noises under ground;
While earth for many dozen leagues
Groaned with her dismal load of Whigs!
Was there a meteor far and wide
But mustered on the Tory-side?
A star malign that has not bent
Its aspect for the Parliament,
Foreboding your defeat and misery;
As once they fought against old Sisera?
Was there a cloud that spread the skies,
But bore our armies of allies?
While dreadful hosts of fire stood forth
'Mid baleful glimm'rings from the North It is said to be a fact, that in
America, about the commencement of the war, the aurora borealis appeared more
frequently than usual, and assumed more singular appearances.
;
Which plainly shows which part they joined,
For North's the minister, ye mind;
Whence often your quibblers in gazettes
On Northern blasts have strained their wits;
And think ye not the clouds no how
To make the pun as well as you?
Did there arise an apparition,
But grinn'd forth ruin to sedition?
A death-watch, but has joined our leagues,
And click'd destruction to the Whigs?
Heard ye not, when the wind was fair,
At night our or'tors in the air,
That loud as admiralty-libel,
Read awful chapters from the bible,
And death and Deviltry denounced,
And told you how you would soon be trounc'd?
I see, to join our conquering side
Heaven, earth, and hell at once allied!
See from your overthrow and end
The Tories paradise ascend;
Like that new world that claims its station
Beyond the final conflagration!
I see the day that lots your share
In utter darkness and despair;
The day of joy when North, our Lord,
His faithful favorites shall reward!
No Tory then shall set before him
Small wish of 'Squire, or Justice Quorum;
But before his unmistaken eyes
See Lordships, posts and pensions rise.
Awake to gladness then, ye Tories,
The unbounded prospect lies before us!
The power displayed in Gage's banners
Shall cut Amer'can lands to manors,
And over our happy conquered ground
Dispense estates and titles round.
Behold, the world will stare at new sets
Of home made See Hutchinson's and Oliver's letters.
earls in Massachusetts;
Admire, arrayed in ducal tassels,
Your Ol'vers, Hutchinsons, and Vassals;
See, joined in ministerial work,
His grace of Albany and York!
What Lordships from each carved estate,
On our New York Assembly wait!
What titled Members of the ministerial majority, in the New York Assembly;
Wilkins, a noted writer.
Jauncys, Gales and Billops;
Lord Brush, Lord Wilkins and Lord Phillips!
In wide-sleev'd pomp of godly guise,
What solemn rows of bishops rise!
Aloft a card'nal's hat is spread
Over punster President Cooper is a notorious punster; Vardell, author of some
poetical satires on the Sons of Liberty in New York, and royal professor in
king's college; Chandler and Auchmuty High-church and Tory writers of the
clerical order.
Cooper's reverend head!
In Vardell, that poetic zealot,
I view a lawn-bedizen'd prelate!
While mitres fall, as it is their duty,
On heads of Chandler and Auchmuty!
Knights, viscounts, barons, shall ye meet,
As thick as pavements in the street!
Even I, perhaps, Heaven speed my claim,
Shall fix a Sir before my name.
For titles all our foreheads ache;
For what blessed changes can they make!
Place reverence, grace and excellence
Where neither claimed the least pretense;
Transform by patent's magic words
Men, likest Devils, into Lords;
Whence commoners, to peers translated,
Are justly said to be created!
Now where commissioners ye saw
Shall boards of nobles deal you law
Long robbed comptrollers judge your rights,
And tide-waiters start up in knights!
While Whigs subdued in slavish awe,
Our wood shall hew, our water draw,
And bless that mildness, when past hope,
Which saved their necks from noose of rope.
For as to gain assistance we
Design their negroes to set free;
For Whigs, when we enough shall bang 'em,
Perhaps it is better not to hang 'em;
Except their chiefs; the vulgar knaves
Will do more good preserved for slaves."
"'It Is well, Honorius cried, your scheme
Has painted out a pretty dream.
We cannot confute (...) second sight;
We shall be slaves and you a knight:
These things must come: but I divine
They Will come not in your day, or mine.
But oh, my friends, my brethren, hear,
And turn for once the attentive ear.
Ye see how prompt to aid our woes,
The tender mercies of our foes;
Ye see with what unvaried rancour
Still for our blood their minions hanker,
Nor aught can fate their mad ambition,
From us, but death, or worse, submission.
Shall these then riot in our spoil,
Reap the glad harvest of our toil,
Rise from their country's ruin proud,
And roll their chariot wheels in blood?
And can ye sleep while high outspread
Hangs desolation over your head?
See Gage with inauspicious star
Has opened the gates of civil war;
When streams of gore from freemen slain,
Encrimson'd Concord's fatal plain;
Whose warning voice, with awful sound,
Still cries like Abel's, from the ground,
And heaven attentive to its call,
Shall doom the proud oppressor's fall."
"Rise then, ere ruin swift surprise,
To victory, to vengeance rise!
Hark how the distant din alarms!
The echoing trumpet breathes, to arms;
From provinces, remote afar,
The sons of glory rouse to war;
It Is freedom calls; the enraptured sound
The Apalachian hills rebound;
The Georgian shores her voice shall hear,
And start from lethargies of fear.
From the parched zone, with glowing ray,
Where pours the sun intenser day,
To shores where icy waters roll,
And tremble to the dusky pole,
Inspired by freedom's heavenly charms,
United nations wake to arms.
The star of conquest lights their way,
And guides their vengeance on their prey --
Yes, though tyrannic force oppose,
Still shall they triumph over their foes,
Till Heaven the happy land shall bless,
With safety, liberty, and peace."
"And ye whose souls of dastard mould,
Start at the brav'ry of the bold;
To love your country who pretend,
Yet want all spirit to defend;
Who feel your fancies so prolific,
Engend'ring vision'd whims terrific,
O'er-run with horrors of coercion,
Fire, blood, and thunder in reversion,
King's standards, pill'ries, confiscations,
And Gage's scarecrow proclamations,
With all the trumpery of fear;
Hear bullets whizzing in your rear;
Who scarce could rouse, if caught in fray,
Presence of mind to run away;
See naught but halters rise to view
In all your dreams (and dreams are true;)
And while these phantom's haunt your brains,
Bow down the willing neck to chains.
Heavens! are ye sons of sires so great,
Immortal in the fields of fate,
Who braved all deaths by land or sea,
Who bled who conquered to be free!
Hence! coward souls, the worst disgrace
Of our forefathers' valliant race;
Hie homeward from the glorious field;
There turn the wheel, the distaff wield;
Act what ye are, nor dare to stain
The warrior's arms with touch profane:
There beg your more heroic wives
To guard your children and your lives;
Beneath their aprons find a screen,
Nor dare to mingle more with men."
"As thus he said, the Tories' anger
Could now restrain itself no longer,
Who tried before by many a freak, or
Insulting noise to stop the speaker;
Swung the unoil'd hinge of each pew-door;
Their feet kept shuffling on the floor:
Made their disapprobation known
By many a murmer, hum, and groan,
That to his speech supplied the place
Of counterpart in thorough-base:
As bag-pipes, while the tune they breathe,
Still drone and grumble underneath;
Or as the famed Demosthenes
Harangu'd the rumbling of the seas,
Held forth with eloquence full grave
To audience loud of wind and wave;
And had a stiller congregation
Than Tories are to hear the oration.
But now the storm grew high and louder,
As nearer thund'rings of a cloud are,
And every soul with heart and voice
Supplied his quota of the noise;
Each listening ear was set on torture
Each Tory bell'wing out, to order:
And some, with tongue not low or weak,
Were clam'ring fast, for leave to speak;
The moderator, with great vi'lence,
The cushion thump'd with "Silence! silence!"
The constable to every prater
Bawled out, "Pray hear the moderator;"
Some called the vote, and some, in turn,
Were screaming high "Adjourn, adjourn."
Not chaos heard such jars and clashes
When all the el'ments fought for places.
Each bludgeon soon for blows was timed;
Each fist stood ready cocked and prim'd;
The storm each moment louder grew;
His sword the great M'Fingal drew,
Prepared in either chance to share,
To keep the peace, or aid the war.
Nor lacked they each poetic being,
Whom bards alone are skilled in seeing;
Plumed Victory stood perched on high,
Upon the pulpit-canopy,
To join, as is her custom tried,
Like Indians, on the strongest side;
The Destinies with shears and Distaff,
Drew near, their threads of life to twist off;
The Furies 'gan to feast on blows,
And broken heads or bloody nose;
When on a sudden, from without,
Arose a loud terrific shout;
And strait the people all at once heard
Of tongues an universal concert;
Like Aesop's times, as fable runs,
When every creature talked at once;
Or like the variegated gabble
That crazed the carpenters of Babel.
Each party soon forgot the quarrel,
And let the other go on parole;
Eager to know what fearful matter
Had conjured up such general clatter;
And left the church in thin array,
As though it had been lecture-day.
Our 'Squire M'Fingal straightway beckoned
The constable to stand his second,
And sallied forth with aspect fierce
The crowd assembled to disperse.
The moderator, out of view
Beneath a bench, had lain perdue;
Peeped up his head to view the fray,
Beheld the wranglers run away,
And, left alone, with solemn face,
Adjourned them without time or place.
END OF CANTO SECOND.
M'FINGAL: CANTO THIRD. The Liberty-Pole.
NOW armed with ministerial ire,
Fierce sallied forth our loyal 'Squire,
And on his striding steps attends,
His desperate clan of Tory friends;
When sudden met his angry eye,
A pole ascending through the sky,
Which numerous throngs of Whiggish race
Were raising in the marketplace;
Not higher schoolboys kites aspire,
Or royal mast or country spire,
Like spears at Brobdignagian tilting,
Or Satan's walking-staff in Milton;
And, on its top the flag unfurled,
Waved triumph over the prostrate world,
Inscribed with inconsistent types
Of liberty and thirteen stripes.
Beneath, the crowd* without delay,
The dedication-rights essay,
And gladly pay in ancient fashion,
The ceremonies of libation;
While briskly to each patriot lip
Walks eager round the inspiring flip: Flip is a liquor composed of beer, rum,
and sugar.

Delicious draught, whose powers inherit
The quintessence of public spirit!
Which whosoever tastes, perceives his mind
To nobler politics refined,
Or roused for martial controversy,
As from transforming cups of Circe;
Or warmed with Homer's nectar'd liquor,
That filled the veins of gods with ichor,
At hand for new supplies in store,
The tavern opes its friendly door,
Whence to and fro the waiters run,
Like bucket-men, at fires in town.
Then with three shouts that tore the sky,
It Is consecrate to Liberty;
To guard it from the attacks of Tories,
A grand committee culled of four is,
Who, foremost on the patriot spot,
Had brought the flip and paid the shot.
By this, M'Fingal, with his train,
Advanced upon the adjacent plain,
And fierce, with loyal rage possessed,
Poured forth the zeal that fired his breast.
"What mad-brain'd rebel gave commission,
To raise this May Pole of sedition!
Like Babel reared by bawling throngs,
With like confusion too of tongues,
To point at Heaven, and summon down
The thunders of the British crown?
Say, will this paltry pole secure
Your forfeit heads from Gage's power?
Attacked by heroes brave and crafty,
Is this to stand your ark of safety?
Or driven by Scottish lord and laddie,
Think ye to rest beneath its shadow?
When bombs, like fiery serpents, fly,
And balls move hissing through the sky,
Will this vile pole, devote to freedom,
Save like the Jewish pole in Edom,
Or like the brazen snake of Moses,
Cure your cracked skulls and battered noses?
Ye dupes to every factious rogue,
Or tavern-prating demagogue,
Whose tongue but rings, with sound more full,
On the empty drumhead of his skull;
Behold you not what noisy fools
Use you, worse simpletons, for tools?
For Liberty in your own by-sense
Is but for crimes a patent license;
To break of law the Egyptian yoke,
And throw the world in common stock,
Reduce all grievances and ills
To Magna Charta of your wills,
Establish cheats and frauds and nonsense,
Framed by the model of your conscience,
Cry justice down, as out of fashion,
And fix its scale of depreciation Alluding to the depreciation of the
continental paper-money. The declining value of this Currency was ascertained
and declared by Congress, in what was called a scale of depreciation. See more
of this subject in the last Canto.
,
Defy all creditors to trouble ye,
And pass new years of Jewish jubilee;
Drive judges out like Aaron's calves,
By jurisdiction of white staves,
And make the bar and bench and steeple,
Submit to our sovereign Lord, the People;
Assure each knave his whole assets,
By general amnesty of debts;
By plunder rise to power and glory,
And brand all property as Tory;
Expose all wares to lawful seizures
Of mobbers and monopolizers;
Break heads and windows and the peace,
For your own interest and increase;
Dispute and pray and fight and groan,
For public good and mean your own;
Prevent the laws, by fierce attacks,
From quitting scores upon your backs,
Lay your old dread, the gallows, low,
And seize the stocks your ancient foe;
And turn them as convenient engines
To wreak your patriotic vengeance;
While all, your claims who understand,
Confess they are in the owner's hand:
And when by clamors and confusions,
Your freedom's grown a public nuisance,
Cry, Liberty, with powerful yearning,
As he does, fire, whose house is burning,
Though he already has much more,
Than he can find occasion for,
While every dunce, that turns the plains,
Though bankrupt in estate and brains,
By this new light transformed to traitor,
Forsakes his plow, to turn dictator,
Starts an haranguing chief of Whigs,
And drags you by the ears like pigs.
All bluster armed with factious license,
Transformed at once to politicians;
Each leather-apron'd clown, grown wise,
Presents his forward face to advise,
And tattered legislators meet
From every work-shop through the street;
His goose the tailor finds new use in,
To patch and turn the constitution;
The Blacksmith comes with sledge and grate,
To iron-bind the wheels of state;
The quack forbears his patient's souse,
To purge the Council and the House;
The tinker quits his moulds and doxies,
To cast assembly men at proxies.
From dunghills deep of sable hue,
Your dirt-bred patriots spring to view,
To wealth and power and pension rise,
Like new winged maggots changed to flies;
And fluttering round in proud parade,
Strut in the robe or gay cockade.
See "* Ar -- d's perjuries at the time of his pretended bankruptcy, which was
the first rise of his fortune; and his curious lawsuit against a
brother-skipper, who had charged him with having caught the above mentioned
disease, by his connection with a certain African princess in the West Indies,
with its humorous issue, are matters, not I believe so generally known, as the
other circumstances of his public and private character."
Ar -- d quits, for ways more certain,
His bankrupt perj'ries for his fortune;
Brews rum no longer in his store,
Jocky and skipper now no more;
Forsakes his warehouses and docks,
And writs of slander for the pox,
And, purged by patriotism from shame,
Grows General of the foremost name.
"* M'Fingal having here inserted the names and characters of several great
men, whom the public have not yet fully detected, it is thought proper to omit
sundry paragraphs of his speech in the preseat edition."
Hiatus.

For in this ferment of the stream,
The dregs have worked up to the brim,
And by the rule of topsy-turvys,
The skum stands swelling on the surface.
You Have caused your pyramid to ascend,
And set it on the little end;
Like Hudibras, your empire's made,
Whose crupper had o'er-top'd his head;
You Have pushed and turned the whole world up-
Side down, and got yourselves a-top:
While all the great ones of your state,
Are crushed beneath the pop'lar weight;
Nor can you boast this present hour,
The shadow of the form of power.
For what is your Congress The author here, in a true strain of patriotic
censure, pointed out the principle defects in the first federal Constitution of
the United States; all which have been since removed in the New Constitution,
established in the year 1789. So that the prophecy below, You Will never have
sense enough to mend it, must be ranked among the other sage blunders of his
second-fighted hero.
, or its end?
A power to advise and recommend;
To call for troops, adjust your quotas
And yet no soul is bound to notice;
To pawn your faith to the utmost limit,
But cannot bind you to redeem it,
And when in want, no more in them lies,
Than begging of your State-Assemblies;
Can utter oracles of dread,
Like Friar Bacon's brazen head;
But should a faction ever dispute 'em,
Has never an arm to execute 'em.
As though you chose supreme dictators,
And put them under conservators;
You Have but pursued the self-same way,
With Shakespeare's Trinclo in the play,
"You shall be viceroys, here, it is true,
But we'll be viceroys over you."
What wild confusion hence must ensue,
Though common danger yet cements you;
So some wrecked vessel, all in shatters,
Is held up by surrounding waters,
But stranded, when the pressure ceases,
Falls, by its rottenness, to pieces.
And fall it must -- if wars were ended,
You Will never have sense enough to mend it;
But creeping on with low intrigues
Like vermin of an hundred legs,
Will find as short a life assigned
As all things else of reptile kind.
Your Commonwealth's a common harlot,
The property of every varlet,
Which now in taste and full employ,
All sorts admire, as all enjoy;
But soon a battered strumpet grown,
You Will curse and drum her out of town.
Such is the government you chose,
For this you bade the world be foes,
For this, so marked for dissolution,
You scorn the British constitution;
That constitution, formed by sages,
The wonder of all modern ages:
Which owns no failure in reality,
Except corruption and venality;
And only proves the adage just,
That best things spoiled, corrupt to worst:
So man, supreme in mortal station,
And mighty lord of this creation,
When once his corse is dead as herring,
Becomes the most offensive carrion,
And sooner breeds the plague, it is found,
Than all beasts rotting 'bove the ground.
Yet for this gov'rnment, to dismay us,
You Have called up Anarchy from Chaos,
With all the followers of her school,
Uproar and Rage and wild Misrule;
For whom this rout of Whigs distracted
And ravings dire of every cracked head;
These new-cast legislative engines
Of country-musters and conventions,
Committees vile of correspondence
And mobs, whose tricks have almost undone's;
While reason fails to check your course,
And loyalty's kicked out of doors,
And folly, like inviting landlord,
Hoists on your poles her royal standard.
While the king's friends in doleful dumps,
Have worn their courage to the stumps,
And leaving George in sad disaster,
Most sinfully deny their master.
What furies raged, when you in sea,
In shape of Indians drowned the tea The persons who destroyed the cargo of
tea, above referred to, were disguised in the habit of Indians.
,
When your gay sparks, fatigued to watch it,
Assumed the moggison and hatchet,
With wampum'd blankets hid their laces,
And, like their sweet-hearts, primed their faces:
While not a Red-coat dared oppose,
And scarce a Tory showed his nose;
While Hutchinson for sure retreat,
Maneuvered to his country seat,
And thence affrighted in the suds,
Stole off bare-headed through the woods!
Have you not roused your mobs to join,
And make Mandamus-men resign,
Called forth each duffil-dress'd curmudgeon,
With dirty trowsers and white bludgeon,
Forced all our Councils through the land,
To yield their necks to your command;
While paleness marks their late disgraces
Through all their rueful length of faces?
Have you not caused as woeful work
In loyal city of New York There were so many influential Tories in New York,
that they at first obtained a vote in favor of the Acts of Parliament, and
against the proceedings of the first Congress.
,
When all the rabble well cockaded,
In triumph through the streets paraded;
And mobb'd the Tories, scared their spouses,
And ransacked all the custom-houses,
Made such a tumult, bluster, jarring,
That 'mid the clash of tempests warring,
Smith's weathercock, with veers forlorn, William Smith, formerly a lawyer in
New York.

Could hardly tell which way to turn;
Burnt effigies of the Higher Powers,
Contrived in planetary hours,
As witches, with clay-images,
Destroy or torture whom they please;
'Till fired with rage, the ungrateful club
Spared not your best friend, Beelzebub,
O'er-look'd his favors, and forgot
The reverence due to his cloven foot;
And in the self-same furnace frying,
Burned him, and North, and Bute, and Tryon Tryon, being now dead, is probably
forgot. The reader must know that he was governor of New York, and a British
general during the war. He had the glory of burning the towns of Fairfield and
Norwalk, and of issuing many proclamations. The other personages that make up
this kettle of fish, Bute, Beelzebub, and North, are still living, and therefore
want no explanation.
?
Did you not in as vile and shallow way,
Fright our poor Philadelphian, Galloway began by being a flaming patriot. He
is one of the few men, who proved a traitor to his country, wrote against it,
and ran away.
Galloway,
Your Congress when the daring ribald
Belied, berated, and bescribbled?
What ropes and halters did you send,
Terrific emblems of his end,
Till, least he would hang in more than effigy,
Fled in a fog the trembling refugee?
Now rising in progression fatal,
Have you not ventured to give battle?
When treason chased our heroes troubled,
With rusty gun and leathern doublet,
Turned all stone-walls, and groves, and bushes,
To batt'ries armed with blunderbusses,
And with deep wounds, that fate portend,
Gaul'd many a Reg'lar's latter end,
Drove them to Boston as in jail,
Confined without main-prize or bail.
Were not these deeds enough betimes,
To heap the measure of your crimes,
But in this loyal town and dwelling,
You raise these ensigns of rebellion?
It Is done; fair Mercy shuts her door;
And Vengeance now shall sleep no more;
Rise then, my friends, in terror rise,
And wipe this scandal from the skies!
You Will see their Dagon, though well jointed,
Will sink before the Lord's anointed,
And like old Jericho's proud wall,
Before our ram's horns prostrate fall."
This said our 'Squire, yet undismayed,
Called forth the Constable to aid,
And bade him read in nearer station,
The riot-act and proclamation Reading the Riot-act has the same miraculous
effect in America as in England: it may convert any collection of men into a
riot, and is the tremendous prologue to any tragedy that may result from the
exercise of Martial Law.
;
Who, now advancing towered the ring,
Began, "Our sovereign Lord the King" --
When thousand clamorous tongues he hears,
And clubs, and stones affail his ears;
To fly was vain, to fight was idle,
By foes encompassed in the middle;
In stratagem his aid he found,
And fell right craftily to ground;
Then crept to seek an hiding place,
'Twas all he could, beneath a brace;
Where soon the conquering crew espied him,
And where he lurked, they caught and tied him.
At once with resolution fatal,
Both Whigs and Tories rushed to battle;
Instead of weapons, either band
Seized on such arms, as came to hand.
And as famed "* Ovid's Metamorphoses, Book xii."
Ovid paints the adventures
Of wrangling Lapithae and Centaurs,
Who at their feast, by Bacchus led,
Threw bottles at each other's head,
And these arms failing in their scuffles,
Attacked with hand-irons, tongs, and shovels:
So clubs and billets, staves and stones
Met fierce, encountering every sconce,
And covered over with knobs and pains
Each void receptacle for brains*
Their clamours rend the hills around,
And earth rebellows with the sound;
And many a groan increased the din
From broken nose and battered shin*
M'Fingal, rising at the word,
Drew forth his old militia sword;
Thrice cried, "King George," as erst in distre
Romancing heroes did their mistress,
And, brandishing the blade in air,
Struck terror through the opposing war.
The Whigs unsafe within the wind
Of such commotion shrunk behind.
With whirling steel around addressed,
Fierce through their thickest throng he pressed,
(Who rolled on either side in arch,
Like Red Sea waves in Israel's march)
And like a meteor rushing through,
Struck on their pole a vengeful blow.
Around, the Whigs, of clubs and stones
Discharged whole vollies in platoons,
That over in whistling terror fly,
But not a foe dares venture nigh.
And now, perhaps, with conquest crowned,
Our 'Squire had felled their pole to ground;
Had not some Power, a Whig at heart,
Descended down and took their part,
(Whether 'twere Pallas, Mars, or Iris,
It Is scarce worth while to make enquiries,)
Who at the nick of time alarming,
Assumed the graver form of Chairman;
Addressed a Whig, in every scene
The stoutest wrestler on the green,
And pointed where the spade was found,
Late used to fix the pole in ground,
And urged with equal arms and might
To dare our 'Squire to single fight " The learned reader will readily observe
the allusions in this scene to the single combat of Paris and Menelaus in
Homer, Aeneas and T^rnus in Virgil, and Michael and Satan in Milton."
.
The Whig thus armed, untaught to yield,
Advanced tremendous to the field;
Nor did M'Fingal shun the foe,
But stood to brave the desperate blow;
While all the party gazed suspended,
To see the deadly combat ended.
And Jove in equal balance weighed
The sword against the brandished spade,
He weighed; but lighter than a dream,
The sword flew up and kicked the beam.
Our 'Squire on tiptoe rising fair,
Lifts high a noble stroke in air,
Which hung not, but like dreadful engines
Descended on the foe in vengeance.
But ah! in danger with dishonor,
The sword perfidious fails its owner;
That sword, which often had stood its ground
By huge train-bands encompassed round A train band is a Captain's company in
the Militia.
,
Or on the bench, with blade right loyal,
Had won the day at many a trial,
Of stones and clubs had braved the alarms,
Shrunk from these new Vulcanian arms.
The spade so tempered from the sledge,
Nor keen nor solid harmed its edge,
Now met it from his arm of might
Descending with steep force to smite;
The blade snap'd short -- and from his hand
With rust embrown'd the glittering sand.
Swift turned M'Fingal at the view,
And called for aid the attendant crew,
In vain; the Tories all had run,
When scarce the fight was well begun;
THE COMBAT.


Their setting wigs he saw decreased,
Far in the horizon towered the west.
Amazed he viewed the shameful sight,
And saw no refuge but in flight:
But age unweildy checked his pace,
Though fear had winged his flying race;
For not a trifling prize at stake;
No less than great M'Fingal's back.
With legs and arms he worked his course,
Like rider that outgoes his horse,
And labored hard to get away, as
Old Satan In Milton.
struggling on through Chaos:
Till, looking back, he spied in rear
The spade armed chief advanced too near.
Then stopped and seized a stone that lay,
An ancient landmark near the way;
Nor shall we, as old Bards have done,
Affirm it weighed an hundred ton:
But such a stone as at a shift
A modern might suffice to lift.
Since men, to credit their enigmas,
Are dwindled down to dwarfs and pigmies;
And giants, exiled with their cronies,
To Brobdingnags and Patagonies.
But while our hero turned him round,
And stooped to raise it from the ground,
The deadly spade discharged a blow
Tremendous on his rear below:
His bent knee failed, and void of strength,
Stretched on the ground his manly length;
Like ancient oak o'er-turn'd he lay,
Or towers to tempests fallen a prey,
And more things else -- but all men know 'em,
If slightly versed in Epic Poem.
At once the crew, at this sad crisis,
Fall on, and bind him ere he rises,
And with loud shouts, and joyful soul,
Conduct him prisoner to the pole.
When now the mob in lucky hour,
Had got their enemies in their power,
They first proceed, by wise command,
To take the constable in hand.
Then from the pole's sublimest top
They speeded to let down the rope,
At once its other end in haste bind,
And make it fast upon his waistband,
Till, like the earth, as stretched on tenter,
He hung self balanced on his center.
Then upwards, all hands hoisting sail,
They swung him, like a keg of ale;
Till to the pinnacle so fair,
He rose like meteor in the air:
As "Socrates is represented in Aristophanes's Comedy of the Clouds, as hoisted
in a basket to aid contemplation,"
Socrates of old at first did
To aid philosophy get hoisted,
And found his thoughts flow strangely clear,
Swung in a basket in mid air:
Our culprit thus in purer sky,
With like-advantage raised his eye;
And looking forth in prospect wide
His Tory errors clearly spied,
And from his elevated station,
With bawling voice began addressing.
"Good gentlemen, and friends, and kin,
For Heaven's sake hear, if not for mine!
I here renounce the Pope, the Turks,
The King, the Devil, and all their works;
And will, set me but once at ease,
Turn Whig or Christian, what you please;
And always mind your laws as justly;
Should I live long as old Methus'lah;
I Will never join with British rage,
Nor help Lord North, or General Gage,
Nor lift my gun in future fights,
Nor take away your charter'd rights;
Nor overcome your new-raised levies,
Destroy your towns, nor burn your navies;
Nor cut your poles down while I Have breath,
Though raised more thick than hatchel teeth:
But leave king George and all his elves
To do their conquering work themselves."
This said, they lowered him down in state,
Spread at all points, like falling cat;
But took a vote first on the question,
That they would accept this full confession,
And to their fellowship and favor,
Restore him on his good behavior.
Not so, our 'Squire submits to rule,
But stood heroic as a mule.
"You Will find it all in vain, quoth he,
To play your rebel tricks on me.
All punishments the world can render,
Serve only to provoke the offender;
The will's confirmed by treatment horrid,
As hides grow harder when they are cur^^^d.
No man ever felt the halter draw,
With good opinion of the law;
Or held in method orthodox
His love of justice in the stocks;
Or failed to lose by sheriff's shears
At once his loyalty and ears.
Have you made Murray look less big,
Or smoked old Williams to a Whig?
Did our mobb'd This is the "Chief-Judge Oliver" of the first Canto, in whose
(...) the sagacious M Fingal perceives that Heaven had no hand. One ground of
the quarrel between the British government and the people of Massachusetts, was
the act by which the Judges of the Colony were rendered independent of the
Colony for their salary, as well as for their places; which was contrary to
ancient usage. When the people felt these particular acts of oppression from a
power three thousand miles distant, their only method of redress was, to
prevent any person from accepting an office, or from exercising its functions,
under such an act. This expedient had been successful in the case of the
Stamp Act a few years before; and the people now applied to Judge Oliver,
requesting him to resign an office, the new arrangement of which so manifestly
struck at the foundation of their liberty. The Judge promised to resign his
place; but afterward claimed that " highest privilege of speech," which
M'Fingal has so well vindicated in favor of General Gage.
Oliver quit his station,
Or heed his vows of resignation?
The TORY'S Day of JUDGMENT


Has Rivington Here again is an old acquaintance of the first Canto. His paper,
entitled The Royal Gazette, had, by a strange combination of circumstances,
obtained the name, through all the country, of The Lying Gazette It was on this
account that the people at a certain time sent a committee to take away his
types. But this measure was as ineffectual as those that were used with Murray,
Williams, Oliver, etc.
, in dread of stripes,
Ceased lying since you stole his types?
And can you think my faith will alter,
By tarring, whipping, or the halter?
I Will stand the worst; for recompense
I trust King George and Providence*
And when, our conquest gained, I come,
Arrayed in law and terror, home,
You Will rue the inauspicious morn,
And curse the day you ever were born,
In Job's high style of imprecations,
With all his plagues, without his patience."
Meanwhile, beside the pole, the guard
A Bench of Justice had prepared,
Where, sitting round in awful sort,
The grand Committee hold their court;
While all the crew, in silent awe,
Wait from their lips the lore of law.
Few moments, with deliberation,
They hold the solemn consultation,
When soon in judgment all agree,
And Clerk declares the dread decree;
"That 'Squire M'Fingal having grown
The vilest Tory in the town,
And now on full examination,
Convicted by his own confession,
Finding no tokens of repentance,
This Court proceed to render sentence:
That first the Mob a slip-knot single
Tie round the neck of said M'Fingal;
And in due form do tar him next,
And feather, as the law directs;
Then through the town attendant ride him,
In cart, with Constable beside him;
And having held him up to shame,
Bring to the pole from whence he came."
Forthwith the crowd proceed to deck,
With halter'd noose, M'Fingal's neck,
While he, in peril of his soul,
Stood tied half-hanging to the pole;
Then lifting high the ponderous jar,
Poured over his head the smoking tar:
With less profusion erst was spread
The Jewish oil on royal head,
That down his beard and vestments ran,
And covered all his outward man.
As when (so "* Claudian's Gigantomachia."
Claudian sings) the gods
And earth-born giants fell at odds,
The stone Enceladus in malice
Tore mountains up to throw at Pallas;
And as he held them over his head,
The river from their fountains fed,
Poured down his back its copious tide,
And wore its channels in his hide:
So from the high raised urn the torrents,
Spread down his side their various currents;
His flowing wig, as next the brim,
First met and drank the sable stream;
Adown his visage, stern and grave,
Rolled and adhered the viscid wave;
With arms depending as he stood,
Each cuff capacious holds the flood;
From nose and chin's remotest end,
The tarry icicles depend;
Till all overspread, with colors gay
He glittered to the western ray,
Like sleet-bound trees in wintry skies,
Or Lapland idol carved in ice.
And now the feather-bag displayed,
Is waved in triumph over his head,
And spread him over with feathers missive,
And down, upon the tar adhesive:
Not Maia's son, with wings for ears,
Such plumes around his visage wears;
Nor Milton's six-wing'd angel gathers,
Such superfluity of feathers.
Till all complete appears our 'Squire
Like Gorgon or Chimera dire;
Nor more could boast on "* Alluding to Plato's famous definition of Man, '
Animal bipes, implumis."
Plato's plan
To rank amid the race of man,
Or prove his claim to human nature,
As a two-legg'd, unfeather'd creature.
Then on the two-wheel'd car of state,
They raised our grand Duumvirate.
And as at Rome a like committee,
That found an owl within their city,
With solemn rites and sad processions,
At every shrine performed lustrations;
And lest infection should abound,
From prodigy with face so round,
All Rome attends him through the street,
In triumph to his country-seat;
The PROCESSION.


With like devotion all the choir
Paraded round our feathered 'Squire;
In front the martial music comes
Of horns and fiddles, fifes and drums,
With jingling sound of carriage bells,
And treble creak of rusted wheels;
Behind, the crowd in lengthened row,
With grave procession closed the show;
And at fit periods every throat
Combined in universal shout,
And hailed great Liberty in chorus,
Or bawled, Confusion to the Tories.
Not louder storm the welkin braves,
From clamors of conflicting waves;
Less dire in Lybian wilds the noise
When rav'ning lions lift their voice;
Or triumphs at town-meetings made,
On passing votes to reg'late trade Such votes were frequently passed at Town
meetings; the object of which was, to prevent the augmentation of prices on the
necessaries of life, and thus to obviate the effects of the depreciation of the
paper-money.
.
Thus having borne them round the town,
Last at the pole they set them down,
And towered the tavern take their way,
To end in mirth the festal day.
And now the Mob, dispersed and gone,
Left 'Squire and Constable alone.
The Constable, in rueful case,
Leaned sad and solemn over a brace,
And fast beside him, cheek by jowl,
Stuck 'Squire M'Fingal against the pole,
Glu'd by the tar, to his rear applied,
Like barnacle on vessel's side:
But though his body lacked physician,
His spirit was in worse condition.
He found his fears of whips and ropes,
By many a dram out-weigh'd his hopes.
As men in gaol without main-prize,
View every thing with other eyes;
And all goes wrong in church and state,
Seen through perspective of the grate:
So now M'Fingal's second-sight
Beheld all things in different light;
His visual nerve, well purged with tar,
Saw all the coming scenes of war.
As his prophetic soul grew stronger,
He found he could hold in no longer:
First from the pole, as fierce he shook,
His wig from pitchy durance broke.
His mouth unglu'd, his feathers fluttered,
His tarr'd skirts cracked, and thus he uttered:
"Ah, Mr. Constable, in vain
We strive against wind, and tide, and rain!
Behold my doom! this feathered omen
Portends what dismal times are coming,
Now future scenes before my eyes,
And second-sighted forms (...);
I hear a voice that calls away,
And cries the Whigs will win the day;
My beck'ning Genius gives command,
And bids us fly the fatal land;
Where, changing name and constitution,
Rebellion turns to Revolution,
While Loyalty, oppressed in tears,
Stands trembling for his neck and ears.
Go, summon all our brethren greeting,
To muster at our usual meeting.
There my prophetic voice shall warn 'em,
Of all things future that concern 'em,
And scenes disclose, on which, my friend,
Their conduct and their lives depend:
There I -- but first it is more of use,
From this vile pole to set me loose; --
Then go with cautious steps and steady,
While I steer home and make all ready."
END OF CANTO THIRD.
TORY PANDEMONIUM.


M'FINGAL: CANTO FOURTH. The Vision.
NOW night came down, and rose full soon
That patroness of rogues, the Moon,
Beneath whose kind, protecting ray,
Wolves, brute and human, prowl for prey.
The honest world all snored in chorus,
While owls, and ghosts, and thieves and Tories,
Whom erst the midday sun had awed,
Crept from their lurking holes abroad.
On cautious hinges, slow and stiller
Wide ope'd the great M'Fingal's "* Panditur interia domus omnipotentis Olympi,
Conciliumque vocat Divum pater atque hominum re^ Sideream in sedem." Lib. 10.
Aeneid.
cellar,
Where, shut from prying eyes in cluster,
The Tory Pandemonium muster.
Their chiefs all sitting round descried are,
On kegs of ale, and seats of cider;
When first M'Fingal, dimly seen,
Rose solemn from the turnip-bin.
Nor yet his "* -- His form had not yet lost
All its original brightness, (...) appeared
Less than Archangel ruined."
Milton.
form had wholly lost
The orig'nal brightness it could boast,
Nor less appeared than Justice Quorum,
In feathered majesty before 'em.
Adown his tar-streak'd visage clear
Fell glistening fast the indignant tear,
And thus his voice, in mournful wise,
Pursued the prologue of his sighs:
"Brethren and friends, the glorious band
Of loyalty in rebel land!
It was not thus you have seen me sitting
Returned in triumph from town-meeting,
When blustering Whigs were put to stand,
And votes obeyed my guiding hand,
And new commissions pleased my eyes;
Blessed days, but, ah, no more to rise!
Alas! against my better light
And optics sure of second-sight,
My (...) soul, in error strong,
Had faith in Hutchinson too long.
See what brave trophies still we bring
From all our battles for the king;
And yet these plagues, now past before us,
Are but our entering-wedge of sorrows.
I see, in glooms tempestuous, stand
The cloud impending over the land;
That cloud, which still beyond their hopes
Serves all our orators with tropes,
Which though from our own vapors fed,
Shall point its thunders on our head!
I see the Mob, beflipp'd in taverns,
Hunt us, like wolves, through wilds and caverns!
What dungeons rise to alarm our fears!
What horse-whips whistle round our ears!
Tar, yet in embryo in the pine,
Shall run, on Tories backs to shine;
Trees rooted fair in groves of sallows
Are growing for our future gallows;
And geese unhatch'd, when plucked in fray,
Shall rue the feath'ring of that day.
For me, before these fatal days,
I mean to fly the accursed place,
And follow omens, which of late
Have warned me of impending fate;
Yet passed unnotic'd over my view,
Till sad conviction proved them true;
As prophecies of best intent,
Are only heeded in the event*
For late in visions of the night
The gallows stood before my sight;
I saw its ladder heaved on end;
I saw the deadly rope descend;
And in its noose, that wavering swang,
Friend "* Malcolm was a Scotchman, Aid to Governor Tryon in his expedition
against the Regulators in North Carolina, where, in the engagement, he met with
the accident of the breeches here alluded to. He was afterward an
under-officer of the customs in Boston, where becoming obnoxious, he was
tarred, feathered, and half-hanged by the mob, about the year 1774. After this
he was neglected and avoided by his own party, and thinking his merits and
sufferings unrewarded, appeared equally malevolent against Whigs and Tories."

"The pretenses of the Highlanders to prophecy by second-sight are too well
known to need an explanation."


Malcolm hung or seemed to hang.
How changed from him, who bold as lion,
Stood Aid-de-Camp to Governor Tryon,
Made rebels vanish once, like witches,
And saved his life, but dropped his breeches.
I scarce had made a fearful bow,
And trembling asked him, "How do you do?"
When lifting up his eyes so wide,
His eyes alone, his hands were tied;
With feeble voice, as spirits use,
Now almost choked with gripe of noose;
"Ah, "* There is in this scene, a general allusion to the appearance and
speech of Hector's ghost, in the second book of the Aeneid."
fly, my friend! he cried; escape!
And keep yourself from this sad scrape;
Enough you have talked, and writ, and planned;
The Whigs have got the upper hand.
Dame Fortune's wheel has turned so short,
It plunged us fairly in the dirt;
Could mortal arm our fears have ended,
This arm (and shook it) had defended.
But longer now it is vain to stay;
See even the Reg'lars run away:
Wait not till things grow desperater,
For hanging is no laughing matter:
This might your grandsires' fortunes tell you on,
Who both were hanged the last rebellion;
Adventure then no longer stay,
But call your friends and run away.
For lo, through deepest glooms of night
I come to aid thy second sight,
Disclose the plagues that round us wait
And wake the dark decreees of Fate;
Ascend this ladder, whence unfurled
The curtain opes of to other world,
For here new worlds their scenes unfold,
Seen from this backdoor of the old That the gallows is the backdoor leading
from this to the other world, is a perfectly new idea in Epic Poetry; unless
the hint might have been taken from the rear-trumpet of Fame in Hudibras.
.
As when Aeneas risqu'd his life,
Like Orpheus vent'ring for his wife,
And bore in show his mortal carcass,
Through realms of Erebus and Orcus,
Then in the happy fields Elysian,
Saw all his embryon sons in vision:
As, shown by great archangel, Michael,
Old Adam saw the world's whole sequel,
And from the mount's extended space,
The rising fortunes of his race;
So from this stage shall thou behold,
The war its coming scenes unfold,
Raised by my arm to meet thine eye;
My Adam, thou, thine Angel, I.
But first my power for visions "* See Milton's Paradise Lost, Book II."
bright,
Must cleanse from clouds thy mental sight,
Remove the dim suffusions spread,
Which bribes and sal'ries there have bred;
And, from the well of Bute, infuse
Three genuine drops of Highland dews,
To purge, like euphrasy and rue,
Thine eyes, for much thou have to view.
"Now, freed from Tory darkness, raise
Thy head, and spy the coming days;
For lo, before our second-sight,
The Continent ascends in light;
From north to south, what gathering swarms,
Increase the pride of rebel arms!
Through every State our legions brave,
Speed gallant marches to the grave,
Of battling Whigs the frequent prize,
While rebel trophies stain the skies.
Behold, over northern realms afar Nothing less than the whole History of the
American War would be sufficient, completely to illustrate the merits of this
single paragraph. Malcolm, the gallows-taught prophet, in preparing the mind of
M'Fingal to contemplate, with proper intelligence, the various scenes that are
to rise successively to view in the course of the Vision, glances over the
Continent, and mentions in this passage the principal scenes of action, from
the expedition into Canada in 1775. to the capture of Lord Cornwallis in 1781.
The concluding part of his speech is therefore a kind of argument to this whole
book of Vision; in which the same objects are unfolded at large with their
attendant circumstances; in order that they may make a proper impression on the
elevated mind of the great M'Fingal. It is thus that our Poet, like Homer, in
his Iliad, seizes all occasions to do honor to his principal hero. By
supposing him already possessed of all natural and political knowledge that
could be obtained by mortal study and experience, he makes him, like Achilles,
capable of receiving instruction only by the agency of a super-terrestial
power. The advisers of Achilles descended from the skies, that of M'Fingal is
mounted toward the skies.
,
Extend the kindling flames of war!
See famed St. John's and Montreal,
Doomed by Montgom'ry's arm to fall!
Where Hudson with majestic sway,
Through hills disparted plows his way;
Fate spreads on Bemus' Heights alarms,
And pours destruction on our arms;
There Bennington's ensanguin'd plain,
And Stony-Point the prize of Wayne.
Behold near Del'ware's icy roar,
Where morning dawns on Trenton's shore,
While Hessians spread their Christmas feasts,
Rush rude these uninvited guests;
Nor aught avail, to Whigs a prize,
Their martial whiskers' grisly size.
On Princeton plains our heroes yield,
And spread in flight the vanquished field.
While fear to Mawhood's heels puts on
Wings, wide as worn by Maia's son.
Behold the Pennsylvanian shore,
Enriched with streams of British gore;
Where many a vet'ran chief in bed
Of honor rests his slumbering head,
And in soft vales in land of foes,
Their wearied virtue finds repose.
See plund'ring Dunmore's negro band
Fly headlong from Virginia's strand;
And far on southern hills, our cousins,
The Scotch M'Donalds, fall by dozens;
Or where King's Mountain lifts its head,
Our ruined bands in triumph led!
Behold over Tarleton's blustering train,
The Rebels stretch the captive chain!
Afar near Eutaw's fatal springs
Descending Victory spreads her wings!
Through all the land in various chase,
We hunt the rainbow of success;
In vain! their Chief, superior still;
Eludes our force with Fabian skill;
Or swift descending by surprise,
Like Prussia's eagle sweeps the prize."
"I looked, nor yet, oppressed with fears,
Gave credit to my eyes or ears,
But held the views an empty dream,
On Berkely's immaterial scheme;
And pond'ring sad with troubled breast
At length my rising doubts expressed.
"Ah, whither, thus by rebels smitten,
Is fled the omnipotence of Britain,
Or failed his usual guard to keep,
Gone traunting or fallen asleep "Cry aloud: for he is god; either he is
talking, or he is pursuing, or he is in a journey, or paradventure he sleeps.
-- And they cried aloud, and cut themselves after their manner with knives and
lancets." 1 Kings, chap. xviii. The other original subjects alluded to in the
subsequent part of this speech, may be found by the curious reader in the
various and immortal works mentioned by the poet in the text.
;
As Baal his prophets left confounded,
And bawling vot'ries gash'd and wounded?
Did not, retired to bowers Elysian,
Great Mars leave with her his commission,
And Neptune erst, in treaty free,
Give up dominion over the sea?
Else where is the faith of famed orations,
Address, debate, and proclamations,
Or courtly sermon, laureat ode,
And ballads on the watery God;
With whose high strains great George enriches
His eloquence of gracious speeches?
Not faithful to our Highland eyes,
These deadly forms of vision rise;
But sure some Whig-inspiring sprite
Now palms delusion on our sight.
I Would scarcely trust a tale so vain,
Should revelation prompt the strain,
Or Ossians ghost the scenes rehearse,
In all the melody of "* Erse, the ancient Scottish language, in which Ossian
wrote his poems."
Erse."
"Too long, quoth Malcolm, with confusion,
You Have dwelt already in delusion,
As Skeptics, of all fools the chief,
Hold faith in creeds of unbelief.
I come to draw thy veil aside
Of error, prejudice, and pride.
Fools love deception, but the wise
Prefer sad truths to pleasing lies.
For know those hopes can never succeed
That trust on Britain's breaking reed.
For weak'ning long from bad to worse,
By fatal atrophy of purse,
She feels at length with trembling heart,
Her foes have found her mortal part.
As famed Achilles, dipped by Thetis
In Styx, as sung in ancient ditties,
Grew all case-harden'd over like steel,
Invulnerable, save his heel,
And laughed at swords and spears, as squibs,
And all diseases, but the kibes;
Yet met at last his fatal wound,
By Paris' arrow nailed to the ground:
So Britain's boasted strength deserts
In these her empire's utmost skirts,
Removed beyond her fierce impressions,
And atmosphere of omnipresence;
Nor to these shores remoter ends,
Her dwarf omnipotence extends:
Whence in this turn of things so strange,
It Is time our principles to change.
For vain that boasted faith, which gathers
No perquisite, but tar and feathers,
No pay, but Whig's insulting malice,
And no promotion but the gallows.
I Have long enough stood firm and steady,
Half-hang'd for loyalty already:
And could I save my neck and pelf,
I Would turn a flaming whig myself,
And quit this cause, and course, and calling,
Like rats that fly from house that is falling.
But since, obnoxious here to Fate,
This saving wisdom comes too late,
Our noblest hopes already crossed,
Our sal'ries gone, our titles lost,
Doomed to worse sufferings from the mob,
Than Satan's surg'ries used on Job;
What more remains but now with slight,
What Is left of us to save by flight?
"Now raise thine eyes; for visions true
Again ascending wait thy view."
I looked; and clad in early light,
The spires of Boston rose to sight;
The morn over eastern hills afar,
Illumined the varying scenes of war.
Great How had long since in the lap
Of Loring taken out his nap,
And with the fun's ascending ray,
The cuckold came to take his pay.
When all the encircling hills around,
With instantaneous breast-works crowned,
With pointed thunders met his sight,
By magic reared the former night.
Each summit far, as eye commands,
Shone peopled with rebellious bands.
Aloft their towering heroes rise,
As Titans erst assailed the skies,
Leagued with superior force to prove,
The sceptered hand of British Jove.
Mounds, pil'd on hills, ascended fair
With batt'ries placed in middle air,
They raised like angry clouds on high,
Seemed like the artill'ry of the sky,
And hurled their fiery bolts amain,
In thunder on the trembling plain.
I saw along the prostrate strand,
Our baffled Generals quit the land,
And, swift as frighted mermaids, flee,
TO our boasted element, the sea!
Resign that long contested shore,
Again the prize of rebel-power,
And towered their town of refuge fly,
Like convict Jews, condemned to die.
Then towered the north, I turned my eyes,
Where Saratoga's height arise,
And saw our chosen vet'ran band,
Descend in terror over the land;
TO oppose their fury of alarms
Saw all New England wake to arms,
And every Yanky, full of mettle,
Swarm forth, like bees at sound of kettle.
Not Rome, when Tarquin rape'd Lucretia,
Saw wilder must'ring of militia.
Through all the woods and plains of fight,
What mortal battles filled my sight,
While British corses strewn the shore,
And Hudson ring'd his streams with gore!
What tongue can tell the dismal day,
Or paint the pa^^y-colour'd fray;
When yeomen left their fields afar,
To plow the crimson plains of war;
When zeal to swords transformed their shares,
And turned their pruning hooks to spears,
Changed tailor's geese to guns and ball,
And stretched to pikes the cobler's awl;
While hunters fierce, like mighty Nimrod,
Made on our troops a daring inroad;
And lev'lling squint on barrel round,
Brought our beau-officers to ground;
While rifle-frocks sent Generals cap'ring,
And redcoats shrunk from leathern apron,
And epaulette and gorget run
From whinyard brown and rusty gun:
While sunburned whigs in high command,
Rush furious on our frighted band,
And ancient beards and hoary hair,
Like meteors stream in troubled air.
With locks unshorne not Samson more
Made useless all the show of war,
Nor fought with asses jaw for rarity,
With more success or singularity.
I saw our vet'ran thousands yield
And pile their muskets on the field,
And peasant guards, in rueful plight,
March off our captur'd bands from fight;
While every rebel-fife in play,
To Yanky-doodle tuned its lay,
And like the music of the spheres,
Mellifluous soothed their vanquished ears.
"Alas, said I, what baleful star,
Sheds fatal influence on the war,
And who that chosen Chief of fame,
That heads this grand parade of shame?
"There see how Fate, great Malcolm cried,
Strikes with its bolts the towers of pride.
Behold that martial Macaroni,
Compound of Phoebus and Bellona,
With warlike sword and sing-song lay,
Equipped alike for feast or fray,
Where equal wit and valor join;
This, this is he, the famed Burgoyne:
Who pawned his honor and commission,
To coax the Patriots to submission,
By songs and balls secure obedience,
And dance the ladies to allegiance.
Often his camp muses he will parade,
At Boston in the grand blockade,
And well invoked with punch of arrack,
Hold converse sweet in tent or barrack,
Inspired in more heroic fashion,
Both by his theme and situation;
While Farce and Proclamation grand,
Rise fair beneath his plastic hand.
For genius swells more strong and clear
When close confined, like bottl'd beer:
So Prior's wit gained greater power,
By inspiration of the tower;
And Raleigh, fast in prison hurled,
Wrote all the History of the World:
So Wilkes grew, while in goal he lay,
More patriotic every day,
But found his zeal, when not confined,
Soon sink below the freezing point,
And public spirit, once so fair,
Evaporate in open air.
But thou, great favorite of Venus,
By no such luck shall cramp thy genius;
Thy friendly stars till wars shall cease,
Shall ward the ill fortune of release,
And hold thee fast in bonds not feeble,
In good condition still to scribble.
Such merit Fate shall shield from firing,
Bomb, carcass, langridge, and cold iron,
Nor trusts thy doubly laurell'd head,
To rude assaults of flying lead.
Hence in this Saratogue retreat,
For pure good fortune thou wilt be beat;
Not taken often, released or rescued,
Pass for small change, like simple Prescott General Prescott was taken and
exchanged several times during the war.
;
But captur'd there, as Fates befall,
Shall stand thy hand for it, once for all.
Then raise thy daring thoughts sublime,
And dip thy conquering pen in rhyme,
And changing war for puns and jokes,
Write new Blockades and Maids of Oaks. "* The Maid of the Oaks and the
Blockade of Boston, are farces -- the first acknowledged by General Burgoyne,
the other generally ascribed to him."
"
This said, he turned, and saw the tale
Had died my trembling cheeks with pale;
Then, pitying, in a milder vein
Pursued the visionary strain.
"Too much, perhaps, has pained your views
Of vict'ries gained by rebel crews;
Now see the deeds, not small nor scanty,
Of British Valor and Human'ty;
And learn from this auspicious sight,
How England's sons and friends can fight,
In what dread scenes their courage grows,
And how they conquer all their foes."
I looked and saw in wintry skies
Our spacious prison-walls arise,
Where Britons all their captives taming,
Plied them with scourging, cold, and famine;
Reduced to life's concluding stages,
By noxious food and plagues contagious.
Aloft the mighty Loring was a Refugee from Boston, made commissary of
prisoners by General How. The consummate cruelties practiced on the American
prisoners under Loring's administration almost exceed the ordinary powers of
human invention. If a simple statement of facts relative to this business were
properly drawn up and authenticated, it would furnish the friends of humanity
with new images of horror in contemplating the ravages of war; especially a war
that obtains the name of rebellion, and is carried on at a distance from the
eye of the nation. The conduct of the Turks in putting all prisoners to death
is certainly much more rational and humane, than that of the British army for
the three first years of the American war, or till after the capture of
Burgoyne. We except from this general observation, the conduct of Lord
Dorchester in Canada; he acted on the common principles of war, as now
practiced in Europe.
Loring stood,
And thrived, like " The notion of Vampyres is a superstition, that has greatly
prevailed in many parts of Europe. They pretend it is a dead body, which rises
out of its grave in the night, and sucks the blood of the living."
Vampyre, on their blood;
And counting all his gains arising,
Dealt daily rations out of poison.
Amid the dead that crowd the scene,
The moving skeletons were seen.
At hand our troops in vaunting strains,
Insulted all their wants and pains,
And turned on all the dying tribe,
The bitter taunt and scornful gibe:
And British officers of might,
Triumphant at the joyful sight,
Over foes disarmed with courage daring,
Exhausted all their tropes of swearing.
Around all stained with rebel blood,
Like Milton's lazar-house it stood,
Where grim Despair attended nurse,
And Death was Gov'rnor of the house.
Amazed, I cried, "Is this the way,
That British Valor wins the day?"
More had I said, in strains unwelcome,
Till interrupted thus by Malcolm:
"Blame not, quoth he, but learn the reason
Of this new mode of conquering treason.
It Is but a wise, politic plan,
To root out all the rebel-clan;
(For surely treason never can thrive,
Where not a soul is left alive:)
A scheme, all other chiefs to surpass,
And do the effectual work to purpose,
For war itself is nothing further,
But the art and mystery of murder,
And who most methods has essayed,
Is the best General of the trade,
And stands Death's Plenipotentiary,
To conquer, poison, starve, and bury.
This How well knew, and thus began,
(Despising Carleton's coaxing plan,
Who kept his prisoners well and merry,
And dealt them food like Commissary,
And by p^^^les and ransoms vain,
Dismissed them all to fight again:)
Whence his first captives, with great spirit,
He tied up for his troops to fire "* This was done openly and without censure
by the troops under Howe's command in many instances, on his first conquest of
Long Island."
at
And hoped they would learn, on foes thus taken,
To aim at rebels without shaking.
Then, wise in stratagem he planned
The sure destruction of the land,
Turned famine, sickness, and despair,
To useful enginry of war,
Instead of cannon, musket, mortar,
Used pestilence, and death, and torture,
Sent forth the smallpox, and the greater,
To thin the land of every traitor,
And ordered out with like endeavor,
Detachments of the prison-fever;
Spread desolation over their head,
And plagues in Providence's stead,
Performed with equal skill and beauty,
The avenging angel's tour of duty,
Brought all the elements to join,
And stars to assist the great design;
As once in league with Kishon's brook,
Famed Israel's foes they fought and took.
Then proud to raise a glorious name,
And em'lous of his country's fame,
He bade these prison-walls arise,
Like temple towering to the skies,
Where British Clemency renowned,
Might fix her seat on sacred ground;
(That virtue, as each herald says,
Of whole blood kin to Punic Faith;)
Where all her God-like powers unveiling,
She finds a grateful shrine to dwell in.
Then, at this altar for her honor,
Chose this High Priest to wait upon her,
Who with just rites, in ancient guises,
Presents these human sacrifices;
Great Loring, famed above all laymen,
A proper Priest for Lybian Ammon,
Who, while Howe's gift his brows adorns,
Had matched that deity in horns.
Here every day her vot'ries tell,
She more devours than the idol Bell;
And thirsts more rav'nously for gore,
Than any worshipped Power before.
That ancient Heathen Godhead, Moloch,
Often stayed his stomach with a bullock,
Or if his morning rage you would check first,
One child sufficed him for a breakfast.
But British Clemency, with zeal,
Devours her hundreds at a meal;
Right well by Nat'ralists defined,
A Being of carniv'rous kind:
So erst "* See Rabelais's History of the Giant Gargantua."
Gargantau pleased his palate,
And eat his pilgrims up for sallad.
Not blessed with maw less ceremonious,
The wide-mouthed whale that swallowed Jonas;
Like earthquake gapes, to death devote,
That open sepulcher, her throat;
The grave, or barren womb you would stuff,
And sooner bring to cry, enough;
Or fatten up to fair condition,
The lean-flesh'd kine of Pharaoh's vision.
"Behold her temple where it stands
Erect by famed Britannic hands;
It Is the Black-hole of Indian structure,
New-built with English architecture,
On plan, it is said, contrived and wrote,
By Clive, before he cut his throat;
Who ere he took himself in hand,
Was her High Priest in Nabob-land:
And when with conquering glory crowned,
He Would well enslaved the nation round,
With pitying heart the generous chief,
(Since slav'ry's worse than loss of life,)
Bade desolation circle far,
And famine end the work of war;
Thus loosed their chains, and for their merits,
Dismiss them free to worlds of spirits;
Whence they with gratitude and praise,
Returned "* Clive in the latter years of his life conceived himself
perpetually haunted by the ghosts of those, who were the victims of his British
humanity in the West Indies."
to attend his latter days,
And hovering round his restless bed,
Spread nightly visions over his head.
"Now turn, he cried, to nobler sights,
And mark the prowess of our fights:
Behold like whelps of British Lion,
The warriors, Clinton, Vaughan, and Tryon,
March forth with patriotic joy,
To ravish, plunder, burn, destroy.
Great Generals, foremost in the nation,
The journeymen of Desolation!
Like Samson's foxes each assails,
Let loose with firebrands in their tails,
And spreads destruction more forlorn,
Than they did in Philistine corn.
And see in flames their triumphs rise,
Illuming all the nether skies,
And streaming, like a new Aurora,
The western hemisphere with glory!
What towns, in ashes laid, confess
These heroes' prowess and success!
What blackened walls, or burning fane,
For trophies spread the ruined plain!
What females, caught in evil hour,
By force submit to British power,
Or plundered Negroes in disaster
Confess King George their lord and master!
What crimson corses strew their way
Till smoking carnage dims the day!
Along the shore, for sure reduction,
They wield their besom of destruction.
Great Homer likens, in his Ilias,
To dog star bright the fierce Achilles;
But never beheld in red procession,
Three dog-stars rise in constellation;
Or saw in glooms of evening misty,
Such signs of fiery triplicity,
Which far beyond the comet's tail,
Portend destruction where they sail.
Oh! had Great-Britain's god-like shore,
Produced but ten such heroes more,
They Would spared the pains, and held the station
Of this world's final conflagration,
Which, when its time comes, at a stand,
Would find its work all done to its hand!
"Yet though gay hopes our eyes may bless;
Indignant fate forbids success;
Like morning dreams our conquest flies,
Dispersed before the dawn arise."
Here Malcolm paused; when, pond'ring long,
Grief thus gave utt'rance to my tongue.
"Where shrink in fear our friends dismayed,
And all the Tories' promised aid?
Can none amid these fierce alarms
Assist the power of royal arms?"
"In vain, he cried, our king depends,
On promised aid of Tory-friends.
When our own efforts want success,
Friends ever fail as fears increase.
As leaves, in blooming verdure wove,
In warmth of summer cloth the grove,
But when autumnal frosts arise,
Leave bare their trunks to wintry skies;
So while your power can aid their ends,
You never can need ten thousand friends,
But, once in want by foes dismayed,
May advertise them stolen or strayed.
Thus, ere Great-Britain's strength grew slack,
She gained that aid, she did not lack,
But now in dread, imploring pity,
All hear unmoved her dol'rous ditty;
Allegiance wandering turns astray,
And faith grows dim for lack of pay.
In vain she tries by new inventions,
Fear, falsehood, flattery, threats, and pensions,
Or sends Commiss'ners with credentials The passage that here follows is to be
explained thus: In the year 1778, after the war had been raging three years,
and the capture of Burgoyne's army was known in England, the British government
concluded to give up all the objects for which the contest had been begun. It
accordingly passed an act repealing all the acts of which the Americans
complained, provided we would rescind our declaration of Independence, and
continue to be their colonies. The Ministry then sent over three Commissioners,
Mr. Johnstone, Mr. Eden, and Lord Carlisle. These commissioners began their
operations, and finished them by attempting to bribe individuals among the
members of the States, and of the army. This bait appears to have caught nobody
but Arnold. The petticoated politition, here mentioned, is a woman of
Philadelphia, (and a Lady of considerable distinction) through whose agency
they offered a bribe to Joseph Read, Governor of Pennsylvania.

Of promises and penitentials.
As, for his fare over Styx of old,
The Trojan stole the bough of gold,
And, lest grim Cerb'rus should make head,
Stuffed both his fobs with -- Medicatam frugibus offam. Aeneid, lib. vi. 410
gingerbread;
Behold at Britain's utmost shifts,
Comes Johnstone, loaded with like gifts,
To venture through the whiggish tribe,
To cuddle, wheedle, coax, and bribe,
Enter their lands, and on his journey,
Possession take, as King's Attorney,
Buy all the vassals to protect him,
And bribe the tenants not to eject him;
And call, to aid his desperate mission,
His petticoated politician,
While Venus, joined to' assist the farce,
Strolls forth ambassador for Mars.
In vain he strives, (for while he lingers,
These mastiffs bite his offering fingers,)
Nor buys for George and realms infernal,
One spaniel, but the mongrel Arnold.
'Twere vain to paint in vision'd show,
The mighty nothings done by How;
What towns he takes in mortal fray,
As stations, whence to run away;
What conquests gained in battles warm,
To us no aid, to them no harm;
For still the event alike is fatal,
Whatever success attend the battle,
If he gain victory, or lose it,
Who never had skill enough to use it;
And better 'twere, at their expense,
TO have drubb'd him into common sense,
And waked by bastings on his rear,
The activity, though but of fear,
By slow advance his arms prevail,
Like emblematic march of snail;
That, be Millenium nigh or far,
'Twould long before him end the war.
From York to Philadelphian ground,
He sweeps the mighty flourish round,
Wheeled circ'lar by excentric stars,
Like racing boys at Prison-bars Prison-bars is a kind of juvenile contest
sufficiently described here. How far our author is justifiable in comparing to
it the operaations of General How in America is left to be determined by those
military men who know the history of his maneuvers.
,
Who take the adverse crew in whole,
By running round the opp'site goal;
Works wide the traverse of his course,
Like ship in storms' opposing force,
Like mill-horse, circling in his race,
Advances not a single pace,
And leaves no trophies of reduction,
Save that of canker-worms, destruction.
Thus, having long both countries cursed,
He quits them, as he found them first,
Steers home disgraced, of little worth,
To join Burgoyne, and rail at North.
"Now raise thine eyes, and view with pleasure,
The triumphs of his famed successor."
I looked, and now by magic lore,
Faint rose to view the Jersey shore;
But dimly seen, in glooms arrayed,
For Night had poured her sable shade,
And every star, with glimm'rings pale,
Was muffled deep in evening veil:
Scarce visible in dusky night,
Advancing Red-coats Red Coats, a term for British troops.
rose to sight;
The lengthened train, in gleaming rows,
Stole silent from their slumbering foes,
Slow moved the baggage, and the train,
Like snails, crept noiseless over the plain;
No trembling soldier dared to speak,
And not a wheel presumed to creak.
My looks my new surprise confessed,
Till by great Malcolm thus addres'd:
"Spend not thy wits in vain researches;
It Is one of Clinton's moonlight marches.
From Philadelphia now retreating,
To save his anxious troops a beating,
With hasty stride he flies in vain,
His rear attacked on Monmouth plain:
With various chance the mortal fray
Is lengthened to the close of day,
When his tired bands, o'ermatch'd in sight,
Are rescued by descending night,
THE VISION.


He forms his camp with vain parade,
Till evening spreads the world with shade,
Then still, like some endangered spark,
Steals off on tiptoe in the dark;
Yet writes his king, in boasting tone,
How grand he marched by light of moon The circumstance of Genesis Clinton's
official dispatches, giving an a count of his marching from Monmouth by
moonlight, furnished a subject of some pleasantry in America; where it was
known that the moon had set two hours before the march began.
.
I see him, but thou can not; proud
He leads in front the trembling crowd,
And wisely knows, if danger's near,
'Twill fall the heaviest on his rear.
Go on great General, nor regard
The scoffs of every scribbling bard,
Who sing how Gods that fatal night
Aided by miracles your flight,
As once they used, in Homer's day,
To help weak heroes run away;
Tell how the hours at awful trial,
Went back, as erst on Ahaz' dial,
While British Joshua stayed the moon,
On Monmouth plains, for Ajalon:
Heed not their sneers and gibes so arch,
Because she set before your march.
A small mistake, your meaning right,
You take her influence for her light;
Her influence, which shall be your guide,
And over your Gen'ralship preside.
Hence still shall teem your empty skull,
With vict'ries when the moon's at full,
Which by transition yet more strange,
Wane to defeats before the change;
Hence all your movements, all your notions,
Shall steer by like excentric motions,
Eclipsed in many a fatal crisis,
And dimmed when Washington arises.
And see how fate herself turn traitor,
Inverts the ancient course of nature,
And changes manners, tempers, climes,
To suit the genius of the times.
See Bourbon forms his generous plan,
First guardian of the rights of man.
And prompt in firm alliance joins,
To aid the Rebels proud designs.
Behold from realms of eastern day,
His sails innum'rous shape their way,
In warlike line the billows sweep,
And roll the thunders of the deep.
See, low in equinoctial skies,
The Western Islands fall their prize.
See British flags o'ermatch'd in might,
Put all their faith in instant flight;
Or broken squadrons from the affray,
Drag slow their wounded hulks away.
Behold his chiefs in daring sets,
D'Estaings, De Grasses, and Fayettes,
Spread through our camps their dread alarms,
And swell the fears of rebel-arms.
Yet, ere our empire sink in night,
One gleam of hope shall strike the sight;
As lamps that fail of oil and fire,
Collect one glimmering to expire.
And lo where southern shores extend,
Behold our union'd hosts descend,
Where Charlestown views, with varying beams,
Her turrets gild the encircling streams.
There by superior might compelled,
Behold their gallant Lincoln yield General Lincoln was second in command in
the army of General Gates, during the campaign of 1777, which ended in the
capture of General Burgoyne. He is an officer of great reputation. He
afterward commanded the army in South Carolina, and was taken prisoner with
the garrison of Charlestown in 1780.
,
Nor aught the wreaths avail him now,
Plucked from Burgoyne's imperious brow.
See, furious from the vanquished strand,
Cornwallis leads his mighty band!
The southern realms and Georgian shore
Submit, and own the victor's power*
Lo, sunk before his wasting way,
The Carolinas fall his pray!
In vain embattl'd hosts of foes
Essay in warring strife to oppose.
See, shrinking from his conquering eye,
The rebel legions fall or fly;
And, withering in these torrid skies,
The northern laurel fades and dies This refers to the fortune of General
Gates, who after having conquered General Burgoyne in the North, was defeated
by Lord Cornwallis in the South.
.
With rapid force he leads his band
To fair Virginia's fated strand,
Triumphant eyes the traveled zone,
And boasts the southern realms his own.
Nor yet this hero's glories bright
Blaze only in the fields of fight;
Not Howe's human'ty more deserving,
In gifts of hanging, and of starving;
Not Arnold plunders more tobacco,
Or steals more negroes for Jamaica Arnold, in year 1781, having been converted
to the cause of G. Britain, commanded a detachment of their army in Virginia;
where he plundered many cargoes of negroes and of tobacco, and sent them to
Jamaica for his own account. How far the Lords Rodney and Cornwallis might have
excelled him in this kind of heroic achievements, time will perhaps never
discover.
;
Scarce Rodney's self, among the Eustatians,
Insults so well the laws of nations;
Even Tryon's fame grows dim, and mourning,
He yields the laurel crown of burning.
I see with rapture and surprise,
New triumphs sparkling in thine eyes;
But view, where now renewed in might,
Again the rebels dare the fight."
I looked, and far in southern skies,
Saw Green, their second hope, arise,
And with his small but gallant band,
Invade the Carolinian land.
As winds in stormy circles whirled
Rush billowing over the darkened world,
And, where their wasting fury roves,
Successive sweep the astonished groves.
Thus where he pours the rapid fight,
Our boasted conquests sink in night,
And wide over all the extended field,
Our forts resign, our armies yield,
Till, now regained the vanquished land,
He lifts his standard on the strand.
Again to fair Virginia's coast,
I turned and viewed the British host,
Where Chesapeak's wide waters lave
Her shores, and join the Atlantic wave.
There famed Cornwallis towering rose,
And scorned secure his distant foes;
His bands the haughty rampart raise,
And bid the royal standard blaze.
When lo, where ocean's bounds extend,
I saw the Gallic sails ascend,
With favoring breezes stem their way,
And crowd with ships the spacious bay.
Lo, Washington, from northern shores,
Over many a region, wheels his force,
And Rochambeau, with legions bright,
Descends in terrors to the fight.
Not swifter cleaves his rapid way,
The eagle cow'ring over his prey,
Or knights in famed romance that fly
On fairy pinions through the sky.
Amazed the Briton's startled pride,
Sees ruin wake on every side;
And, all his troops to fate consigned,
By instantaneous stroke Burgoyn,d.
Not Cadmus viewed with more surprise,
From earth embattl'd armies rise,
When, by superior power impelled,
He sowed with dragon's teeth the field.
Here Gallic troops in terror stand,
There rush in arms the Rebel band;
Nor hope remains from mortal fight,
Or that last British refuge, flight.
I saw, with looks downcast and grave,
The Chief emerging from his " Alluding to (...) well-known fact of
Cornwallis's taking up his residence in a cave, during the siege of York-Town."
cave,
(Where, chased like hare in mighty round,
His hunters eathed him first in ground,)
And, doomed by Fate to rebel sway,
Yield all his captur'd hosts a prey.
There, while I viewed the vanquished town,
Thus with a sigh my friend went on:
"Behold'st thou not that band forlorn,
Like slaves in Roman triumphs borne;
Their faces lengthening with their fears,
And checks distained with streams of tears,
Like dramatis personae sage,
Equipt to act on Tyburn's stage.
Lo these are they, who, lured by follies,
Left all and followed great Cornwallis;
True to their King, with firm devotion,
For conscience sake and hoped promotion,
Expectant of the promised glories,
And new Millennial state of Tories.
Alas! in vain, all doubts forgetting,
They tried the omnipotence of Britain;
But found her arm, once strong and brave,
So shortened now she cannot save.
Not more aghast departed souls,
Who risk'd their fate on Popish bulls,
And find St. Peter at the wicket
Refuse to countersign their ticket,
When driven to purgatory back,
With all their pardons in their pack:
Than Tories must'ring at their stations
On faith of royal proclamations.
As Pagan Chiefs at every crisis,
Confirmed their leagues by sacrifices,
And herds of beasts to all their deities,
Oblations fell at close of treaties:
Cornwallis thus, in ancient fashion,
Concludes his league of cap'tulation,
And victims, due to Rebel-glories,
Gives this sin offering up of Tories.
See where, relieved from sad embargo,
Steer off consigned a recreant cargo,
Like old scape-goats to roam in pain,
Marked like their great forerunner, Cain.
The rest, now doomed by British leagues,
To justice of resentful Whigs,
Hold worthless lives on tenure ill,
Of tenancy at Rebel-will,
While hovering over their forfeit persons,
The gallows waits his sure reversions.
"Thou too, M'Fingal, ere that day,
Shall taste the terrors of the affray.
See over thee hangs in angry skies,
Where Whiggish constellations rise,
And while plebeian signs ascend,
Their m^^-inspiring aspects bend,
That baleful Star, whose "* -- From his horrid hair
Shakes pestilence and war."
MILTON.
horrid hair
Shakes forth the plagues of down and tar!
I see the pole, that rears on high
Its flag terrific through the sky;
The Mob beneath prepared to attack,
And tar predestined for thy back!
Ah! quit, my friend, this dangerous home,
Nor wait the darker scenes to come;
For know that Fate's auspicious door,
Once shut to flight, is opened no more,
Nor wears its hinge by various stations,
Like Mercy's door in proclamations. The door of mercy is now open, and the
door of mercy will be shut, were phrases so often used in the proclamations of
the British Generals in America, that our Poet seems to fear that the hinge of
that door will be worn out. A general collection of these proclamations, or an
abridgement of them comprised in a few volumes, would form a curious system of
rhetorical tactics; which might be of great utility to the French emigrant
princes, and to those potentates of Europe, who are going to subdue the spirit
of Liberty in France.

"But lest thou pause, or doubt to fly,
To stranger visions turn thine eye:
Each cloud that dimmed thy mental ray,
And all the mortal mists decay;
See more than human Powers befriend,
And lo, their hostile forms ascend!
See towering over the extended strand,
The Genius of the western land,
In vengeance armed, his sword assumes,
And stands, like Tories, dressed in plumes.
See over yon Council seat with pride,
How Freedom spreads her banners wide!
There Patriotism with torch addressed,
To fire with zeal each daring breast!
While all the Virtues in their band*
Escape from yon unfriendly land,
Desert their ancient British station,
Possessed with rage of emigration.
Honor, his business at a stand,
For fear of starving quits the land;
And Justice, long disgraced at Court, had
By Mansfield's sentence been transported.
Victory and Fame attend their way,
Though Britain wish their longer stay,
Care not what George or North would be at,
Nor heed their writs of ne exeat;
But, fired with love of colonizing,
Quit the fallen empire for the rising."
I looked, and saw, with horror smitten,
These hostile powers averse to Britain.
When lo, an awful spectre rose,
With languid paleness on his brows;
Wan dropsies swelled his form beneath;
And ic'd his bloated cheeks with death;
His tattered robe exposed him bare,
To every blast of ruder air;
On two weak crutches propt he stood,
That bent at every step he trod,
Gilt titles graced their sides so slender,
One, "Regulation," the other, "Tender;"
His breast plate engraved with various dates,
"The faith of all the United States:"
Before him went his funeral pall,
His grave stood dug to wait his fall.
I started, and aghast I cried,
"What means this spectre at their side?
What danger from a Power so vain,
And why he joins that splendid train?"
"Alas, great Malcolm cried, experience
Might teach you not to trust appearance.
Here stands, as dressed by fierce Bellona,
The ghost of Continental Money,
Of dame Necessity descended,
With whom Credulity engendered.
Though born with constitution frail,
And feeble strength that soon must fail;
Yet strangely versed in magic lore,
And gifted with transforming power,
His skill the wealth Peruvian joins
With diamonds of Brazilian mines.
As erst Jove fell by subtle wiles
On Danae's apron through the tiles,
In showers of gold: his potent hand
Shall shed like showers through all the land.
Less great the magic art was reckoned,
Of tallies cast by Charles the Second,
Or Law's famed Missisippi schemes,
Or all the wealth of South Sea dreams.
For he of all the world alone
Owns the long-sought Philos'pher's Stone,
Restores the fab'lous times to view,
And proves the tale of Midas true.
Over heaps of rags he waves his wand,
All turn to gold at his command,
Provide for present wants and future,
Raise armies, victual, clothe, accoutre,
Adjourn our conquests by essoigne,
Check Howe's advance, and take Burgoyne,
Then make all days of payment vain,
And turns all back to rags again.
In vain great How shall play his part,
To ape and counterfeit his art;
In vain shall Clinton, more belated,
A conj'rer turn to imitate it;
With like ill luck and power as narrow,
They Will fare, like sor'cers of old Pharaoh,
Who though the art they understood
Of turning rivers into blood,
And caused their frogs and snakes t'exist,
That with some merit croak'd and hissed,
Yet never, by every quaint device,
Could frame the true Mosaic lice.
He for the Whigs his arts shall try,
Their first, and long their sole ally;
A patriot firm, while breath he draws,
He Will perish in his country's cause;
And when his magic labors cease,
Lie buried in eternal peace.
"Now view the scenes in future hours,
That wait the famed European Powers.
See where yon chalky cliffs arise,
The hill's of Britain strike your eyes:
Its small extension long supplied
By vast immensity of pride;
So small, that had it found a station
In this new world at first creation,
Or were by Justice doomed to suffer,
And for its crimes transported over,
We'd find full room for it in Lake Erie, or
That larger water-pond, Superior This supposition, so far as it respects Lake
Superior, is not exaggerated. That Lake is 2200 miles in circumference. It is
supposed by some, that in this passage the Author meant to ridicule the
misfortune of Lord North, in the loss of his sight. But as this Poem was
written and published, word for word, as in this edition, several years before
that misfortune happened, the Author must be innocent of the least design upon
any thing more than mental blindness. There is no allusion to any other eyes in
his lordship, than the eyes of his understanding, which were supposed, by some
people at that time to be wonderously dim; especially when considered as
belonging to the Argus of a great nation.
,
Where North, on margin taking stand,
Would not be able to spy land.
No more, elate with power at ease
She deals her insults round the seas;
See, dwindling from her height amain,
What piles of ruin spread the plain;
With mouldering hulks her ports are filled,
And brambles clothe the cultured field!
See on her cliffs her Genius lies,
His handkerchief at both his eyes,
With many a deep-drawn sigh and groan,
To mourn her ruin and his own!
While joyous Holland, France, and Spain,
With conquering navies rule the main,
And Russian banners, wide unfurled,
Spread commerce round the eastern world,
And see (sight hateful and tormenting)
The Amer'can empire, proud and vaunting,
From anarchy shall change her crasis,
And fix her power on firmer basis;
To glory, wealth, and fame ascend,
Her commerce rise, her realms extend;
Where now the panther guards his den,
Her desert forests swarm with men,
Her cities, towers and columns rise,
And dazzling temples meet the skies;
Her pines descending to the main,
In triumph spread the watery plain;
Ride inland lakes with favoring gales,
And crowd her ports with whit'ning sails;
Till to the skirts of western day,
The peopled regions own her sway."
Thus far M'Fingal told his tale,
When thundering shouts his ears assail,
And strait a Tory that stood centry,
Aghast, rushed headlong down the entry,
And with wild outcry, like magician,
Dispersed the residue of vision:
For now the Whigs intell'gence found
Of Tories must'ring under ground,
And with rude bangs and loud uproar,
'Gan thunder furious at the door.
The lights put out, each Tory calls
To cover him, on cellar walls,
Creeps in each box, or bin, or tub,
To hide his head from wrath of mob,
Or lurks, where cabbages in row
Adorned the side with verdant show;
M'Fingal deemed it vain to stay,
And risk his bones in second fray;
But chose a grand retreat from foes,
In lit'ral sense, beneath their nose.
The window then, which none else knew,
He softly opened and crept through,
And crawling slow in deadly fear,
By movements wise made good his rear.
Then, scorning all the fame of martyr,
For Boston took his swift departure;
Nor dared look back on fatal spot,
More than the family of Lot.
Not North, in more distressed condition,
Out-voted first by Opposition:
Nor good King George when that dire phantom
Of Independence comes to haunt him,
Which hovering round by night and day,
Not all his conj'rers yet can lay.
His friends, assembled for his sake,
He wisely left in pawn, at stake,
To tarring feath'ring, kicks, and drubs
Of furious, disappointed mobs,
And with their forfeit hides to pay
For him, their leader crept away.
So when wise Noah summoned greeting
All animals to general meeting;
From every side the members sent
All kinds of beasts to represent;
Each from the flood took care to embark,
And save his carcass in the ark;
But as it fares in state and church,
Left his constituents in the lurch.
FINIS.

