AN EXTRACT OF THE REV. MR. JOHN WESLEY's JOURNALS.

VOLUME I.

THE FIRST AMERICAN EDITION.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY HENRY TUCKNISS, NO. 25, CHURCH-ALLEY, AND SOLD BY
JOHN DICKINS, NO. 44, NORTH SECOND STREET, NEAR ^^CH STREET. M DCC XC^.

Advertisement.
TO such as have read the Rev. Mr. JOHN WESLEY's Journals, there needs no
commendation; but to such as are unacquainted with this valuable part of his
works, it may not be improper to observe, that they contain a very instructive
and useful fund of religious knowledge and diversified information. And while
the reader is highly entertained in the perusal of them, he will find they have
a strong tendency to raise in his mind the most beneficial ideas.

We would inform the purchasers, that it is our design to publish the whole of
these Journals, one volume at a time, which will make it easier both for them
and us.

Philadelphia, January 21st, 1795.
AN EXTRACT OF THE REV. MR. JOHN WESLEY's JOURNAL, From his embarking for
GEORGIA, to his Return to LONDON.
What shall we say then? -- That Israel which followed after the law of
righteousness, has not attained to the law of righteousness. -- Wherefore?
Because they sought it not by FAITH, but as it were by the works of the law.
Romans ix. 30, 31.
THE PREFACE.
1. IT was in pursuance of an advice given by bishop Tailor, in his Rules for
Holy Living and Dying, that about fifteen years ago, I began to take a more
exact account than I had done before, of the manner wherein I spent my time,
writing down how I had employed every hour. This I continued to do, wherever I
was, till the time of my leaving England. The variety of scenes which I then
passed through, induced me to transcribe from time to time, the more material
parts of my diary, adding here and there such little reflections as occurred to
my mind. Of this Journal thus occasionally compiled, the following is a short
extract: it not being my design to relate all those particulars which I wrote
for my own use only, and which would answer no valuable end to others, however
important they were to me.

2. Indeed I had no design or desire to trouble the world with any of my little
affairs; as it cannot but appear to every impartial mind, from my having been
so long as one that hears not, notwithstanding the loud and frequent calls I
have had to answer for myself. Neither should I have done it now, had not
Captain Williams's affidavit, published as soon as he had left England, laid an
obligation upon me, to do what in me lies, in obedience to that command of God,
Let not the good which is in you be evil spoken of. With this view I do at
length give an answer to every man that asks me a reason of the hop which is
in me, that in all these things, I have a conscience void of offense toward
God and toward man.

3. I have prefixed hereto a letter wrote several years since, containing a
plain account of the rise of that little society in Oxford, which has been so
variously represented. Part of this was published in 1733; but without my
consent or knowledge. It now stands as it was wrote; without any addition,
diminution, or amendment; it being my only concern herein, nakedly to declare
the thing as it is.

4. Perhaps my employments of another kind may not allow me to give any farther
answer to them who say all manner of evil of me, falsely, and seem to think
that they do God service. Suffice it, that both they and I shall shortly give
an account to him that is ready to judge the quick and the dead.

Oxford, Oct. 18, 1730. SIR,
THE occasion of my giving you this trouble is of a very extraordinary nature.
On Sunday last I was informed (as no doubt you will be e're long) that my
brother and I had killed your son: that the rigorous fasting which he had
imposed upon himself, by our advice, had increased his iliness and hastened his
death. Now though, considering it in itself, it is a very small thing with me
to be judged with man's judgment; yet as the being thought guilty of so
mischievous an imprudence might make me the less able to do the work I came
into the world for, I am obliged to clear myself of it, by observing to you, as
I have done to others, that your son left off fasting about a year and a half
since, and that it is not yet half a year since I began to practice it.

I must not let this opportunity slip of doing my part toward giving you a
juster notion of some other particulars, relating both to him and myself, which
have been industriously misrepresented to you.

In March last he received a letter from you, which not being able to read, he
desired me to read to him; several of the expressions whereof I perfectly
remember, and shall do, till I too am called hence. I then determined, that if
God was pleased to take a thy your son before me, I would justify him and
myself, which I now do with all plainness and simplicity, as both my character
and cause requires.

In one practice for which you blamed your son, I am only concerned as a
friend, not as a partner. That therefore I shall consider first: your own
account of it was in effect this, He frequently went into poor people's houses
in the villages about Holt, called their children together, and instructed them
in their duty to God, their neighbor, and themselves. He likewise explained to
them the necessity of private as well as public prayer, and provided them with
such forms as were best suited to their several capacities: and being well
apprized how much the success of his endeavors depended on their goodwill
toward him, to win upon their affections, he sometimes distributed among them
a little of that money which he had saved from gaming, and the other
fashionable expenses of the place. This is the first charge against him; upon
which all that I shall observe is, that I will refer it to your own judgment,
whether it be fitter to have a place in the catalogue of his faults, or of
those virtues, for which he is now numbered among the sons of God.

If all the persons concerned in "that ridiculous society, whose follies you
have so often heard repeated," could but give such a proof of their deserving
the glorious title The Holy Club.
which was once bestowed upon them, they would be contented that their lives
too should be counted madness, and their end thought to be without honor. But
the truth is, theft title to holiness stands upon much less stable foundations;
as you will easily perceive when you know the ground of this wonderful outcry,
which it seems, England is not wide enough to contain.

In November, 1729, at which time I came to refine at Oxford, your son, my
brother, myself, and one more, agreed to spend three or four evenings in in
week together Our design was to read over the classicks, which we had before
read in private, on common nights, and on Sunday some book in d^^^^ty. In the
summer following Mr. M. told me he had called at the gaol, to see a man who was
condemed for killing his wife; and that, from the talk he had with one of the
debtors, he verily believed it would do much good, if any one would be at the
pains of now and then speaking with them. This he so frequently repeated, that
on the 24th of Aug. 1730, my brother and I walked with him to the castle. We
were so well satisfied with our conversation there, that we agreed to go
thither once or twice a week; which we had not done long, before he desired me,
to go with him to see a poor woman in the town who was sick. In this employment
too when we came to reflect upon it, we believed it would be worth while to
spend an hour or two in a week, provided the minister of the parish, in which
any such person was, were not against it. But that we might not depend wholly
on our own judgments, I wrote an account to my father of our whole design;
withal begging that he, who had lived seventy years in the world, and seen as
much of it as most private men have ever done, would advise us whether we had
yet gone too far, and whether we should now stand still, or go forward?


Part of his answer, dated Sept. 21, 1730, was this:

"And now as to your own designs and employments, what can I say less of them
than valde proho: I greatly approve.
and that I have the highest reason to bless God, that he has given me two sons
together at Oxford, to whom he has given grace and courage to turn the war
against the world and the devil, which is the best way to conquer them. They
have but one more enemy to combat with, the flesh; which if they take care to
subdue by fasting and prayer, there will be no more for them to do, but to
proceed steadily in the same course, and expect the crown which fades not
away. You have reason to bless God, as I do, that you have so fast a friend as
Mr. M. who I see in the most difficult service is ready to break the ice for
you. You do not know of how much good that poor wretch who killed his wife has
been the providential occasion. I think I must adopt Mr. M. to be my son,
together with you and your brother Charles; and when I have such a ternion to
prosecute that war, wherein I am now Miles Emeritus, I shall not be ashamed,
when they speak with their enemies in the gate."

"I am afraid left the main objection you make against your going on in the
business with the prisoners may secretly proceed from flesh and blood. For who
can harm you if you are followers of that which is so good? And which will be
one of the marks by which the Shepherd of Israel will know his sheep at the
last day? -- Though if it were possible for you to suffer a little in the
cause, you would have a confessor's reward. You own none but such as are out of
their senses would be prejudiced against your acting in this manner; but say,
"these are they that need a physician." But what if they will not accept of
one, who will be welcome to the poor prisoners? Go on then in God's name in the
path to which your Savior has directed you, and that track wherein your father
has gone before you! For when I was an undergraduate at Oxford, I visited those
in the castle there, and reflect on it with great satisfaction to this day.
Walk as prudently as you can, though not fearfully, and my heart and prayers
are with you.

"Your first regular step is to consult with him (if any ^ucl. there be) who
has a jurisdiction over the prisoners, and the next is, to obtain the direction
and approbation of your bishop. This is Monday morning, at which time I shall
never forget you. If it be possible I should be glad to see you all three here
in the fine end of the summer. But if I cannot have that satisfaction, I am
sure I can reach you every day, though you were beyond the Indies. Accordingly,
to him, who is every where, I now heartily commit you, as being

Your most affectionate and joyful father."


In pursuance of these directions, I immediately went to Mr. Gerard, the Bishop
of Oxford's Chaplain, who was likewise the person that took care of the
prisoners when any were condemned to die (at other times they were left to
their own care): I proposed to him our design of serving them as far as we
could, and my own intention to preach there once a month, if the Bishop
approved of it. He much commended our design, and said he would answer for the
Bishop's approbation, to whom he would take the first opportunity of mentioning
it. It was not long before he informed me he had done so, and that his lordship
not only gave his permission, but was greatly pleased with the undertaking, and
hoped it would have the desired success.

Soon after a gentleman of Merton college, who was one of our little company,
which now consisted of five persons, acquainted us, that he had been much
rallied the day before for being a member of the holy club; and that it was
become a common topic of mirth at his college, where they had found out several
of our customs, to which we were ourselves utter strangers. Upon this I
consulted my father again, in whose answer were these words.

Dec. 1.
"This day I received both yours, and this evening in the course of our
reading, I thought I found an answer that would be more proper than any I
myself could dictate; though since it will not be easily translated, I send it
in the original. 2 Cor. vii. 4. (...). Great is my glorying of you. I am filled
with comfort. I, am exceeding joyful.
What would you be? Would you be angels? I question whether a mortal can arrive
to a greater degree of perfection, than steadily to do good, and for that very
reason patiently and meekly to suffer evil. For my part, on the present view of
your actions and designs, my daily prayers are, that God would keep you humble;
and then I am sure that if you continue to suffer for righteousness sake,
though it be but in a lower degree, the Spirit of God and of glory shall in
some good measure rest upon you. Be never weary of well-doing; never look back,
for you know the prize and the crown are before you. Though I can scarce think
so meanly of you, as that you would be discouraged with the crackling of thorns
under a pot. Be not high-minded, but fear. Preserve an equal temper of mind
under whatever treatment you meet with from a not very just or well-natured
world. Bear no more sail than is necessary, but steer steady. The less you
value yourselves for these unfashionable duties (as there is no such thing as
works of supererogation) the more all good and wise men will value you, if they
see your actions are of a piece; or, which is infinitely more, he by whom
actions and intentions are weighed, will both accept, esteem and reward you."


Upon this encouragement we still continued to meet together as usual; and to
confirm one another as well as we could, in our resolutions, to communicate as
often as we had opportunity (which is here once a week;) and do what service we
could to our acquaintance, the prisoners, and two or three poor families in the
town. But the outcry daily increasing, that we might show what ground there was
for it, we proposed to our friends, or opponents, as we had opportunity, these,
or the like questions:

I. Whether it does not concern all men of all conditions, to imitate him as
much as they can, who went about doing good?

Whether all Christians are not concerned in that command, "While we have time
let us do good to all men."

Whether we shall not be more happy hereafter, the more good we do now?

Whether we can be happy at all hereafter unless we have, according to our
power, Fed the hungry, clothed the naked, visited those that are sick, and in
prison, and made all these actions subservient to a higher purpose, even the
saving of souls from death?

Whether it be not our bounden duty always to remember, that he did more for
us, than we can do for him, who assures us, In as much as ye have done it unto
one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me?

II. Whether upon these considerations we may not, try to do good to our
acquaintance? Particularly, whether we may not try to convince them of the
necessity of being Christians?

Whether of the consequent necessity of being scholars?

Whether of the necessity of method and industry in order to either learning or
virtue?

Whether we may not try to persuade them to confirm and increase their
industry, by communicating as often as they can?

Whether we may not mention to them the authors whom we conceive to have wrote
best on those subjects?

Whether we may not assist them as we are able from time to time, to form
resolutions upon what they read in those authors, and to execute them with
steadiness and perseverance?

III. Whether, upon the considerations abovementioned, we may not try to do
good to those that are hungry, naked, or sick? In particular, whether if we
know any necessitous family, we may not give them a little food, clothes, or
physic, as they want?

Whether we may not give them, if they can read, a bible, common prayer book,
or Whole Duty of Man?

Whether we may not now and then enquire how they have used them; explain what
they do not understand, and enforce what they do?

Whether we may not enforce upon them more especially the necessity of private
prayer, and of frequenting the church and sacrament?

Whether we may not contribute what little we are able toward having their
children clothed and taught to read?

Whether we may not take care that they be taught their catechism, and short
prayers for morning and evening?

IV. Lastly, Whether upon the considerations abovementioned, we may not try to
do good to those that are in prison? In particular, Whether we may not release
such well-disposed persons as remain in prison (...) small sums?

Whether we may not lend smaller sums to those that are of any trade, that they
may procure themselves tools and materials to work with?

Whether we may not give to them who appear to want it most, a little money, or
clothes, or physic?

Whether we may not supply as many as are serious enough to read, with a bible,
and Whole Duty of Man?

Whether we may not, as we have opportunity, explain and enforce these upon
them, especially with respect to public and private prayer, and the blessed
sacrament?

I do not remember that we met with any person who answered any of these
questions in the negative, or who even doubted, whether it were not lawful to
apply to this use that time and money, which we should else have spent in other
diversions. But several we met with who increased our little stock of money for
the prisoners and the poor, by subscribing something quarterly to it; so that
the more persons we proposed our designs to, the more we were confirmed in the
belief of their innocence, and the more determined to pursue them in spite of
the ridicule, which increased fast upon us during the winter. However, in
spring I thought it could not be improper to desire farther instructions from
those, who were wiser and better than ourselves; and accordingly (o^ May 18,
1731) I wrote a particular account of all our proceedings to a clergyman of
known wisdom and integrity. After having informed him of all the branches of
our design, as clearly and simply a^ I could, I next acquainted him with the
success it had met with in the following words: -- "Almost as soon as we had
made our first attempts this way, some of the men of wit in Christ church
entered the lift against us, and between mirth and anger made a pretty many
reflections upon the sacramentarians, as they were pleased to call us. Soon
after their allies at Merton changed our title, and did us the honor of ^ling
us The Holy Club. But most of them being persons of wellknown characters, they
had not the good fortune to gain any proselytes from the sacrament, till a
gentleman eminent for learning, and well esteemed for piety, joining them, told
his nephew, that if he dared to go to the weekly communion any longer, he would
immediately turn him out of doors. That argument indeed had no success; the
young gentleman communicated next week; upon which his uncle having again tried
to convince him that he was in the wrong way, by shaking him by the throat to
no purpose, changed his method, and by mildness, prevailed upon him to absent
from it the Sunday following, as he has done five Sundays in six ever since.
This much delighted our gay opponents, who increased their number apace,
especially when shortly after one of the seniors of the college having been
with the doctor, upon his return from him, sent for two young gentlemen
severally, who had communicated weekly for some time; and was so successful in
his exhortations, that for the future they promised to do it, only three times
a year. About this time there was a meeting (as one who was present at it
informed your son) of several of the officers and seniors of the college,
wherein it was consulted what would be the speediest way to stop the progress
of enthusiasm in it. The result we know not, only it was soon publicly
reported, that Dr. --, and the censors were going to blow up the godly club.
This was now our common title, though we were sometimes dignified with that of
the enthusiasts, or the reforming club."

Part of the answer I received was as follows:

" Good Sir,
A pretty while after the date, yours came to my hand. I waved my answer till I
had an opportunity of consulting your father, who upon all accounts is a more
proper judge of the affair than I am. But I could never find a fit occasion for
it. As to my own sense of the matter, I confess, I cannot but heartily approve
of that serious and religious turn of mind that prompts you and your associates
to those pious and charitable offices; and can have no notions of that man's
religion or concern for the honor of the university, that opposes you as far
as your design respects the colleges. I should be loath to send a son of mine to
any seminary, where his conversing with virtuous young men, whose professed
design of meeting together at proper times, was to assist each other in forming
good resolutions, and encouraging one another to execute them with constancy
and steadiness, was inconsistent with any received maxims or rules of life
among the members. As to the other branch of your design, as the town is
divided into parishes, each of which has its proper incumbent, and as there is
probably an ecclesiastic, who has the spiritual charge of the prisoners,
prudence may direct you to consult them: for though I dare not say you would be
too officions, should you of your own mere motion seek out the persons that
want your instructions and charitable contributions, yet should you have the
concurrence of their proper pastor your good offices would be more regular, and
less liable to censure."

Your son was now at Holt; however, we (...) ed to meet at our usual times,
though our little (...) went on but heavily without him. But at our return from
Lincolnshire, in September last, we had the pleasure of seeing him again; when,
though he could not be so active with us as formerly, yet we were exceeding
glad to spend what time we could in talking and reading with him. It was a
little before this time my brother and I were at London, when going into a
bookseller's shop (Mr. Rivington's in St. Paul's Churchyard) after some other
conversation, he asked us whether we lived in town; and upon our answering,
"No, at Oxford:" Then gentlemen, said he, let me earnestly recommend (...) your
acquaintance a friend I have there, Mr. Clayton of Brazen-nose. Of this, having
small leisure for contracting new acquaintance, we took no notice for the
present. But in the spring following (April 20) Mr. Clayton meeting me in the
sreet, and giving Mr. Rivington's service, I desired his company to my room,
and then commenced our acquaintance. At the first opportunity I acquainted him
with our whole design, which he immediately and heartily closed with: and not
long after, Mr. M -- having then left Oxford, we fixed two evenings in a week
to meet on, partly to talk upon that subject, and partly to read something in
practical divinity.

The two points, whereunto by the blessing of God, and your son's help, we had
before attained, we endeavored to hold fast: I mean, the doing what good we
can, and in order thereto communicating as often as we have opportunity. To
these, by the advice of Mr. Clayton, we have added a third, the observing the
fasts of the church; the general neglect of which we can by no means apprehend
to be a lawful excuse for neglecting them. And in the resolution to adhere to
these, and all things else which we are convinced God requires at our hands, we
trust we shall persevere, till he calls us to give an account of our
stewardship. As for the names of Methodists, Supererogation-men, and so on,
with which some of our neighbors are pleased to compliment us, we do not
conceive ourselves to be under any obligation to regard them, much less to take
them for arguments. To the law and to the testimony we appeal, whereby we ought
to be judged. If by these it can be proved we are in an error, we will
immediately and gladly retract it: if not, we have not so learned Christ, as to
renounce any part of his service, though men should say all manner of evil
against us, with more judgment, and as little truth as hitherto. We do indeed
use all the lawful means we know, to prevent the good which is in us from being
evil spoken of; but if the neglect of known duties be the one condition of
securing our reputation, why fare it well; -- we know whom we have believed,
and what we thus lay out he will pay us again. Your son already stands before
the judgment seat of him who judges righteous judgment; at the brightness of
whose presence the clouds remove; his eyes are open, and he sees clearly
whether it was "Blind zeal and a thorough mistake of true religion, that
hurried him on in the error of his way," or whether he acted like a faithful
and wise servant, who from a just sense that his time was short, made haste to
finish his work before his Lord's coming, that when laid in the balance he
might not be sound wanting.

I have now largely and plainly laid before you the real ground of all the
strange outcry you have heard; and am not without hope that by this fairer
representation of it than you probably ever received before, both you and the
clergy man you formerly mentioned may have a more favorable opinion of a good
cause, though under an ill name. Whether you have or not, I shall ever
acknowledge my best services to be due to yourself and your family, both for
the generous assistance you have given my father, and for the invaluable
advantages your son has (under GOD) bestowed on,

SIR, Your ever obliged And most obedient servant.


On the DEATH of Mr. MORGAN of Christ-Church, By the Rev. Mr. SAMUEL WESLEY.
We fools counted his life madness.
IF ought beneath them happy souls attend,
Let Morgan hear the triumph of a friend,
And hear well-pleased. Let libertines so gay
With careless indolence despise the lay;
Let critic wits, and fools for laughter born
Their verdict pass with supercilious scorn:
Let jovial crowds, by wine their senses drowned,
Stammer out censure in their frantic round;
Let yawning sluggards faint dislike display,
Who, while they trust tomorrow, lose today;
Let such as these the sacred strains condemn;
For it is true glory to be hissed by them.
Wise in his prime, he waited not for noon,
Convinced, that mortal never lived too soon.
As if foreboding here, his little stay,
He made his morning bear the heat of day.
Fixed while unfading glory he pursues,
No ill to hazard, and no good to lose:
No fair occasion glides unheeded
Snatching the golden moments as they fly,
He by few fleeting hours ensures eternity.
Friendship's warm beams his artless breast inspire,
And tenderest reverence for a much-loved sire.
He dared for heaven this flattering world forego,
Ardent to teach, as diligent to know.
Unwarp'd by sensual views, or vulgar aims,
By idle riches, or by idler names.
Fearful of sin in every close disguise,
Unmoved by threatening or by glozing lies.
Seldom indeed the wicked came so far,
Forced by his piety to defensive war;
Whose zeal for other men's salvation shown,
Beyond the reach of hell secured his own.
Glad'ning the poor, wherever his steps he turned,
Where pined the orphan, or the widow mourned,
Where prisoners sighed beneath guilt's horrid stain,
The worst confinement and the heaviest chain.
Where death's sad shade the uninstructed sight
Veiled with thick darkness in the land of light.
Our Savior thus fulfilled his great design,
(If human we may liken to divine)
Healed each disease that bodies frail endure,
And preached the unhop'd-for gospel to the poor.
To means of grace the last respect he showed,
Nor sought new paths, as (...) than his God:
Their sacred strength preserved him from extremes
Of empty outside or enthusiast dreams;
Whims of Molino, lost in rapture's mist,
Or Quaker, late reforming quietist.
He knew that works our faith must here employ,
And that it is heaven's great business to enjoy.
Fixed on that heaven he death's approaches saw,
Nor vainly murmured at our nature's law;
Repined not that his youth so soon should go,
Nor grieved for fleeting pleasures here below.
Of sharpest anguish scorning to complain,
He fills with mirth the intervals of pain.
Not only unappal'd but joyful sees
The dark, cold passage that must lead to peace;
Strong with immortal bloom secure to rise,
The tears for ever banished from his eyes.
Who now regrets his early youth would spend
The life so nobly that so soon should end?
Who blames the stripling for performing more
Than doctors grave, and prelates of threescore?
Who now esteems his fervor indiscreet,
His prayers too frequent, or his alms too great?
Who thinks, were blessed he reigns beyond the sky,
His crown too radiant, or his throne too high?
Who but the fiend, who once his course withstood
And whispered -- "Stay till fifty to be good?"
Sure, if believed to obtain his hellish aim,
Adjourning to the time that never came.
JOURNAL From Oct. 14, 1735, to Feb. 1, 1738.
TUESDAY, Oct. 14, 1735, Mr. Benjamin Ingham, of Queen's-College, Oxford, Mr.
Charles Delamotte, son of a merchant in London, who had offered himself some
days before, my brother Charles Wesley, and myself, took boat for Gravesend, in
order to embark for Georgia. Our end in leaving our native country, was not to
avoid want (God having given us plenty of temporal blessings) nor to gain the
dung or dross of riches or honor: but singly this, to save our souls: to live
wholly to the glory of God. In the afternoon we found the Simmonds off
Gravesend, and immediately went on board.

Wednesday and Thursday we spent with one or two of our friends, partly on
board and partly on shore, in exhorting one another to shake off every weight,
and to run with patience the race set before us.

Friday 17. I began to learn German, in order to converse with the Germans, six
and twenty of whom we had on board. On Sunday, the weather being fair and calm,
we had the morning-service on quarterdeck. I now first preached ex tempore, and
then administered the Lord's supper to six or seven communicants. A little
flock. May God increase it!

Monday 20. Believing the denying ourselves even in the smallest instances,
might, by the blessing of God, be helpful to us, we wholly left off the use of
flesh and wine, and confined ourselves to vegetable food, chiefly rice and
biscuit. In the afternoon David Nitchman, bishop of the Germans, and two others
began to learn English. O may we be, not only of one tongue, but of one mind
and of one heart!

Tues. 21. We failed from Gravesend. When we were past about half the Goodwin
Sands, the wind suddenly failed. Had the calm continued till ebb, the ship had
probably been lost. But the gale sprung up again in an hour, and carried us
into the Downs.

We now began to be a little regular. Our common way of living was this. From
four in the morning till five, each of us used private prayer. From five to
seven we read the bible together, carefully comparing it (that we might not
lean to our own understandings) with the writings of the earliest ages. At
seven we breakfasted. At eight were the public prayers. From nine to twelve I
usually learned German, and Mr. Delamotte, Greek. My brother writ sermons, and
Mr. Ingham instructed the children. At twelve we met to give an account to one
another what we had done since our last meeting, and what we designed to do
before our next. About one we dined. The time from dinner to four, we spent in
reading to those of whom each of us had taken in charge, or in speaking to them
severally, as need required. At four were the evening prayers; when either the
second lesson was explained (as it always was in the morning) or the children
were catechized, and instructed before the congregation. From five to six we
again used private prayer. From six to seven I read in our cabin to two or
three of the passengers (of whom there were about eighty English on board) and
each of my brethren to a few more in theirs. At seven I joined with the Germans
in their public service; while Mr. Ingham was reading between the decks, to as
many as desired to hear. At eight we met again, to exhort and instruct one
another. Between nine and ten we went to bed, where neither the roaring of the
sea, nor the the motion of the ship, could take away the refreshing sleep which
God gave us.

Friday 24. Having a rolling sea, most of the passengers found the effects of
it. Mr. Delamotte was exceeding sick, for several days: Mr. Ingham for about
half an hour. My brother's head ached much. Hitherto it has pleased God, the
sea has not disordered me at all; nor have I been hindered one quarter of an
hour from reading, writing, composing, or doing any business I could have done
on shore.

During our stay in the Downs, some or other of us went, as often as we had
opportunity, on board the ship that failed in company with us, where also many
were glad to join in prayer and hearing the word.

Friday 31. We failed out of the Downs. At eleven at night I was waked by a
great noise. I soon found there was no danger. But the bare apprehension of it,
gave me a lively conviction what manner of men those ought to be, who are every
moment on the bri^k of eternity.

Sat. Nov. 1. We came to St. Helen's harbor, and the next day into Cowes road.
The wind was fair, but we waited for the man of war, which was to fail with us.
This was a happy opportunity of instructing our fellow-travellers. May he whose
feed we sow, give it the increase!

Sund. 16. Thomas Hird, and Grace his wife, with their children, Mark, aged 21,
and Phebe, about 17, late quakers, were, at their often-repeated desire, and
after careful instruction, admitted to baptism.

Thur. 20. We fell down into Yarmouth road, but the next day were forced back
into Cowes. During our stay here there were several storms: in one of which two
ships in Yarmouth road were lost.

The continuance of the contrary winds gave my brother an opportunity of
complying with the desire of the minister of Cowes, and preaching there three
or four times. The poor people flocked together in great numbers. We
distributed a few little books among the serious of them, which they received
with all possible expressions of thankfulness.

Fri. 21. One recovering from a dangerous illness, desired to be instructed in
the nature of the Lord's supper. I thought it concerned her to be first
instructed in the nature of Christianity: and accordingly fixed an hour a day
to read with her in Mr. Law's Treatise on Christian Perfection.

Sund. 23. At night I was waked by the tossing of the ship and roaring of the
wind, and plainly showed I was unfit, for I was unwilling to die.

Tues. Dec. 2. I had much satisfaction in conversing with one that was very ill
and very serious. But in a few days she recovered from her sickness and from
her seriousness together.

Sund. 7. Finding nature did not require so frequent supplies as we had been
accustomed to, we agreed to le^^^ off suppers; from doing which we have
hitherto found ^o inconvenience.

Wednes. 10. We failed from Cowes, and in the afternoon (...) the Needles. Here
the ragged rocks, with the waves dashing and foaming at the foot of them, and
the white side of the island rising to such a height, perpendicular from the
beach, gave a strong idea of him that spauneth the heavens, and holds the
waters in the hollow of his hand!

To day I spoke closely on the head of religion, to one I had talked with once
or twice before. Afterward she said, with many tears, "My mother died when I
was but ten years old. Some of her last words were, "Child, fear God; and
though y^^ lose me, you shall never want a friend." I have now found a friend,
when I most wanted, and le^ ^pected one."

From this day to the 14th, being in the Bay of Biscay, the sea was very rough.
Mr. Delamotte and many others were mo^^ sick than ever: Mr. Ingham a little; I
not at all. But the 14th being a calm day, most of the sick were cured at once.

Thurs. 18. One who was big with child, in a high fever, and almost wasted away
with a violent cough, desired to receive the holy communion before fire died.
At the hour of her receiving, she began to recover, and in a few days was
entirely out of danger.

Sund. 21. We had fifteen communicants, which was our usual number on Sundays:
on Christmas Day we had nineteen; but on New-year's-day fifteen only.

Thurs. Jan. 15, 1736. Complaint being made to Mr. Oglethorpe, of the unequal
distribution of the water among the passengers, he appointed new officers to
take charge of it. At this the old ones and their friends were highly
exasperated against us, to w^ they imputed the change. But the fierceness of
man turn to thy praise.

Sat. 17. Many people were very impati^ (...) contrary wind. At seven in the
evening (...) were quieted by a storm. It rose higher ^her till nine. About
nine the sea broke over us from stem to stern; burst through the windows of the
state cabin, where three or four of us were, and covered us all over, though a
bureau sheltered me from the main shock. About eleven I lay down in the great
cabin^ and ^n a short time fell asleep, though very uncertain whether I should
wake alive, and much ashamed of my unwillingness to die. O how pure in heart
must he be, who would rejoice to appear before God at a moment's warning!
Toward morning, he rebuked the winds and the sea, and there was a great calm.

Sund. 18. We returned God thanks for our deliverance, of which a few appeared
duly sensible. But the rest (among whom were most of the sailors) denied we had
been in any danger. I could not have believed that so little good would have
been done by the terror they were in before. But it cannot be that they should
long obey God from fear, who are deaf to the motives of love.

Fri. 25. In the evening another storm began. In the morning it increased, so
that they were forced to let the ship drive. I could not but say to myself, How
is it that thou have no faith? Being still unwilling to die. About one in the
afternoon, almost as soon as I had stepped out of the great cabin door, the sea
did not break as usual, but came with a full, smooth tide over the side of the
ship. I was vaulted over with water in a moment, and so stunned, that I scarce
expected to lift up my head again, till the sea should give up her dead. But,
thanks be to God, I received no hurt at all. About midnight the storm ceased.

Sund. 25. At noon, our third storm began. At (...) was more violent than
before. Now indeed we (...) say, the waves of the sea were mighty and raged
hor(...) they rose up to the heavens above, and cleave down to he^ (...). The
winds roared round about us, and (what (...) heard before) whistled as
distinctly as if it had been a (...) voice. The ship not only rocked to and fro
with the utmost violence, but shook and jarred with so unequal, grating a
motion, that one could not but with great difficulty keep one's hold of any
thing, nor stand a moment without it. Every ten minutes came a shock against
the stern or side of the ship, which one would think should dash the planks in
pieces. At this time, a child, privately baptized before, was brought to be
received into the church. It put me in mind of Jeremiah's buying the field,
when the Chaldeans were on the point of destroying Jerusalem, and seemed a
pledge of the mercy God designed to show us, even in the land of the living.

We spent two or three hours after prayers, in conversing suitably to the
occasion, confirming one another in a calm submission, to the wise, holy,
gracious will of God. And now a storm did not appear so terrible as before.
Blessed be the God of all consolation!

At seven I went to the Germans. I had long before observed, the great
seriousness of their behavior. Of their humility they had given a continual
proof, by performing those servile offices for the other passengers, which none
of the English would undertake, for which they desired, and would receive no
pay, saying, "It was good for their proud hearts," and "Their loving Savior
had done more for them." And every day had given them occasion of showing a
meekness, which no injury could move. If they were pushed, struck, or thrown
down, they rose again and went away; but no complaint was found in their mouth.
There was now an opportunity of trying, whether they were deliv^ from the
spirit of fear, as well as from that off (...) anger and revenge. In the midst
of the psal^ (...) with their service began, the sea broke over (...) main-sail
in pieces, covered the ship, and (...) between the decks, as if the gr^ (...)
already swallowed us up. A terrible f^ began among the English; The Germans
calmly sung on. I asked one of them afterward, "Was you not afraid?" He
answered, "I thank God, No." I asked, "But were not your women and children
afraid?" He replied mildly, "No; our women and children are not afraid to die."

From them I went to their crying, trembling neighbors, and pointed out to
them the difference in the hour of trial, between him that fears God, and him
that fears him not. At twelve the wind fell. This was the most glorious day
which I have hitherto seen.

Mond. 26. We enjoyed the calm. I can conceive no difference, comparable to
that between a smooth and a rough sea, except that which is between a mind
calmed by the love of God, and one torn up by the storms of earthly passions.

Thurs. Jan. 29. About seven in the evening, we fell in with the skirts of a
hurricane. The rain as well as the wind was extremely violent. The sky was so
dark in a moment, that the sailors could not so much as see the ropes, or set
about furling the sails. The ship must in all probability have overset, had not
the wind fell as suddenly as it rose. Toward the end of it, we had that
appearance on each of the masts, which (it is thought) the ancients called
Castor and Pollux. It was a small ball of white fire, like a star. The mariners
say, it appears either in a storm (and then commonly upon the deck) or just at
the end of it: and then it is usually on the masts or sails.

Frid. 30. We had another storm, which did us no (...) harm, than splitting the
fore-sail. Our bed (...) ^et, I laid me down on the floor, and slept found ^ll
morning. And I believe, I shall not find it nee^ (...) go to bed (as it is
called) any more.

Sund. (...) spoke with a ship of Carolina; and Wedn. 4. (...) within
soundings. About noon the trees were visible from the mast, and in the
afternoon from the main deck. In the evening lesson were these words, A great
door and effectual is opened. O let no one shut it!

Thurs. Feb. 5. Between two and three in the afternoon, God brought us all safe
into the Savannah river. We cast anchor near Tybee-island, where the groves of
pines, running along the shore, made an agreeable prospect, showing as it were,
the bloom of spring, in the depth of winter.

Frid. 6. About eight in the morning, we first set foot on American ground. It
was a small uninhabited island, over against Tybee. Mr. Oglethorpe led us to a
rising ground, where we all kneeled down to give thanks. He then took boat for
Savannah. When the rest of the people were come on shore, we called our little
flock together to prayers. Several parts of the second lesson, Mark. vi. were
wonderfully suited to the occasion; in particular, the account of the courage
and sufferings of John the baptist; our Lord's directions to the first
preachers of his gospel and their toiling at sea, and deliverance with those
comfortable words, It is I, be not afraid.

Sat. Feb. 7, M^. Oglethorpe returned from Savannah, with Mr. Spangenberg, one
of the pastors of the Germans. I soon found what spirit he was of; and asked
his advice with regard to my own conduct. He said, My brother, I must first ask
you one or two questions. Have you the witness within yourself? Does the Spirit
of God bear witness with your spirit, that you are a child of God? I was
furprized, and ^^ew not what to answer. He observed it, and asked, "Do you know
Jesus Christ?" I paused and said, "I know he is the Savior of the world."
True; replied he; but do (...) know he has saved you? I answered "(...) ^ope he
has died to save me." He only ad^ "Do you know yourself?" I said, "I do." But I
fear, they were vain words.

Mond. 9. I asked him many questions, both concerning himself, and the church
at Hernhuth. The substance of his answers was this.

"At eighteen years old I was sent to the university of Jena, where I spent
some years in learning languages, and the vain philosophy, which I have now
long been laboring to forget. Here it pleased God by some that preached his
word with power, to overturn ^urn my heart. I immediately threw aside all my
learning, but what tended to save my soul. I shunned all company, and retired
into a solitary place, resolving to spend my life there. For three days I had
much comfort here; but on the fourth it was all gone. I was amazed, and went
for advice to an experienced Christian. When I came to him, I could not speak.
But he saw my heart, and advised me to go back to my house, and follow the
business providence called me to. I went back, but was fit for nothing. I could
neither do business, nor join in any conversation. All I could say to any one,
was Yes, or No. Many times I could not say that, nor understand the plainest
thing that was said to me. My friends and acquaintance looked upon me as dead,
came no more to me, nor spoke about me.

"When I grew better, I began teaching some poor children. Others joining with
me, we taught more and more, till there were above thirty teachers and above
two hundred scholars. I had now invitations to other universities. But I could
not accept of any: desiring only, if it were the will of God, to be little and
unknown. I had spent some years thus, when professor Breithaupt of Halle died:
being then pressed to remove thither, I believed it was the call of God, and
went. I had not been long there, before many faults were found, both with my
behavior and preaching: and offenses increased more and more, till after half
a year, a petition against me was sent to the king of Prussia, who sent an
order to the commander at Halle, in pursuance whereof I was warned to leave the
city in forty-eight hours. I did so, and retired to Hernhuth, to Count
Zinzendorf.

"The village of Hernhuth contains about a thousand souls, gathered out of many
nations. They hold (...) the discipline, as well as the faith and practice of
the apostolical church. I was desired by the brethren there last year, to
conduct sixteen of them to Georgia, where two lots of ground are assigned us,
and with them I have stayed ever since."

I asked, "Whither he was to go next?" He said, "I have thoughts of going to
Pennsylvania. But what God will do with me, I know not. I am blind. I am a
child. My father knows, and I am ready to go wherever he calls."

Frid. 13. Some of the Indians sent us word of their intention to come down to
us. In our course of reading to day, were these words; Thus says the Lord of
hosts, It shall yet come to pass that there shall come people, and the
inhabitants of many cities. And the inhabitants of one city shall go to
another, saying, Let us go speedily to pray before the Lord, and to seek the
Lord of hosts: I will go also. Yea many people and strong nations, shall come
to seek the Lord of hosts, and to pray before him. Zech. xiii. 20, etc.

Sat. Feb. 14. About one, Tomo-Chachi, his nephew Thleeanouhee, his wife
Sinauky, with two more women and two or three Indian children, came on board.
As soon as we came in, they all rose, and shook us by the hand, and Tomo-Chachi
(one Mrs. Musgrove intepreted) spoke as follows.

"I am glad you are come. When I was in England I desired that some would speak
the great word to me. And my nation then desired to hear it. But now we are all
in confusion. Yet I am glad you are come. I will go up and speak to the wise
men of our nation. And I hope they will hear. But we would not be made
Christians, as the Spaniards make Christians. We would be taught, before we are
baptized."

I answered, "There is but one, he that sits in heaven, who is able to teach
man wisdom. Though we are come so far, we know not whether he will please to
teach you by us or no If He teaches you, you will learn wisdom; but we can do
nothing." We then withdrew.

Sund. 15. Another party of Indians came. They were all tall, well-proportioned
men, and had a remarkable softness in their speech, and gentleness in their
whole behavior. In the afternoon they all returned home, but three, who stayed
to go with Mr. Oglethorpe.

Monday, Feb. 16. Mr. Oglethorpe set out for (...) new settlement on the
Alatamahaw river. He took with him 50 men; besides Mr. Ingham, Mr. Hermsdorf
and the three Indians.

Thurs, 19. My brother and I took boat, and passing by Savannah, went to pay
our first visit in America, to the poor (...). But neither Tomo Chachi^nor
Sinauky were as home. Coming back, we waited upon Mr. Causton, the chief
magistrate of Savannah. From him we went with Mr. Spangenberg to the German
brethren. About eleven we returned to the boat, and came to our ship about four
in the morning.

Sat. 21. Mary Welsh, aged eleven days, was baptized according to the custom of
the first church, and the rule of the church of England. The child was ill
then, but recovered from that hour.

Tu. 24. Mr. Oglethorpe returned. The day following I took my leave of most of
the passengers of the ship; who all appeared serious. I may be, a^ the seed is
not fallen upon stony ground.

In the evening I went to Savannah again, whence Mr. Spangenberg, bishop
Nitscman and Andrew Dober, went up with us to Mrs. Musgrove's, to choose a spot
for the little house which Mr. Oglethorpe had promised to build us. Being
afterward disappointed of our boat, we were obliged to pass the night there.
But wherever we are, it is the same thing, if it be the will of our Father
which is in heaven.

At our return the next day (Mr. Quincy being then in the house wherein we
afterward were) Mr. Delamotte and I took up our lodging with the Germans. We
had now an opportunity day by day, of observing their whole behavior. For we
were in one room with them from morning to night, unless for the little time I
spent in walking. They were always employed, always cheerful themselves, and in
good humor with one another. They had put away all anger and strife, and wrath
and bitterness and clamor, and evil-speaking. They walked worthy of the
vocation wherewith they were called, and adorned the gospel of our Lord in all
things.

Sat. Feb. 28. They met to consult concerning the affairs of their church: Mr.
Spangenberg being (...) to go to Pennsylvania, and bishop Nitschman to return
to Germany. After several hours spent in conference and prayer, they proceeded
to the election and ordination of a bishop. The great simplicity as well as
^^^emnity of the whole, almost made me forget the seventeen hundred years
between, and imagine myself in one of those affemblies, where form and state
were not: but Paul the tent-maker or Peter the fi^erman prefided; yet with the
demonstration of the spirit and of power.

Sund. 29. Hearing Mr. Oglethorpe did not come any more to Savannah, before he
went to Frederica, I was obliged to go down to the ship again (Mr Spangenberg
followed me thither) and receive his orders and instructions on several heads.
From him we went to public prayers: after which we were refreshed by several
letters from England. Upon which I could not but observe how careful our Lord
is, to repay whatever we give up on his account. When I left England, I was
chiefly afraid of two things; one, that I should never again have so many
faithful friends as I left there; the other, that the spark of love which began
to kindle in their hearts, would cool and die away. But who knows the mercy
and power of God? From ten friends I am a while secluded: and he has opened me
a door into a whole church. And as to the very persons I left behind, his
spirit is gone forth so much the more, teaching them not to trust in man, but
in him that raised the dead, and calls the things that are not, as though
they (...)

About four, having taken leave of Mr. Spangenberg, who was the next morning to
set out for Pennsylvania, I returned to Savannah. Sat. March 6. I had a long
conversation with John Reinier, the son of a gentleman, who being driven out of
France, on account of his religion, settled at Vivay in Swisserland, and
practiced physic there. His father died while he was a child. Some years after
he told his mother, he was desirous to leave Swisserland, and to retire into
some other country, where he might be free from the temptations which he could
not avoid there. When her consent was at length obtained, he agreed with a
master of a vessel, with whom he went to Holland by land; thence to England,
and from England to Pennsylvania. He was provided with money, books and drugs,
intending to follow his father's profession. But no sooner was he come to
Philadelphia, than the captain who had borrowed his money before, instead of
repaying it, demanded the full pay for his passage, and under that pretense
seized on all his effects. He then left him in a strange country, where he
could not speak to be understood, without necessaries, money or friends. In
this condition he thought it best to sell himself for a servant, which he
accordingly did, for seven years. When about five were expired, he fell sick of
a lingering illness, which made him useless to his master; who after it had
continued half a year, would not keep him any longer, but turned him out to
shift for himself. He first tried to mend shoes, but soon after joined himself
to some French protestants, and learned to make buttons. He then went and lived
with an anabaptist: but soon after hearing an account of the Germans in
Georgia, walked from Pennsylvania thither, where he found the rest, which he
had so long sought in vain.

Sund. March 7. I entered upon my ministry at Savannah, by preaching on the
epistle for the day, being the 13th of the first Corinthians. In the second
lesson, Luke xviii. was our Lord's prediction of the treatment which he himself
(and consequently his followers) was to meet with from the world; and his
gracious promise to those who are content, Nudi nudum Christum sequi: Verily I
say unto you, there is no man that has left house, or friends, or brethren, or
wife, or children for the kingdom of God's sake, which shall not receive
manifold more in this present time, and in the world to come everlasting life.

Yet notwithstanding these plain declarations of our Lord, notwithstanding my
own repeated experience, notwithstanding the experience of all the sincere
followers of Christ, whom I have ever talked with, read or heard of: nay, and
the reason of the thing, evincing to a demonstration, that all who love not the
light must hate him, who is continually laboring to pour it in upon them: I do
here bear witness against myself, that when I saw the number of people crowding
into the church, the deep attention with which they received the word, and the
seriousness that afterward sat on all their faces; I could scarce refrain from
giving the lie to experience and reason and scripture all together. I could
hardly believe that the greater, the far greater part of this attentive,
serious people, would hereafter trample under foot that word, and say all
manner of evil falsely of him that spoke it. O who can believe, what their
heart abhors? Jesus, Master, have mercy on us! Let us love thy cross; then
shall we believe, If we suffer with thee, we shall also reign with ^hee!

This evening one of the Germans, who had been long ill of a consumption, found
himself much worse. On my mentioning it to bishop Nitschman he smiled and said,
"He will soon be well; he is ready for the bridegroom."

Sund. Mar. 14, Having before given notice of my design to do so, every Sunday
and holiday, according to the rules of our church, I administered the holy
communion to eighteen persons. Which of these will endure to the end?

Mond. Mar. 15. Mr. Quincy going for Carolina, I removed into the minister's
house. It is large enough for a larger family than ours and has many
conveniences, besides a good garden. I could not but reflect on the well known
epigram, (...)

How short a time will it be before its present possessor is removed! Perhaps
to be no more seen!



Sund. 28. A servant of Mr. Bradley's sent to desire to speak with me. Going to
him, I found a young man ill, but perfectly sensible. He desired the rest to go
out, and then said, "On Thursday night, about eleven, being in bed, but broad
awake, I heard one calling aloud "Peter! Peter Wright!" And looking up, the
room was as light as day, and I saw a man in very bright clothes stand by the
bed, who said, "Prepare yourself; for your end is nigh;" and then immediately
all was dark as before." I told him, "The advice was good, whencesoever it
came." In a few days he recovered from his illness; his whole temper was
changed as well as his life; and so continued to be, till after three or four
weeks he relapsed and died in peace.

T^^s. Mar. 30. Mr. Ingham coming from Frederica, brought me letters, pressing
me to go thither. The next day Mr. Delamotte and I began to try, whether life
might not as well be sustained, by one sort as by a variety of food. We chose
to make the experiment with bread; and were never more vigorous and healthy
than while we tasted nothing else. Blessed are the pure in heart! Who whether
they eat or drink, or whatever they do, have no end therein but to please God!
To them all things are pure. Every creature is good to them, and nothing to be
rejected. But let them who know and feel, that they are not thus pure, use
every help and remove every hindrance: always remembering, He that despises
little things, shall fall by little and little.

Sund. Apr. 4. About four in the afternoon, I set out for Frederica, in a
Pettiawga (a sort of flat-bottomed barge.) The next evening we anchored near
Skidoway island, where the water at flood was twelve or fourteen feet deep. I
wrapped myself up from head to foot, in a large cloak, to keep off the
sand-flies, and lay down on the quarter deck. Between one and two I waked under
water, being so fast asleep that I did not find where I was till my mouth was
full of it. Having left my cloak, I know not how upon deck, I swam round to the
other side of the Pettiawga, where a boat was tied, and climbed up by the rope,
without any hurt, more than wetting my clothes. Thou art the God of whom comes
salvation: thou art the Lord by whom we escape death.

The winds were so contrary, that on Sat. 10. we could but just get
over against Doboy island, twenty miles from Frederica, but could not possibly
make the creek, having a strong tide also against us. Here we lay beating off
till past one; when the lightning and rain which we had long seen at a
distance, drove down full upon us; till after a quarter of an hour, the clouds
parted, some passing on the right, and some on the left, leaving us a clear
sky, and so strong a wind right after us, as in two hours brought us to
Frederica.

A little before we landed, I opened my Testament on these words, If God be for
us, who can be against us? Coming on shore, I found my brother exceeding weak,
having been for some time ill of a flux. But he mended from the hour he saw me.
This also has God wrought!

Sund. April 11. I preached at the new Storehouse on the first verse of the
gospel for the day, Which of you convinces me of sin? And if I say the truth,
why do ye not believe me? There was a large congregation, whom I endeavored to
convince of unbelief, by simply proposing the conditions of salvation, as they
are laid down in scripture, and appealing to their own hearts, whether they
believed they could be saved on no other terms?

In every one of the six following days, I had some fresh proofs of the
absolute necessity of following that wise advice of the apostle, Judge nothing
before the time; until the Lord come, who both will bring to light the hidden
things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the hearts.

Sat. April 17. We set out for Savannah, and reached it on Tuesday evening. O
blessed place, where having but one end in view, dissembling and fraud are not:
but each of us can pour out his heart without fear into his brother's bosom!

Not finding as yet any door open, for the pursuing our main design, we
considered, in what manner we might be most useful to the little flock at
Savannah. And we agreed, 1st. To adv^se the more serious among them, to form
themselves into a sort of little society, and to meet once or twice a week, in
order to reprove, instruct and exhort one another. 2. To select out of these a
smaller number for a more intimate union with each other, which might be
forwarded, partly by our conversing singly with each, and partly by inviting
them altogether to our house; and this accordingly we determined to do every
Sunday in the afternoon.

Wed. May 5. I was asked to baptize a child of Mr. Parker's, second bailiff of
Savannah. But Mrs. Parker told me, "Neither Mr. P. nor I will consent to its
being dipped." I answered, "If you certify that your child is weak, it will
suffice (the rubric says) to pour water upon it." She replied, "Nay the child
is not weak; but I am resolved it shall not be dipped." This argument I could
not confute. So I went home; and the child was baptized by another person.

Sund. 9. I began dividing the public prayers, according to the original
appointment of the church (still observed in a few places in England.) The
morning service began at five. The communion office (with the sermon) at
eleven. The evening service about three. And this day I began reading prayers
in the Courthouse; a large and convenient place.

Mond. 10. I began visiting my parishioners in order, from house to house; for
which I set apart the time (when they cannot work, because of the heat, viz.)
from twelve till three in the afternoon.

Sund. May 16. We were surprised in the evening by my brother just come from
Frederica. After some conversation, we consulted how the poor people there
might be taken care of, during his absence. And it was at last agreed, that Mr.
Ingham and I should take our turns in assisting them; and the first was
allotted me. Accordingly on Tues. 18. I walked to Thunderbolt; whence the next
afternoon we set out in a small boat: in the evening we touched at Skidoway,
and had a small, but attentive congregation, to join with us in evening prayer.

Sat. May 22. About four in the afternoon we entered upon Doboy Sound. The
wind, which was right ahead, was so high, when we were in the middle of it,
and the sea so rough, being driven in at the inlet, that the boat was on the
point of sinking every moment. But it pleased God to bring us safe to the other
side in half an hour, and to Frederica the next morning. We had public prayers
at nine, at which nineteen persons were present; and (I think) nine
communicants.

Fri. 28. I read the commendatory prayer by Mr. Germain, who lay at the point
of death. He had lost his speech and his senses. His eyes were set, neither had
he any discernable motion, but the heaving of his breast. While we stood round
him, he stretched out his arms, rubbed his head, recovered his sight, speech
and understanding; and immediately sending for the bailiffs, settled the
affairs of his family; and then lay down and died.

At the first service on Sund. May 30. were only five, at the second
twenty-five. The next day, I made Mr Lassel's will; who notwithstanding his
great weakness, was quite revived, when any mention was made of death, or of
eternity.

Tues. June 1. After praying with him, I was surprised to find one of the most
controverted questions in divinity, disinterested love, decided at once by a
poor old man, without education or learning or any instructor, but the Spirit
of God. I asked him, what he thought of paradise (to which he had said he was
going?) He said, "To be sure, it is a fine place. But I don't mind that. I
don't care what place I am in. Let God put me where he will, or do with me what
he will, so I may but set forth his honor and glory."

Thurs. June 3. Being ascension-day, we had the holy communion; but only Mr.
Hird's family joined with us in it. One reason why there were no more, was
because a few words which a woman had inadvertently spoken, had set almost all
the town in a flame. Alas! How shall a city stand that is thus divided against
itself? Where there is no brotherly love, no meekness, no for-bearing or
forgiving one another: but envy, malice, revenge, suspicion, anger, clamor,
bitterness, evil-speaking, without end! Abundant proof that there can be no
true love of man, unless it be built on the love of God.

Sun. 6. Calling on Mr. Lassel, and asking how he did, "My departure (said he)
I hope is at hand." I asked, "Are you troubled at that?" He replied, "O no; to
depart and to be with Christ, is far better. I desire no more of this bad
world. My hope and my joy and my love is there." The next time I saw him he
said, "I desire nothing more, than for God to forgive my many and great sins. I
would be humble. I would be the humblest creature living. My heart is humble
and broken for my sins. Tell me, teach me, what shall I do to please God. I
would fain do whatever is his will." I said, "It is his will you should
suffer." He answered, "Then I will suffer. I will gladly suffer whatever
pleases him."

Mon. 7. Finding him weaker, I asked, "Do you still desire to die?" He said,
"Yes; but I dare not pray for it, for fear I should displease my heavenly
Father. His will be done. Let him work his will, in my life, or in my death."

Thurs. 10. We began to execute at Frederica what we had before agreed to do at
Savannah. Our design was on Sundays in the afternoon, and every evening after
public service, to spend some time with the most serious of the communicants,
in singing, reading and conversation. This evening we had only Mark Hird. But
on Sunday Mr. Hird, and two more desired to be admitted. After a psalm and a
little conversation, I read Mr. Law's Christian Perfection, and concluded with
another psalm.

Sat. June 12. Being with one who was very desirous to converse with me, "but
not upon religion," I spoke to this effect. "Suppose you was going to a
country, where every one spoke Latin and understood no other language, neither
would converse with any that did not understand it: suppose one was sent to
stay here a short time, on purpose to teach it you: suppose that person,
pleased with your company, should spend his time in trifling with you, and
teach you nothing of what he came for: would that be well done? Yet this is our
case. You are going to a county, where every one speaks the love of God. The
citizens of heaven understand no other language. They converse with none who do
not understand it. Indeed none such are admitted there. I am sent from God to
teach you this. A few days are allotted us for that purpose. Would it then be
well done in me, because I was pleased with your company, to spend this short
time in trifling, and teach you nothing of what I came for? God forbid! I will
rather not converse with you at all. Of the two extremes, this is the best."

Wed. June 16. Another little company of us met, Mr. Reed, Davidson, Walker,
Delamotte, and myself. We sung, read a little of Mr. Law, and then conversed.
Wednesdays and Fridays were the days we fixed for constant meeting.

Thurs. 17. An officer of a man of war, walking just behind us, with two or
three of his acquaintance, cursed and swore exceedingly; but upon my reproving
him, seemed much moved, and gave me many thanks.

Sat. 19. Mr. Oglethorpe returned from the south, and gave orders on Sunday the
20th, that none should profane the day (as was usual before) by fishing or
fowling upon it. In the afternoon I summed up what I had seen or heard at
Frederica, inconsistent with christianity, and consequently with the prosperity
of the place. The event was as it ought: some of the hearers were profited, and
the rest deeply offended.

This day, at half an hour past ten, God heard the prayer of his servant, and
Mr. Lassel, according to his desire, was dissolved that he might be with Christ.

Tues. 22. Observing much coldness in Mr. -- 's behavior, I asked him the
reason of it. He answered, "I like nothing you do; all your sermons are satires
upon particular persons. Therefore I will never hear you more. And all the
people are of my mind. For we will not hear ourselves abused."

"Besides, they say, they are pr^testants. But as for you, they cannot tell
what religion you are of. They never heard of such a religion before. They do
not know what to make of it. And then, your private behavior. -- All the
quarrels that have been here since you came, have been long of you. Indeed
there is neither man nor woman in the town, who minds a word you say. And so
you may preach long enough; but nobody will come to hear you."

He was too warm for hearing an answer. So I had nothing to do, but to thank
him for his openness, and walk away.

Wednes. 23. I had a long conversation with Mr. --, upon the nature of true
religion. I then asked him, "Why he did not endeavor to recommend it to all
with whom he conversed?" He said, "I did so once; and for some time, I thought
I had done much good by it. But I afterward found they were never the better,
and I myself was the worse. Therefore now, though I always strive to be
inoffensive in my conversation, I do not strive to make people religious,
unless those that have a desire to be so, and are consequently willing to hear
me. But I have not yet (I speak not of you, or your brother) found one such
person in America."

He that has ears to hear, let him hear! Mark the tendency of this accursed
principle! If you will speak only to those who are willing to hear, see how
many you will turn from the error of their ways! If therefore, striving to do
good, you have done hurt, what then? So did St. Paul. So did the Lord of life.
Even HIS word was the savor of death, as well as the savor of life. But shall
he therefore strive no more? God forbid! Strive more humbly, more calmly, more
c^^tiously. Do not strive as you did before, -- but strive, while the breath of
God is in your noctril^!

Being to leave Frederica in the evening, I took the more notice of these words
in the lesson for the day. Whereunto shall I liken the men of this generation?
They are like unto children sitting in the marketplace, and saying, (...) have
piped unto you, and ye have not danced, we have mourned to you, and ye have not
wept. For John the baptist came neither eating bread, nor drinking wine, and ye
say, He has a devil. The Son of Man is come eating and drinking, and ye say,
Behold a gluttonous man and a wine bibber, a friend of Publicans and Sinners.
Luke vii.

About eleven at night we took boat. And on Sat. 26, about one in the afternoon
came to Savannah. O what de we want here, either for life or godliness! If
suffering, God will send it in his time.

Sun. June 27. About twenty joined with us in morning prayer. An hour or two
after, a large party of Creek Indians came, the expectation of whom deprived us
of our place of public worship, in which they were to have their audience.

Wednes. 30. I hoped a door was opened, for going up immediately to the
Choctaws, the least polished, i. e. the least corrupted of all the Indian
nations. But upon my informing Mr. Oglethorpe of our design, he objected, not
only the danger of being intercepted, or killed by the French there; but much
more, the inexpediency of leaving Savannah destitute of a minister. These
objections I related to our brethren in the evening, who were all of opinion,
"We ought not to go yet."

Thurs. July 1. The Indians had an audience, and another on Saturday, when
Chicali, their head-man, dined with Mr. Oglethorpe. After dinner, I asked the
grey-headed old man, "What he thought he was made for?" He said, "He that is
above knows what he made us for. We know nothing. We are in the dark. But white
men know much. And yet white men build great houses, as if they were to live
for ever. But white men cannot live for ever. In a little time, white men will
be dust as well as I." I told him, "If red men will learn the good book, they
may know as much as white men. But neither we nor you can understand that book,
unless we are taught y him that is above: and he will not teach, unless you
avoid, what you already know is not good." He answered, "I believe that. He
will not teach us, while our hearts are not white. And our men do what they
know is not good. They kill their own children. And our women do what they know
is not good. They kill the child before it is born. Therefore, he that is
above, does not send us the good book."

Hearing the younger of the Miss Boveys was not well, I called upon them this
evening. I found she had only the prickly heat, a sort of rash, very common
here in summer. We soon fell into serious conversation, after I had asked, "If
they did not think they were too young to trouble themselves with religion yet?
And, whether they might not defer it ten or a dozen years?" To which one of
them replied, "If it will be reasonable ten years hence, to be religious, it is
so now: I am not for deferring one moment."

Wednes. July 7. I called there again, being determined now to speak more
closely. But meeting company there, prudence induced me to put it off till
another opportunity.

Thurs. 8. Mr. O. being there again, and casually speaking of sudden death,
Miss Becky said, "If it was the will of God, I should choose to die without a
lingering illness." Her sister said, "Are you then always prepared to die?" She
replied, "Jesus Christ is always prepared to help me. And little stress is to
be laid on such a preparation for death, as is made in a sit of sickness."

Sat. July 10. Just as they had done drinking tea, Mrs. Margaret seeing her
color change, asked, if she was well? She did not return any answer; and Dr.
Tal^er soon after going by, she desired him to step in, and said, "Sir, my
sister, I fear is not well." He looked earnestly at her, felt her pulse, and
replied, "Well, madam! Your sister is dying." However he thought it not
impossible, bleeding might help. She bled about an ounce, leaned back and died.

As soon as I heard of it, I went to the house, and begged they would not lay
her out immediately, there being a possibility, at least, she might only be in
a swoon: of which indeed there was some slight hope, she not only being as warm
as ever, but having a fresh color in her cheeks, and a few drops of blood
starting out, upon bending her arm: but there was no pulse and no breath; so
that having waited some hours, we found her spirit was indeed returned to God
who gave it.

I never saw so beautiful a corpse in my life. Poor comfort to its late
inhabitant! I was greatly surprised at her sister. There was in all her
behavior, such an inexpressible mixture of tenderness and resignation. The
first time I spoke to her, she said, "All my afflictions are nothing to this. I
have lost not only a sister, but a friend. But it is the will of God. I rely on
him; and doubt not but he will support me under it."

This evening we had such a storm of thunder and lightning, as I never saw
before even in Georgia. This voice of God too, told me I was not fit to die;
since I was afraid, rather than desirous of it! O when shall I wish to be
dissolved and to be with Christ! When I love him with all my heart.

Almost the whole town was the next evening at the funeral: where many
doubtless made a world of good resolutions. O how little trace of most of these
will be left in the morning! It Is a true saying, "Hell is paved with good
intentions."

Tues. July 20. Five of the Chicasaw Indians (twenty of whom had been in
Savannah several days) came to see us, with Mr. Andrews, their interpreter.
They were all warriors; four of them head men. The two chiefs were Paustoobee
and Mingo Mattaw. Our conference was as follows:

Q. Do you believe, there is one above who is over all things?

Paustoobee answered, We believe there are four beloved things above, the
clouds, the sun, the clear sky, and he that lives in the clear sky.

Q. Do you believe, there is but one that lives in the clear sky?

A. We believe, there are two with him, three in all.

Q. Do you think he made the sun, and the other beloved things?

A. We cannot tell. Who has seen?

Q. Do you think he made you?

A. We think he made all men at first.

Q. How did he make them at first?

A. Out of the ground.

Q. Do you believe he loves you?

A. I do not know. I cannot see him.

Q. But has he not often saved your life?

A. He has. Many bullets have gone on this side, and many on that side, but he
would never let them hurt me. And many bullets have gone into these young men;
and yet they are alive?

Q. Then, cannot he save you from your enemies now?

A. Yes, but we know not, if he will. We have now so many enemies round about
us, that I think of nothing but death. And if I am to die, I shall die, and I
will die like a man. But if he will have me to live I shall live. Though I had
ever so many enemies, he can destroy them all.

Q. How do you know that?

A. From what I have seen. When our enemies came against us before, then the
beloved clouds came for us. And often much rain, and sometimes hail has come
upon them, and that in a very hot day. And I saw, when many French and Choctaws
and other nations came against one of our towns. And the ground made a noise
under them, and the beloved ones in the air behind them. And they were afraid,
and went away, and left their meat and drink and their guns. I tell no lie. All
these saw it too.

Q. Have you heard such noises at other times?

A. Yes, often: before and after almost every battle.

Q. What sort of noises were they?

A. Like the noise of drums and guns and shouting.

Q. Have you heard any such lately?

A. Yes: four days after our last battle with the French.

Q. Then you heard nothing before it?

A. The night before I dreamed, I heard many drums up there: and many trumpets
there, and much stamping of feet and shouting. Till then I thought we should
all die. But then I thought the beloved ones were come to help us. And the next
day I heard above a hundred guns go off, before the fight began. And I said,
"When the sun is there, the beloved ones will help us; and we shall conquer our
enemies." And we did so.

Q. Do you often think and talk of the beloved ones?

A. We think of them always, wherever we are. We talk of them and to them, at
home and abroad; in peace, in war, before and after we fight; and indeed
whenever and wherever we meet together.

Q. Where do you think your souls go after death?

A. We believe the souls of red men walk up and down near the place where they
died, or where their bodies lie. For we have often heard cries and noise^ near
the place where any prisoners had been burnt.

Q. Where do the souls of white men go after death?

A. We cannot tell. We have not seen.

Q. Our belief is, that the souls of bad men only walk up and down; but the
souls of good men go up.

A. I believe so too. But I told you the talk of the nation.

(Mr. Andrews. They said at the burying, "They knew what you was doing. You was
speaking to the beloved ones above, to take up the soul of the young woman.")

Q. We have a book that tells us many things of the beloved ones above, would
you be glad to know them?

A. We have no time now, but to fight. If we should ever be at peace, we should
be glad to know?

Q. Do you expect ever to know what the white men know?

(Mr. Andrews. They told Mr O. They believe the time will come, when the red
and white men will be one)

Q. What do the French teach you?

A. The French black So they call the priests.
kings never go out. We see you go about. We like that. That is good.

Q. How came your nation by the knowledge they have?

A. As soon as ever the ground was sound, and fit to stand upon, it came to us,
and has been with us ever since. But we are young men. Our old men know more.
But all of them do not know. There are but a few; whom the beloved one chooses
from a child, and is in them, and takes care of them, and teaches them. They
know these things: and our old men practice: therefore they know. But I do not
practice. Therefore I know little.

Mond. July 26. My brother and I set out for Charleston, in order to his
embarking for England. But the wind being contrary, we did not reach Port.
Royal, 40 miles from Savannah, till Wednesday evening. The next morning we left
it. But the wind was so high in the afternoon, as we were crossing the neck of
St. Helena's sound, that our oldest sailor cried out "Now every one must take
care for himself." I told him, "God would take care for us all." Almost as soon
as the words were spoken, the mast fell. I kept on the edge of the boat, to be
clear of her when she sunk (which we expected every moment) though with little
prospect of swimming ashore, against such a wind and sea. But, How is it that
thou had no faith? The moment the mast fell, two men caught it and pulled it
into the boat; the other three rowed with all their might, and God gave command
to the wind and seas, so that in an hour we were safe on land.

Sat. July 31. We came to Charleston. The church is of brick, but plaistered
over like stone. I believe it would contain three or four thousand persons.
About three hundred were present at the morning service the next day (when Mr.
Garden desired me to preach) about fifty at the holy commun^^^. I was glad to
see several negroes at church, one of whom told me, "She was there constantly;
and that her old mistress (now dead) had many times instructed her in the
Christian religion. I asked her, "What religion was?" She said, "She could not
tell." I asked, "If she knew what a soul was?" She answered, "No." I said, "Do
not you know there is something in you, different from your body? Something you
cannot see or feel?" She replied, "I never heard so much before." I added, "Do
you think then, a man dies altogether as a horse dies?" She said, "Yes, to be
sure." O God, where are thy tender mercies? Are they not over all thy works?
When shall the Sun of righteousness arise on these outcasts of men, with
healing in his wings!

Mond. August 2. I set out for the lieutenant governor's seat, about thirty
miles from Charleston, to deliver Mr. Oglethorpe's letters. It stands very
pleasant, on a little hill, with a vale on either side, in one of which is a
thick wood; the other is planted with rice and Indian corn. I designed to have
gone back by Mr. Skeene's, who has about fifty Christian negroes. But my horse
tiring, I was obliged to return the straight way to Charleston.

I had sent the boat we came in back to Savannah, expecting a passage thither
myself in Col. Bull's. His not going so soon, I went to Ashley-ferry on
Thursday, intending to walk to Port Royal. But Mr. Belinger not only provided
me a horse, but rode with me himself ten miles, and sent his son with me to
Cumbee-ferry twenty miles farther? whence having hired horses and a guide, I
came to Beaufort (on Port Royal) the next evening. We took boat in the morning;
but the wind being contrary, and very high, did not reach Savannah till Sunday
in the afternoon. -- Finding Mr. Oglethorpe was gone, I stayed only a day (...)
Savannah: and leaving Mr. Ingham and Delamotte there, set out on Tuesday
morning for Frederica. In walking to Thunderbolt, I was in so heavy a shower,
that all my clothes were as wet as if I had gone through the river. On which
occasion I cannot but observe that vulgar error, concerning the hurtfulness of
the rains and dews of America. I have been thoroughly wet with these rains more
than once; yet without any harm at all. And I have lain many nights in the open
air, and received all the dews that fell. And so I believe might any one, if
his constitution was not impaired by the softness of a genteel education.

At Thunderbolt we took boat, and on Friday, Aug, 13. came to Frederica, where
I delivered Mr. O. the letters I had brought from Carolina. The next day he set
out for Fort St. George. From that time I had less and less prospect of doing
good at Frederica; many there being extremely zealous, and indefatigably
diligent to prevent it: and few of the rest daring to show themselves of
another mind, for fear of their displeasure.

Sat. 28. I set apart (out of the few we had) a few books toward a library at
Frederica. In the afternoon I walked to the fort on the other side of the
island. About five we set out homeward. But my guide not being perfect in the
way, we were soon lost in the woods. We walked on however as well as we could,
till between nine and ten, when being heartily tired, and thoroughly wet with
dew, we lay down and slept till morning.

About daybreak, on Sunday the 29th, we set out again endeavoring to walk
straight forward, and soon after sunrise found ourselves in the Great Savannah
near Frederica. By this good providence I was delivered from another fear, that
of lying in the woods, which experience showed, was to one in tolerable health
a mere lion in the way.

Thurs. Sept. 2. I set out in a sloop, and about ten on Sunday morning, came to
Skidoway; which (after reading prayers, and preaching to a small congregation)
I left and came to Savannah in the evening.

Mond. 13. I began reading with Mr. Delamotte, bishop Beveridge's Pandect^
Canonum Conciliorum. -- Nothing could so effectually have convinced us, that
both particular and general councils may err, and have erred: and that things
ordained by them as necessary to salvation, have neither strength ^or
authority, unless they be taken out of holy scripture.

Mond. 20. We ended (of which also I must confess. I once thought more highly
than I ought to think) the apostolical canons; so called, as bishop Beveridge
observes, because partly grounded upon, partly agreeing with, the traditions
delivered down from the apostles. But he farther observes (in the 159th page of
his Code^ Ganonum Ecclesiae Primitivae: and why did he not observe it in the
first page of the book?) They contain the discipline used in the church at the
time when they were collected: not when the council of Nice met; for then many
parts of it were useless and obsolete.

Tuesd. October 12. We considered if any thing could yet be done, for the poor
people of Frederica. And I submitted to the judgment of my friends, which was,
that I should take another journey thither: Mr. Ingham undertaking to supply my
place at Savannah, for the time I should stay there. I came thither on Sat. the
16th, and found few things better than I expected. The morning and evening
prayers, which were read for a while after my leaving the place, had been long
discontinued, and from that time every thing grew worse and worse: not many
retaining any more of the form than the power of godliness.

I was at first a little discouraged, but soon remembered the word which cannot
fail, Greater is he that is in you than he that is in the world. I cried to God
to arise and maintain his own cause: and after the evening prayers were ended,
invited a few to my house (as I did every night while I stayed at Frederica.) I
read to them one of the exhortations of Ephraim Syrus, the the most awakening
writer (I think) of all the ancients. We concluded our reading and conversation
with a psalm, and I trust, our God gave us his blessing.

Mond. 18. Finding there were several Germans at Frederica, who not
understanding the English tongue, could not join in our public service, I
desired them to meet me at my house; which they did every day at noon from
thence forward. We first sung a German hymn, then I read a chapter in the New
Testament, then explained it to them as well as I could. After another hymn we
concluded with prayer.

Mond. 25. I took boat, and after a flow and dangerous passage, came to
Savannah on Sunday the 31st.

Tues. Novem. 23. Mr. Oglethorpe sailed for England, leaving Mr. Ingham, Mr.
Delamotte and me at Savannah, but with less prospect of preaching to the
Indians, than we had the first day we set foot in America. Whenever I mentioned
it, it was immediately replied, "You cannot leave Savannah without a minister."
To this indeed my plain answer was, "I know not that I am under any obligation
to the contrary. I never promised to stay here one (...). I ^^^^ly declared
both before, at, and ever (...) (...), that I neither would nor could take
charge of the English any longer than till I could go among the Indians." If it
was said, "But did not the trustees of Georgia appoint you to be minister of
Savannah?" I replied "They did; h^t it was not done by my solicitation (...) it
was done without either: my desire or knowledge. Therefore I cannot conceive
that appointment to lay me under any obligation of continuing there, any longer
than till a door is opened to the Heathens; and this I expressly declared, at
the time I consented to accept of that appointment." But though I had no other
obligation not to leave Savannah now, yet that of love I could not break
through: I could not resist the importunate request of the more serious
parishioners, "To watch over their souls yet a little longer, till some one
came who might supply my place." And this I the more willingly did, because the
time was not come to preach the gospel of peace to the Heathens; all their
nations being in a ferment: and Paustoobee and Mingo Mattaw, having told me, in
terms, in my own house, "Now our enemies are all about us, we can do nothing
but sight: but if the beloved ones should ever give us to be at peace, then we
would hear the great word."

Thurs. Dec. 9. Hearing of (...) dangerously ill, I went to her immediately:
she (...), "That she had many things to say:" but h^^ weakness prevented her
saying them the^; (...) the next day God required her soul of her.

Wed. 23. Mr. Delamotte and I, with a guide, set out to walk to the Cowpens;
when we had walked two or three hours, our guide told us plainly, "He did not
know where we were." However, believing it could not be far off, we thought it
best to go on. In an hour or two we came to a Cypress Swamp, which lay directly
across our way: there was not time to walk back to Savannah before night; so we
walked through it, the water being about breast-high. By that time we had gone
a mile beyond it, we were out of all path; and it being now past sunset, we
sat down, intending to make a fire, and to stay there till morning; but finding
our tinder wet, we were at a stand; I advised to walk on still: but my
companions being faint and weary, were for lying down, which we accordingly did
about six o'clock: the ground was as wet as our clothes, which (it being a
sharp frost) were soon froze together; however, I slept till six in the
morning. There fell a heavy dew in the night, which covered us over as white as
snow. Within an hour after sunrise, we came to a plantation, and in the
evening, without any hurt to Savannah.

Tues. 28. We set out by land with a better guide for Frederica. On Wednesday
evening we came to Fort-Argyle, on the back of the river Ogeechy. The next
afternoon we crossed Cooanoochy river in a small cano^, our horses swimming by
the side of it. We made a fire on the bank, and notwithstanding the rain, slept
quietly till the morning.

Sat. Jan. 1, 1737. Our provisions fell short, our journey being longer than we
expected: but having a little barbe^^^d bears-flesh (i. e. dried in the sun) we
boiled it, and found it wholesome food. The next day we reached (...), the
settlement of the Scotch highlanders, a sober, industrious, friendly,
hospitable people; whose minister, Mr. McLeod, is a serious, resolute, and (I
hope) a pious man.

On Monday evening we left Darien, and on Wed. 5. came to Frederica. Most here
were as we expected, cold and heartless: we found not one who retained his
first love. O send forth thy light and thy truth, that they may guide them! Let
them not yet follow their own imaginations!

After having beaten the air in this unhappy place for twenty days, on January
26, I took my final leave of Frederica. It was not any apprehension of my own
danger (though my life had been threatened many times) but an utter despair of
doing good there, which made me content with the thought of seeing it no more.

In my passage home, having procured a celebrated book, the works of Nicholas
Machiavel, I set myself carefully to read and consider it. I began with a
prejudice in his favor; having been informed, he had often been misunderstood,
and greatly misrepresented. I weighed the sentiments that were less common;
transcribed the passages wherein they were contained; compared one passage with
another, and endeavored to form a cool, impartial judgment. And my cool
judgment is, that if all the other doctrines of devils which have been
committed to writing, since letters were in the world, were collected together
in one volume, it would fall short of this: and, that should a prince form
himself by this book, so calmly recommending hypoerisy, treachery, lying,
robbery, oppression, adultery, whoredom and murder of all kinds; Domitian or
Nero would be an angel of light, compared to that man.

Mon. Jan. 31. We came to Savannah. Tuesday Feb. 1. being the anniversary
feast, on account of the first convoy's landing in Georgia, we had a sermon and
the holy communion. Thurs. 24. It was agreed Mr. Ingham should go for England,
and endeavor to bring over (if it should please God) some of our friends to
strengthen our hands in his work. Sat. 26. He left Savannah.

By Mr. Ingham I writ to Dr. Bray's associates, who had sent a parochial
library to Savannah. It is expected of the ministers who receive these, to send
an account to their benefactors of the method they use in catechizing the
children, and instructing the youth of their respective parishes. That part of
the letter, was as follows:

"Our general method is this: A young gentleman who came with me, teaches
between thirty and forty children to read, write, and cast accounts. Before
school in the morning, and after school in the afternoon, he catechizes the
lowest class, and endeavors to fix something of what was said, in their
understandings as well as their memories. In the evening he instructs the
larger children. On Saturday in the afternoon I catechize them all. The same I
do on Sunday before the evening service. And in the church, immediately after
the second lesson, a select number of them having repeated the catechism and
been examined in some part of it, I endeavor to explain at large, and to
enforce that part, both on them and the congregation.

"Some time after the evening service, as many of my parishioners as desire it,
meet at my house (as they do also on Wednesday evening) and spend about an hour
in prayer, singing and mutual exhortation. A smaller number (mostly those who
design to communicate the next day) meet here on Saturday evening: and a few of
these come to me on the other evenings, and pass half an hour in the same
employment."

Fri. March 4. I writ the trustees for Georgia an account of our year's expense
from March 1, 1736, to March 1, 1737. Which, deducting extraordinary expenses
(such as repairing the parsonage house, and journies to Frederica) amounted for
Mr. Delamotte and me to 44 l. 4 s. 4 d.

From the directions I received from God this day, touching an affair of the
greatest importance, I could not but observe (as I had done many times before)
the entire mistake of those, who assert, "God will not answer your prayer,
unless your heart be wholly resigned to his will." My heart was not wholly
resigned to his will. Therefore, not daring to depend on my own judgment, I
cried the more earnestly to him, to supply what was wanting in me. And I know
and am assured, he heard my voice, and did send forth his light and his truth.

Thurs. 24. A fire broke out in the house of Robert Hows, and in an hour burnt
it to the ground. A collection was made for him the next day; and the
generality of the people showed a surprising willingness, to give a little out
of their little, for the relief of a necessity greater than their own.

About this time Mr. L^cy of Thunderbolt called upon me; when observing him to
be in a deep sadness, I asked, what was the reason of it? And a terrible one
indeed he gave in the relation following.

In 1733, David Jones, a sadler, a middle-aged man, who had for some time
before lived at Nottingham, being at Bristol, met a person there; who after
giving him some account of Georgia, asked, Whether he would go thither? Adding,
his trade (that of a sadler) was an exceeding good trade there, upon which he
might live creditably and comfortably. He objected his want of money to pay his
passage, and buy some tools which he should have need of. The gentleman (Capt.
W.) told him, he would supply him with that, and hire him a shop when he came
to Georgia, wherein he might follow his business, and so repay him, as it
suited his convenience. Accordingly to Georgia they went; where soon after his
arrival, his master (as he now styled himself) sold him to Mr. Lacy, who set
him to work with the rest of his servants in clearing land. He commonly
appeared much more thoughtful than the rest, often stealing into the woods
alone. He was now sent to do some work on an island, three or four miles from
Mr. Lacy's great plantation. Thence he desired the other servants to return
without him, saying, He would stay and kill a deer. This was on Saturday. On
Monday they found him on the shore, with his gun by him, and the forepart of
his head shot to pieces. In his pocket was a paper-book, all the leaves thereof
were fair, except one, on which ten or twelve verses were written; two of which
were these (which I transcribed thence, from his own hand, writing) Death could
not a more sad retinue find;
Sickness and pain before, and darkness all behind!


Sun. April 3. And every day in this great and holy week, we had a sermon and
the holy communion.

Mon. 4. I began learning Spanish, in order to converse with my Jewish
Parishioners: some of whom seem nearer the mind that was in Christ, than many
of those who call him Lord.

Tues. 12. Being determined, if possible, to put a stop to the proceedings of
one in Carolina, who had married several of my parishioners without either
banns or license, and declared, "He would do so still:" I set out in a sloop
for Charleston. I landed there on Thursday, and related the case to Mr. Garden,
the bishop of London's commissary, who assured me, "he would take care no such
irregularity should be committed for the future."

Sun. 17. Mr. Garden (to whom I must ever acknowledge myself indebted for many
kind and generous offices) desiring me to preach, I did so, on those words of
the epistle for the day, Whatsoever is born of God, overcomes the world. To
that plain account of the Christian state which these words naturally lead me
to give, a man of education and character seriously objected. (what is indeed a
great truth) "Why if this be Christianity, a Christian must have more courage
than Alexander the Great."

Tues. 19. We left Charleston; but meeting with stormy and contrary winds,
after losing our anchor, and beating out at sea all night, on Thurs. 21, we
with some difficulty got back into Charleston harbor.

Fri. 22. It being the time of their annual visitation, I had the pleasure of
meeting with the clergy of South Carolina: among whom in the afternoon there
was such a conversation for several hours, on "Christ our Righteousness," as I
had not heard at any visitation in England, or hardly on any other occasion.

Sat. 23. Mentioning to Mr. Thompson, minister of St. Bartholomew's, near
Ponpon, my being disappointed of a passage home by water, he offered me one of
his horses, if I would go by land, which I gladly accepted of. He went with me
twenty miles, and sent his servant to guide me the other twenty to his house.
Finding a young negro there, who seemed more sensible than the rest, I asked
her how long she had been in Carolina? She said, two or three years; but that
she was born in Barbados, and had lived there in a minister's family from a
child. I asked, Whether she went to church there? She said, Yes, every Sunday,
-- to carry my mistress's children. I asked what she had learned at church? She
said, Nothing; I heard a deal; but did not understand it. But what did your
master teach you at home? Nothing. Nor your mistress? No. I asked, "But don't
you know, that your hands and feet, and this you call your body, will turn to
dust in a little time? She answered, Yes. But there is something in you that
will not turn to dust, and this is what they call your soul. Indeed, you cannot
see your soul, though it is within you, as you cannot see the wind, though it is
all about you. But if you had not a soul in you, you could no more see, or
hear, or feel, than this table can. What do you think will become of your soul,
when your body turns to dust? I don't know. Why, it will go out of your body,
and go up there, above the sky, and live always. God lives there. Do you know
who God is? No. You cannot see him, any more than you can see your own soul. It
is he that made you and me, and all men and women, and all beasts and birds,
and all the world. It is he that makes the sun shine, and rain fall, and corn
and fruits to grow out of the ground. He makes all these for us. But why do you
think he made us? What did he make you and me for? I cannot tell. He made you to
live with himself above the sky. And so you will, in a little time, -- if you
are good. If you are good, then when your body dies, your soul will go up, and
want nothing, and have whatever you can desire. No one will beat or hurt you
there. You will never be sick, You will never be sorry any more, nor afraid of
any thing. I cannot tell you, I don't know how happy you will be: for you will
be with God.

The attention with which this poor creature listened to instruction is
inexpressible. The next day she remembered all, readily answered every
question; and said, She would ask him that made her, to show her how to be good.

Sun. 24. I preached twice at Ponpon chapel, o^ the 13th chapter of the first
epistle to the Corinthians. O how will even those men of Carolina, who come
eight, ten, or twelve miles to hear the gospel, rise i^ judgment against those
who hear it not, when it is preached at their own doors!

Wednes. 27. I came to Mr. Belinger's plantation at Chulifinny, where the rain
kept me till Friday. Here I met with an half Indian (one that had an Indian
mother, and a Spanish father) and several negroes, who were very desirous of
instruction. One of them said, "When I was at Ashley-Ferry, I went to church
every Sunday. But here we are buried in the woods. Though if there was any
church within five or six miles, I am so lame I cannot walk, but I would orawl
thither."

Mr. Belinger sent a negro lad with me to Purrysburg, or rather to the poor
remains of it. O how has God stretched over this place the lines of confusion,
and the stones of emptiness! Alas for those whose lives were here vilely cast
away, through oppression, through diverse plagues and troubles! O earth! How
long will thou hide their blood! How long will thou cover thy slain?

This lad too I found both very desirous and very capable of instruction. And
perhaps one of the easiest and shortest ways to instruct the American negroes
in Christianity, would be first to enquire after and find out some of the most
serious of the planters. Then having enquired of them, which of their slaves
were best inclined and understood English, to go to them from plantation to
plantation, staying as long as appeared necessary at each. Three or four
gentlemen in Carolina I have been with, that would be sincerely glad of such an
assistant; who might pursue his work with no more hindrance than must every
where attend the preaching of the gospel.

Sat. 30. I came to Savannah, and found my little flock in a better state than
I could have expected: God having been pleased greatly to bless the endeavors
of my fellow laborer, while I was absent from them.

Wednes. May 18. I discovered the first convert to deism that (I believe) has
been made here. He was one that for some time had been zealously and
exemplarily religious. But indulging himself in harmless company, he first made
shipwreck of his zeal, and then of his faith. I have since found several others
that have been attacked. They have as yet maintained their ground. But I doubt
the devil's apostles are too industrious to let them long halt between two
opinions.

Wednes. 25. I was sent for by one who had been several years of the church of
Rome; but was now deeply convinced (as were several others) by what I had
occasionally preached, of the grievous errors that church is in, and the great
danger of continuing a member of it. Upon this occasion I could not but reflect
on the many advices I had received, to beware of the increase of Popery: but
not one (that I remember) to beware of the increase of infidelity. This was
quite surprising, when I considered, 1. That in every place where I have yet
been, the number of the converts to Popery bore no proportion to the number of
the converts to infidelity. 2. That as bad a religion as Popery is, no religion
is still worse; a baptized infidel being always found upon the trial, twofold
worse than even a bigoted Papist. 3. That as dangerous a state as a Papist is
in, with regard to eternity, a Deist is in a yet more dangerous state, if he be
not (without repentance) an assured heir of damnation. And lastly, That as hard
as it is to recover a Papist, it is still harder to recover an infidel: I
myself having known many Papists, but never one Deist reconverted.

May 29. Being Whitsunday, four of our scholars, after having been instructed
daily for several weeks, were at their earnest and repeated desire, admitted to
the Lord's table. I trust their zeal has stirred up many, to remember their
Creator in the days of their youth, and to redeem the time, even in the midst
of an evil and adulterous generation.

Indeed about this time we observed the Spirit of God to move upon the minds of
many of the children. They began more carefully to attend to the things that
were spoken both at home and at church, and a remarkable seriousness appeared
in their whole behavior and conversation. Who knows but some of them may grow
up, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ?

June 25. Mr. Causton (the store-keeper and chief magistrate of Savannah) was
seized with a slow fever. I attended him every day (as I did any of my
parishioners, who were in any painful or dangerous illness) and had a good hope
from the thankfulness he showed, that my labor was not in vain.

Sun. July 3. Immediately after the holy communion, I mentioned to Mrs.
Williamson (Mr. Causton's neice) some things which I thought reproveable in her
behavior. At this she appeared extremely angry, and said, She did not expect
such usage from me; and at the turn of the street (through which we were
walking home) went abruptly away. The next day Mrs. Causton endeavored to
excuse her, told me, She was exceedingly grieved for what had passed the day
before, and desired me to tell her in writing what I disliked; which I
accordingly did the day following.

But first, I sent Mr. Causton the following note: SIR,
"To this hour, you have shown yourself my friend: I ever have and ever shall
acknowledge it. And it is my earnest desire, that he who had hitherto given me
this blessing, would continue it still.

"But this cannot be, unless you will allow me one request, which is not so
easy a one as it appears, Don't condemn me for doing in the execution of my
office, what I think is my duty to do.

"If you can prevail upon yourself to allow me this, even when I act without
respect of persons, I am persuaded there will never be, at least not long, any
misunderstanding between us. For even those who seek it, shall I trust, find no
occasion against me, except it be concerning the law of my God."

July 5, 1737. I am, etc.




Wednes. 6. Mr. Causton came to my house, with Mr. Bailiff Parker, and Mr.
Recorder; and warmly asked, "How could you possibly think I should condemn you,
for executing any part of your office?" I said short, "Sir, what if I should
think it the duty of my office, to repel one of your family from the holy
communion?" He replied, "If you repel me or my wife, I shall require a legal
reason. But I shall trouble myself about none else. Let them look to
themselves."

Sat. 9. Meeting with a Frenchman of New Orleans on the Missisippi, who had
lived several months among the Chicasaws, he gave us a full and particular
account of many things which had been variously related. And hence we could not
but remark, What is the religion of nature properly so called; or, that
religion which flows from natural reason, unassisted by revelation. And that,
even in those who have the knowledge of many truths; and who converse with
their beloved ones day and night. But too plainly does it appear by the fruits,
That the gods of these Heathens to^ are but devils.

The substance of his account was this; Some years past the Chicasaws and
French were friends. The French were then mingled with the Nautchee Indians,
whom they used as slaves; till the Nautchees made a general rising, and took
many of the French, prisoners. But soon after, a French army set upon them,
killed many and carried away the rest. Among those that were killed were some
Chicasaws, whose death the Chicasaw nation resented; and soon after a French
boat was going through their country, they fired into it, and killed all the
men but two. The French resolved ^n revenge, and orders were given for many
Indian^ and several parties of white men, to rendezvous on the 26th of March,
1736, near one of the Chicasaw towns. The (...) party, consisting of fifty men,
came thither some days before the time. They staid there till the 24th, but
none came to join them. On the 25th, they were attacked by two hundred
Chicasaws. The French attempted to force their way through them. Five or six
and twenty did so; the rest were taken prisoners. The prisoners were sent two
or three to a town to be burnt. Only the commanding officer and one or two more
were put to death on the place of the engagement."

"I (said he) and one more, were saved by the warrior who took us. The manner
of burning the rest was, holding lighted canes to their arms and legs and
several parts of their bodies for some time, and then for a while taking them
away. They likewise stuck burning pieces of wood into their flesh all round, in
which condition they kept them from morning till evening. But they commonly
beat them before they burn them. I saw the priest that was with us carried to
be burnt: and from head to foot, he was as black as your coat with the blows
which they had given him."

I asked him, "What was their manner of life?" He said, "They do nothing but
eat, and drink, and smoke, from morning till night, and in a manner from night
till morning. For they rise at any hour of the night when they wake; and after
eating and drinking as much as they can, go to sleep again." See The religion
of nature truly delineated!

Saturday 23. Reflecting on the state I was now in, I could not but observe in
a letter to a friend, "How to attain to the being crucified with Christ, I find
not, being in a condition I neither desired, nor expected in America, in ease
and honor, and abundance. A strange school for him who has but one business,
(...). To exercise himself unto godliness.


Wednes. 27. I rejoiced to meet once more with that good soldier of Jesus
Christ, August Spangenberg; with whom on Monday, August 1, I began my long
intended journey to Ebenezer. In the way I told him, "The calm we had so long
enjoyed, was now drawing to an end: that I hoped he would shortly see I was not
(as some had told him) a respecter of persons; but was determined (God being my
helper) to behave indifferently to all, rich or poor, friends or enemies." I
then asked his advice as to the difficulty I foresaw, and resolved, by God's
grace to follow it.

In the evening we came to New Ebenezer, where the poor Saltzburghers are
settled. The industry of this people is quite surprising. Their sixty huts are
neatly and regularly built; and all the little spots of ground between them,
improved to the best advantage. One side of the town, is a field of Indian
corn; on the other are the plantations of several private persons: all which
together one would scarce think it possible for a handful of people to have
done in one year.

Wednes. 3. We returned to Savannah. Sund. 7, I repelled Mrs. Williamson from
the holy communion. And Mond. 8, Mr. Recorder of Savannah, issued out the
warrant following: Georgia. Savannah, ss. To all Constables, Tythingmen and
others, whom these may concern:
"You and each of you are hereby required, to take the body of John Wesley,
Clerk:

"And bring him before one of the bailiffs of the said town, to answer the
complaint of William Williamson and Sophia his wife, for defaming the said
Sophia, and refusing to administer to her the sacrament of the Lord's supper,
in a public congregation, without cause; by which the said William Williamson
is damaged one thousand pounds sterling. And for so doing, this is your
warrant, certifying what you are to do in the premises. Given under my hand
and seal the 8th day of Aug. Anno Dom. 1737.

Tho. Christie."




Tues. 9. Mr. Jones the constable served the warrant, and carried me before Mr.
Bailiff Parker and Mr. Recorder. My answer to them was, that "The giving or
refusing the Lord's supper, being a matter purely ecclesiastical, I could not
acknowledge their power, to interrogate me upon it." Mr. Parker told me,
"However, you must appear at the next court holden for Savannah." Mr.
Williamson (who stood by) said, "Gentlemen, I desire Mr. Wesley may give bail
for his appearance." But Mr. Parker immediately replied, Sir, Mr. Wesley's word
is sufficient.

Wedn. 10. Mr. Causton (from a just regard, as his letter expressed it, to the
friendship which had subsisted between us, ^ill this affair) required me, to
give the reasons in the courthouse, why I repelled Mrs. Williamson from the
holy communion? I answered, "I apprehend many ill consequences may arise from
so doing. Let the cause be laid before the trustees."

Thurs. 11. Mr. Causton came to my house, and among many other sharp words
said, "Make an end of this matter, thou had best. My niece to be used thus! I
have drawn the sword, and I will never sheath it, till I have satisfaction."

Soon after he added, "Give the reasons of your repelling her, before the whole
congregation," I answered, "Sir, if you insist upon it, I will; and so you may
be pleased to tell her." He said, "Write to her, and tell her so yourself." I
said, I will; and after he went, I wrote as follows.

To Mrs. Sophia Williamson.
"At Mr. Causton's request, I write once more. The rules whereby I proceed are
these:

" So many as intend to be partakers of the Holy Communion, shall signify their
names to the curate, at least some time the day before. This you did not do.

" And if any of these -- have done any wrong to his neighbors by word or
deed, so that the congregation be thereby offended, the curate -- shall
advertise him that in any wise he presume not to come to the Lord's table, un^^
he has openly declared himself to have truly repented.

"If you offer yourself at the Lord's table on Sunday, I will advertise you (as
I have done more than once) wherein you have done wrong. And when you have
openly declared yourself to have truly repented, I will administer to you the
mysteries of God.

Aug. 11, 1737. John Wesley."


Mr. Delamotte carrying this, Mr. Causton said, among many other warm sayings,
"I am the person that am injured. The affront is offered to me; and I will
espouse the cause of my niece. I am ill used; and I will have satisfaction, if
it be to be had in the world."

Which way this satisfaction was to (...) had, I did not yet conceive. But on
Friday and Saturday it began to appear; Mr. Causton declared to many persons,
that Mr. Wesley had repelled Sophy from the Holy Communion, purely out of
revenge; because he had made proposals of marriage to her, which she rejected,
and married Mr. Williamson.

I could not but observe the gracious providence of God, in the course of the
lessons all this week. On Mond. evening God spoke to us in these words. Call to
remembrance the former days, in which you end^^red a great fight of
afflictions: partly whilst ye were made a gazing-stock, both by reproaches and
afflictions, and partly ^ilst ye became companions of them that were so used.
-- Cast not away therefore your confidence, which has great recompense of
reward, For ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God,
ye might receive the promise.

The evening lesson on Tuesday, was the 11th of the Hebrews; in reading which I
was more particularly encouraged by his example, who chose rather to suffer
affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season: esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of
Egypt.

The lesson on Wednesday began with these words, Wherefore seeing we are
compast about with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight
-- and run with patience the race that is set before us: looking unto Jesus the
author and sinisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him,
endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of
the throne of God.

In the Thursday lesson were these comfortable words, I will never leave thee
nor forsake thee. So that we may boldly say, the Lord is my helper, and I will
not fear what man shall do unto me.

The words of St. James, read on Friday were, Blessed is the man that endures
temptation: and those on Saturday, My brethren, Have not the faith of our Lord
Jesus Christ -- with respect of persons.

I was only afraid, lest those who were weak, should be turned out of the way,
at least, so far as to forsake the public assembling of themselves together.
But I feared where no fear was. God took care of this also. So that on Sunday
14, more were present at the morning prayers, than had been for some months
before. Many of them observed those words in the first lesson, Set Naboth on
high among the people; and set two men, sons of Belial, before him, to bear
witness against him.

Tues. 16. Mrs. Williamson swore to and signed an affidavit, insinuating much
more than it asserted; but asserting, "That Mr. Wesley had many times proposed
marriage to her, all which proposals she had rejected." Of this I desired a
copy: Mr. Causton replied, "Sir, You may have one from any of the News papers
in America."

On Thursday or Friday was delivered out a list of twenty-six men, who were to
meet as a grand jury, on Monday the 22d. But this list was called in the next
day, and twenty-four names added to it. Of this grand jury (forty-four of whom
only met) one was a Frenchman, who did not understand English, one a papist,
one a professed Infidel, three Baptists, sixteen or seventeen others, Dissenters,
and several others who had personal quarrels against me, and had openly vowed
revenge.

To this grand jury, on Monday the 22d, Mr. Causton gave a long and earnest
charge, To beware of spiritual tyranny, and to oppose the now, illegal
authority which was usurped over their consciences. Then Mrs. Williamson's
affidavit was read: after which Mr. Causton delivered to the grand jury, a
paper entitled

"A list of grievances, presented by the grand jury for Savannah, this (...)
day of Aug. 1737."

This the majority of the grand jury altered in some particulars, and on Thurs.
Sept. 1, delivered it again to the court, under the form of two presentiments,
containing ten bills, which were then read to the people.

Herein they asserted, upon oath, "That John Wesley, Clerk, had broken the laws
of the realm, contrary to the peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, his crown
and dignity.

"1.By speaking and writing to Mrs. Williamson, against her husband's consent:

"2.By repelling her from the Holy Communion:

"3.By not declaring his adherence to the church of England:

"4.By dividing the morning service on Sundays:

"5.By refusing to baptize Mr. Parker's child otherwise than by dipping, except
the parents would certify it was weak, and not able to bear it:

"6.By repelling William Gough from the Holy Communion:

"7.By refusing to read the burial service over the body of Nathamel Polhill:

"8.By calling himself Ordinary of Savannah.

"9.By refusing to receive William Aglionby, as a godfather, only because he
was not a communicant:

"10.By refusing Jacob Matthews for the same reason: and baptizing an Indian
trader's child with only two sponsors." (This, I own was wrong; for I ought, at
all hazards, to have refused baptizing it till he had procured a third.)

Frid. 2. Was the third court, at which I appeared, since my being carried
before Mr. P. and the recorder.

I now moved for an immediate hearing on the first bill, being the only one of
a civil nature: but it was refused. I made the same motion in the afternoon;
but was put off till the next court day.

On the next court day I appeared again; as also at the two courts following:
but could not be heard, because (the Judge said) Mr. Williamson was gone out of
town.

The sense of the minority of the grand jurors themselves (for they were by no
means unanimous) concerning these presentiments, may appear from the following
paper, which they transmitted to the trustees.

To the Honorable the Trustees for Georgia.
"Whereas two presentiments have been made, the one of August 23, the other of
August 31, by the grand jury for the town and county of Savannah in Georgia,
against John Wesley, Clerk.

"We whose names are underwritten, being members of the said grand jury, do
humbly beg leave to signify our dislike of the said presentiments; being by many
and diverse circumstances thoroughly persuaded in ourselves, that the whole
charge against Mr. Wesley, is an artifice of Mr. Causton's, designed rather to
blacken the character of Mr. Wesley, than to free the colony from religious
tyranny, as he was pleased in his charge to us to term it. But as these
circumstances will be too tedious to trouble your honors with, we shall only
beg leave to give the reasons of our dissent from the particular bills.

"With regard to the first bill, we do not apprehend, that Mr. Wesley acted
against any law, by writing or speaking to Mrs. Williamson, since (...) does
not appear to us, that the said Mr. Wesley has either spoke in private, or
wrote to the said Mrs. Williamson, since March 12 (the day of her marriage,)
except one letter of July the 5th, which he wrote at the request of her uncle,
as a pastor to exhort and reprove her.

"The second we do not apprehend to be a true bill, because we humbly conceive
Mr. Wesley did not assume to himself any authority contrary to law: for we
understand, Every person intending to communicate, should "signify his name to
the curate, at least some time the day before," which Mrs. Williamson did not
do; although Mr. Wesley had often in full congregation declared, he did insist
on a compliance with that rubric, and had before repelled diverse persons, for
noncompliance therewith.

"The third we do not think a true bill, because several of us have been his
hearers, when he has declared his adherence to the church of England, in a
stronger manner than by a formal declaration; by explaining and defending the
Apostles, the Nicene and the Athanasian Creeds, the Thirty-nine Articles, the
whole Book of Common Prayer, and the Homilies of the said church: and because
we think a formal declaration is not required, but from those who have received
institution and induction.

"The fact alleged in the fourth bill we cannot apprehend to be contrary to
any law in being.

"The fifth we do not think a true bill, because we conceive Mr. Wesley is
justified by the rubric, viz. If they (the parents) certify that the child is
weak, it shall suffice to pour water upon it." Intimating (as we humbly
suppose) it shall not suffice, if they do not certify.

"The sixth cannot be a true bill, because the said William Gough, being one of
our members, was surprised to hear himself named, without his knowledge or
privity; and did publicly declare, It was no grievance to him, because the said
John Wesley, had given him reasons with which he was satisfied.

"The seventh we do not apprehend to be a true bill, for Nathaniel Polhill was
an Anabaptist, and defired in his lifetime, that he might not be interred with
the office of the church of England. And farther, we have good reason to
believe, that Mr. Wesley was at Frederica, or on his return thence, when
Polhill was buried.

"As to the eighth bill we are in doubt, as not well knowing the meaning of the
word Ordinary. But for the ninth and tenth, we think Mr. Wesley is sufficiently
justified by the canons of the church; which forbid any person to be admitted
godfather or godmother to any child, before the said person has received the
Holy Communion; whereas William Aglionby and Jacob Matthews, had never
certified Mr. Wesley that they had received it."


This was signed by twelve of the grand jurors, of whom three were constables,
and six more, tythingmen: who consequently would have made a majority, had the
jury consisted, as it regularly should have done, of only fifteen members, viz.
the four constables and eleven tythingmen.

Friday, Sept. 30. Having ended the homilies, I began reading Dr. Rogers's
eight sermons to the congregation: hoping they might be a timely antidote
against the poison of infidelity, which was now with great industry propagated
among us.

October the 7th, I consulted my friends, whether God did not call me, to
return to England? The reason for which I left it had now no force; there being
no possibility as yet of instructing the Indians: neither had I as yet found or
heard of any Indians on the continent of America, who had the least desire of
being instructed. And as to Savannah, having never engaged myself, either by
word or letter, to stay there a day longer than I should judge convenient, nor
ever take charge of the people any otherwise, than as in my passage to the
Heathens, I looked upon myself to be fully discharged therefrom, by the
vacating of that design. Besides, there was a probability of doing more service
to that unhappy people in England, than I could do in Georgia, by representing
without fear or favor to the trustees, the real state the colony was in. After
deeply considering these things, they were unanimous, That I ought to go: but
not yet. So I laid the thoughts of it aside for the present: being persuaded,
that when the time was come, God would make the way plain before my face.

Sat. Oct. 15. Being at Highgate, a village five miles from Savannah,
consisting of (all but one) French families, who, I found, knew but little of
the English tongue, I offered to read prayers there in French every Saturday in
the afternoon. They embraced the offer gladly. On Saturday the 22d I read
prayers in German likewise, to the German villagers of Hampstead: and so
continued to do, once a week. We began the service (both at Highgate and
Hampstead) with singing a psalm. Then I read and explained a chapter in the
French or German testament, and concluded with prayers and another psalm.

Sat. Oct. 22. Some of the French of Savannah were present at the prayers at
Highgate. The next day I received a message from them all, "That as I read
prayers to the French of Highgate, who were but few, they hoped I would do the
same to those of Savannah, where there was a large number who did not
understand English." Sund. 30, I began so to do: and now I had full employment
for that holy day. The first English prayers lasted from five till half an hour
past six. The Italian (which I read to a few Vaudois) began at nine. The second
service for the English (including the sermon and the holy communion) continued
from half an hour past ten, till about half an hour past twelve. The French
service began at one. At two I catechized the children. About three began the
English service. After this was ended, I had the happiness of joining with as
many as my largest room would hold, in reading, prayer, and singing praise. And
about six the service of the Moravians, so called, began: at which I was glad
to be present, not as a teacher, but a learner.

Thurs. Nov. 3. I appeared again, at the court holden on that day: and again,
at the court held Tuesday, Nov. 22. On which day Mr. Causton desired to speak
with me. He then read me some affidavits which had been made, Sept. 15, last
past: in one of which it was affirmed, "That I then abused Mr. Causton in his
own house, calling him liar, villain, and so on." It was now likewise repeated
before several persons (which indeed I had forgot) "That I had been reprimanded
at the last court, for an enemy to, and hinderer of, the public peace."

I again consulted my friends, who agreed with me, that the time we looked for
was now come. And the next morning calling on Mr. Causton, I told him, "I
designed to set out for England immediately." I set up an advertisement in the
Great-square to the same effect, and quietly prepared for my journey.

Fri. Dec. 2. I proposed to set out for Carolina about noon, the tide then
serving. But about ten the magistrates sent for me, and told me, "I must not go
out of the province; for I had not answered the allegations laid against me." I
replied, I have appeared at six or seven courts successively, in order to
answer them. But I was not suffered so to do, when I desired it time after
time. Then they said, "However, I must not go, unless I would give security to
answer those allegations at their court." I asked, "What security?" After
consulting together about two hours, the Recorder showed me a kind of bond,
engaging me under a penalty of fifty pounds, to appear at their court when I
should be required. He added, But Mr. Williamson too has desired of us, that
you should give bail to answer his action. I then told him plainly, Sir, you
use me very ill, and so you do the trustees. I will give neither any bond, nor
any bail at all. You know your business, and I know mine.

In the afternoon the magistrates published an order, requiring all the
officers and sentinels, to prevent my going out of the province; and forbidding
any person so to do. Being now only a prisoner at large, in a place where I
knew by experience, every day would give fresh opportunity, to procure evidence
of words I never said, and actions I never did; I saw clearly the hour was come
for leaving this place: and as soon as evening prayers were over, about eight
o'clock, the tide then serving, I shook off the dust of my feet, and left
Georgia, after having preached the gospel there (not as I ought, but as I was
able) one year, and nearly nine months.

During this time I had frequent opportunities of making many observations and
enquiries, concerning the real state of thie province (which has been so
variously represented) the English settlements therein, and the Indians that
have intercourse with them. These I minuted down from time to time; a small
extract of which I have subjoined.

1. Georgia lies in the 30th and 31st degree of north latitude. The air is
generally clear, the rains being much shorter, as well as heavier, than in
England. The dews are very great. Thunder and lightning are expected almost
every day, in May, June, July, and August. They are very terrible, especially
to a stranger. During those months, from ten in the morning to four in the
afternoon, the sun is extremely scorching. But the sea-breeze generally blows,
from ^en till three or four. The winter is nearly of the same length as in
England. But the midday sun is always warm, even when the mornings and
evenings are very sharp, and the nights piercing cold.

2. The land is of four sorts, pine-barren, oak-land, swamp and marsh. The
pine-land is of far the greatest extent, especially near the seacoasts. The
soil of this is a dry, whitish sand, producing shrubs of several sorts, and
between them a spiry, coarse grass, which cattle do not love to feed on. But
here and there is a little of a better kind, especially in the savannahs (so
they call the low, watery meadows, which are usually intermixed with
pine-lands). It bears naturally two sorts of fruit, wortle-berries (much like
those in England) and Chincopin-nuts; a dry, harsh nut, about the size of a
small acorn. A laborious man may in one year clear and plant four or five acres
of this land: it will produce the first year, from two to four bushels of
Indian corn, and from four to eight of Indian pease per acre. The second year
it usually bears half as much; the third, less; the fourth, nothing.

3. Vines, mulberries and peach-trees it bears well. The white mulberry is not
good to eat. The black is about the size of a black-berry, and has much the
same flavor. In fresh pine-land, Indian potatoes grow well (which are more
luscious and larger than the Irish). And so do water-melons and sewee-beans,
about the size of our scarlet, but to be shelled and eaten like Windsor beans.

4. Oak-land commonly lies in narrow streaks between pine-land and some swamp,
creek or river. The soil is a blackish sand, producing several kinds of oak
(though none exactly like the English) bay, laurel, ash, walnut, sumac-trees,
gum-trees (a fort of sycamore) dog-trees (covered in spring with large white
flowers) and many hickory-trees, which bear a bad and of walnut. In the
moistest part of this land some parsimmon-trees grew (which bear a sort of
yellow, clear, luscious plumb) and a few mulberry and cherry-trees. The common
wild grapes are of two sorts, both red: the fox-grape grows two or three only
on a stalk, is thick-skinned, large-stoned, of a harsh taste, and of the size
of a small Kentish cherry. The cluster-grape is of a harsh taste too, and about
the size of a white current.

5. This land requires much labor to clear; but when it is cleared, it will
bear any grain, for three, four, or sometimes five years, without laying any
manure upon it. An acre of it generally bears ten bushels of Indian corn,
besides five of pease, in a year. So that this at present is justly esteemed
the most valuable land in the province.

6. A swamp is, any low, watery place, which is covered with trees or canes.
They are here of three sorts, cypress, river and cane swamps. Cypress swamps
are, mostly, large ponds, in and round which cypresses grow. Most river-swamps
are overflown every tide, by the river which runs through or near them. If they
were drained, they would produce good rice; as would the cane-swamps also;
which in the mean time are the best feeding for all sorts of cattle.

7. The marshes are of two sorts: soft marsh, which is all a quagmire, and
absolutely good for nothing: and hard-marsh, which is a firm, but barren sand,
bearing only sower rushes. Marshes of both sorts abound on the sea islands,
which are very numerous and contain all sorts of land. And upon these chiefly,
near creeks and runs of water, juniper-trees and cedars grow.

8. Savannah stands on a flat bluff (so they term any high-land hanging over a
creek or river) which rises forty-five feet perpendicular from the river, and
commands it several miles both upward and downward. The soil is a white sand
for above a mile in breadth, south-east and north-west. Beyond this, eastward,
is a river-swamp; westward a small wood, in which was the old Indian town. On
the other side of the river is a marshy island, covered with large trees.
Southwest of the town is a large pine-barren, which extends backward to a
branch of the Altamahaw river.

9. St. Simon's island, having on the south-cast the gulf of Florida; on the
other sides, branches of the Altamahaw, is about one hundred miles south of
Savannah, and extends in length about twenty, in breadth from two to five
miles. On the west side of it, on a low bluff, stands Frederica, having woods
to the north and south; to the east, partly woods, partly savannahs, and partly
marshes. The soil is mostly a blackish sand. There is not much pine-land on the
island; the greatest part being oak-land, intermixed with many savannahs, and
old Spanish or Indian fields.

10. On the sea-point, about five miles south-east of the town, is the fort
where the soldiers are stationed. But the storehouse in Frederica better
deserves that name; being encompassed with regular ramparts of earth, and a
palisaded ditch, and mounted with cannon, which entirely command the river.

11. About twenty miles north-west from St. Simon's is Darien, the settlement
of the Scotch Highlanders, a mile from Fort King George, which was built about
seventeen and abandoned about eleven years since. The town lies on the
main-land, close to a branch of the Altamahaw, on a bluff about thirty feet
above the river, having woods on all sides. The soil is a blackish sand. They
built at first many scattered huts; but last spring (1736) expecting the
Spaniards, they built themselves a large fort, and all retired within the walls
of it.

12. Augusta, distant from Savannah one hundred and fifty miles, and five from
old Savannah Town, is designed to stand in an old Indian field, on a bluff,
about thirty feet high. A small fort of wooden piles was built there in 1737;
but no house was then built, nor any more ground cleared, than Mr. Lacy and his
men found so.

13. Old Ebenezer, where the Saltzburghers settled at first, lies twenty-five
miles west of Savannah. A small creek runs by the town, down to the river, and
many brooks run between the little hills: but the soil is a hungry, barren
sand; and upon any sudden shower, the brooks rise several feet perpendicular,
and overflow whatever is near them. Since the Saltzburghers removed, two
English families have been placed there: but these too say, That the land is
good for nothing; and that the creek is of little use: it being by water twenty
miles to the river; and the water generally so low in summertime, that a boat
cannot come within six or seven miles of the town.

14. New Ebenezer, to which the Saltzburghers removed, in March 1736, lies six
miles eastward from the old, on a high bluff, near the Savannah river. Here are
some tracts of fruitful land, though the greatest part of that adjoining to the
town, is pinebarren. The huts, sixty in number, are neatly and regularly built;
the little piece of ground allotted to each for a garden, is every where put to
the best use, no spot being left unplanted. Nay, even one of the main streets,
being one more than was as yet wanted, bore them this year a crop of Indian
corn.

15. About ten miles east of this, on a creek, three miles from the river, was
the village of Abercorn. Ten families settled here in 1733; but it is now
without inhabitants. Four miles below the mouth of Abercorn-creek in
Joseph's-town, is the settlement of two Scotch gentlemen. A mile below was Sir
Francis Bathurst's plantation. And a quarter of a mile from this, Walter
Augustine's settlement. But both these are left without inhabitant.

16. A mile below this is Capt. Williams's plantation: a mile from thence, Mrs.
Matthews's, (late Musgrove) commonly known by the name of the Cowpens:
adjoining to which is the land belonging so Capt. Watson; on which is an
unfinished house, swiftly running to ruin. A mile from this is Irene, (...)
^use built for an Indian school, in the year 1736. (...) stands on a small,
round hill, in a little piece of fruitful ground, given by the Indians to Mr.
Ingham. The Indian town is within a furlong of it.

17. Five miles south-west of Savannah, on a small rise, stands the village of
Highgate. It has pineland on three sides, and a swamp on the fourth. Twelve
families were placed here in 1733; nine whereof remain there. A mile eastward
of this is Hampstead, settled with twelve families also, a little before
Highgate; five of which are still remaining.

18. Six miles south-east of Savannah is Thunderbolt. Three families are
settled here, near a small, ruinous fort: four miles south of this is the
island of Skidoway: on the north-east point whereof ten families were placed in
1734; (a small fort was built here likewise) but nine of them are either dead,
or removed to other places. A small creek divides Skidoway from Tybee island,
on the south-east part of which, fronting the inlet, the light-house is built.
Ten families were settled here in 1734; but they are part dead, and part
removed, so that the island is now again without any fixed inhabitant.

19. Twelve miles southward from Savannah (by land) is Mr. Houstoun's
plantation: and forty or fifty miles from him, up Ogeechy river, that where Mr.
Sterling for some time lived. Fort Argyle stands twenty miles from this, on a
high bluff, by the river Ogeechy. It is a small, square, wooden fort,
musketproof. Ten freeholders were settled near it; but eight of them are gone,
and the land they had cleared lying waste, will in a few years be as it was
before.

20. The southernmost settlement in Georgia, is Fort St. Andrew. It stands
fifty miles south of Frederica, on the south-west side of Cumberland-island,
upon a high neck of land, which commands the river both ways. The walls are of
wood, filled up with earth, round which are a ditch and palisade.

21. It is hard to pick out any consistent account of the Georgian Indians,
from the contradictory relations of their traders. The following is extracted,
partly from those wherein all, or the generality of them agree; partly from the
relations of such as have been occasionally amongst them, and have no interest
in making them better or worse than they are.

22. Of the Georgian Indians in general it may be observed, That they are not
so properly nations, as tribes or clans, who have wandered thither at different
times; perhaps expelled their native countries by stronger tribes; but how or
when they cannot tell, being none of them able to give any rational account of
themselves. They are inured to hardships of all kinds, and surprisingly patient
of pain. But as they have no letters, so they have no religion, no laws, no
civil government. Nor have they any kings or princes, properly speaking; their
Meekos or head-men, having no power either to command or punish, no man obeying
them any farther than he pleases. So that every one does what is right in his
own eyes; and if it appears wrong to his neighbor, the person aggrieved
usually steals on the other unawares, and shoots him, scalps him, or cuts off
his ears: having only two short rules of proceeding, to do what be will, and
what he can.

23. They are likewise all, except (perhaps) the Choctaws, gluttons, drunkards,
thieves, dissemblers, liars. They are implacable, unmerciful: murderers of
fathers, murderers of mothers, murderers of their own children: it being a
common thing for a son to shoot his father or mother, because they are old and
past labor; and for a woman either to procure abortion, or to throw her child
into the next river, because she will go with her husband to the war. Indeed
husbands, strictly speaking, they have none: for any man leaves his wife (so
called) at pleasure, who, frequently, in return, cuts the throats of all the
children she has had by him. Whoredom they account no crime, and few instances
appear of a young Indian woman's refusing any one. Nor have they any fixed
punishment for adultery; only, if the husband take his wife with another man,
he will do what he can to both, unless speedily pacified by the present of a
gun or a blanket.

24. The Choctaws only have some appearance of an entire nation, possessing a
large extent of land, eight or nine hundred miles west of Savannah, and many
well inhabited towns. They are said to have six thousand fighting men, united
under one head. At present they are in league with the French, who have sent
some priests among them; by whom (if one may credit the Choctaw traders) ten or
twelve have been baptized.

25. Next to these, to the north-east, are the Chicasaws: Their country is
flat, full of meadows, springs and rivers. In their fields, though six (...)
seven hundred miles from the sea, are found sea-she^^ in great numbers. They
have about nine hundred fighting men, ten towns, and one Meeko (at least) in
every one. They are eminently gluttons, eating, drinking, and smoking all day,
and almost all night. They are extreme indolent and lazy, except in war^ then
they are the most indefatigable, and the most valiant of all the Indians; but
they are equally cruel with the rest, torturing and burning all their
prisoners, whether Indian or European.

26. East of them, in the latitude of 35 and 36, about three or four hundred
miles from Savannah, lie the Cherokees. Their country is very mountainous,
fruitful, and pleasant. They have fifty-two towns, and above three thousand
fighting men. In each town are three or more head-men, who keep up a sort of
shadow of government, having power to set the rest to work, and to punish such
as will not join in the common labor. They are civil to strangers, and will do
any thing for them, for pay; being always willing, for a small piece of money,
to carry a message for fifty or sixty miles, and, if required, a heavy burden
too: but they are equally cruel to prisoners with the Chicasaws, though not
equally valiant. They are seldom intemperate in drinking, but when they can be
so on free-cost. Otherwise, love of drink yields to covetousness: a vice
scarcely to be found in any Indian but a Cherokee.

27. The Uchees have only one small town left (near two hundred miles from
Savannah) and about forty fighting men. The Creeks have been many times on the
point of cutting them off. They are indeed hated by most, and despised by all
the other nations, as well for their cowardice, as their superlative diligence
in thieving, and for out-lying all the Indians upon the continent.

28. The Creek Indians are about four hundred miles from Savannah. They are
said to be bounded on the west by the Choctaws, to the north by the Chicasaws,
to the east by the Cherokees, and to the south by the Alatamahaw river. They
have many towns, a plain, well-watered country, and fifteen hundred sighting
men. They have often three or four Meekos in a town; but without so much as the
shadow of authority, only to give advice, which every one is at liberty to take
or leave. But age and reputation for valor and wisdom, have given Chicali, a
Meeko of the Coweta-town, a more than ordinary influence over the nation;
though not even the show of regal power. Yet neither age, wisdom nor reputation
can restrain him from drunkenness. Indeed all the Creeks, having been most
conversant with white men, are most infected with an insatiate love of drink,
as well as many other European vices, They are more exquisite dissemblers than
the rest of their countrymen. They know not what friendship or gratitude means.
They show no inclination to learn any thing; but least of all, Christianity;
being full as opiniated of their own parts and wisdom, as either the modern
Chinese, or ancient Romans.

Sat. Dec. 3. We came to Purrysburg early in the morning, and endeavored to
procure a guide to Port Royal. But none being to be had, we set out without
one, an hour before sunrise. After walking two or three hours, we met with an
old man, who led us into a small path, near which was a line of blazed trees,
(i. e. marked by cutting off part of the bark) by following which, he said, we
might easily come to Port Royal in five or six hours.

We were four in all; one of whom intended to go to England with me; the other
two to settle in Carolina. About eleven we came into a large swamp, where we
wandered about till near two. We then found another blaze, and pursued it, till
it divided into two; one of these we followed through an almost impassable
thicket, a mile beyond which it ended. We made through the thicket again, and
traced the other blaze till that ended too. It now grew toward sunset, so we
sat down, faint and weary, having had no food all day, except a ginger-bread
cake, which I had taken in my pocket. A third of this we had divided among us
at noon; another third we took now; the rest we reserved for the morning; but
we had met with no water all the day. Thrusting a stick into the ground, and
finding the end of it moist, two of our company fell a digging with their
hands, and at about three feet depth, found water. We thanked God, drank, and
were refreshed. The night was sharp; however, there was no complaining among
us; but after having commended ourselves to God, we lay down close together,
and (I at least) slept till near six in the morning.

Sun. Dec. 24. God renewing our strength, we arose neither faint nor weary, and
resolved to make one trial more, to find out a path to Port Royal. We st^^^ed
due east; but finding neither path nor blaze, and the woods growing thicker and
thicker, we judged it would be our best course to return, if we could, by the
way we came. The day before, in the thickest part of the woods, I had broke
many young trees, I knew not why, as we walked along: these we found a great
help in several places, where no path was to be seen; and between one and two
God brought us safe to Benjamin Arieu's house, the old man we left the day
before.

In the evening I read French prayers to a numerous family, a mile from Mr.
Arieu's; one of whom undertook to guide us to Port Royal. In the morning we set
out. About sunset, we asked our guide, if he knew where he was? Who frankly
answered, No. However, we pushed on ^till about seven when we came to a
plantation, and the next evening (after many difficulties and delays) we landed
on Port Royal island.

Wednes. 7. We walked to Beaufort; where Mr. Jones (the minister of Beaufort)
with whom I lodged during my short stay here, gave me a lively idea of the old
English hospitality. On Thurs. Mr. Delamotte came; with whom, on Friday the
9th, I took boat for Charleston. After a slow passage by reason of contrary
winds, and some conflict (our provisions falling short) with hunger as well as
cold, we came thither early in the morning, on Tuesday the 13th. Here I
expected trials of a different kind, and far more dangerous. For contempt and
want are easy to be borne: but who can bear respect and abundance?

Wednes. 14. Being desired to read public prayers, I was much refreshed with
those glorious promises, contained both in the 72d Psalm, and in the first
lesson, the 40th chapter of Isaiah. Yea, they that wait upon the Lord shall
renew their strength, and mount up with wing^ as eagles^ they shall run and not
be weary; they shall walk and not saint.

In the afternoon visiting a dying man, we found him still full of the freshest
advices, and busy in settling the affairs of the C^arina, Prince Thamas, and
the Ottoman Port. How natural then is the thought -- Quae cura nitentis
Pascere equos, endem sequitur tellure repostos?


For if a soul quivering on the verge of life, h^^ still leisure for these
impertinencies, one might almost believe the same dreams would continue even in
the sleep of death!

Friday, 16. I parted from the last of those friends, who came with me into
America, Mr. Charles Delamotte, from whom I had been but a few days separate,
since Oct. 14, 1735.

Sun. 18. I was seized with a violent flux, which I felt came not before I
wanted it. Yet I had strength enough given to preach once more to this (...)
people: and a few believed our report.

Thurs. 22. I took my leave of America (though if it please God not for ever)
going on board the Samuel, Captain P^rcy, with a young gentleman who had been a
few months in Carolina, one of my parishioners of Savannah, and a Frenchman,
late of Parrysburg, who was escaped thence with the skin of his teeth.

Sat. 24. We sailed over Charleston bar, and about noon lost sight of land.

The next day the wind was fair, but high, as it was on Sunday 25, when the sea
affected me more than it had done in the sixteen weeks of our passage to
America. I was obliged to lie down the greate^^ part of the day, being easy
only in that posture.

Mon. 26. I began instructing a negro-lad in the principles of Christianity.
The next day I resolved to break off living delicately, and return to my old
simplicity of diet: and after I did so, neither my stomach nor my head much
complained of the motion of the ship.

Wednes. 28. Finding the unaccountable apprehensions of I know not what danger
(the wind being small, and the sea smooth) which had been upon me several days,
increase; I cried earnestly for help; and it pleased God as in a moment to
restore peace to my soul.

Let me observe hereon, 1. That not one of these hours ought to pass out of my
remembrance, till I attain another manner of spirit, a spirit equally willing
to glorify God by life or by death. 2. That whoever is uneasy on any account
(bodily pain alone excepted) carries in himself his own conviction, that he is
so far an unbeliever. Is he uneasy at the apprehension of death? Then he
believes not, That to die is gain. At any of the events of life, then he has
not a firm belief, That all things work together for his good. And if he bring
the matter close, he will always find, beside the general want of faith, every
particular uneasiness is evidently owing to the want of some particular
Christian temper.

Sun. Jan. 1, 1738. All in the ship (except the Captain and steersman) were
present both at the morning and evening service, and appeared as deeply
attentive, as even the poor people of Frederica did, while the word of God was
new to their ears. And it may be, one or two among these likewise, may bring
forth fruit with patience.

Mon. 2. Being sorrowful and very heavy (though I could give no particular
reason for it) and utterly unwilling to speak close to any of my little flock
(about twenty persons) I was in doubt, whether my neglect of them was not one
cause of my own heaviness? In the evening therefore, I began instructing the
cabin-boy; after which I was much easier.

I went several times the following days, with a design to speak to the
sailors, but could not, I mean, I was quite averse from speaking; I could not
see how to make an occasion, and it seemed quite absurd to speak without. Is
not this what men commonly mean by, "I could not speak?" And is this a
sufficient cause of silence, or no? Is it a prohibition from the Good Spirit?
Or a temptation from nature or the evil one? Fri. 6. I ended the abridgment of
Mr. de Renty's life. O that such a life should be related by such a historian!
Who by inserting all, if not more than all the weak things that holy man ever
said or did, by his commendation of almost every action or word which either
deserved or needed it not; and by his injudicious manner of relating many
others, which were indeed highly commendable; has cast the shade of
superstition and folly over one of the brightest patterns of heavenly wisdom.

Sat. 7. I began to read and explain some passages of the bible to the young
negro. The next morning, another negro who was on board, desired to be a hearer
too. From them I went to the poor Frenchman, who understanding no English, had
none else in the ship with whom he could converse. And from this time, I read
and explained to him a chapter in the testament every morning.

Sun. 8. In the fullness of my heart, I wrote the following words:

By the most infallible of proofs, inward feeling, I am convinced

1. "Of unbelief, having no such faith in Christ, as will prevent my heart from
being troubled; which it could not be, if I believed in God, and rightly
believed also in him:

2. "Of pride, throughout my life past, inasmuch as I thought I had, what I
find I have not:

3. "Of gross irrecollection, inasmuch as in a storm I cry to God every moment;
in a calm, not.

4. "Of levity and luxuriancy of spirit, recurring whenever the pressure is
taken off, and appearing by my speaking words not tending to edify; but most,
by my manner of speaking of my enemies.

"Lord save, or I perish! Save me

1. "By such a faith as implies peace in life and in death.

2. "By such humility, as may fill my heart from this hour for ever, with a
piercing uninterrupted sense, I have done nothing hitherto.
Nihil est quod hactenus feci, having evidently built without a foundation.

3. "By such a recollection as may cry to thee every moment, especially when
all is calm; give me faith or I die; give me a lowly spirit; otherwise Let life
be a burden to me.
Mihi non sit suave vivere.

4. "By steadiness, seriousness, (...), sobriety of spirit, avoiding as fire
every word that tends not to edifying, and never speaking of any who oppose
me, or sin against God, without all my own sins set in array before my face."

This morning, after explaining those words of St. Paul, I beseech you,
brethren, by the mercies of God, (...) ye present your bodies a living
sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God. I exhorted my fellow-travellers with all my
might, to comply with the apostle's direction. But leaving them afterward, to
themselves, the seriousness they showed at first, soon vanished away.

On Mond. 9, and the following days, I reflected much on that vain desire,
which had pursued me for so many years, of being in solitude, in order to be a
Christian. I have now, thought I, solitude enough. But am I therefore the
nearer being a Christian? Not if Jesus Christ be the model of Christianity, I
doubt indeed I am much nearer that mystery of Satan, which some writers affect
to call by that name. So near, that I had probably sunk wholly into it, had not
the great mercy of God just now thrown me upon reading St. Cyprian's works. O
my soul, come not thou into their secret! Stand thou in the good old paths.

Frid. 13. We had a thorough storm, which obliged us to shut all close, the sea
breaking over the ship continually. I was at first afraid; but cried to God and
was strengthened. Before ten I lay down. I bless God, without fear. About
midnight we were awaked by a confused noise, of seas and wind and men's voices,
the like to which I had never heard before. The sound of the sea breaking over,
and against the sides of the ship, I could compare to nothing but large cannon,
or American thunder. The rebounding, starting, quivering motion of the ship,
much resembled what is said of earthquakes. The captain was upon deck in an
instant. But his men could not hear what he said. It blew a complete harricane;
which beginning at south west, then went west, northwest, north, and in a
quarter of an hour, round by the east to the south-west point again. At the
same time the sea running (as they term it) mountain high, and that from many
different points at once, the ship would not obey the helm; nor indeed could
the steersman, through the violent rain, see the compass. So he was forced to
let her run before the wind, and in half an hour the stress of the storm was
over.

About noon the next day it ce^^ed. But first I had resolved, God being my
helper, not only to preach it to all, but to apply the word of God to every
single soul in the ship; and if but one, yea if not one of them will hear, I
know my labor is not in vain.

I no sooner executed this resolution, than my spirit revived; so that from
this day I had no more of that fearfulness and heaviness, which before almost
continually weighed me down. I am sensible one who thinks the being in orco, as
they phrase it, an indispensable preparative for being a Christian, would say,
I had better have continued in that state; and that this unseasonable relief
was a curse, not a blessing. Nay, but who art thou, O man, who in favor of a
wretched hypothesis, thus blasphemest the good gift of God? Has not he himself
said, This also is the gift of God, if a man have power to rejoice in his
labor? Yea, God sets his own seal to his weak endeavors, while the thus
answers him in the joy of his heart.

Tues. 24. We spoke with two ships, outwardbound, from whom we had the welcome
news, of our wanting but 160 leagues of the land's-end. My mind was now full of
thought; part of which I writ down as follows:

"I went to America, to convert the Indians; but oh! Who shall convert me! Who,
what is he tha^ will deliver me from this evil heart of unbelief? I have a fair
summer religion. I can talk well; nay, and believe myself, while no danger is
near: but let death look me in the face, and my spirit is troubled. Nor can I
say, To die is gain!

in the morning (the wind continuing southerly) the clouds began to fly just
contrary to the wind, and to the surprise of us all, sunk down under the sun,
so that at noon we had an exact observation; and by this we found we were as
well as we could desire, about eleven leagues south of Scilly.

Sund. 29. We saw English land once more, which about noon appeared to be the
Lizard-point. We ran by it with a fair wind, and at noon the next day, made the
west end of the Isle of Wight.

Here the wind turned against us, and in the evening blew fresh, so that we
expected (the tide being likewise strong against us) to be driven some leagues
backward in the night: but in the morning, to our great surprise, we saw
Beachy-head just before us, and found we had gone forwards near forty miles.

Toward evening was a calm; but in the night a strong north wind brought us
safe into the Downs. The day before Mr. Whitefield had failed out, neither of
us then knowing any thing of the other. At four in the morning we took boat,
and in half an hour landed at Deal: it being Wednesday, February 1. the
anniversary festival in Georgia for Mr. Oglethorpe's landing there.

It is now two years and almost four months, since I left my native country, in
order to teach the Georgian Indians, the nature of Christianity: but what have
I learned myself in the mean time? Why (what I the least of all suspected) that
I who went to America to convert others, was never myself converted to God. I
am not sere of this.
I am not mad, though I thus speak; but I speak the words of truth and
soberness; If happily some of those who still dream may awake, and see, that as I
am, so are they. --

Are they read in philosophy? So was I. In ancient or modern tongues? So was I
also. Are they versed in the science of divinity? I too have studied it many
years. Can they talk fluently upon spiritual things? The very same could I do.
Are they plenteous in alms? Behold, I gave all my goods to feed the poor. Do
they give of their labor as well as of their substance? I have labored more
abundantly than they all. Are they willing to suffer for their brethren? I have
thrown up my friends, reputation, ease, country; I have put my life in my hand,
wandering into strange lands; I have given my body to be devoured by the deep,
parched up with heat, consumed by toil and weariness, or whatsoever God should
please to bring upon me. But does all this (be it more or less, it matters not)
make me acceptable to God? Does all I ever did or can know, say, give, do, or
suffer, justify me in his sight? Yea, or the constant use of all the means of
grace? (which nevertheless is meet, right, and our bounden duty). Or, that I
know nothing of myself, that I am as touching outward, moral righteousness,
blameless? Or (to come closer yet) the having a rational conviction of all the
truths of Christianity? Does all this give me a claim to the holy, heavenly,
divine character of a Christian? By no means. If the oracles of God are true,
if we are still to abide by the law and the testimony; all these things, though
when ennobled by faith in Christ, they are holy, and just and good, yet without
it are dung and dross, meet only to be purged away by the sire that never shall
be quenched. I had even then the says of a servant, though not that of a son.


This then have I learned in the ends of the earth, that I am fallen short of
the glory of God: that my whole heart is altogether corrupt and abominable, and
consequently my whole life (seeing it cannot be, that an evil tree should bring
forth good fruit): that alienated as I am from the life of God, I am a child of
wrath; I believe, not.
an heir of hell: that my own works, my own sufferings, my own righteousness,
are so far from reconciling me to an offended God, so far from making any
atonement for the least of those sins, which are more in number than the hairs
of my head, that the most specious of them need an atonement themselves, or
they cannot abide his righteous judgment; that heaving the sentence of death in
my heart, and having nothing in or of myself, to plead, I have no hope, but
that of being justified freely, through the redemption that is in Jesus: I have
no hope, but that if I seek I shall find Christ, and be found in him, not
having my own righteousness, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the
righteousness which is of God by says.

If it be said, that I have faith (for many such things have I heard, from many
miserable comforters) I answer, So have the devils, -- a sort of faith; but
still they are strangers to the covenant of promise. So the apostles had even
at Cana in Galilee, when Jesus first manifested forth his glory; even then
they, in a sort believed on him; but they had no then the faith that overcomes
the world. The faith I want is, A sure trust and consulence in God, that
through the merits of Christ, my sins are forgiven, and I reconciled to the
favor of God. I want that faith which St. Paul recommends to all the world,
especially in his epistle to the Romans: that faith which enables every one
that has it to cry out, I live not; but Christ lives in me: and the life
which I now live, I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me, and gave
himself for me. I want that faith which none can have without knowing that he
has it (though many imagine they have it, who have it not) for whosoever has
it, is freed from sin, the whole body of sin is destroyed in him: he is freed
from fear, having peace with God through Christ, and rejoiceing in hope of the
glory of God. And he is freed from doubt, having the love of God shed abroad in
his heart, through the Holy Ghost which is given unto him; which spirit itself
bears witness with his Spirit, that he is a child of God.

AN EXTRACT OF THE REV. MR. JOHN WESLEY's JOURNAL, From February 1, 1738, To
his return from Germany.
For this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might show
forth all long-suffering, for a pattern to them which should hereafter believe
on him to life everlasting. 1 Timothy i. 16.
The PREFACE.
1. THAT men revile me and say all manner of evil against me, that I am become
as it were a monster unto many, that the zealous of almost every denomination
cry out, Away with such a fellow from the earth: this gives me with regard to
myself, no degree of uneasiness. For I know the scripture must be fulfilled, If
they have called the moster of the house Beelzebub, how much more them of his
household? But it does give me a concern, with regard to those, who by this
artifice of the devil, are prevented from hearing that word, which is able to
save their souls.

2. For the sake of these, and indeed of all who desire to hear the truth of
those things which have been so variously related, I have been induced to
publish this farther account: and I doubt not but it will even hence appear, to
all candid and impartial judges, that I have hitherto lived in all good
conscience toward God.

3. I shall be easily excused by those who either love or seek the Lord Jesus
in sincerity, for speaking so largely of the Moravian church, a city which
ought to be set upon an hill. Their light has been too long hid under a
bushel: it is high time it should at length break forth, and so shine before
men, that others also may glorify their Father which is in heaven.

4. If any should ask, "But do you think even this church is perfect, without
spot or wrinkle or any such thing?" I answer plainly, No; though I trust it
will be, when patience has had its perfect work. But neither do I think it
right, to entertain the world with the spots of God's children.

5. It has been farther asked, "Whether I imagine God is to be found, only
among them?" I reply, "By no means. I know there is a God in England, and we
need not go to seek him in strange lands." I know that in our own he is very
nigh unto all that call upon him: and therefore I think those unwise (to say no
more) who run to enquire after him in Holland or Germany.

6. When I went, the case was widely different. God had not then made bare his
arm before us as he has now done: in a manner (I will be bold to say) which
had not been known either in Holland or Germany, at that time, when he who
ordered all things wisely, according to the counsels of his own will, was
pleased by me to open the intercourse between the English and the Moravi^^
church.

7. The particular reason which obliged me to relate so much of the
conversation I had with those holy men, is this. In September, 1738, when I
returned from Germany, I exhorted all I could to follow after that great
salvation, which is through faith in the blood of Christ; waiting for it, in
all the ordinances of God, and in doing good as they bad opportunity, to all
men. And many found the beginning of that salvation, being justified freely,
having peace with God through Christ, rejoicing in hope of the glory of God,
and having his love shed abroad in their hearts.

8. But about September, 1739, while my brother and I were absent, certain men
crept in among them unawares, greatly troubling and subverting their souls:
telling them, "They were in a delusion, that they had deceived themselves, and
had no true faith at all. For (said they) none has any justifying faith, who
has ever any doubt or fear (which you know you have) or who has not a clean
heart, which you know you have not: nor will you ever have it, till you leave
off using the means of grace (so called) till you leave off running to church
and sacrament, and praying, and singing, and reading either the bible, or any
other book. For you cannot use these things without trusting in them. Therefore,
till you leave them off, you can never have true faith; you can never till then
trust in the blood of Christ."

9. And this doctrine from the beginning to this day has been taught, as the
doctrine of the Moravian church. I think therefore it is my bounden duty, to
clear the Moravians from this aspersion. And the more, because I am perhaps the
only person now in England that both can and will do it. And I believe it is
the peculiar providence of God that I can: that two years since the most
eminent members of that church, should so fully declare both their experience
and judgment, touching the very points now in question.

10. The sum of what has been asserted, as from them, is this,

1. "That a man cannot have any degree of justifying faith, till he is wholly
freed from all doubt and fear, and till he has (in the fall, proper sense) a
new, a clean heart."

2. "That a man may not use the ordinances of God, the Lord's Supper in
particular, before he has such a faith as excludes all doubt and fear, and
implies a new, a clean heart."

In flat opposition to this I assert,

1. "That a man may have a degree of justifying faith, before he is wholly
freed from all doubt and fear, and before he has, in the full, proper sense, a
new, a clean heart."

2. "That a man may use the ordinances of God, the Lord's Supper in particular,
before he has such a says as excludes all doubt and fear, and implies a new, a
clean heart."

I farther assert, "This I learned (not only from the English, but also) from
the Moravian church."

And I hereby openly and earnestly call upon that church (and upon Count
Zinzendorf in particular, who I trust is not ashamed nor afraid to avow any
part of the gospel of Christ) to correct me and explain themselves, if I have
misunderstood or misrepresented them.

LONDON, Sept. 29, 1740. JOHN WESLEY.

JOURNAL From Feb. 1, 1738, to Sept. 16, 1738.
WEDNESDAY, Feb. 1. After reading prayers and explaining a portion of scripture
to a large company at the inn, I left Deal, and came in the evening to
Feversham.

I here read prayers, and explained the 2d lesson, to a few of those who were
called Christians, but indeed were more savage in their behavior than the
wildest Indians I have yet met with.

Fri. 3. I came to Mr. Delamotte's at Blendo^, where I expected a cold
reception. But God had prepared the way before me: and I no sooner mentioned my
name, than I was welcomed in such a manner, as constrained me to say, Surely
God is in this place, and I knew it not! Blessed be ye of the Lord! Ye have
shown more kindness in the latter and than in the beginning.

In the evening I came once more to London, whence I had been absent two years
and near four months.

Many reasons I have to bless God, though the design I went upon did not take
effect, for my having been carried into that strange land, contrary to all my
preceding resolutions. Hereby I trust he has in some measure humbled me and
proved me, and shown me what was in my heart. Hereby I have been taught, to
beware of men. Hereby I am come to know assuredly, that if in all our ways we
acknowledge God, he will where reason fails, direct our path, by the other
means which he knows. Hereby I am delivered from the fear of the sea, which I
had both dreaded and abhorred from my youth.

Hereby God has given me to know many of his servants, particularly those of
the church of Hernhuth. Hereby my passage is opened to the writings of holy men
in the German, Spanish and Italian tongues. I hope too some good may come to
others hereby. All in Georgia have heard the word of God. Some have believed,
and began to run well. A few steps have been taken toward publishing the glad
tidings both to the African and American Heathens. Many children have learned
how they ought to serve God, and to be useful to their neighbor. And those
whom it most concerns have an opportunity of knowing the true state of their
infant colony, and laying a firmer foundation of peace and happiness to many
generations.

Sat. 4. I told my friends some of the reasons; which a little hastened my
return to England. They all agreed it would be proper to relate them to the
trustees of Georgia.

Accordingly the next morning I waited on Mr. Oglethorpe, but had not time to
speak on that head. In the afternoon I was desired to preach at St. John the
Evangelist's. I did so on those strong words, If any man be in Christ, he is a
new creature. I was afterward informed, Many of the best in the parish were so
offended, that I was not to preach there any more.

Mond. 6. I visited many of my old friends, as well as most of my relations. I
find the time is not yet come when I am to be hated of all men. O may I be
prepared for that day!

Tues. 7. (A day much to be remembered) at the house of Mr. Weinantz, a Dutch
merchant, I met Peter Bohler, Schulius Richter and Wensel Neiser, just then
landed from Germany. Finding they had no acquaintance in England, I offered to
procure them a lodging, and did so near Mr. Hutton's, where I then was. And
from this time I did not willingly lose any opportunity of conversing with
them, while I stayed in London.

Wednes. 8. I went to Mr. Oglethorpe again, but had no opportunity of speaking
as I designed. Afterward I waited on the board of trustees, and gave them a
short but plain account of the state of the colony: an account, I fear, not a
little differing from those which they had frequently received before: and for
which I have reason to believe, some of them have not forgiven me to this day.

Sund. 12. I preached at St. Andrew's, Holborn, on, Though I give all my goods
to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity,
it profits me nothing. -- O hard sayings! Who can hear them? Here too (it
seems) I am to preach no more.

Wednes. 15. I waited on the trustees again, and gave them in writing the
substance of what I had said at the last board. Whatsoever farther questions
they asked concerning the state of the province, I likewise answered to the
best of my knowledge.

Fri. 17. I set out for Oxford with Peter Bohler, where we were kindly received
by Mr. Sarney, the only one now remaining here, of many who at our embarking
for America, were used to take sweet counsel together, and rejoice in bearing
the reproach of Christ.

Sat. 18. We went to Stanton-Harcourt, to Mr. Gambold, and found my old friend
recovered from his mystic delusion, and convinced that St. Paul was a better
writer than either Tauler or Jacob Behman. The next day I preached once more at
the castle (in Oxford) to a numerous and serious congregation.

All this time I conversed much with Peter Bohler, but I understood him not:
and least of all when besaid, Mi frater, mi frater, excoquenda est ista tua
philosophia. (My brother, my brother, that philosophy of yours must be purged
away.)

Mond. 20. I returned to London. On Tuesday I preached at Great St. Helen's,
on, If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his crossed
daily and follow me.

Wedn. 22. I was with the trustees again, to whom I then gave a short account
(and afterward delivered it to them in writing) of the reasons why I lest
Georgia.

Sun. 26. I preached at six at St. Lawrence's; at ten, in St. Katherine's
Creed-church; and in the afternoon, at St. John's, Wapping. I believe it
pleased God to bless the first sermon most, because it gave most offense; being
indeed an open defiance of that mystery of iniquity which the world calls
prudence: grounded on those words of St. Paul to the Galatians; As many as
desire to make a fair show in the flesh, they constrain you to be circumcised,
only lest they should suffer persecution for the cross of Christ.

Mond. 27. I took coach for Salisbury, and had several opportunities of
conversing seriously with my fellow travelers. But endeavoring to mend the
wisdom of God, by the worldly wisdom of prefacing serious with light
conversation, and afterward following that advice of the mystics, leave them
to themselves, all I had said was written on the sand. Lord, lay not this sin
to my charge!

Tues. 28. I saw my mother once more. The next day I prepared for my journey to
my brother at Tiverton. But on Thursday morning, March 2d, a message that my
brother Charles was dying at Oxford obliged me to set out for that place
immediately. Calling at an odd house in the afternoon, I found several persons
there, who seemed well-wishers to region, to whom I spoke plainly; as I did in
the evening, both to the servants and strangers at my inn.

With regard to my own behavior, I now renewed and wrote down my former
resolutions.

1. To use absolute openness and unreserve, with all I should converse with.

2. To labor after continual seriousness, not willingly indulging myself, in
any the least levity of behavior, or in laughter, no not for a moment.

3. To speak no word which does not tend to the glory of God, in particular,
not to talk of worldly things. Others may, nay, must. But what is that to thee?
And

4. To take no pleasure which does not tend to the glory of God; thanking God
every moment for all I do take, and therefore rejecting every sort and degree
of it, which I feel I cannot so thank him in and for.

Sat. 4. I found my brother at Oxford, recovering from his pleurisy; and with
him Peter Bohler: by whom (in the hand of the great God) I was on Sunday the
5th clearly convinced of unbelief, of the want of that faith whereby alone we
are saved with full christian salvation.

Immediately it struck into my mind Leave off preaching. How can you preach to
others, who have not faith yourself? I asked Bohler, whether he thought I
should leave it off, or not? He answered, "By no means." I asked, But what can
I preach? He said, Preach faith till you have it, and then, because you have
it, you will preach faith.

Accordingly, Monday 6, I began preaching this new doctrine, though my soul
started back from the work. The first person to whom I offered salvation by
faith alone, was a prisoner under sentence of death. His name was Clifford.
Peter Bohler had many times desired me to speak to him before. But I could not
prevail on myself so to do; being still (as I had been many years) a zealous
assertor of the impossibility of a deathbed repentance.

Fri. 10. Peter Bohler returned to London. Tues. 15. I set out for Manchester,
with Mr. Kinchin, Fellow of Corpus Christi, and Mr. Fox, late a prisoner in the
city prison. Between five and six we called at Chapel on the Heath, where
lived a (...) man, sometime prisoner in the castle of Oxford. He was not at
home; but his wife came to us, to whom Mr. Kinchin spoke a few words, which so
melted her heart, that she burst out into tears, and we went on rejoicing and
praising God.

About eight, it being rainy and very dark we (...) our way; but before nine,
came to Shipston, having rode over, I know not how, a narrow foot-bridge, which
lay across a deep ditch near the town. After supper I read prayers to the
people of the inn, and explained the second lesson; I hope not in vain.

The next day we dined at Birmingham, and (...) after we left it, were reproved
for our negligence them (in letting those who attended us go, without
exhortation or instruction) by a severe shower of hail. At Hedgesord, about
five, we endeavored to be more faithful; and all who heard, seemed serious and
affected.

In the evening we came to Stafford. The mistress of the house joined with us
in family prayer. The next morning, one of the servants appeared deeply
affected, as did the hostler before we went. Soon after breakfast, stepping
into the stable, I spoke a few words to those who were there. A stranger who
heard me, said, Sir, I wish I was to travel with you. And wh^^ I went into the
house followed me, and began abruptly, Sir, I believe you are a good man, and I
come to (...) you a little of my life. The tears stood in his eyes all the time
he spoke; and we hoped not a word which was said to him was lost.

At Newcastle, whither we came about ten, some to whom we spoke at our inn,
were very attentive; but a gay young woman waited on us, quite unconcerned:
however we spoke on. When we went away, she fixed her eyes, and neither moved
nor said one word, but appeared as much astonished as if she had seen one risen
from the dead.

Coming to Holms-chapel about three, we were surprised at being shown into a
room, where a cloth and plates were laid. Soon after two men came in to dinner.
Mr. Kinchin told them, "If they pleased, that gentleman would ask a blessing
for them." They stared, and as it were consented; but sat still while I did it,
one of them with his hat on. We began to speak on turning to God, and went on,
though they appeared utterly regardless. After a while their countenances
changed, and one of them stole off his hat, and laying it down behind him said,
All we said was true; but he had been a grievous sinner, and not considered it
as he ought: but he was resolved, with God's help, now to turn to him in
earnest. We exhorted him and his companion, who now likewise drank in every
word, to cry mightily to God, that he would send them help from his holy place.

Being faint in the evening, I called at Altringham, and there light upon a
Quaker, well skilled in, and therefore (as I soon found) sufficiently fond of,
controversy. After an hour spent therein (perhaps not in vain) I advised him,
To dispute as little as possible, but rather follow after holiness, and walk
humbly with his God.

Late at night we reached Manchester. Friday the 17th, we spent entirely with
Mr. Clayton, by whom, and the rest of our friends here, we were much refreshed
and strengthened. Mr. Hoole, the rector of St. Ann's church being taken ill the
next day, on Sunday 19, Mr. Kinchin and I officiated at Salford chapel in the
morning, by which means Mr. Clayton was at liberty to perform the service of
St. Ann's: and in the afternoon, I preached there on those words of St. Paul,
If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature.

Early in the morning we left Manchester, taking with us Mr. Kinchin's brother,
for whom we came, to be entered at Oxford. We were fully determined to lose no
opportunity of awakening, instructing, or exhorting any whom we might meet with
in our journey. At Knutsford, where we first stopped, all we spoke to,
thankfully received the word of exhortation. But at Talk in the hill, where we
dined, she with whom we were, was so much of a gentlewomen, that for near an
hour our labor seemed to be in vain. However we spoke on. Upon a sudden, she
looked as one just awaked out of a sleep. Every word sunk into her heart. Nor
have I seen so entire a change both in the eyes, face, and manner of speaking,
of any one in so short a time.

About 5. Mr. Kinchin riding by a man and woman double-horsed, the man said,
"Sir, you ought to thank God it is a fair day,; for if it rained, you would be
sadly dirty with your little horse." Mr. Kinchin answered, "True: and we ought
to thank God for our life and health, and food and raiment, and all things." He
then rode on, Mr. Fox following the man said, "Sir, my mistress would be glad
to have some more talk with that gentleman." We stayed, and when they came up,
began to search one another's hearts. They came to us again in the evening, at
our inn at Stone, where I explained both to them and many of their acquaintance
who were come together, that great truth, "Godliness, has the promise both of
this life, and of that which is to come."

Tues. 21. Between 9 and 10 we came to Hedgeford. Just then, one was giving an
account of a young woman, who had dropped down dead there the day before. This
gave us a fair occasion to exhort all that were present, So to number their own
days that they might apply their hearts unto wisdom.

In the afternoon one overtook us whom we soon found more inclined to speak
than to hear. However we spoke and spared not. In the evening we overtook a
young man, a Quaker, who afterward came to us, to our inn at Henley, whither
he sent for the rest of his family, to join with us in prayer: to which I
added, as usual, the exposition of the 2d lesson. Our other companion went with
us a mile or two in the morning, and then not only spoke less than the day
before; but took in good part a serious caution against talkativeness and
vanity.

An hour after, we were overtook by an elderly gentleman, who said, "He was
going to enter his son at Oxford." We asked, "At what college?" He said, "he
did not know: having no acquaintance there on whose recommendation he could
depend." After some conversation, he expressed a deep sense of the good
providence of God, and told us, "He knew God had cast us in his way, in answer
to his prayer." In the evening we reached Oxford, rejoicing in our having
received so many fresh instances of that great truth, In all thy ways
acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths.

Thurs. 23. I met Peter Bohler again, who now amazed me more and more, by the
account he gave of the fruits of living faith, the holiness and happiness which
he affirmed to attend it. The next morning I began the Greek Testament again,
resolving to abide by the law and the testimony, and being confident, that God
would hereby show me, whether this doctrine was of God.

Sund. 26. I preached at Whitam, on the new creature, and went in the evening
to a society in Oxford, where (as my manner then was at all societies) after
using a collect or two and the Lord's prayer, I expounded a chapter in the New
Testament, and concluded with three or four more collects and a psalm.

Mond. 27. Mr. Kinchin went with me to the castle, where after reading prayers
and preaching, on, It is appointed for men once to die, we prayed with the
condemned man, first in several forms of prayer, and then in such words as were
given us in that hour. He kneeled down in much heaviness and confusion, having
no rest in his bones, by reason of his sins. After a space he rose up, and
eagerly said, I am now ready to die. I know Christ has taken away my sins, and
there is no more condemnation for me. The same composed cheerfulness he showed,
when he was carried to execution: and in his last moments he was the same,
enjoying a perfect peace, in confidence that he was accepted in the beloved.

Sat. April 1. Being at Mr. Fox's society, my heart was so full that I could
not confine myself to the forms of prayer, which we were accustomed to use
there. Neither do I purpose to be confined to them any more; but to pray
indifferently, with a form or without, as I may find suitable to particular
occasions.

Sund. 2. Being Easter Day, I preached in our college chapel, on, The hour
comes and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and
they that ^ear shall live. I preached in the afternoon first at the castle, and
th^^ at Car^ax on the same words, I see the promise. But it is afar off.

Believing it would be better for me to wait for the accomplishment of it in
silence and retirement, on Mond. 3. I complied with Mr. Kinchin's desire, and
went to him at Dummer in Hampshire. But I was not suffered to stay here long;
being earnestly pressed to come up to London, if it were only for a few days.
Thither therefore I returned, on Tues. 17th.

Sat. 21. I met Peter Bohler once more. I had now no objection to what he said
of the nature of faith, viz. That it is (to use the words of our church) A sure
trust and confidence which a man has in God, th^^ through the merits of
Christ, his sins are forgiven, and he reconciled to the ^avour of God. Neither
could I deny either the happiness or holiness which he described, as fruits of
this living faith. The Spirit itself bears witness with our spirit that we
are the children of God: and, He that believes has the witness in himself,
fully convinced me of the former: As, Whatsoever is born of God, does not
commit sin; and Whosoever believes, is born of God, did of the latter. But I
could not comprehend what he spoke of an instantaneous work. I could not
understand how this faith should be given in a moment: how a man could at once
be thus turned from darkness to light, from sin and misery to righteousness and
joy in the Holy Ghost. I searched the scriptures again, touching this very
thing, particularly the ^cts of the apostles. But, to my utter astonishment,
found scarce any instances there of other than instantaneous conversion; scarce
any so ^low as that of St. Paul, who was three days in the pangs of the new
birth. I had but one retreat lest, viz. " Thus, I grant God wrought in the
first ages of Christianity: but the times are changed. What reason have I to
believe, he works in the same manner now?"

But on Sund. 22. I was beat out of this retreat too, by the concurring
evidence of several living witnesses; who testified God had thus wrought in
themselves; giving them in a moment, such a faith in the blood of his Son, as
translated them out of darkness into light, out of sin and fear into holiness
and happiness. Here ended my disputing. I could now only "cry out, Lord help
thou my unbelief!"

I asked P. Bohler again, "Whether I ought not to refrain from teaching
others?" He said, "No; Do not hide in the ^arth the talent God has given you."
Accordingly on Tues. 25. I spoke clearly and fully at Blendon to Mr.
Delamotte's family, of the nature and fruits of faith. Mr. Broughton and my
brother were there. Mr. Broughton's great objection was, He could never think
that I had not faith, who had done and suffered such things. My brother was
very angry, and told me I did not know what mischief I had done by talking
thus. And indeed it did please God then to kindle a fire, which I trust shall
never be extinguished.

On Wednes. 21. The day fixed for my return to Oxford, I once more waited on
the trustees for Georgia: but being straitened for time, was obliged to leave
the papers for them, which I had designed to give into their own hands. One of
these was the instrument whereby they had appointed me minister of Savannah;
which having no more place in those parts, I thought it not right to keep any
longer.

P. Bohler walked with me a few miles, and exhorted me not to stop short of the
grace of God. At Gerrard's Cross I plainly declared to those whom. God gave
into my hands, The faith as it is in Jesus: as I did next day to a young man I
overtook on the road, and in the evening to our friends at Oxford. A strange
doctrine, which some, who did not care to contradict, yet knew not what to make
of; but one or two, who were thoroughly bruised by sin, willingly heard, and
received it gladly.

In the day or two following, I was much confirmed in the truth that is after
godliness, by hearing (...) experiences of Mr. Hutchins (of Pembroke-college)
and Mrs. Fox: two living witnessess that God can (at least, if he does not
always) give that faith whereof comes salvation in a moment, as lightning
falling from heaven.

Mond. May 1. The return of my brother's illness obliged me again to hasten to
London. In the evening I found him at James Hutton's, better as to his health,
than I expected; but strongly averse from what he called The New Faith.

This evening our little society began, which afterward met in Fetter-lane.
Our fundamental rules were as follow.

In obedience to the command of God by St. James, and by the advice of Peter
Bohler, it is agreed by us,

1. That we will meet together once a week to confess our faults one to
another, and pray one for another, that we may be healed:

2. That the persons so meeting be divided into several bands, or little
companies, none of them consisting of fewer than five or more than ten persons.

3. That every one in order speak as freely, plainly, and concisely as he can,
the real state of his heart, with his several temptations and deliverances,
since the last time of meeting.

4. That all the bands have a conference at eight every Wednesday evening,
began and ended with singing and prayer.

5. That any who desire to be admitted into this society be asked, What are
your reasons for desiring this? Will you be entirely open, using no kind of
reserve? Have you any objection to any of our orders? (which may then be read.)

6. That when any new member is proposed, every one present speak clearly and
freely whatever objection he has to him.

7. That those against whom no reasonable objection appears, be in order for
their trial, formed into one or more distinct bands, and some person agreed on
to assist them.

8. That after two months trial, if no objection then appear, they may be
admitted into the society.

9. That every fourth Saturday be observed as a day of general intercession.

10. That on the Sunday seven-night following be a general love-feast, from
seven till ten in the evening.

11. That no particular member be allowed to act in any thing, contrary to any
order of the society: and that if any persons, after being thrice admonished,
do not conform thereto, they be not any longer esteemed as members.

Wednes. 3. My brother had a long and particular conversation with Peter
Bohler. And it now pleased God to open his eyes; so that he also saw clearly,
what was the nature of that one, true living faith, whereby alone, through
grace we are saved.

Thurs. 4. Peter Bohler left London in order to embark for Carolina. O what a
work has God begun, since his coming into England! Such an one as shall never
come to an end, till heaven and earth pass away.

Friday and Saturday, I was at Blendon. They now believed our report. O may the
arm of the Lord be speedily revealed unto them!

Sun. 7. I preached at St. Lawrence's in the morning; and afterward at St.
Katherine's Creed-church. I was enabled to speak strong words at both; and was
therefore the less surprised at being informed, I was not to preach any more in
either of those churches.

Tues. 9. I preached at Great St. Helen's, to a very numerous congregation, on,
He that spared not his own Son but delivered him up for us all, how shall he
not with him also freely give us all things? My heart was now so enlarged, to
declare the love of God, to all that were oppressed by the devil, that I did
not wonder in the least, when I was afterward told, "Sir, you must preach here
no more."

Wednes. 10. Mr. Stonhouse, Vicar of Islington, was convinced of the truth as
it is in Jesus. From this time till Saturday 13, I was sorrowful and very
heavy; being neither able to read, nor meditate, nor sing, nor pray, nor do any
thing. Yet I was a little refreshed by Peter Bohler's letter, which I insert in
his own words.

Charissime and suavissime Frater,
INTENTISSIMO amore te diligo, multum tui recordans in itinere m^o, optando and
precando ut quam primum viscera misericordiae crucifixi Jesu Christi, tui
gratia jam ante 6000 Annos commota, mentituae appareant; Ut gustare and tunc
videre possis, quam vehementer te Filius DEI amaverit and hucusque ^met, and ut
sic considere possis in co omni tempore: vitamque ejus in Te and in carne tua
sentire. Cave Tibi a peccato Incredulitatis, and si nondum vicisti illud, fac
ut proximo die illud vincas, per Sanguinem Jesu Christi, Ne differ, quaeso
credere Tuum in Jesum Christum; sed potius promissionum ejus quae pertinent ad
miserandos peccatores, coram, ^a^ie ejus benigna sic mentionem fac, ut non
aliter possit quam proestare tibi, quod multis aliis praestitit, O quam multus
quam magnus, quam inessabilis, quam inexhaustus, est illius Amor! Ille certe
jam jam paratus est ad auxilium, and nihil potest illum offendere nisi
incredulitas nostra, Creed igitur. Fratrem tuum Carolum and Hall, nomine meo
saluta multum; and admonete vos invicem ad credendum, and tunc ad ambulandum
coram facie Domini (...), and ad pugnandum contra Diabolum and Mundum (...),
and ad crucifigendum and conculcandum peccatum omne sub pedibus nostris,
quantum nobis datum est per gratiam secundi Adami, cujus vita excedit mortem
prioris Adami, and cujus gratia antecellit Corruptionem and Damnationem prioris
Adami.

Dominus tibi benedicat. Permane in Fide, Amore, Doctrina, Communione
Sanctorum, and breviter, in omni quod habemus in novo Foedere. Ego sum and maneo

Tuus indignus Frater, Petrus Bohlen
In Agris Southamptonianis Die 8vo Maii, 1738.

Most dear and beloved Brother,
I Love you greatly, and think much of you in my journey, wishing and praying
that the tender mercies of Jesus Christ the crucified, whose bowels were moved
toward you more than six thousand years ago, may be manifested to your soul:
that you may ta^^^ and then see, how exceedingly the Son of God has loved you,
and loves you still; and that so you may continually trust in him, and feel his
life in yourself. Beware of the sin of unbelief, and if you have not conquered
it yet, see that you conquer it this very day, through the blood of Jesus
Christ. Delay not, I beseech you, to believe in your Jesus Christ; but so p^^
him in mind of his promises to poor sinners, that he may not be able to refrain
from doing for you, what he has done for so many others. O how great, how
inexpressible, how unexhausted is his love! Surely he is now ready to help; and
nothing can offend him but our unbelief. --

The Lord bless you! Abide in faith, love, teaching, the communion of saints;
and briefly, in all which we have in the new testament.

I am, Your unworthy brother, Peter Bohler.
County of Southampton, May 8th, 1738.

Sun. 14. I preached in the morning at St. Ann's, Aldersgate; and in the
afternoon at the Savoy chapel, free salvation by faith in the blood of Christ.
I was quickly apprized, that at St. Ann's likewise, I am to preach no more.

So true did I find the words of a friend, wrote to my brother about this time.

"I have seen upon this occasion, more than ever I could have imagined, how
intolerable the doctrine of faith is to the mind of man; and how peculiarly
intolerable to religious men. One may say the most unchristian things, even
down to deism; the most enthusiastic things, so they proceed but upon mental
raptures, lights and unions; the most severe things, even the whole rigor of
ascetic mortification; and all this will be forgiven. But if you speak of faith
in such a manner as makes Christ a Savior to the utmost, a most universal help
and refuge; in such a manner as takes away glorying, but adds happiness to
wretched man; as discovers a greater pollution in the best of us, than we could
before acknowledge, but brings a greater deliverance from it than we could
before expect: if any one offers to talk at this rate, he shall be heard with
the same abhorrence, as if he was going to rob mankind of their salvation,
their mediator, or the^ hopes of forgiveness. I am persuaded that a Montanist
or a Novatian, who from the height of his purity should look down with contempt
upon poor sinners, and exclude them from all mercy, would not be thought such
an overthrower of the gospel, as he who should learn from the author of it, to
be a friend of Publicans and Sinners, and to sit down upon the level with them,
as soon as they begin to repent."

"But this is not to be wondered at. For all religious people have such a
quantity of righteousness, acquired by much painful exercise, and formed at
last into current habits; which is their wealth, both for this world and the
next. Now all other schemes of religion, are either so complaisant, as to tell
them, they are very rich, and have enough to triumph in: or else only a little
rough, but friendly in the main, by telling them, their riches are not yet
sufficient, but by such arts of self-denial, and mental refinement, they may
enlarge the stock. But the doctrine of faith is a downright robber. It takes
away all this wealth, and only tells us, it is deposited for us with some body
else, upon whose bounty we must live like mere beggars. Indeed they that are
truly beggars, vile and filthy sinners till very lately, may stoop to live in
this dependent condition: it suits them well enough. But they who have long
distinguished themselves from the herd of vicious wretches, or have even gone
beyond moral men; for them to be told, that they are either not so well, or but
the same needy, impotent, insignificant vessels of mercy, with the others: this
is more shocking to reason, than transubstantiation. For reason had rather
resign its pretensions to judge what is bread or flesh, than have this honor
wrested from it to be the architect of virtue and righteousness. But where am I
running? My design was only to give you warning, that wherever you go, this
foolishness of preaching will alienate hearts from you, and open mouths against
you."

Fri. 19. My brother had a second return of his pleurisy. A few of us spent
Saturday night in prayer. The next day, being Whitsunday, after hearing Dr.
Heylin preach a truly Christian sermon (on, They were all filled with the Holy
Ghost: and so, said he, may all you be, if it is not your own ^ault) and
assisting him at the holy communion (his curate being taken ill in the church)
I received the surprising news, that my brother had found rest to his soul. His
bodily strength returned also from that hour. Who is so great a God as our God?

I preached at St. John's W^pping, at three, and St. Be^nett's, Paul's-wharf,
in the evening. At these churches likewise I am to preach no more. At St.
Antholin's I preached on the Thursday following.

Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday, I had continual sorrow and heaviness in my
heart; something of which I described, in the broken manner I was able, in the
following letter to a friend.

"O why is it, that so great, so wise, so holy a God will use such an
instrument as me! Lord let the dead bury their dead? But will thou send the
dead to raise the dead? Yea, thou sendest whom thou will send, and show
mercy by whom thou will show mercy! Amen! Be it then according to thy will! If
thou speak the word, Judas shall cast out devils.

I feel what you say (though not enough) for I am under the same condemnation.
I see that the whole law of God is holy, just and good. I know every thought,
every temper of my soul, ought to bear God's image and superscription. But how
am I fallen from the glory of God! I feel, that I am sold under sin. I know,
that I too deserve nothing but wrath, being full of all abominations: and
having no good thing in me to atone for them, or to remove the wrath of God.
All my works, my righteousness, my prayers, need an atonement for themselves.
So that my mouth is stopped. I have nothing to plead. God is holy, I am unholy.
God is a consuming fire. I am altogether a sinner, meet to be consumed.

"Yet I hear a voice (and is it not the voice of God?) saying, Believe and thou
shall be saved. He that believes, is passed from death unto life. God so loved
the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him,
should not perish, but have everlasting life.

"O let no one deceive us by vain words, as if we had already attained this
says! i. e. The proper christian faith. By its fruits we shall know. Do we
already feel peace with God, and joy in the Holy Ghost? Does his Spirit bear
witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God? Alas, with mine he
does not. Nor, I fear with yours. O thou Savior of men, save us from trusting
in any thing but thee! Draw us after thee! Let us be emptied of ourselves, and
then fill us with all peace and joy in believing, and let nothing separate us
from thy love, in time or in eternity!"

What occurred on Wednesday 24, I think best to relate at large, after
premising what may make it the better understood. Let him that cannot receive
it, ask of the Father of lights, that he would give more light to him and me.

1. I believe, till I was about ten years old, I had not sinned away that
initial grace which was given me in infancy having been strictly educated and
carefully taught, that I could only be saved by universal obedience, by ^eeping
all the commandments of God, (...) the meaning of which I was diligently
instructed. And those instructions, so far as they respected outward duties and
sins, I gladly received, and often thought of. But all that was said to me of
inward obedience, or holiness, I neither understood nor remembered. So that I
was indeed as ignorant of the true meaning of the law, as I was of the gospel
of Christ.

2. The next six or seven years were spent at school: where outward restraints
being removed, I was much more negligent than before even of outward duties,
and almost continually guilty of outward ^ins, which I knew to be such, though
they were not scandalous in the eye of the world. However I still read the
scriptures, and said my prayers, morning and evening. And what I now hoped to
be saved by, was, 1. Not being so bad a^ other people. 2. Having still a
kindness for religion. And 3. Reading the bible, going to church, and saying my
prayers.

3. Being removed to the university, for five years, I still said my prayers
both in public and in private, and read with the scriptures several other books
of religion, especially comments on the New Testament. Yet I had not all this
while so much as a notion of inward holiness: nay, went on habitually and for
the most part) very contentedly, in some or other known ^in: indeed with some
intermission and short struggles, especially before and after the Holy
Communion, which I was obliged to receive thrice a year: I cannot well tell,
what I hoped to be saved by now, when I was continually sinning against the
little light I had: unless by those transient fits of what many divines taught
me to call repentance.

4. When I was about 22, my father pressed me to enter into holy orders. At the
same time the providence of God directing me to Kempis 's Christian Pattern, I
began to see, that true religion was seated in the heart, and that God's law
extended to all our thoughts as well as words and actions. I was however very
angry at Kempis, for being too strict, though I read him only in Dean
Stan^ope's translation. Yet I had frequently much sensible comfort in reading
him, such as I was an utter stranger to before: and meeting likewise with a
religious friend, which I never had till now, I began to alter the whole form
of my conversation, and to set in earnest upon a new life. I set apart an hour
or two a day for religious retirement. I communicated every week. I watched
against all sin, whether in word or deed. I began to aim at, and pray for
inward holiness. So that now, doing so much, and living so good a life, I
doubted not but I was a good Christian.

5. Removing soon after to another college, I executed a resolution, which I
was before convinced was of the utmost importance, shaking off at once all my
trifling acquaintance. I began to see more and more the value of time. I
applied myself closer to study. I watched more carefully against actual sins; I
advised others to be religious, according to that scheme of religion by which I
modelled my own life. But meeting now with Mr. Law's Christian Perfection and
Serious Call (although I was much offended at many parts of both, yet) they
convinced me more than ever of the exceeding height, and breadth, and depth of
the law of God. The light flowed in so mightily upon my soul, that every thing
appeared in a new view. I cried to God for help, and resolved not to prolong
the time of obeying him as I had never done before. And by my continued
endeavor to keep his whole law, inward and outward, to the utmost of my power,
I was persuaded that I should be accepted of him, and that I was even then in a
state of salvation.

6. In 17^0, I began visiting the prisons, assisting the poor and sick in town,
and doing what other good I could by my presence or my little fortune to the
bodies and souls of all men. To this end I abridged myself of all
superfluities, and many that are called necessaries of life. I soon became a
byword for so doing, and I rejoiced that my name was cast out as evil. The
next spring I began observing the Wednesday and Friday fasts, commonly observed
in the ancient church; tasting no food till three in the afternoon. And now I
knew not how to go any farther. I diligently strove against all sin. I omitted
no sort of self-denial which I thought lawful: I carefully used, both in public
and private, all the means of grace at all opportunities. I omitted no occasion
of doing good; I for that reason suffered evil. And all this I knew to be
nothing, unless as it was directed toward inward holiness. Accordingly this,
the image of God, was what I aimed at in all, by doing his will, not my own.
Yet when after continuing some years in this course, I apprehended myself to be
near death, I could not find that all this gave me any comfort, or any
assurance of acceptance with God. At this I was then not a little surprised:
not imagining I had been all this time building on the sand, nor considering
that other foundation can no man lay, than that which is laid by God, even
Christ Jesus.

7. Soon after, a contemplative man convinced me still more than I was
convinced before, that outward works are nothing, being alone; and in several
conversations instructed me, how to pursue inward holiness, or a union of the
soul with God. But even of his instructions (though I then received them as the
words of God) I cannot but now observe, 1. That he spoke so incautiously
against trusting in outward works, that he discouraged me from doing them at
all. 2. That he recommended (as it were, to supply what was wanting in them)
mental prayer, and the like exercises, as the most effectual means of purifying
the soul, and uniting it with God. Now these were in truth, as much my own
works as visiting the sick or clothing the naked, and the union with God thus
pursued, was as really my own righteousness, as any I had before pursued, under
another name.

8. In this refined way of trusting to my own works and my own righteousness
(so zealously inculcated by the mystic writers) I dragged on heavily, finding
no comfort or help therein, till the time of my leaving England. On shipboard
however I was again active in outward works; where it pleased God of his free
mercy, to give me 26 of the Moravian brethren for companions, who endeavored
to show me a more excellent way. But I understood it not at first. I was too
learned and too wise. So that it seemed foolishness unto me. And I continued
preaching and following after and trusting in that righteousness, whereby no
flesh can be justified.

9. All the time I was at Savannah I was thus beating the air. Being ignorant
of the righteousness of Christ, which by a living faith in him brings
salvation to every one that believes, I sought to establish my own
righteousness, and so labored in the fire all my days. I was now, properly
under the law; I knew that the law of God was spiritual; I consented to it,
that it was good. Yea, I delighted in it, after the inner man. Yet was I
carnal, sold under sin. Every day was I constrained to cry out, What I do, I
allow not; for what I would, I do not, but what I hate, that I do. To will is
indeed present with me: but how to perform that which is good, I find not. For
the good which I would, I do not; but the evil which I would not, that I do. I
find a law, that when I would do good, evil is present with me: even the law in
my members warring against the law of my mind, and still bringing me into
captivity to the law of sin.

10. In this vile, abject state of bondage to ^in, I was indeed fighting
continually, but not conquering. Before, I had willingly served sin: now it was
unwillingly, willingly, but still I served it. I fell and rose, and fell again.
^ometimes I was overcome, and in heaviness: Sometimes I overcame, and was in
joy. For as in the former state, I had some foretastes of the terrors of the
law, so had I in this, of the comforts of the gospel. During this whole
struggle between nature and grace (which had now continued above ten years) I
had many remarkable returns to prayer, especially when I was in trouble: I had
many sensible comforts, which are indeed no other than short anticipations of
the life of faith. But I was still under the law, not under grace (the state
most who are called Christians are content to live and die in.) For I was only
striving with, not freed from sin: neither had I the witness of the Spirit with
my spirit, and indeed could not; for I sought it not by faith, but (as it were)
by the works of the law.

11. In my return to England, January 1738, being in imminent danger of death,
and very uneasy on that account, I was strongly convinced that the cause of
that uneasiness was unbelief, and that the gaining a true, living faith, was
the one thing needful for me. But still I fixed not this faith on its right
object: I meant only faith in God, not faith in or through Christ. Again, I
knew not that I was wholly void of this faith; but only thought, I had not
enough of it. So that when Peter Bohler, whom God prepared for me as soon as I
came to London, affirmed of true faith in Christ (which is but one) that it had
those two fruits inseparably attending it, "Dominion over sin, and constant
peace from a sense of forgiveness," I was quite amazed, and looked upon it as a
new gospel. If this was so, it was clear, I had not faith. But I was not
willing to be convinced of this. Therefore I disputed with all my might, and
labored to prove, that faith might be where these were not; especially where
the sense of forgiveness was not: for all the scriptures relating to this, I
had been long since taught to construe away, and to call all Presbyterians who
spoke otherwise. Besides, I well saw, no one could (in the nature of things)
have such a sense of forgiveness, and not feel it. But I felt it not. If then
there was no faith without this, all my pretensions to faith dropped at once.

12. When I met Peter Bohler again, he consented, to put the dispute upon the
issue which I desired, viz. Scripture and experience. I first consulted the
scripture. But when I set aside the glosses of men, and simply considered the
word of God, comparing them together, endeavoring to illustrate the obscure by
the plainer passages, I found they all made against me, and was forced to
retreat to my last hold, "That experience would never agree with the literal
interpretation of those scriptures. Nor could I therefore allow it to be true,
till I found some living witnesses of it." He replied, "He could show me such
at any time; if I desired it the next day." And accordingly the next day, he
came again with three others, all of whom testified of their own personal
experience, that a true living faith in Christ, is inseparable from a sease of
pardon for all past, and freedom from all present sins. They added with one
mouth, that this faith was the gift, the free gift of God, and that he would
surely bestow it upon every soul, who earnestly and perseveringly sought it. I
was now thoroughly convinced; and by the grace of God, I resolved to seek it
unto the end, 1. By absolutely renouncing all dependence, in whole or in part,
upon my own works or righteousness, on which I had really grounded my hope of
salvation, though I knew it not, from my youth up. 2. By adding to the constant
use of all the other means of grace, continual prayer for this very thing,
justifying, saving faith, a full reliance on the blood of Christ shed for me; a
trust in him, as my Christ, as my sole justification, sanctification, and
redemption.

13. I continued thus to seek it (though with strange indifference, dullness and
coldness, and usually frequent relapses into sin) till Wednesday, May 24. I
think it was about five this morning, that I opened my Testament on those
words. (...). There are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises,
even that ye should be partakers of the divine nature. 2 Pet. i. 4. Just as I
went out, I opened it again on those words, Thou art not far from the kingdom
of God. In the afternoon I was asked to go to St. Paul's. The anthem was, Out
of the deep have I called unto thee, O Lord: Lord hear my voice. O let thine
ears consider well the voice of my complaint. If thou, Lord, wilt be extreme to
mark what is done amiss, O Lord, who may abide it? But there is mercy with
thee; therefore thou shall be feared. O Israel, trust in the Lord: for with the
Lord there is mercy, and with him is plenteous redemption. And he shall redeem
Israel from all his sins

14 In the evening I went very unwillingly to a society in Aldersgate Street,
where one was reading Luther's preface to the epistle to the Romans. About a
quarter before nine, while he was describing the change which God works in the
heart through faith in Christ, I felt my heart strangely warmed. I felt I did
trust in Christ, Christ alone for salvation: and an assurance was given me,
that he had taken away my sins, even mine, and saved me from the law of sin and
death.

15. I began to pray with all my might for those who had in a more especial
manner despitefully used me and persecuted me. I then testified openly to all
there, what I now first felt in my heart. But it was not long before the enemy
suggested, "This cannot be faith; for where is thy joy?" Then was I taught,
that peace and victory over sin, are essential to faith in the Captain of our
salvation: but, that as to the transports of joy that usually attend the
beginning of it, especially in those who have mourned deeply, God sometimes
gives, sometimes withholds them, according to the counsels of his own will.

16. After my return home, I was much buffeted with temptations: but cried out,
and they fled away. They returned again and again. I as often lifted up my
eyes, and he sent me help from his holy place. And herein I found the
difference between this and my former state chiefly consisted. I was striving,
yea, fighting with all my might under the law, as well as under grace. But then
I was sometimes, if not often, conquered; now, I was always conqueror.

17. Thurs. May 25. The moment I awaked, "Jesus, Master," was in my heart and
in my mouth; and I found all my strength lay in keeping my eye sixed upon him,
and my soul waiting on him continually. Being again at St. Paul's in the
afternoon, I could taste the good word of God in the anthem, which began, My
song shall be always of the loving kindness of the Lord: with my mouth will I
ever be showing forth thy truth from one generation to another. Yet the enemy
injected a fear, "If thou do believe, why is there not a more sensible
change? I answered (yet not I) that I know not. But this I know, I have now
peace with God. And I sin not to day, and Jesus my Master has forbid me to take
thought for the morrow."

18. "But is not any sort of fear (continued the tempter) a proof that thou
do not believe?" I desired my master to answer for me; and opened his book
upon those words of St. Paul. Without were fightings, within were fears. Then
inferred I, well may fears be within me; but I must go on, and tread them under
my feet.

Friday, May 26. My soul continued in peace, but yet in heaviness, because of
manifold temptations. I asked Mr. Telching the Moravian, What to do? He said
you must not fight with them, as you did before, but flee from them, the moment
they appear, and take shelter in the wounds of Jesus. The same I learned also
from the afternoon anthem, which was, My soul truly waits still upon God, for
of him comes my salvation; he verily is my strength and my salvation, he is my
defense so that I shall not greatly fall. O put your trust in him always, ye
people; pour out your hearts before him; for God is our hope.

Sat. 27. Believing one reason of my want of joy, was want of time for prayer,
I resolved to do no business till I went to church in the morning, but to
continue pouring out my heart before him. And this day my spirit was enlarged;
so that though I was now also assaulted by many temptations, I was more than
conqueror, gaining more power thereby to trust and rejoice in God my Savior.

Sunday 28. I waked in peace, but not in joy. In the same even quiet state I
was till the evening, when I was roughly attacked in a large company as an
enthusiast, a seducer, and a setter forth of new doctrines. By the blessing of
God I was not moved to anger, but after a calm and short reply went away;
though not with so tender concern as was due to those, who were seeking death
in the error of their life.

This day I preached in the morning at St. George's Bloomsbury, on, This is the
victory that overcomes the world, even our faith; and in the afternoon at the
chapel in Long-Acre, on God's justifying the ungodly; the last time (I
understand) I am to preach at either. Not as I will, but as thou will.

Mond. 29 I set out for Dummer with Mr. Wolf, one of the first fruits of Peter
Bohler's ministry in England. I was much strengthened by the grace of God in
him: yet was his state so far above mine, that I was often tempted to doubt,
whether we had one faith? But, without much reasoning about it, I held here;
"Though his be strong and mine weak, yet that God has given some degree of
faith even to me, I know by its fruits. For I have constant peace; not one
uneasy thought. And I have freedom from sin: not one unholy desire."

Yet on Wednesday did I grieve the Spirit of God, not only by not watching unto
prayer, but likewise by speaking with sharpness instead of tender love, of one
that was not sound in the faith. Immediately God hid his face and I was
troubled; and in this heaviness I continued till the next morning, June 1. When
it pleased God, while I was exhorting another, to give comfort to my soul, and
(after I had spent some time in prayer) to direct me to those gracious words,
Having therefore boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus --
Let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith. Let us hold
fast the profession of our faith without wavering; (for he is faithful that
promised) and let us consider one another, to provoke unto love and to good
works.

Sat. June 3. I was so strongly assaulted by one of my old enemies, that I had
scarce strength to open my lips, or even to look up for help. But after I had
prayed, faintly, as I could, the temptation vanished away.

Sun. 4. Was indeed a feast day. For from the time of my rising till past one
in the afternoon, I was praying, reading the scriptures, singing praise, or
calling sinners to repentance. All these days I scarce remember to have opened
the testament, but upon some great and precious promise. And I saw more than
ever, that the gospel, is in truth but one great promise, from the beginning of
it to the end.

Tues. 6. I had still more comfort, and peace, and joy: on which I fear I began
to presume. For in the evening I received a letter from Oxford which threw me
into much perplexity. It was asserted therein, "That no doubting could consist
with the least degree of true faith: that whoever at any time felt any doubt or
fear, was not weak in faith, but had no faith at all: and that none has any
faith, till the law of the spirit of life has made him wholly free from the law
of sin and death."

Begging of God to direct me, I opened my testament on 1 Cor. iii. ver. 1, etc.
where St. Paul speaks of those whom he terms babes in Christ, who were not able
to bear strong meat, nay (in a sense) carnal; to whom nevertheless he says, Ye
are God's building, ye are the temple of God. Surely then these men had some
degree of faith; though it is plain, their faith was but weak.

After some hours spent in the scripture and prayer, I was much comforted. Yet
I felt a kind of foreness in my heart, so that I found my wound was not fully
healed. O God, save thou me, and all that are weak in the faith, from doubtful
disputations!

Wednesday, June 7. I determined, if God should permit, to retire for a short
time into Germany. I had fully proposed before I left Georgia so to do, if it
should please God to bring me back to Europe. And I now clearly saw the time
was come. My weak mind could not bear to be thus sawn asunder. And I hoped the
conversing with these holy men, who were themselves living witnesses of the
full power of faith, and yet able to bear with those that are weak, would be a
means, under God, of so establishing my soul, that I might go on from faith to
faith, and from strength to strength.

Thurs. 8. I went to Salisbury to take leave of my mother. The next day I left
Sarum, and on Saturday came to Stanton-harcourt. Having preached faith in
Christ there on Sunday 11, I went on to Oxford; and thence on Monday to London,
where I found Mr. Ingham just setting out. We went on board the next day,
Tuesday 13, and fell down to Gravesend that night. About four in the afternoon
on Wednesday we lost sight of England. We reached the Mease at eight on
Thursday morning, and in an hour and a half landed at Rotterdam.

We were eight in all, five English and three Germans. Dr. Koker, a physician
of Rotterdam, was so kind, when we set forward in the afternoon, as to walk an
hour with us on our way. I never before saw any such road as this. For many
miles together, it is raised for some yards above the level, and paved with a
small sort of brick, as smooth and clean as the Mall in St. James's. The
walnut-trees stand in even rows on either side: so that no walk in a
gentleman's garden is pleasanter. About seven we came to Goudart, where we were
a little surprised, at meeting with a treatment which is not heard of in
England. Several inns utterly refused to entertain us; so that it was with
difficulty we at last found one, where they did us the favor to take our money
for some meat and drink, and the use of two or three bad b^d^. They pressed us
much in the morning to see their church, but were displeased at our pulling off
our hats when we went in; telling us, "We must not do so; it was not the custom
there." It is a large old building, of the Gothic kind, resembling some of our
English cathedrals. There is much history-painting in the windows, which they
told us, is greatly admired. About eight we lest Goudart, and in a little more
than six hours reached Ysselstein.

Here we were at Baron Wattevil's, as at home. We found with him a few German
brethren and sisters, and seven or eight of our English acquaintance, who had
settled here some time before. They lodged just without the town, in three or
four little houses, till one should be built that would contain them all.
Saturday 17, was their intercession-day. In the morning, some of our English
brethren desired me to administer the Lord's supper: the rest of the day was
spent with all the brethren and sisters, in hearing the wonderful work which
God is beginning to work over all the earth, and in making our requests known
unto him, and giving him thanks for the mightiness of his kingdom.

At six in the morning we took boat. The beautiful gardens lie on both sides
the river, for great part of the way to Amsterdam, whither we came about five
in the evening. The exact neatness of all the buildings here, the nice
cleanness of the streets (which, we were informed, were all washed twice a
week) and the canals which run through all the main streets, with rows of trees
on either side, make this the pleasantest city which I have ever seen. Here we
were entertained with truly Christian hospitality, by Mr. Decknatel, a minister
of the Mennonists, who suffered us to want nothing while we stayed here, which
was till the Thursday following. Dr. Barkhausen (a physician, a Muscovite by
nation) who had been with Mr. Decknatel for some time, showed us likewise all
possible kindness. Remember them, O Lord, for good!

Mond. 17. I was at one of the societies, which lasted an hour and an half.
About sixty persons were present. The singing was in Low Dutch (Mr. Decknatel
having translated into Low Dutch, part of the Hernhuth hymn-book) but the words
were so very near the German, that any who understood the original, might
understand the translation. The expounding was in High Dutch. I was at another
of the societies on Tuesday, where were present about the same number. On
Wednesday, one of our company found a sheep that had been lost: his sister, who
had lived here for some time with one whom she loved too well, as he did her.
But they were now both resolved, by the grace of God (which they accordingly
executed without delay) To pluck out the right eye, and cast it from them.

Thurs. 22. We took boat at eight in the evening, and landing at four in the
morning, walked on to U^tfass, which we left about two, having now another boy
added to our number. A little before eight we came to Beurn, a small ill-built
city, belonging to the Prince of Orange. Setting out early in the morning, we
came to Nimwegen, the last town in Holland, about two in the afternoon: and
leaving it at four, came before eight to an inn, two hours short of Cleve.

Sun. 25. After spending an hour in singing and prayer, we walked till near
noon, before we could meet with any refreshment. The road would have appeared
exceeding pleasant, being broad and strait, with tall trees on either side, had
not weariness and rain prevented. We hoped to reach Reinberg in the evening,
but could not; being obliged to stop two hours short of it, at a little house,
where many good Lutherans were concluding the Lord's Day (as is usual among
them) with fiddling and dancing!

Mond. 26. We breakfasted at Reinberg, left it at half an hour past ten, and at
four came to Urding. Being much tired, we rested here, so that it was near ten
at night before we came to Neus. Having but a few hours walk from hence to
Colen, we went thither easily, and (...) at five the next evening, into the
^glic^l, dirtiest city, I ever yet saw with my eyes.

Wednes. 28. We went to the cathedral, which is mere heaps upon heaps; a huge,
misshapen thing, which has no more of symmetry, than of neatness belonging to
it. I was a little surprised to observe, that neither in this, nor in any other
of the Romish churches where I have been, is there, properly speaking any such
thing as joint worship: but one prays at one shrine or altar, and another at
another, without any regard to, or communication with one another. As we came
out of the church, a procession began on the other side of the churchyard. One
of our company scrupling to pull off his hat, a zealous Catholic presently
cried out, Knock down the Lutheran dog. But we prevented any contest, by
retiring into the church.

Walking on the side of the Rhine in the afternoon, I saw to my great surprise
(for I always thought before, no Romanist of any fashion believed any thing of
the story) a fresh painting, done last year at the public expense, on the
outside of the city wall, in memory of the bringing in the heads of the three
kings (says the Latin inscription) through the gate adjoining: which indeed, in
reverence (it seems) to them, has been stopped up ever since.

At four we took boat, when I could not but observe the decency of the Papists,
above us who are called reformed. As soon as ever we were seated (and so every
morning after) they all pulled off their hats, and each used by himself, a
short prayer for our prosperous journey. And this justice I must do to the very
boatmen (who upon the Rhine are generally wicked even to a proverb) I never
heard one of them take the name of God in vain, or saw any one laugh when any
thing of religion was mentioned. So that I believe the glory of sporting with
sacred things, is peculiar to the English nation!

We were four nights on the water, by reason of the swiftness of the stream, up
which the boat was drawn by horses. The high mountains o^ ^ach side the river,
rising almost perpendicular, and yet covered with vines to the very top, gave
us many agreeable prospects: a religious house, or old castle, every now and
then appearing on the brow of one of them. On Sunday evening, July 2, we came
to Mentz; and Monday the 3d, at half an hour past ten, to Frankfort.

Faint and weary as we were, we could have no admittance here, having brought
no passes with us, which indeed we never imagined would have been required, in
a time of settled general peace. After waiting an hour at the gates, we
procured a messenger, whom we sent to Mr. Bohler (Peter Bohler's father) who
immediately came, procured us entrance into the city, and entertained us in the
most friendly manner. We set out early in the morning on Tuesday the 4th, and
about one came to Marienborn. But I was so ill, that after talking a little
with Count Zinzendorf, I was forced to lie down the rest of the day.

The family at Marienborn consists of about ninety persons, gathered out of
many nations. They live for the present in a large house hired by the Count,
which is capable of receiving a far greater number; but are building one, about
three (English) miles off, on the top of a fruitful hill. O how pleasant a
thing it is, for brethren to dwell together in unity!

Thurs. 6. The Count carried me with him to the Count of Solmes, where I
observed with pleasure the German frugality. Three of the young Countesses
(though grown up) were dressed in linen; the Count and his son in plain cloth. At
dinner, the next day, a glass of wine and a glass of water were set by every
one, and if either were emptied, a second. They all conversed freely and
unaffectedly. At ten at night we took coach again, and in the morning reached
Marienborn.

I lodged with one of the brethren at Eckershausen, an English mile from
Marienborn, where I usually spent the day, chiefly in conversing with those who
could speak either Latin or English; not being able, for want of more practice,
to speak German readily. And here I continually met with what I sought for,
viz. Living proofs of the power of faith: persons saved from inward as well as
outward sin, by the love of God shed abroad in their hearts; and from all doubt
and fear, by the abiding witness of the Holy Ghost given unto them.

Sund. 9. The Count preached in the old castle at Runneberg (about three
English miles from Marienborn) where is also a small company of those who seek
the Lord Jesus in sincerity. Wednesday 12, was one of the conferences for
strangers; where one of Frankfort proposing the question, Can a man be
justified and not know it? The Count spoke largely and scripturally upon it to
this effect:

1. Justification is, the forgiveness of sins. 2. The moment a man flies to
Christ he is justified: 3. And has peace with God, but not always joy: 4. Nor
perhaps may he know he is justified, till long after. 5. For the assurance of
it is distinct from justification itself. 6. But others may know he is
justified by his power over sin, by his seriousness, his love of the brethren,
and his hunger and thirst after righteousness, which alone prove the spiritual
life to be begun. 7. To be justified is the same thing as to be born of God.
(Not so.) 8. When a man is awakened, he is begotten of God, and his fear and
sorrow and sense of the wrath of God, are the pangs of the new birth.
I then recollected what Peter Bohler had often said upon this head, which was
to this effect:

1. When a man has living faith in Christ, then is he justified: 2. This is
always given in a moment, 3. And in that moment he has peace with God; 4. Which
he cannot have, without knowing that he has it: 5. And being born of God, he
sins not: 6. Which deliverance from sin he cannot have without knowing that
he has it.
Sat. 15. Was the intercession day, when many strangers were present from
different parts. On Monday 17, having stayed here ten days longer than I
intended (my first design being only to rest one or two days) I proposed
setting out for Hernhuth; but Mr. Ingham desiring me to stay a little longer, I
stayed till Wednesday 19, when Mr. Hauptman (a native of Dresden) Mr. Brown and
I set out together.

We breakfasted at Gehlenhausen, an old, unhandsome town, dined at Offenau
(where is a strange instance of moderation, a church used every Sunday, both by
the Papists and the Lutherans alternately) and notwithstanding some sharp
showers of rain, in the evening reached Steinau. Thursday 20 we dined at
Braunsal, and passing through Fulda in the afternoon (where the Duke has a
pleasant palace) traveled through a delightful country of hills and vales, and
in the evening came to Rickhersch. The next night (after having had the most
beautiful prospect which I think I ever saw, from the top of a high hill,
commanding a vast extent of various land on every side) we, with some
difficulty, and many words, procured a poor accommodation at an inn in Marksul.
Saturday 22, having passed through Elsenach in the morning, we came through a
more level open country, to Saxe-Gotha in the afternoon, a (...) and pleasant
city, in which the Prince's palace is indeed a fine building. We stopped an
hour here with a friendly man, and in the evening came to Ditleben; and thence
in the morning to Erfurt, where we were kindly entertained by Mr. Reinhurt, to
whom we were directed by some of the brethren at Marienborn. In the afternoon
we came to Weymar, where we had more difficulty to get through the city than is
usual, even in Germany: being not only detained a considerable time at the
gate, but also carried before I know not what great man (I believe, the Duke)
in the square: who after many other questions, asked, What we were going so far
as Hernhuth for? I answered, "To see the place where the Christians live." He
looked hard, and let us go.

Mond. 24. We came early to Jena, which lies at the bottom of several high,
steep, barren hills. The students here are distinguished from the townsmen by
their swords. They do not live together in colleges (nor indeed in any of the
German universities) as we do in Oxford and Cambridge; but are scattered up and
down the town; in lodging or boarding-houses. Those of them to whom we were
recommended, behaved as brethren indeed. O may brotherly kindness, and every
good word and work, abound in them more and more!

At Jena the stone pillars begin, set up by the Elector of Saxony, and marking
out every quarter of a German mile, to the end of his Electorate. Every mile is
a large pillar, with the names of the neighboring towns, and their distances
inscribed. It were much to be wished, that the same care were taken in England,
and indeed in all countries.

We left Jena early on Tuesday, reached Weisenfeltz in the evening, and
Mer^eberg on Wednesday morning. Having a desire to see Halle (two German miles
off) we set out after breakfast, and came thither at two in the afternoon. But
we could not be admitted into the town, when we came. The King of Prussia's
tall men, who kept the gates, sent us backward and forward, from one gate to
another, for near two hours. I then thought of sending in a note to professor
Francke, the son of that August Herman Francke, whose name, is indeed as
precious ointment. O may I follow him, as he did Christ! And by manifestation
of the truth, commend myself to every man's conscience in the sight of God!

He was not in town. However we were at length admitted into the orphan-house,
that amazing proof, that all things are still possible to him that believes.
There is now a large yearly revenue for its support, beside what is continually
brought in by the Printing office, the books sold there, and the apothecary's
shop, which is furnished with all sorts of medicines. The building reaches
backward from the front is two wings, for, I believe, a hundred and fifty
yards. The lodging-chambers for the children, their dining room, their chapel,
and all the adjoining apartments, are so conveniently contrived, and so exactly
clean, as I have never seen any before. Six hundred and fifty children (we were
informed) are wholly maintained there, and three thousand (if I mistake not)
taught. Surely such a thing neither we nor our fathers have known, as this
great thing which God has done here!

Thursday 27. We returned to Merseberg, and at five in the evening came to the
gates of Leipsig. After we had sent in our pass, and waited an hour and an
half, we were suffered to go to a bad inn in the town.

Friday 28. We found out Mr. Merschall, and the other gentlemen of the
university, to whom we were directed. They were not wanting in any good office
while we stayed, and in the afternoon went with us an hour forward in our
journey.

After a pleasant walk on Saturday, on Sunday 30, about seven in the morning,
we came to Meissen. In Meissen-Castle, the German china-ware is made, which is
full as dear as that imported from the Indies; and as finely shaped, and
beautifully colored, as any I have ever seen. After breakfast we went to
church. I was greatly surprised at all I saw there: at the costliness of
apparel in many, and the gaudiness of it in more; at the huge fur caps worn by
the women, of the same shope with a Turkish turban; which generally had one or
more ribbands hanging down a great length behind. The minister's habit was
adorned with gold and scarlet, and a vast cross both behind and before. Most of
the congregation sat (the men generally with their hats on, at the prayers as
well as sermon) and all of them stayed, during the holy communion, though but
very few received. Alas, alas! what a reformed country is this!

At two in the afternoon we came to Dresden, the chief city of Saxony. Here
also we were carried for above two hours from one magistrate or officer to
another, with the usual impertinent solemnity, before we were suffered to go to
our inn. I greatly wonder that common sense and common humanity (for these
doubtless subsist in Germany as well as England) do not put an end to this
senseless, inhuman usage of strangers, which we met with at almost every German
city, though more particularly at Frankfort, Weymar, Halle, Leipsig and Dresden.
I know nothing that can reasonably be said in its defense, in a time of full
peace, being a breach of all the common, even heathen laws of hospitality. If
it is a custom, so much the worse; the more is the pity and the shame.

In the evening we saw the palace the late elector was building, when God
called him away. The stone-work he had very near finished, and some of the
apartments within. It is a beautiful and magnificent design; but all is now
swiftly running to ruin. The new church on the outside resembles a theater. It
is eight square, built of fine freestone. We were desired also to take notice
of the great bridge which joins the new with the old town; of the large, brass
crucifix upon it, generally admired for the workmanship; and of the late king
Augustus's statue on horseback, which is at a small distance from it. Alas!
Where will all these things appear, when the earth and the works thereof shall
be burnt up?

Between five and six the next evening (having left Mr. Hauptman with his
relations in Dresden) we came to Neustadt, but could not procure any lodging in
the city. After walking half an hour, we came to another little town, and found
a sort of an inn there: but they told us plainly, we should have no lodging
with them; for they did not like our looks.

About eight we were received at a little house in another village, where God
gave us sweet rest.

Tuesday, August 1, At three in the afternoon, I came to Hernhuth, about thirty
English miles from Dresden. It lies in Upper-Lusatia, on the borders of
Bohemia, and contains about an hundred houses, built on a rising ground, with
evergreen woods on two sides, gardens and cornfieldsd on the others, and high
hills at a small distance. It has one long street, through which the great road
from Zittan to Lobau goes. Fronting the middle of this street is the
orphan-house; in the lower part of which is the apothecary's shop, in the
upper, the chapel, capable of containing six or seven hundred people. Another
row of houses runs at a small distance from either end of the orphan-house,
which accordingly divides the rest of the town (beside the long street) into
two squares. At the cast end of it is the Count's house, a small, plain
building like the rest: having a large garden behind it, well laid out, not for
show, but for the use of the community.

We had a convenient lodging assigned us in the house appointed for strangers:
and I had now abundant opportunity, of observing whether what I had heard was
enlarged by the relators, or was neither more nor less than the naked truth.

I rejoiced to find Mr. Hermsdorf here, whom I had so often conversed with in
Georgia. And there was nothing in his power which he did not do, to make our
stay here useful and agreeable. About eight we went to the public service, at
which they frequently use other instruments with their organ. They began (as
usual) with singing. Then followed the expounding, closed by a second hymn:
prayer followed this; and then a few verses of a third hymn; which concluded
the service.

Wednesday 2. At four in the afternoon was a love-feast of the married men,
taking their food with gladness and singleness of heart, and with the voice of
praise and thanksgiving.

Thursday 3. (and so every day at eleven) I was at the bible conference,
wherein Mr. Miller (late master of a great school in Zittau, till he left all
to follow Christ) and several others, read together, as usual, a portion of
scripture in the original. At five was the conference for strangers, when
several questions concerning justification were resolved. This evening
Christian David came hither. O may God make him a messenger of glad tidings.

On Friday and Saturday (and so every day in the following week) I had much
conversation with the most experienced of the brethren, concerning the great
work which God had wrought in their souls, purifying them by faith: and with
Martin Dober, and the other teachers and elders of the church, concerning the
discipline used therein.

Sund. 6. We went to church at Bertholdsdorf, a Lutheran village about an
English mile from Hernhuth. Two large candles stood lighted upon the altar: the
last supper was painted behind it; the pulpit was placed over it, and over
that, a brass image of Christ on the cross.

The minister had on a sort of pudding-sleeve gown, which covered him all
round. At nine began a long voluntary on the organ, closed with a hymn, which
was sung by all the people sitting (in which posture, as is the German custom,
they sung all that followed.) Then the minister walked up to the altar, bowed;
sung these latin words, Gloria in excelsis Deo; bowed again and went away. This
was followed by another hymn, sung as before, to the organ by all the people.
Then the minister went to the altar again, bowed, sung a prayer, read the
epistle and went away. After a third hymn was sung, he went a third time to the
altar, sung a versicle (to which all the people sung a response) read the third
chapter to the Romans, and went away. The people having then sung the creed in
rhyme, he came and read the gospel, all standing. Another hymn followed, which
being ended, the minister in the pulpit used a long extemporary prayer, and
afterward preached an hour and a quarter on a verse of the gospel. Then he
read a long in^^rcession and general thanksgiving, which before twelve
concluded the service.

After the evening service at Hernhuth was ended, all the unmarried men (as is
their custom) walked quite round the town, singing praise with instruments of
music; and then on a small hill, at a little distance from it, casting
themselves into a ring, joined in prayer. Thence they returned into the great
square, and a little after eleven, commended each other to God.

Tuesday 8. A child was buried. The burying ground (called by them Gottes
Acker, i. e. God's ground) lies a few hundred yards out of the town, under the
side of a little wood. There are distinct squares in it for married men and
unmarried; for married and unmarried women; for male and female children, and
for widows. The corpse was carried from the chapel, the children walking first:
next the Orphan-father (so they call him who has the chief care of the
Orphan-house) with the minister of Bertholdsdorf: then four children bearing
the corpse, and after them, Martin Dober and the father of the child. Then
followed the men, and last of all the women and girls. They all sung as they
went. Being come into the square where the male-children are buried, the men
stood on two sides of it, the boys on the third, and the women and girls on the
fourth. There they sung again: after which the minister used (I think read) a
short prayer, and concluded with that blessing, "Unto God's gracious mercy and
protection I commit you."

Seeing the father (a plain man, a tailor by trade) looking at the grave, I
asked, "How do you find yourself?" He said, "Praised be the Lord, never better.
He has taken the soul of my child to himself. I have seen, according to my
desire, his body committed to holy ground. And I know that when it is raised
again, both he and I shall ever be with the Lord."

Several evenings this week I was with one or other of the private bands. On
Wednesday and Thursday I had an opportunity of talking with Michael Linner, the
eldest of the church, and largely with Christian David, who, under God, was the
first planter of it.

Four times also I enjoyed the blessing of hearing him preach, during the few
days I spent here: and every time he chose the very subject which I should have
desired, had I spoken to him before. Thrice he described the state of those who
are weak in says, who are justified, but have not yet a new, clean heart; who
have received forgiveness through the blood of Christ, but have not received
the constant indwelling of the Holy Ghost. This state he explained once, from,
Blessed are the poor in spirit; for theirs is the kingdom of heaven; when he
showed at large from various scriptures, that many are children of God and
heirs of the promises, long before their hearts are softened by holy mourning,
before they are comforted by the abiding witness of the Spirit, melting their
souls into all gentleness and meekness; and much more, before they are renewed
in all that righteousness, which they hungered and thirsted after, before they
are sure in heart from all self-will and sin, and merciful as their Father
which is in heaven is merciful.

A second time he pointed out this state from those words, Who shall deliver me
from the body of this death! I thank God, Jesus Christ our Lord. There is
therefore no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. Hence also he at
large both proved the existence, and showed the nature of that intermediate
state, which most experience between that bondage which is described in the 7th
chapter of the epistle to the Romans, and the full glorious liberty of the
children of God, described in the eighth and in many oth^^ parts of scripture.

This he yet again explained from the scriptures which describe the state the
apostles were in, from our Lord's death (and indeed for some time before) till
the descent of the Holy Ghost at the day of Pentecost. They were then clean as
Christ himself had borne them witness, by the word which he had spoken unto
them. They then had faith, otherwise he could not have prayed for them, that
their faith might not fail. Yet they had not in the full sense new hearts;
neither had they received the gift of the Holy Ghost.

The fourth sermon which he preached, concerning the ground of faith, made such
an impression upon me, that when I went home, I could not but write down the
substance of it, which was as follows:

"The word of reconciliation which the apostles preached, as the foundation of
all they taught was, that we are reconciled to God, not by our own works, nor
by our own righteousness, but wholly and solely by the blood of Christ.

"But you will say, must I not grieve and mourn for my sins? Must I not humble
myself before God? Is not this just and right? And must I not do this before I
can expect God to be reconciled to me? I answer, it is just and right. You must
be humbled before God. You must have a broken and contrite heart. But then,
observe, this is not your own work. Do you grieve that you are a sinner? This
is the work of the Holy Ghost. Are you contrite? Are you humbled before God? Do
you indeed mourn, and is your heart broken within you? All this works the
self-same spirit.

"Observe again, this is not the foundation. It is not this by which you are
justified. This is not the righteousness, this is no part of the righteousness
by which you are reconciled unto God. You grieve for your sins. You are deeply
humble. Your heart is broken. Well* but all this is nothing to your
justification. The remission of your sins is not owing to this cause, either in
whole or in part. Your humiliation and contrition have no influence on that.
Nay, observe farther, that it may hinder your justification, that is, if you
build any thing upon it; if you think, I must be so or so contrite. I must
grieve more, before I can be justified. Understand this well. To think you must
be more contrite, more humble, more grieved, more sensible of the weight of
sin, before you can be justified; is, to lay your contrition, your grief, your
humiliation for the foundation of your being justified; at least for a part of
the foundation. Therefore it hinders your justification; and a hinderance it is
which must be removed, before you can lay the right foundation. The right
foundation is, not your contrition (though that is not your own) not your
righteousness, nothing of your own: nothing that is wrought in you by the Holy
Ghost: but it is something without you, viz. The righteousness and the blood of
Christ.

"For this is the word, To him that believes on God that justifies the
ungodly, his faith is founted for righteousness. See ye not, that the
foundation is nothing in us? There is no connection between God and the ungodly.
There is no tie to unite them. They are altogether separate from each other.
They have nothing in common. There is nothing less or more in the ungodly, to
join them to God. Works, righteousness, contrition? No, Ungodliness only. This
then do, if you will lay a right foundation. Go straight to Christ with all
your ungodliness. Tell him, thou whose eyes are as a flame of fire searching my
heart, see that I am ungodly. I plead nothing else. I do not say, I am humble
or contrite; but I am ungodly. Therefore bring me to him that justifies the
ungodly. Let thy blood be the propitiation for me. For there is nothing in me
but ungodliness.

"Here is a mystery. Here the wise men of the world are lost, are taken in
their own craftiness. This the learned of the world cannot comprehend. It is
foolishness unto them: sin is the only thing which divides men from God. Sin
(let him that hears understand) is the only thing which unites them to God,
i. e. the only thing which moves the Lamb of God to have compassion upon, and
by his blood t^ give them access to the Father.

"This is the word of reconciliation which we preach. This is the foundation
which never can be moved. By faith we are built upon this foundation; and this
faith also is the gift of God. It is his free gift, which he now and ever
gives to every one that is willing to receive it. And when they have received
this gift of God, then their hearts will melt for sorrow that they have
offended him. But this gift of God lives in the heart, not in the head. The
faith of the head, learned from men or books, is nothing worth. It brings
neither remission of sins, nor peace with God. Labor then to believe with your
whole heart. So shall you have redemption through the blood of Christ. So shall
you be cleansed from all sin. So shall ye go on from strength to strength,
being renewed day by day in righteousness, and all true holiness."

Satur. 12. Was the intercession day, when many strangers were present, some of
whom came twenty or thirty miles. I would gladly have spent my life here: but
my Master calling me to labor in another part of his vineyard, on Monday 14, I
was constrained to take my leave of this happy place; Martin Dober, and a few
others of the brethren, walking with us about an hour. O when shall THIS
christianity cover the earth, as the waters cover the sea!

To hear in what manner God out of darkness commanded this light to shine, must
be agreeable to all those in every nation, who can testify from their own
experience, The gracious Lord has so done his mavelous acts, that they ought
to be had in remembrance. I shall therefore ^e subjoin the substance of several
conversations, which I had at Hernhuth, chiefly on this subject. And may many
be incited hereby to give praise unto him that sits upon the throne, and
unto the Lamb for ever!

It was on August 10 (old style) that I had an opportunity of spending some
hours with Christian David. He is a carpenter by trade, more than middle aged,
though I believe not fifty yet. Most of his words I understood well; if at any
time I did not, one of the brethren who went with me, explained them in Latin.
The substance of what he spoke, I immediately after wrote down; which was as
follows:

"When I was young, I was much troubled at hearing some affirm that the Pope
was Antichrist. I read the Lutheran books writ against the Papists, and the
Popish books writ against the Lutherans. I easily saw that the Papists were in
the wrong; but not that the Lutherans were in the right. I could not understand
what they meant by being justified by faith, by faith alone, by faith without
works. Neither did I like their talking so much of Christ. Then I began to
think, How can Christ be the Son of God? But the more I reasoned with myself
upon it, the more confused I was, till at last I loathed the very name of
Christ. I could not bear to mention it. I hated the sound of it; and would
never willingly have either read or heard it. In this temper I left Moravia,
and wandered through many countries, seeking rest but finding none.

In these wandering; I fell among some Jews. Their objections against the new
testament, threw me into fresh doubts. At last I set myself to read over the
old testament, and see if the prophecies therein contained were fulfilled. I
was soon convinced they were. And thus much I gained, a fixed belief that Jesus
was the Christ.

But soon after this, a new doubt arose, Are the new testament prophecies
fulfilled! This I next set myself to examine. I read them carefully over, and
could not but see every event answered the prediction: so that the more I
compared the one with the other, the more fully I was convinced that All
scripture was given by inspiration of God.

Yet still my soul was not in peace: nor indeed did I expect it, till I should
have openly renounced the errors of Popery: which accordingly I did at Berlin.
I now also led a very strict life. I read much, and prayed much. I did all I
could to conquer sin; yet it profited not; I was still conquered by it. Neither
found I any more rest among the Lutherans, than I did before among the Papists.

At length, not knowing what to do, I listed myself a soldier. Now I thought I
should have more time to pray and read, having with me a new testament and a
hymn-book. But in one day both my books were stole. This almost broke my heart.
Finding also in this way of life all the inconveniences which I thought to
avoid by it, after six months I returned to my trade, and followed it two
years. Removing then to Gorlitz in Saxony, I fell into a dangerous illness. I
could not stir hand nor foot for twenty weeks. Pastor Sleder came to me every
day. And from him it was, that the gospel of Christ came first with power to my
soul.

Here I found the peace I had long sought in vain; for I was assured my sins
were forgiven. Not indeed all at once, but by degrees; not in one moment, nor
in one hour. For I could not immediately believe, that I was forgiven, because
of the mistake I was then in concerning forgiveness. I saw not then, that the
first promise to the children of God is, Sin shall no more reign over you; but
thought, I was to feel it in me no more, from the time it was forgiven.
Therefore, although I had the mastery over it, yet I often feared it was not
forgiven, because it still stirred in me, and at some times thrust sore at me,
that I might fall: because though it did not reign, it did remain in me; and I
was continually tempted, though not overcome, This at that time threw me into
many doubts: not understanding that the devil tempts, properly speaking, only
those whom he perceives to be escaping from him. He need not tempt his own: for
they lie in the wicked one (as St. John observes) and do his will with
greediness. But those whom Christ is setting free, he tempts day and night, to
see if he can recover them to his kingdom. Neither saw I then, that the being
justified, is widely different from the having the full assurance of faith. I
remembered not, that our Lord told his apostles before his death, Ye are clean;
whereas it was not till many days after it, that they were fully assured by the
Holy Ghost then received, of their reconciliation to God, through his blood.
The difference between these fruits of the Spirit was as yet hid from me; so
that I was hardly and slowly convinced I had the one, because I had not the
other.

When I was recovered from my illness, I resolved to return into Moravia, and
preach Christ to my relations there Thence I came back to Gorlitz, when I
continued five years, and there was a great awakening both in the town and
country round about. In this space I made two more journies into Moravia, where
more and more came to hear me, many of whom promised to come to me, wherever I
was, when a door should be opened for them.

After my return from my third journey, Count Zinzendorf sent to Gorlitz, the
minister of Bertholdsdorf being dead, for Mr. Rothe who was in a gentleman's
family there, to be minister of that place. Mr. Rothe told him of me, and he
writ to me to come to him, and when I came, said, Let as many as will of your
friends come hither; I will give them land to build on, and Christ will give
them the rest. I went immediately into Moravia and told them, God had now found
out a place for us. Ten of them followed me then; ten more the next year; one
more in my following journey. The Papists were now alarmed, set a price upon my
head, and levelled the house I had lodged in, even with the ground. I made
however eleven journies thither in all, and conducted as many as desired it to
this place, the way to which was now so well known that many came of themselves.

Eighteen years ago we built the first house. We chose to be near the great
road rather than at Bertholdsdorf (for the Count gave us our choice) hoping we
might thereby find opportunities of instructing some that traveled by us. In
two years we were increased to a hundred and fifty; when I contracted an
intimate acquaintance with a Calvinist, who after some time brought me over to
his opinion touching election and reprobation: and by me were most of our
brethren likewise brought over to the same opinions. About this time we were in
great straits, wherewith many were much dejected. I endeavored to comfort them
with the sense of God's love toward them. But they answered, Nay, it may be he
has no love toward us; it may be we are not of the election: but God hated us
from eternity, and therefore he has suffered all these things to come upon us.
The Count observing this, desired me to go to a neighboring minister, pastor
Steinm^tz, and talk with him, fully on that head, "Whether Christ died for
all?" I did so, and by him God fully convinced me of that important truth. And
not long after, the Count defired we might all meet together, and consider
these things thoroughly. We met accordingly at his house, and parted not for
three days. We opened the scriptures, and considered the account which is given
therein, of the whole economy of God with man, from the creation to the
consummation of all things, and by the blessing of God we came all to one mind;
particularly in that fundamental point, that He wills all men to be saved,
and to come to the knowledge of his truth.

Sometime after, the Jesuits told the Emperor, that the Count was gathering
together all the Moravians and Bohemians, forming them into one body, and
making a new religion. Commissioners were immediately sent to Hernhuth, to
examine the truth of this. The substance of the final answer returned through
them to the Emperor was as follows.

An extract of the public instrument signed at Hernhuth, in August, 1729.
1. WE believe the church of the Bohemian and Moravian brethren, from whom we
are descended, to have been a holy and undefiled church, as is owned by Luther
and all other Protestant divines: who own also that our doctrine agrees with
theirs. But our discipline they have not.

2. But we do not rest upon the holiness of our ancestors; it being our
continual care to show that we are past from death unto life, by worshipping
God in Spirit and in truth. Nor do we account any man a brother, unless he has
either preserved inviolate the covenant he made with God in Laptism, or, if he
has broken it, been born again of God.

3. On the other side, whosoever they are who being sprinkled by the blood of
Christ, are sanctified through faith, we receive them as brethren, although in
some points they may differ from us. Not that we can renounce or give up any
doctrine of God, contained in holy writ; the least part of which is dearer unto
us, than thousands of gold and silver.

4. Discipline we judge to be necessary in the highest degree, for all those
who have any knowledge of divine truth: and we can therefore in no wise forsake
that, which we have received from our forefathers. Yet if it should ever be
(which God forbid) that any of us should speak or act perverse things, we could
only say, with St. John, They went forth from us, but were not of us: for if
they had been of us, they would have continued with us.

5. The public worship of God at Bertholdsdorf, which we have hitherto
frequented, we are the less able now to forsake, because we have there an
assembly of true believers, a doctrine free from error, and a pastor who having
labored much in the word, is worthy of double honor. Therefore we have no
cause to form any congregation, separate from this; especially seeing we both
use that liberty which Christ has purchased for us; and so often experience
the power of the doctrine which is taught there, and agree with the evangelical
protestants (i. e. Lutherans) in all truths of importance. As for the
controverted points, which require a subtle wit, we either are ignorant of
them, or despise them.

6. The name of brethren and sisters we do not reject, as being agreeable both
to scripture and to Christian simplicity. But we do not approve of being called
by the name of any man: as knowing, we have one father, even him which is in
heaven.


In 1732 we were again required to give an account of ourselves. This was then
done, in the manner following.

An extract of a letter wrote by the church of Hernhuth, to the president of
Upper Lusatia, 24 Jan. 1732.
1. NONE can be ignorant of the religion of our ancestors, who have read the
history of John Huss. Some of his followers endeavored to repel force by
force. The rest, having better learned Christ, obtained leave of George
Podibrad, king of Bohemia, to retire and live apart. Retiring accordingly in
the year 1453, to a place on the borders of Silesm and Moravia, they lived in
peace, till the time of Luther and Calvin, with both of whom, as with their
followers, they maintained a friendly intercourse, especially when by the
providence of God, they were placed among those of either opinion.

2. In the year 1699, David Earnest Jablonsky, grandson to Amos Comenius, the
last bishop of the Moravians, was consecrated bishop of the united brethren in
Moravia, Bohemia and Poland, in a synod regularly assembled. To him Count
Zinzendorf signified, that several of the Moravian brethren, having escaped
from the tyranny of the Papists, were so joined to the Lutherans, whose
doctrine they approved, as nevertheless to retain their ancient discipline. His
entire approbation of this, bishop Jablonsky testified to the Count in several
letters

3. It must be acknowledged, that many of our ancestors, about the beginning of
the reformation, from fear of man, did not openly confess the truth. And hence
it was that the Romish pastors bore with them; being little concerned what
their private opinions were. But hence it also was, that continually using
dissimulation, and not walking in simplicity, they were no longer fervent in
spirit, as of old time, neither could they find any peace to their souls.

4. It was in the year 1715, that a soldier of the Emperor's, lately discharged
came to Sehl, a village of which the Jesuits are Lords, and began to talk with
Augustine Neusser and his brother. He sharply reproved their hypocrisy, in
pretending to be Romanists, and dissembling the true faith. Yet they conferred
with flesh and blood, till the year 1722, when at length they ^o^^ook all, and
retired into Upper Lusatia. They left three brothers behind them, who were soon
after cast into prison, and grievously persecuted by the Papists: so that as
soon as ever a door was opened, they also left all, and followed their brothers
into Lusatia. The same did many others soon after, as finding no safety, either
for body or soul in their own country: whence about the same time, Michael and
Martin Linner, and the Haberlands were driven out, with their families, after
having suffered the loss of all things, for not conforming to the Romish
worship, and for receiving those they called Heretics into to their houses.

5. But the brethren at Kuhnewald were treated with still greater severity. All
their books were taken away; they were compelled by the most exquisite
torments, to conform to the Popish superstitions and idolatries; and in the end
cast into, and kept in, the most loathsome prisons: whereby David Schneider,
the Nitschmans, and many others, were constrained also to leave their country,
and all that they had. These are the plain reasons of our leaving Moravia, of
which your excellency desired an account from us."


"In the mean time we found a great remissness of behavior had crept in among
us. And indeed the same was to be found in most of those round about us,
whether Lutherans or Calvinists, so insisting on faith, as to forget at least
in practice, both holiness and good works.

Observing this terrible abuse of preaching Christ given for us, we began to
insist more than ever, on Christ living in us. All our exhortation and
preaching turned on this; we spoke, we writ, of nothing else. Our constant
inquiries were, "Is Christ formed in you? Have you a new heart? Is your soul
renewed in the image of God? Is the whole body of sin destroyed in you? Are you
fully assured, beyond all doubt or fear, that you are a child of God? In what
manner, and at what moment did you receive that full assurance?" If a man could
not answer all these questions, we judged he had no true faith. Nor would we
permit any to receive the Lord's supper among us, till he could.

In this persuasion we were, when I went to Groenland, five years ago. There I
had a correspondence by letter with a Danish minister, on the head of
justification. And it pleased God to show me by him (though he was by no means
a holy man, but openly guilty of gross sins) that we had now leaned too much to
this hand, and were run into another extreme: that Christ in us and Christ for
us, ought indeed to be both insisted on; but first and principally Christ for
us, as being the ground of all. I now clearly saw, we ought not to insist on
any thing we feel, any more than any thing we do, as if it were necessary
previous to justification, or the remission of sins. I saw, that least of all
ought we so to insist on the full assurance of faith, or the destruction of the
body of sin, and the extinction of all its motions, as to exclude those who had
not attained this from the Lord's table, or to deny that they had any faith at
all. I plainly perceived, this full assurance was a distinct gift from
justifying faith, and often not given till long after it: and that
justification does not imply, that fin should not stir in us, but only that it
should not conquer.

And now first it was, that I had that full assurance of my own reconciliation
to God, through Christ. For many years I had had the forgiveness of my sins,
and a measure of the peace of God; but I had not till now, that witness of his
Spirit, which shuts out all doubt and fear. In all my trials I had always a
confidence in Christ, who had done so great things for me. But it was a
confidence mixed with fear: I was afraid, I had not done enough. There was
always something dark in my soul till now. But now the clear light shined: and
I saw that what I had hitherto so constantly insisted on, the doing so much and
feeling so much, the long repentance and preparation for believing, the bitter
sorrow for sin, and that deep contrition of heart which is found in some, where
by no means essential to justification. Yea, that wherever the free grace of
God is rightly preached, a sinner in the full career of his sins, will probably
receive it, and be justified by it, before one who insists on such previous
preparation.

After my return to Hernhuth, I found it difficult at first, to make my
brethren sensible of this, or to persuade them not to insist on the assurance
of faith, as a necessary qualification for receiving the Lord's supper. But
from the time they were convinced, which is now three years since, we have all
chiefly insisted on Christ given for us; I dare say, this is right.
This we urge as the principal thing, which if we rightly believe, Christ will
surely be formed in us. And this preaching we have always found to be
accompanied with power, and to have the blessing of God following it. By this,
believers receive a steady purpose of heart, and a more unshaken resolution, to
endure with a free and cheerful spirit whatsoever our Lord is pleased (...) ^ay
upon them."

The same day I was with Michael Linner, the eldest of the church; the sum of
whose conversation was this:

"The church of Moravia was once a glorious church. But it is now covered with
thick darkness. It is about sixteen years ago, that I began to seek for light.
I had a New Testament which I constantly read; upon which I often said to
myself, "This says, I ought to be humble, and meek, and pure in heart. How
comes it that I am not so?" I went to the best men I knew, and asked, "Is not
this the word of God? And if so, ought I not to be such as this requires, both
in heart and life?" They answered, "The first Christians were such; but it was
impossible for us to be so perfect." This answer gave me (...) satisfaction. I
knew God could not mock his ^eatures, by requiring of them what he saw it was
impossible for them to perform. I asked others, but had still the same answer,
which troubled me more and more.

About fourteen years ago, I was more than ever convinced, that I was wholly
different from what God required me to be. I consulted his word again and
again; but it spoke nothing but condemnation; ^ill at last I could not read,
nor indeed do any thing (...), having no hope and no spirit lest in me. I had
^een in this state for several days, when being musing by myself, these words
came strongly into my mind, "God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son, to the end that all who believe in him, should not ^erish but
have everlasting life." I thought, " All? Then I am one. Then he is given for
me. But I am a sinner. And he came to save sinners." Immediately my burden
dropped off, and my heart was at rest.

But the full assurance of faith I had not yet; nor for the two years I
continued in Moratia. When I was driven out thence by the Jesuits, I retired
hither, and was soon after received into the church. And here after some time
it pleased our Lord to manifest himself more clearly to my soul, and give me
that full sense of acceptance in him, which excludes all doubt and fear.

Indeed the leading of the spirit is different in different souls. His more
usual method, I believe is, to give in one and the same moment the forgiveness
of (...), and a full assurance of that forgiveness. Yet in many he works as he
did in me: giving first the remission of sins, and after some weeks or months
(...) the full assurance of it."

This great truth was farther confirmed to me the next day by the conversation
I had with David Nitschman, one of the teachers or pastors of the church^ who
expressed himself to this effect:

"In my childhood I was very serious; but as I grew up, was so careless, that
at eighteen years old, I had even forgot to read. When I found this, I was
startled. I soon learned again, and then spent much time in reading and prayer.
But I knew nothing of my heart, till about the age of twenty-six, I bought a
bible, and began to read the New Testament. The farther I read, the more I was
condemned. I found a law which I did not, could not keep. I had a will to avoid
all sin: but the power I had not. I continually strove; but was continually
conquered. The thing which I would I did not; but what I would not have done,
that I did. In this bondage I was, when I fell into a sit of sickness; during
my recovery from which I felt a stronger desire than ever, to avoid all sin. At
the same time I felt the power. And sin no longer reigned over me.

But soon after I fell into grievous temptations; which made me very uneasy.
For though I yielded not to them, yet they returned again, and again, as fast
as they were conquered. Then it came into my mind, "I take all this pains to
serve God. What if there be no God? How do I know there is?" And on this I
mused more and more, till I said in my heart, "There is no God!"

In this state I was when I came to Hernhuth, about fourteen years ago. And
every day for a full year, from morning to night, I groaned under this
unbelief. Yet I prayed continually, unbelieving as I was; particularly one
Sunday, when being in the church of Bertholdsdorf, and quite weary of hearing
(...) much of him, whose very being I did not believe, I vehemently said, "O
God, If thou be a God, thou must manifest thyself, or I cannot believe it." In
walking home, I thought of an expression of Pastor Rothe's, "Only suppose these
things are so: suppose there be a God." I said to myself, "Well, I with I do
suppose it." Immediately I felt a strange sweetness in my soul, which increased
every moment till the next morning: and from that time, if all the men upon
earth, and all the devils in hell had joined in denying it, I could not have
doubted the being of God, no, not for one moment. This first sweetness lasted
for six weeks, without any intermission.

I then fell into doubts of another kind. I believed in God; but not in Christ.
I opened my heart to Martin Dober, who used many arguments with me, but in
vain. For above four years I found no rest, by reason of this unbelief, till
one day, as I was sitting in my house despairing of any relief, those words
shot into me, "God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself." I thought,
"Then God and Christ are one." Immediately my heart was filled with joy; and
much more at the remembrance of these words which I now felt I did believe.
"The word was with God, and the word was God. And the word was made flesh, and
dwelt among us."

Yet in a few days I was troubled again. I believed Christ was the Savior of
the world. But I could not call him my Savior, neither did I believe, he would
save me. And one day, as I was walking across the square, that text came
strongly into my mind, "The unbelieving shall have their part in the lake which
burns with fire and brimstone." I returned home, terrified beyond expression,
and instantly began crying out to our Savior, telling him, "I deserved no less
than hell, and gave myself up, if it were his will, to suffer what I had
deserved." In a moment I found a gleam of hope, that he would have mercy even
on me.

But this in a short time vanished away, and my uneasiness returned again. Many
endeavored to persuade me that I had, but I knew I had not, a right faith in
Christ. For I had no confidence in him; nor could I lay hold upon him as my
Savior. Indeed reading one day (in Arndt's True Christianity) "That if all the
sins of all the men upon earth were joined in one man, the blood of Christ was
sufficient to cleanse that man from all sin:" I felt for a time comfort and
peace: but it was but for a time, and then I was overwhelmed as before with
sadness and unbelief. And I was oppressed almost beyond my strength, when N. B.
i. e. In the year 1737. Several years before which he was elected one of the
four public teachers of the church; which office he retains to this day. Now
which of the two consequences will you choose (for one or the other is
unavoidable) Either that a man may preach the gospel, yea (and with the
demonstration of the Spirit) who has no says? or that a man who has a degree
of true faith, may yet have doubts and fears?
a year ago I went into this little wood. At first I was tempted to break out
into impatience; but then I thought, our Savior knows best; nor would he
suffer this trouble to continue so long, if he did not see it was good for me.
I delivered myself wholly into his hands, to dispose of me according to his
good pleasure. In the (...) ^our I saw, that all who believe in him are
reconciled to God through his blood, and was assured, that I was thereby
reconciled, and numbered among the children of God. And from that hour, I have
had no doubt or fear, but all peace and joy in believing."

Some of the circumstances of this uncommon relation, were made more clear to
me, by the account I received in the afternoon from a student at Hernl^uth,
Albinus Theodorus Feder.

"I (said he) for three years sought against sin with all my might, by fasting
and prayer and all the other means of grace. But notwithstanding all my
endeavors, I gained no ground; sin still prevailed over me; till at last, not
knowing what to do farther, I was on the very brink of despair. Then it was
that having no other refuge left, I fled to my Savior as one lost and undone,
and that had no hope but in his power and free mercy. In that moment I found my
heart at rest, in good hope that my sins were forgiven; of which, I had a
stronger assurance six weeks after, when I received the Lord's supper here. But
I dare not affirm, I am a child of God; neither have I the seal of the Spirit.
Yet I go on quietly doing my Savior's will, taking shelter in his wounds, from
all trouble and sin, and knowing he will perfect his work in his own time."

Martin Dober, when I described my state to him, said, "He had known very many
believers, who if asked the question, would not have dared to affirm, that they
were the children of God. And he added, It is very common for persons to
receive remission of sins, or justification through faith in the blood of
Christ, before they receive the full assurance of faith, which God many times
withholds, till be has tried whether they will work together with him, in the
use of the first gift. Nor is there any need (continued he, Dober) to incite
any one to seek that assurance by telling him, the faith he has is nothing.
This will be more likely to drive him to despair, than to encourage him to
press forward. His single business, who has received the first gift is,
credendo credere and in credendo perseverare (to believe on, and to hold fast
that whereunto he has obtained). To go on, doing his Lord's will, according to
the ability God has already given; cheerfully and faithfully to use what he
has received, without solicitude for the rest."

In the conversation I afterward had with Augustine Neusser, a knife-smith
(another of the pastors or teachers of the church, about sixty years of age) as
also with his brothers, Wensel, and Hantz Neusser, the nature of true faith and
salvation was yet farther explained to me.

Augustine Neusser spoke to this effect:

"By experience I know, that we cannot be justified through the blood of
Christ, till we feel that all our righteousness and good works avail nothing
toward our justification. Therefore what men call a good life, is frequently
the greatest of all hindrances to their coming to Christ. For it will not let
them see, that they are lost, undone sinners, and if they see not this, they
cannot come unto him.

Thus it was with me. I had led a good life from a child. And this was the
great hinderance to my coming to Christ. For, abounding in good works, and
diligently using all the means of grace, I persuaded myself for thirteen or
fourteen years, that all was well, and I could not fail of salvation. And yet,
I cannot say my soul was at rest, even till the time when God showed me
clearly, that my heart was as corrupt, notwithstanding all my good works, as
that of an adulterer or murderer. Then my self-dependence withered away. I
wanted a Savior, and fled naked to him. And in him I found true rest to my
soul, being fully assured that all my sins were forgiven. Yet I cannot tell the
hour or day, when I first received that full assurance. For it was not given me
at first, neither at once; but grew up in me by degrees. But from the time it
was confirmed in me, I never lost it; having never since doubted, no, not for a
moment."

What Wensel Neusser said was as follows:

"From a child I had many fits of seriousness, and was often uneasy at my sins:
this uneasiness was much increased fifteen years since, by the preaching of
Christian David. I thought the way to get ease was, to go and live among the
Lutherans, whom I supposed to be all good Christians. But I soon found they, as
well as the Papists, were carnal, worldly-minded men. About thirteen years ago
I came from among them to Hernhuth; but was still as uneasy as before: which I
do not wonder at now (though I did then) for all this time, though I saw
clearly, I could not be saved, but by the death of Christ, yet I did not trust
in that only for salvation, but depended on my own righteousness also, as the
joint condition of my acceptance.

After I was settled here, seeing the great diversity of sects wherewith we
were surrounded, I began to doubt whether any religion was true? For half a
year these doubts perplexed me greatly; and I was often just on the point of
casting off all religion, and returning to the world. The fear of doing this
threw me into a deeper concern than ever I had been in before. Nor could I find
how to escape, for the more I struggled the more I was entangled. I often
reflected on my former course of life, as more desirable than this. And one
day, in the bitterness of my soul, besought our blessed Savior, "at least to
restore me to that state, which I was in before I left Moravia." In that moment
he manifested himself to me, so that I could lay hold on him as my Savior, and
showed me, it is only the blood of Christ which cleanses us from all sin. This
was ten years since, and from that hour, I have not had one doubt of my
acceptance. Yet I have not any transports of joy. Nor had I when he thus
revealed himself unto me. Only I well remember, that manifestation of himself
was like a cool, refreshing wind, to one that is fainting away with fultry
heat. And ever since my soul has been sweetly at rest, desiring no other
portion in earth or heaven."

"I was awakened (said Hantz Neusser) by my grandfather when a child, and by
him carefully instructed in the new testament. I married young, and being from
that time weak and ^ckly, was the more earnest to work out my salvation: and
nineteen or twenty years ago, I had a strong confidence in our. Savior, and
was continually warning others against trusting in themselves, in their own
righteousness or good works. Yet I was not free from it myself. I did not trust
in him only for acceptance with God. And hence it was, that not building on the
right foundation, the blood and righteousness of Christ alone, I could not gain
a full victory over my sins, but sometimes conquered them, and sometimes was
conquered by them. And therefore I had not a full or constant peace, though I
was commonly easy, and hoping for mercy.

Sixteen years ago (on Saturday next) I came to my brother Augustine at
Hernhuth. There was then only one little house here. Here I continued eight
years in much the same state, thinking I trusted in Christ alone; but indeed
trusting partly in his and partly in my own righteousness. I was walking one
day in this little wood, when God discovered my heart to me. I saw I had till
that hour trusted in my own righteousness, and at the same time, that I had no
righteousness at all, being altogether corrupt and abominable, and fit only for
the fire of hell. At this sight I fell into bitter grief, and an horrible dread
overwhelmed me, expecting nothing (as I saw I deserved nothing else) but to be
swallowed up in a moment. In that moment I beheld the Lamb of God, taking away
my sins. And from that time I have had redemption through his blood, and full
assurance of it. I have that peace in him which never fails, and which admits
of no doubt or fear. Indeed I am but a little one in Christ; therefore I can
receive as yet but little of him. But from his fullness I have enough; and I
praise him, and am satisfied."

In the three or four following days I had an opportunity of talking with
Zacharias Neusser (cousin to Hantz) David Schneider, Christopher Demuth, Arvid
Gradin (now at Constantinople) and several others of the most experienced
brethren. I believe no preface is needful to the account they gave of God's
dealings with their souls, which I doubt not will ^^ir up many, through his
grace, to glorify their Father which is in heaven.

"I was born (said Zacharias Neusser) on the borders of Moravia, and was first
awakened by my cousin Wensel, who soon after carried me to hear Mr. Steinmetz,
a Lutheran minister, about thirty English miles off. I was utterly astonished.
The next week I went again: after which, going to him in private, I opened my
heart, and told him all my doubts, those especially concerning Popery. He
offered to receive me into communion with him, which I gladly accepted of; and
in a short time after I received the Lord's supper from his ha^^. While I was
receiving, I felt Christ had died for me. I knew I was reconciled to God. And
all the day I was overwhelmed with joy: having those words continually on my
mind, This day is salvation come to my house: I also am a son of Abraham. This
joy I had continually for a year and a half, and my heart was full of love to
Christ.

After this I had thoughts of leaving Moravia. I was convinced it would be
better for my soul. Yet I would not do it, because I got more money here than I
could elsewhere. When I reflected on this, I said to myself, "This is mere
covetousness. But if I am covetous, I am not a child of God." Hence I fell into
deep perplexity, nor could I find any way to escape out of it. In this slavery
and misery I was for five years; at the end of which I fell sick: in my
sickness my heart was set at liberty, and peace returned to my soul. I now
prayed earnestly to God, to restore my health, that I might leave Moravia. He
did restore it, and I immediately returned to Hernhuth. After I had been here a
quarter of a year, the Count preached one day, upon the nature of
sanctification. I found I had not experienced what he described, and was
greatly terrified. I went to my cousin Wensel, who advised me to read over the
3d, 4th and 5th chapters of the epistle to the Romans. I did so. I had read
them an hundred times before, yet now they appeared quite new, and gave me such
a sight of God's justifying the ungodly, as I never had before. On Sunday I
went to church at Bertholdsdorf, and while we were singing those words, "Wir
glauben auch in Jesum Christ," (we believe also in Jesus Christ) I clearly saw
him as my Savior. I wanted immediately to be alone, and to pour out my heart
before him. My soul was filled with thankfulness, and with a still, soft, quiet
joy, such as it is impossible to express. I had full assurance that my Beloved
was mine, and I was his, which has never ceased to this day. I see by a clear
light, what is pleasing to him, and I do it continually in love. I receive
daily from him peace and joy; and I have nothing to do but to praise him."

The most material part of David Schneider's account was this:

"Both my father and mother feared God, and carefully instructed me in the holy
scriptures. I was from a child earnestly desirous to follow their instructions,
and more so after my father's death. Yet as I grew up, many sins got the
dominion over me. Of which God began to give me a sense, by the preaching of
Pastor Steinmetz; who speaking one day of drunkenness, to which I was then
addicted, I was so grieved and ashamed, that for several days I could not bear
to look any one in the face. It pleased God afterward to give me, though not
all at once, a ^^nse of my other both outward and inward sins. And before the
time of my coming out of Moravia, I knew that my sins were forgiven. Yet I
cannot six on any particular time, when I knew this first. For I did not
clearly know it at once: God having always done every thing in my soul by
degrees.

When I was about twenty-six I was pressed in spirit to exhort and instruct my
brethren. Accordingly many of them met at my house to read pray, and sing
psalms. They usually came about ten or eleven, and stayed till one or two in
the morning. When Christian David came to us, we were much quickened and
comforted, and our number greatly increased. We were undisturbed for two years.
But then the Papists were informed of our meeting. Immediately search was made.
All our books were seized, and we were ordered to appear before the Consistory.
I was examined many times; was imprisoned, released and imprisoned again five
times in one year. At last I was adjudged to pay fifty ^ix dollars, and suffer
a year's imprisonment. But upon (...) re-hearing, the sentence was changed, and
I was ordered to be sent to the galleys. Before this sentence was executed, I
escaped out of prison, and came to Sorau in Silesia. Many of (...) brethren
followed me, and here for near ten years I taught the children in the
orphan-house. I soon sem for my wife and children. But the magistrates had just
then ordered that the wives and children of all those who had fled, should be
taken into safe custody. The night before this order was to be executed, she
escaped and came to Sorau.

Soon after, some of my brethren who had been there, pressed me much to remove
to Hernhuth: Christian David in particular, by whose continued importunity, I
was at length brought to resolve upon it. But all my brethren at Sorau were
still as strongly against it, as I myself had formerly been. For a whole year I
was struggling to break from them or to persuade them to go too. And it cost me
more pains to get from Sorau, than it had done to leave Moravia.

At length I broke loose and came to Hernhuth, which was about three years ago.
Finding I could scarce subsist my family here by hard labor, whereas at Sorau
all things were provided for me, I grew very uneasy. The more uneasy I was, the
more my brethren refrained from my company; This was (...) and (...).
so that in a short time I was left quite alone. Then I was in deep distress
indeed. Sin revived and almost got the mastery over me. I tried all ways, but
found no help. In this miserable state I was about a year ago, when the
brethren cast lots concerning me, and were thereby directed to admit me to the
Lord's table. And from that hour my soul received comfort, and I was more and
more assured that I had an advocate with the Father, and that I was fully
reconciled to God by his blood."

Christopher Demuth spoke to this effect:

"My father was a pious man from his youth. He carefully instructed all his
children. I was about fifteen when he died. A little before he died, having
been all his lifetime under the law, he received at once remission of sins,
and the full witness of the Spirit. He called us to him and said, "My dear
children, let your whole trust be in the blood of Christ. Seek salvation in
this, and in this alone, and he will show to you the same mercy he has to me.
Yea, and he will show it to many of your relations and acquaintance, when his
time is come."

From this time till I was twenty-seven years old I was more and more zealous
in seeking Christ. I then removed into Silesia, and married. A year after I was
much pressed in spirit, to return and visit my brethren in Moravia. I did so.
We had the New Testament, our Moravian hymns, and two or three Lutheran books.
We read and sung, and prayed together, and were much strengthened. One day as
we were together at my house, one knocked at the door. I opened it and he was a
Jesuit. He said, "My dear Demuth, I know you are a good man, and one that
instructs and exhorts your friends, I must see what books you have." And going
into the inner room, he found the testament, and the rest together. He took
them all away; nor did we dare to hinder him. The next day we were summoned
before the Consistory, and after a long examination, ordered to appear in the
church before the congregation, on the following Sunday. There they read a long
confession of faith, and afterward bid us say, "In the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost." We did so, though not knowing what they
meant. They then told us, "We had abjured the Lutheran errors, and had called
the blessed Trinity to witness, that we assented to that confession of faith."
My heart sunk within me when I heard ^t. I went home, but could find no rest. I
thought I had now denied my Savior, and could expect no more mercy from him. I
could not bear to stay in Moravia any longer, but immediately returned into
Silesia. There I continued six years, but there too I was perpetually terrified
with the thoughts of what I had done. I often enquired after my brethren whom I
had left in Moravia. Some of them I heard were thrown into prison, and others
escaped to a little village in Lusatia called Hernhuth. I wished I could go to
that place myself, and at last meeting with one who had the same desire, we
agreed to go together. But our design being discovered he was apprehended and
thrown into prison. Expecting the same treatment, I earnestly prayed, "That God
would show me a token for good." Immediately my soul was filled with joy, and I
was ready to go to prison or to death.

Two days passed, and no man asked me any question; when doubting, what I ought
to do, I went into a neighboring wood, and going into a little ^ave, fell on
my face and prayed, "Lord, thou see I am ready to do what thou will. If it be
thy will I should be cast into prison, thy will be done. If it be thy will,
that I should leave my wife and children, I am ready. Only show thy will."
Immediately I heard a loud voice saying, "Fort, fort, fort" (Go on, go on) I
rose joyful and satisfied; went home and told my wife, "It was God's will I
should now leave her; but that I hoped to return in a short time, and take her
and my children with me." I went out of the door, and in that moment was filled
with peace and joy and comfort.

We had above two hundred miles to go (thirty-five German) and neither I, nor
my friend who went with me, had one Kreutzer. A small coin of about a
halfpenny value.
But God provided things convenient for us, so that in all the way we wanted
nothing.

In this journey God gave me the full assurance that my sins were forgiven.
This was twelve years ago, and ever since, it has been confirmed more and more,
by my receiving from him every day fresh supplies of strength and comfort.

By comparing my experience with that of others, you may perceive, how
different ways God leads different souls. But though a man should be led in a
way different from that of all other men, yet if his eye be at all times fixed
on his Savior, if his constant aim be to do his will; if all his desires tend
to him; if in all trials he can draw strength from him; if he fly to him in all
troubles, and in all temptations find salvation in his blood; in this there can
be no delusion: And whosoever is thus minded, however or whenever it began, is
surely reconciled to God through his Son."

Arvid Gradin (a Swede, born in Dalecarlia) spoke to this purpose:

"Before I was ten years old, I had a serious sense of religion, and great
fervor in my prayer. This was increased by my reading much in the New
Testament; but the more I read, the more earnestly I cried out, "Either these
things are not true, or we are not Christians." About sixteen my sense of
religion began to decline, by my too great fondness for learning, especially
the oriental tongues, wherein I was instructed by a private preceptor, who
likewise did all that in him lay, to instruct me in true divinity.

At seventeen I went to the university of Upsal, and a year or two after was
licensed to preach. But at twenty-two meeting with Arndt's True Christianity,
found I myself was not a Christian. Immediately I left off preaching, and
betook myself wholly to philosophy. This stifled all my convictions for some
years; but when I was about twenty-seven, they revived, and continued the year
after, when I was desired to be domestic tutor to the children of the Secretary
of State. I now felt I was carnal, sold under sin, and continually struggled to
burst the bonds, till (being about thirty-one years old) I was unawares
entangled in much worldly business. This cooled me in my pursuit of holiness;
yet for a year and a half my heart was never at peace. Being then in a
bookseller's shop, I saw the account of the church at Hernhuth. I did not think
there could be any such place, and asked the bookseller, if that was a real
account? His answer, "That it was no more than the plain truth," threw me into
deep thought, and fervent prayer, that God would bring me to that place. I went
to the Secretary, and told him, "I did not design to stay at Upsal, having a
desire to travel." He said, "He had a desire his son should travel, and was
glad of an opportunity to send him with me." I was grieved but knew not how to
refuse any thing to my patron and benefactor. Accordingly we left Upsal
together, and after a year spent in several parts of Germany, went through
Holland into France, and so to Paris, where we spent another year. But I was
more and more uneasy till I could be disengaged from my charge, that I might
retire to Hernhuth. In our return from France, my pupil's elder brother
returning from Italy met us at Leipsig. I immediately writ to his father, and
having obtained his consent, delivered him into his hands.

April 23, 1738, (N. S.) I came hither. Here I was as in another world. I
desired nothing but to be cleansed inwardly and outwardly from sin, by the
blood of Jesus Christ. I found all here laying the same foundation. Therefore,
though I did not think with them in all points of doctrine, I waved these, and
singly pursued reconciliation with God through Christ.

On the 22d of May last, I could think of nothing but, He that believes has
everlasting life. But I was afraid of deceiving myself, and continually prayed
I might not build without a foundation. Yet I had a sweet, settled peace, and
for five days this scripture was always in my thoughts. On the 28th those words
of our Lord were as strongly impressed upon me, "If ye being evil, know how to
give good gifts to your children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give
the Holy Ghost to them that ask him." At the same time I was incessantly
carried out, to ask, that he would give me the witness of his Spirit. Or the
29th I had what I asked of him, viz. the (...), which is,

"Requies in sanguine Christi. Firma fiducia in Deum and persuasio de gratia
divina; tranquillitas mentis summa, atque serenitas and pa^; cum absentia omnis
desiderii carnalis, and cessatione peccatorum etiam internorum. Verbo, Cor quod
antea instar maris turbulenti agitabatur, in summa fuit require, instar maris
sereni and tranquilli."

"Repose in the blood of Christ. A firm confidence in God, and persuasion of
his favor: seren^ peace and steadfast tranquillity of mind, with a deliverance
from every fleshly desire, and from every outward and inward sin. In a word, my
heart which before was tossed like a troubled sea, was still and quiet, and a
sweet calm."

In the present discipline of the church of Hernhuth, all which is alterable at
the discretion of the superiors, may be observed,

I. The officers of it. II. The division of the people. III. The conferences,
lectures, and government of the children. IV. The order of divine service.
I. The officers are, 1. The eldest of the whole church; beside whom, there is
an eldest of every particular branch of it. There is also a distinct eldest
over the young men, and another over the boys; a female eldest over the women
in general, and another over the unmarried, and another over the girls. 2. The
Teachers, who are four. 3. The Helpers (or Deacons). 4. The Overseers (or
Censors) eleven in number at Hernhuth. 5. The Monitors, who are eleven
likewise. 6. The Almoners, eleven also. 7. The Attenders on the sick, seven in
number. Lastly, The servants, or deacons of the lowest order.

II. The people of Hernhuth are divided, 1. Into five male classes, viz. the
children, the middle children, the big children, the young men, and the
married. The females are divided in the same manner. 2. Into eleven classes,
according to the houses where they live: and in each class is an helper, an
overseer, a monitor, an almoner and a servant. 3. Into about ninety bands, each
of which meets twice at least, but most of them three times a week, To confess
their faults one to another, and pray for one another, that they may be healed.

III. The rulers of the church, i. e. The elders, teachers, helpers, have a
conference every week, purely concerning the state of souls, and another
concerning the institution of youth. Beside which, they have one every day,
concerning outward things relating to the church.

The overseers, the monitors, the almoners, the attenders on the sick, the
servants, the schoolmasters, the young men, and the children, have likewise
each a conference once a week, relating to their several offices and duties.

Once a week also is a conference for strangers; at which any person may be
present, and propose any question or doubt, which he desires to have resolved.

In Hernhuth is taught reading, writing, arithmetic, Latin, Greek, Hebrew,
French, English, history and geography.

There is a Latin, French, and an English lecture every day, as well as an
historical and geographical one. On Monday, Wednesday, Friday and Saturday is
the Hebrew lecture; the Greek on Tuesday and Thursday.

In the Orphan-house, the larger children rise at five (the smaller, between
five and six.) After a little private prayer they work till seven. Then they
are at school till eight, the hour of prayer. At nine those who are capable of
it learn Latin, at ten French. At eleven they all walk. At twelve they dine
together, and walk till one. At one they work or learn writing; at three
arithmetic; at four history; at five they work; at six sup and work; at seven,
after a time spent in prayer, walk; at eight the smaller children go to bed,
the larger to the public service. When this is ended, they work again, till (at
ten) they go to bed.

IV. Every morning at eight is singing and exposition of scripture; and
commonly short prayer.

At eight in the evening, there is commonly only mental prayer, This is
unscriptural.
joined with the singing and expounding.

The faithful afterward spend a quarter of an hour in prayer, and conclude
with the kiss of peace.

On Sunday morning the service begins at six; at nine the public service at
Bertholdsdorf. At one the eldest gives separate exhortations to all the members
of the church, divided into fourteen little classes for that purpose, spending
about a quarter of an hour with each class. At four begins the evening service
at Bertholdsdorf, closed by a conference in the church. At eight is the usual
service; after which the young men, singing praises round the town, conclude
the day.

On the first Saturday in the month, the Lord's supper is administered. From
ten in the morning till two, the eldest speaks with each communicant in
private, concerning the state of his soul. At two they dine; then wash one
another's feet, after which they sing and pray. About ten they receive in
silence without any ceremony, and continue in silence till they part at twelve.

On the second Saturday is the solemn prayer-day for the children: the third is
the day of general intercession and thanksgiving: and on the fourth is the
great monthly conference of all the superiors of the church.

For the satisfaction of those who desire a more full account, I have added,

An Extract of the constitution of the church of the Moravian brethren at
Hernhuth, laid before the Theological Order at Wirtemberg, in the year 1733.
1. THEY have a senior, or eldest, who is to assist the church by his counsel
and prayers, and to determine what shall be done in matters of importance. Of
him is required, that he be well experienced in the things of God, and
witnessed to by all for holiness of conversation.

2. They have deacons, or helpers, who are in the private assemblies, to
instruct: to take care that outward things be done decently and in order; and
to see that every member of the church grows in grace, and walks suitable to
his holy calling.

3. The pastor, or teacher, is to be an overseer of the whole flock, and every
person therein; to baptize the children; diligently to form their minds, and
bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord: when he finds in them
a sincere love of the cross, then to receive them into the church: to
administer the supper of the Lord: to join in marriage those who are already
married to Christ: to reprove, admonis^^y quicken, comfort, as need requires:
to declare the whole counsel of God: taking heed at all times, to speak as the
oracles of God, and agreeably to the analogy of faith: to bury those who have
died in the Lord, and to keep that safe which is committed to his charge, even
the pure doctrine and apostolical discipline which we have received from our
forefathers.

4. We have also another sort of deacons who take care that nothing be wanting
to the orphan-house, the poor, the sick, and the strangers. Others again there
are, who are peculiarly to take care of the sick; and others, of the poor. And
two of these are entrusted with the public stock, and keep accounts of all that
is received or expended.

5. There are women who perform each of the abovementioned office^, among
those of their own sex: for none of the men converse with theirs, be^i^e the
eldest, the teacher, and one, or sometimes two of the deacons.

6. Toward magistrates, whether of a superior or inferior rank, we bear the
greatest reverence. We cheerfully submit to their laws; and even when many of
us have been spoiled of their goods, driven out of their houses, and every way
oppressed by them, yet they resisted them not, neither opening their mouths,
nor lifting up their hands against them. In all things which do act immediately
concern the inward, spiritual kingdom of Christ, we simply, and without
contradicting, obey the higher powers. But with regard to conscience, the
liber^ty of this we cannot suffer to be any way limited or infringed. And to
this head we refer whatever directly and in itself tends to hinder the
salvation of souls: or, whatsoever things Christ and his holy apostles (who we
know meddled not with outward worldly things) took charge of, and performed, as
necessary for the constituting and well-ordering of his church. In these things
we acknowledge no head but Christ; and are determined, God being our helper, to
give up, not only our goods (as we did before) but life itself, rather than
this liberty which God has given us.

7. As it behooves all Christians not to be slothful in business, but diligently
to attend the works of their calling; there are persons chosen by the church,
to superintend all those who are employed in outward business. And by this
means also, many things are prevented, which might otherwise be an occasion of
essence.

8. We have also ^^nsors and monitors. In those experience and perspicuity; in
these wisdom and modes^y are chiefly required. The censors signify what they
observe (and they observe the smallest things) either to the deacons or
monitors. Some monitors there are, whom all know to be such; others who are
se^^^ly appointed; and who, if need require, may freely admonish in the love of
Christ, even the rulers of the church.

9. The church is so divided, that first the husbands, then the wives, then the
widows, then the maids, then the young men, then the boys, then the girls, and
lastly the little children, are in so many distinct classes: each of which is
daily visited, the married men by a married man, the wives by a wife, and so of
the rest. This work all the ma^^ie brethren and sisters, as well as (...) in
their turns.
These larger are also (now) divided into near ninety smaller classes or bands,
over each of which one presides who is of the greatest experience. All these
leaders meet the senior every week, and lay open to him and to the Lord,
whatsoever hinders or furthers the work of God, in the souls committed to their
charge.

10. In the year 1727, four and twenty men and as many women agreed, That each
of them would spend an hour in every day, in praying to God for his blessing on
his people: and for this purpose both the men and the women chose a place,
where any of their own sex, who were in distress, might be present with them.
The same number of unmarried women, of unmarried men, of boys, and of girls,
were afterward at their desire, added to them; who pour out their souls before
God, not only for their own brethren, but also for other churches and persons,
that have desired to be mentioned in their prayers. And this perpetual
intercession has never ceased day or night since its first beginning.

11. And as the members of the church are divided, according to their
respective states and sexes; so they are also, with regard to their proficiency
in the knowledge of God. Some are dead, some quickened by the Spirit of God: of
these, some again are untractable, some diligent, some zealous, burning with
their first love; some babes, and some young men. Those who are still dead, are
visited every day. And of the babes in Christ especial care is taken also, that
they may be daily inspected and assisted to grow in grace, and in the knowledge
of our Lord Jesus,

12. In the Orphan-house, about seventy children are brought up separate,
according to their sex: beside which, several experienced persons are appointed
to consult with the parents, touching the education of the other children. In
teaching them Christianity, we make use of Luther's catechism, and study the
amending their wills as well as their understanding; finding by experience,
that when their will is moved, they often learn more in a few hours, than
otherwise in many months. Our little children we instruct chiefly by hymns;
whereby we find the most important truths most successfully insinuated into
their minds.

13. We highly reverence marriage, as greatly conducive to the kingdom of
Christ. But neither our young men nor women enter into it till they assuredly
know, they are married to Christ. When any know it is the will of God, that
they should change their state, both the man and woman are placed for a time,
with some married persons, who instruct them how to behave, so that their
married life may be pleasing to God. Then their design is laid before the whole
church, and after about fourteen days, they are solemnly joined, though not
otherwise habited, than they are at other times. If they make any entertain^^nt
(which is not always) they invite only a few intimate friends, by whose
faithful admonitions they may be the better prepared to bear their cross and
fight the good fight of faith. If any woman is with child, not only especial
mention is made of her in the public prayers, but she is also exhorted in
private, wholly to give herself up into the hands of her faithful Creator. As
soon as a child is born, prayer is made for it, and if it may be, it is
baptized in the presence of the whole church. Before it is weaned, it is
brought into the assembly on the Lord's days.

14. Whoever either of the male or female children, seek God with their whole
heart, need not be much incited to come to the Lord's supper. Before they
receive, they are examined both in private by the pastor, and also in public:
and then, after an exhortation by the se^ior, are by him through laying on of
hands, added to the church and confirmed. The same method is used with those
who renounce the papal superstitions, or who are turned from the service of
Satan to God; and that, if they desire it, although they are not young; 'yea,
though they are well stricken in years.

15. Once or twice a month, either at Bertholdsdorf, or if it may be, at
Hernhuth, all the church receives the Lord's supper. It cannot be expressed how
great the power of God is then present among us. A general confession of sins
is made by one of the brethren in the name of all. Then a few solid questions
are asked; which when they have answered, the absolution or remission of sins
is either pronounced ^o all in general, or confirmed to every particular
person, by the laying on of hands. The seniors first receive; then the rest in
order, without any regard had to worldly dignity, in this, any more than in any
other of the solemn offices of religion. After receiving, all the men (and so
the women) meet together, to renew their covenant with God, to seek his face,
and exhort one another to the patience of hope and the labor of love.

16. They have a peculiar esteem for lots, and accordingly use them both in
public and private, to decide points of importance, when the reasons brought on
each side appear to be of equal weight. And they believe this to be then the
only way, of wholly setting aside their own will, of acquitting themselves of
all blame, and clearly knowing what is the will of God.

17. At eight in the morning, and in the evening we meet to pray to and praise
God, and to read and hear the holy scriptures: the time we usually spend in
sleep, is from eleven at night till four in the morning. So that allowing three
hours a day for taking the food both of our bodies and souls, there remain
sixteen for work. And this space those who are in health spend therein, with
all diligence and faithfulness.

18. Two men keep watch every night in the street, as do two women, in the
women's apartment: that they may pour out their souls for those that sleep; and
by their hymns raise the hearts of any who are awake to God.

19. For the farther stirring up the gift which is in us, sometimes we have
public, sometimes private love feasts: at which we take moderate refreshment,
with gladness and singleness of heart, and the voice of praise and thanksgiving.

20. If any man among us, having been often admonished, and long forborne,
persists in walking unworthy of his holy calling, he is no longer admitted to
the Lord's supper. If he still continues in his fault, hating to be reformed,
the last step is, publicly, and often in the midst of many prayers and tears,
to cast him out of our congregation. But great is our joy, if he then see the
error of his ways, so that we may receive him among us again.

21. Most of our brethren and sisters, have in some part of their life,
experienced holy mourning and sorrow of heart; and have afterward been
assured, that there was no more condemnation for them, being passed from death
unto life. They are therefore far from fearing to die, or desiring to live on
earth; knowing that to them to die is gain, and being confident that they are
the care of him, whose are the issues of life and death. Wherefore they depart
as out of one chamber into ^^other. And after the soul has left its habitation,
their remains are deposited in the earth, appointed for that purpose. And the
survivors are greatly comforted, and rejoice over them, with a joy the world
knows ^^t of.

AN EXTRACT OF THE REV. MR. JOHN WESLEY's JOURNAL, From August 12, 1738, to
November 1, 1739.
If this counsel or this work be of men, it will come to naught: but if it be
of God, ye cannot overthrow it; lest happly ye be found to fight against God.
Acts v. 38, 39.
The PREFACE.
1. WHEN at first men began to say to my charge, things which I knew not, I
often thought, "Had I but two or three intimate friends, who knew what my life
and conversation were, they might easily speak what they had seen and heard,
and all such aspersions would fall to the ground." But I perceived my mistake,
as soon as I had two or three, who were my friends indeed, not in name only.
For a way was easily found to prevent their being of any such use as I once
imagined they would be. This was done at a stroke, and that once for all, by
giving them and me a n^w name: a name, which however insignificant in itself,
yet had this peculiar effect, utterly to disable me from removing, whatever
accusation might for the time to come be cast upon me, by invalidating all
which those who knew me best, were able to say in my behalf: nay, which any
others could say. For how notorious is it, that if any man dare to open his
mouth in my favor, it needs only be replied, "I suppose you are a Methodist
too," and all he has said is to pass for nothing.

2. Hence, on the one hand, many who knew what my conversation was, were afraid
to declare the truth; lest the same reproach should fall upon them: and these
few who broke through this fear, were soon disabled from declaring it with
effect, by being immediately ranked with him they defended. What impartial man
then can refuse to say, It is permitted to thee to answer for thyself? Only do
not add, but, "Thou shall not persuade me, though thou do persuade me^ I am
resolved to think as I did before." Not so, if you are a candid man. You have
heard one side already. Hear the other. Weigh both. Allow for human weakness.
And then judge as you desire to be judged.

3. What I design in the following extract is, openly to declare to all
mankind, what it is that the M^th^^^^s (so called) have done, and are doing
now; or rather, what it is that God has done, and is still doing in our land.
For it is not the work of man which has lately appeared. All who calmly
observe it must say, This is the Lord's doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes.

4. Such a work this has been in many respects, as neither we nor our fathers
had known. Not a few whose sins were of the most flagrant kind, drunkards,
swearers, thieves, whoremongers, adulterers, have been brought from darkness
unto light, and from the power of Satan unto God. Many of these were rooted in
their wickedness, having long gloried in their shame, perhaps for a course of
many years, yea, even to hoary hairs. Many had not so much as a notional faith,
being Jews, A^ians, Deists or Atheists. Nor has God only made bare his arm in
these last days, in behalf of open Publicans and Sinners; but many of the
Pharisees also have believed on him, of the righteous that needed no
repentance: and having received the sentence of death in themselves, have then
heard the voice that raises the dead: have been made partakers of an inward,
vital religion, even righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.

5. The manner wherein God has wrought this work in many souls, is as strange
as the work itself. It has gene^^^ly if not alway^, been wrought in one moment.
^as the lightning shining from heaven, so was the coming of the Son of Man,
either to bring peace or a sword; either to wound or to heal, either to
convince of sin, or to give remission of sins in his blood. And the other
circumstances attending it have been equally remote from what human wisdom
would have expected. So true is that word, My ways are not as your ways, nor my
thoughts as your thoughts.

6. These extraordinary circumstances seem to have been designed by God, for
the further manifestation of his work, to cause his power to be known, and to
awaken the attention of a drowsy world. And yet even from these, some have
drawn their grand objection against the whole work. We never saw it, say they,
on this fashion. Therefore, the work is not of God. To prove which farther,
they have not only greatly misrepresented many circumstances that really were,
but have added many that were not, often without any regard either to truth or
probability. A bare recital of those facts which were not done in a corner, is
the best answer to this sort of objections. To those which have been judged to
be of more weight, I have occasionally given a more particular answer.

Yet I know even this will by no means satisfy the far greater part of those
who are now offended. And for a plain reason, because they will never read it:
they are resolved to hear one side, and one only. I know also, that many who do
read it, will be just of the same mind they were before; because they have
fixed their judgment already, and do not regard any thing which such a fellow
can say. Let them see to that. I have done my part. I have delivered mine own
soul. Nay, I know that many will be greatly offended at this very account. It
must be so from the very nature of the things, which are therein related. And
the best appellation I expect from them is, that of a fool, a madman, an
enthusiast. All that in me lies is, to relate simple truth, in as inoffensive a
manner as I can. Let God give it the effect which pleases him, and which is
most for his glory!

7. May he who has the key of the house of David, who opens and no man
shuts, open a great and effectual door by whom it pleases him, for his
everlasting gospel! May he send by whom he will send, so it may run and be
glorified more and more! May he ride on, conquering and to conquer, until the
fullness of the Gentiles he come in; and the earth be full of the knowledge of
the glory of the Lord, as the waters (...) the sea!

JOURNAL From Aug. 12, 1738, to Nov. 1, 1739.
SATURDAY, Aug. 12. About seven in the evening we came to Neu-Kirche, a town
about twenty-four miles from Hernhuth. Mr. Schneider (the minister of it who
had desired us to take his house in our way) was not at home: but we found one
Mr. Manoetius there, the minister of a neighboring town, who walked with us in
the morning ten miles to Hauswald^, where he lived. He told us, "That the
Lutherans as well as the Papists, were irreconcilable enemies to the brethren
of Hernhuth: that the generality of the Lutheran clergy, were as bitter against
them as the Jesuits themselves: that none of his neighbors durst go thither
(unless by stealth) being sure of suffering for it, if discovered; that to
prevent any of Hernhuth from coming to them, the Elector had forbid, under a
severe penalty, any number of persons, exceeding three, to meet together on a
religious account; and that he himself, for having a little society in his own
parish, had been summoned to appear before the Consistory at Dresden." Yea, let
the kings of the earth stand up, and the rulers take counsel together against
the Lord and against his anointed! He that sits in heaven shall laugh them
to scorn; the Lord shall have them in derision.

We left Hauswalde in the afternoon, and in the evening came to Dresden. But
the officer at the gate would not suffer us to come in; so that we were obliged
to go on to the next village: which leaving early in the morning, on Thursday
in the afternoon we came to Leipsig.

We were now kept only an hour at the gate, and then conducted to Mr. Arnold's,
who had invited us when we were in the town before, to make his house our home.
A few we found here too, who desire to know nothing but Jesus Christ, and him
crucified. And from them we had letters to Halle, whither we came on Friday 18.
But the king of Prussia's tall men (who kept the gates) would not suffer Mr.
Brown to come in. Me they admitted (in honor of my profession) after I had
waited about two hours: and one of them went with me to the Prince of Hesse,
who after a few questions, gave me leave to lodge in the city. Thence he showed
me to Mr Gotsch^lck's lodgings, to whom I had letters from Leipsig. He read
them and said, My brother, what you find here, you will use as your own. And if
you want any thing else, tell us and you shall have it.

I told them, "My companion was without the gate." They soon procured
admittance for him. And we were indeed as at home; for I have hardly seen such
little children as these, even at Hernhuth.

Satur. 19. I waited on Professor Francke, who behaved with the utmost
humanity; and afterward on Professor Knappe, to whom also I am indebted for
his open, friendly behavior. Between ten and eleven, seven of the brethren set
out with us, one of whom went with us two days journey. It was the dusk of the
evening on Sunday 20, when, wet and weary, we reached Jena.

Mond. 21. We visited the schools there; the rise of which (as we were
informed) was occasioned thus:

About the year 1704 Mr. Stoltius, a student at Jena, began to speak of faith
in Christ; which he continued to do, till he took his master's degree, and read
public lectures. About twelve or fifteen students were awakened, and joined
with him in prayer and building up one another. At this (after various
calumnies spread abroad and diverse persecutions occasioned thereby) the
Consistory was offended, and issued out a commission to examine him. In
consequence of the report made to the Consistory by these commissioners, he was
forbid to read any public lectures, or to hold any meetings with his friends.
Not long after an order was given, by which he was excluded from the holy
communion. He was also to have been expelled the university: but this he
prevented by a voluntary retirement.

Yet one of the commissioners, who had been sent by the Duke of Weymar (one of
the Lords of Jena) informed the Duke, that according to his judgment Stoltius
was an innocent and holy man. On this the Duke sent for him to Weymar, and
fixed him in a living there. There likewise he awakened many, and met with them
to pray and read the scriptures together. But it was not long that the city
could bear him. For he boldly rebuked all vice, and that in all persons,
neither sparing the courtiers, nor the Duke himself. Consequently, his enemies
every where increased, and many persecutions followed. In fine, he was forbid
to have any private meetings, and was to have been deposed from the ministry;
when God calling him to himself, took him away from the evil to come.

Before Stoltius left Jena, Boddaeus also began to preach the real gospel, as
did Christius soon after; whereby some awakening continued till the year 1724.
A few of the townsmen then agreed, to maintain a student, to be a schoolmaster
for some poor children. They afterward kept several schoolmasters: But about
1728, all of them going away, the school was broke up, and the children quite
neglected. Professor Buddaeus being informed of this, earnestly recommended the
consideration of it to the students in his house: and about ten of them, among
whom was Mr. Spangenberg, took upon themselves the care of those children.
Their number soon increased, which gave great offense to the other
schoolmasters in the town; and not long after to the magistrates of the town,
and to the senate of the university. The offense soon spread to the pastors,
the professors, the consistory, and the princes who are lords of Jena. But it
pleased God to move one of them, the prince of Eisnach, who had the chief power
there, to stop the open persecution, by forbidding either the senate or
consistory to molest them. He likewise wholly exempted them from the
jurisdiction of both, ordering that all complaints against them for the time to
come should be cognizable only by himself. But during the persecution, the
number of schools was increased from one to three, (one in each suburb of the
city) the number of teachers to above thirty, and of children to above three
hundred.

There are now thirty constant teachers, ten in each school, and three or four
supernumerary, to supply accidental defects. Four of the masters are appointed
to punish, who are affixed to no one school. Each of the schools being divided
into two classes, and taught five hours a day, every one of the thirty masters
has one hour in a day to teach. All the masters have a conference about the
schools every Monday. They have a second meeting on Thursday, chiefly for
prayers. And a third every Saturday.

Once in half a year they meet to fill up the places (...) those masters who
are gone away. And the number has never decreased; fresh ones still offering
themselves, as the former leave the university.

The present method wherein they teach is this.

There are always two classes in each school. In the lower, children from six
to ten or twelve years old are taught to read. They are then removed to the
other ^^ass, in which are taught, the holy scriptures, arithmetic, and whatever
else it may be useful for children to learn.

In the morning from eight to nine they are all catechized, and instructed in
the first principles of Christianity, either from Luther's smaller catechism,
or from some texts of holy scripture.

From nine to ten the smaller children are taught their letters and syllables;
and the larger read the bible. From ten to eleven those in the lower class
learn and repeat some select verses of holy scripture, chiefly relating to the
foundation of the faith. Mean while those in the upper, learn arithmetic.

In the afternoon from one to two all the children are employed as from nine to
ten in the morning. From two to three the smaller children learn and repeat
Luther's smaller catechism, while the larger are taught to write.

Every Sunday there is a public catechizing on some text of scripture; at which
all persons who desire it may be present.

In the afternoon we left Jena, several of the brethren accompanying us out of
town. At five having just passed through Weymar, we met Mr. Ingham going for
Hernhuth. We all turned aside to a neighboring village, where having spent a
comfortable evening together, in the morning we commended each other to the
grace of God, and went on our several ways.

We breakfasted at Erfurt with Mr. Reinhart, spent the evening with some
Brethren at Saxe-Gotha, and by long journeys came to Marienborn on Friday,
August 25.

Monday 28, I took my leave of the Countess (the Count being gone to Jena) and
setting out early the next morning came about three in the afternoon to
Frankfort. From Mr. Bohler's we went to the society, where one of the brethren
from Marienborn offered free redemption through the blood of Christ to sixty or
seventy persons.

Wednesday 30. In the afternoon we came to Mentz, and agreed for our passage to
Colen by water, for a florin per head: which was but half what we gave before,
though (it seems) twice as much as we ought to have given.

Thursday 31. We spent half an hour in the great church, a huge heap of
irregular building; full of altars, adorned (or loaded rather) with abundance
of gold and silver. In going out, we observed a paper on the door, which was of
so extraordinary a nature, that I thought it would not be labor lost to
transcribe it. The words were as follow: Vollkommener ablass fur die arm
seelen im feg-seur.

Seine pabliche heiligket, Clemens der 12te, haben in diesem jahr 1738, den 7
Augusti, die psarr kirche des Sancti Christophori in Mentz gnadigsten
privilegirt, dass ein jeder priester, so wohl secular als regularischen stands,
der am aller seelentag, wie auch an einem jedem tag in derselben octav; so dann
am zwiein vom ordinario tagen einer jeden woch das jahr hindurch, fur die seel
eine christglaubigen verstorbenen an zum altar mess lesen wird, jedesmahl eine
seel aus them feg-feur erlosen konne.

A full release for the poor souls in purgatory.

His papal holiness, Clement the XIIth, has this year 1738, on the seventh of
August, most graciously privileged the cathedral church of St. Christopher in
Mentz, so that every priest, as well secular as regular, who will read mass at
an altar for the soul of a Christian departed, on any holiday, or on any day
within the octave thereof, or on two extraordinary days, to be appointed by the
ordinary, of any week in the year, may each time deliver a soul out of the fire
of purgatory.

Now I desire to know, whether any Romanist of common sense, can either defend
or approve of this?

At eight we took boat, and on Saturday, Sept. 2, about eleven came to Colen;
which we left at one, and between seven and eight reached a village, an hour
short of Neus. Here we overtook a large number of Switzers, men, women and
children, singing, dancing and making merry, being all going to make their
fortunes in Georgia. Looking upon them as delivered into my hands by God, I
plainly told them, what manner of place it was. If they now leap into the fire
with open eyes, their blood is on their own head.

Mond. 4. Before noon we came to Cleve, and to Nimwegen in the evening. The
next night we lay at a little village near Tiel; which leaving early in the
morning, we walked by the side of many pleasant orchards, and in the afternoon
came to Ysselstein. We stayed only one night with the brethren, (in the new
house, called Herndyke, an English mile from the town) and hasting forward came
the next afternoon to Dr. Koker's at Rotterdam.

I cannot but acknowledge the civility of this friendly man, all the time we
stayed in his house. In the morning, Frid. 8, we went to the English episcopal
church, which is a large, handsome, convenient building. The minister read
prayers seriously and distinctly, to a small, well-behaved congregation. Being
informed our ship was to sail the next day (Saturday) we took leave of our
generous friend, and went to an inn close to the key, that we might be ready
when called to go aboard. Having waited till past four in the afternoon, we
stepped into the Jews synagogue, which lies near the waterside. I do not
wonder that so many Jews (especially those who have any re^^ection) utterly
abjure all religon. My spirit was moved within me, at that horrid, senseless
p^geantry, that mockery of God, which they called public worship. Lord, do not
thou yet cast off thy people! But in Abraham's seed let them also be blessed!

The ship lingering still, I had time to exhort several English, whom we met
with at our inn, to pursue inward religion; the renewal of their souls in
righteousness and true holiness. In the morning a daughter of affliction came
to see me, who teaches a school at Rotterdam. She had been for some time under
deep convictions; but could find none to instruct or comfort her. After much
conversation, we joined in prayer, and her spirit a little revived. Between
nine and ten we went on board. In the afternoon I read prayers, and preached in
the great cabin. The wind being contrary, (...) did not get out of the river
till Wednesday; nor to London till Saturday night.

Sunday, Sept. 17. I began again to declare in my own country the glad tidings
of salvation, preaching three times, and afterward expounding the holy
scripture to a large company in the Minories. On Monday I rejoiced to meet with
our little society, which now consisted of 32 persons. The next day I went to
the condemned felons in Newgate, and offered them free salvation. In the
evening I went to a society in Bear-yard, and preached repentance and (...) of
sins. The next evening I spoke the ^^th in love at a society in
Aldersgate Street. Some contradicted at first; but not long: so that nothing
but love appeared at our parting.

Thursday, 21. I went to a society in Gutterlane; but I could not declare the
mighty works of God there; as I did afterward at the Savoy in all simplicity.
And the word did not return empty.

Finding abundance of people greatly exasperated by gross misrepresentations of
the words I had spoken, I went to as many of them in private, as my time would
permit. God gave me much love toward them all. Some were convinced they had
been mistaken. And who knows but God will soon return to the ^est, and leave
a blessing behind him?

On Sat. 23. I was enabled to speak strong words both at Newgate and Mr. E's
society; and the next day at St. Anne's, and twice at St. John's Clerkenwell:
so that I fear they will bear me there no longer.

Tues. 26. I declared the gospel of peace to a ^all company at Windsor. The
next evening Mr. H. preached to the societies at Bow; but not the truth as it
is in Jesus. I was afraid left the la^e should ^e turned out of the way: but
God answered the thoughts of my heart, and took away my fear, in a ^anner I did
not expect, even by the words of Thomas Sternhold. They were these (sung
immediately after the sermon.)

Thy mercy in above all things,
O God; it does excel;
In trust whereof, ^s in thy wing^,
The sons of men shall dwell.
Within thy house they shall be (...)
With plenty at their will:
Of all delights they shall be sped,
And take thereof their fill.
Because the well of life most pure
Does ever flow from thee;
And in thy light we are most sure
Eternal light to see.
From such as thee desire to know
Let not thy grace depart:
Thy righteousness declare and show
To men of upright heart.
Sat. 30. One who had been a zealous opposer of this way, sent and desired to
speak with me immediately. He had all the signs of settled despair, both in his
countenance and behavior. He said, "He had been inslaved to sin many years,
especially to drunkenness; that he had long used all the means of grace, had
constantly gone to church, and sacrament, had read the scripture, and used much
private prayer, and yet was nothing profited." I desired we might join in
prayer. After a short space he rose and his countenance was no longer sad. He
said, "Now I know, God loves me, and has forgiven my sins. And sin shall not
have dominion over me: for Christ has set me free." And according to his faith
it was unto him.

Sund. Oct. 1. I preached both morning and afternoon at St. George's in the
East. On the following days I endeavored to explain the way of salvation, to
many who had misunderstood what had been preached concerning it.

Frid. 6. I preached at St. Antholin's once more. In the afternoon I went to
the Rev. Mr. Bedford, to tell him between me and him alone, of the injury he
had done both to: God and his brother, by preaching and printing that very weak
sermon on assurance, which was an ignoratio clenchi from beginning to end;
seeing the assurance we preach is of quite another bind from that he writes
against. We speak of an assurance of our present pardon; not (as he does) of
(...) final perseverance.

In the evening I began expounding at a little society in Wapping. On Sunday 8.
I preached at the Savoy chapel (I suppose the last time) on the parable (or
history rather) of the Pharisee and Publican praying in the temple. On Mond. 9.
I set out for Oxford. In walking I read the truly surprising narrative of the
conversions lately wrought in and about the town of Northampton in New England.
Surely this is the Lord's doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes!

An extract from this I wrote to a friend, concerning the state of those who
are weak in faith. His answer, which I received at Bristol, on Sat. 14, threw
me into great perplexity, till after crying to God, I took up a bible, which
opened on these words; And Ja^^z called on the God of Israel, saying, Oh, that
thou would bless me indeed, and enlarge my coast! And that thine hand might
be with me, and that thou would keep me from evil that it may not grieve me!
And God granted him that which he requested.

This however, with a sentence in the evening lesson, put me upon considering
my own state more deeply. And what then occurred to me was as follows:

"Examine yourselves, whether ye be in the faith." Now the surest test whereby
we can examine ourselves, whether we be indeed in the faith, is that given by
St. Paul, If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature. Old things are past
away. Behold all things are become new.

First, His judgments are new his judgment of himself, of happiness, of
holiness.

He judges himself to be altogether fallen short ^f the glorious image of God.
To have no good thing abiding in him; but all that is corrupt and abominable:
in a word, to be wholly earthly, sensual, and devilish: a motly mixture of
beast and devil.

Thus, by the grace of God in Christ, I judge of myself. Therefore I am, in
this respect, a new creature.

Again. His judgment concerning happiness is new. He would as soon expect to
dig it out of the earth, as to find it in riches, honor, pleasure (so called)
or indeed in the enjoyment of any creature: he knows there can be no happiness
on earth, but in the enjoyment of God, and in the foretaste of those rivers of
pleasure which flow at his right hand for evermore.

Thus, by the grace of God in Christ, I judge of happiness. Therefore I am, in
this respect, a new creature.

Yet again. His judgment concerning holiness is now. He no longer judge^ it to
be an outward thing: to consist either, in doing no harm, in doing good, or in
using the ordinances of God. He sees it is, the life of God in the soul; the
image of God fresh stamped on the heart: an entire renewal of the mind in every
temper and thought, after the likeness of him that created it.

Thus, by the grace of God in Christ, I judge of holiness. Therefore I am, in
this respect, a new creature.

Secondly, His design^ are new. It is the design of his life, not to heap up
treasures upon earth, not to gain the praise of men, not to indulge the desires
of the flesh, the desire of the eye, or the pride o^ life; but to regain the
image of God; to have the life of God again planted in his soul; and to be
renewed after his likeness, in righteousness and all true holiness.

This, by the grace of God in Christ, is the design of my life. Therefore I am,
in this respect, a new creature.

Thirdly, His desires are new, and indeed the whole train of his passions and
inclinations. They are no longer fixed on earthly things. They are now set on
the things of heaven. His love, and joy, and hope, his sorrow, and fear, have
all respect to things above. They all point heaven-w^rd. Where his treasure is,
there is his heart also.

I dare not say I am a new creature in this respect. For other desires often
arise in my heart. But they do not reign. I put them all under my feet through
Christ which strengthens me. Therefore I believe he is creating me anew in
this also, and that he has begun, though not finished, his work.

Fourthly, His conversation is new. It is always seasoned with salt, and fit to
minister grace to the bearers.

So is mine, by the grace of God in Christ. Therefore, in this respect, I am a
new creature.

Fifthly, His actions are new. The tenor of his life singly points at the glory
of God. All his substance and time are devoted thereto. Whether he eats or
drinks, or whatever he does, it either springs from, or leads to, the love of
God and man.

Such, by the grace of God in Christ, is the tenor of my life. Therefore, in
this respect, I am a new creature.

But St. Paul tells us elsewhere, that the fruit of the Spirit is love, peace,
joy, long-suffering, gentleness, meekness, temperance. Now although, by the
grace of God in Christ, I find a measure of some of these in myself, viz. of
peace, long-suffering, gentleness, meekness, temperance: yet others I find not.
I cannot find in myself the love of God or of Christ. Hence my deadness and
wanderings in public prayer. Hence it is that even in the holy communion, I
have frequently no more than a cold attention.

Again, I have not that joy in the Holy Ghost^ no settled, lasting joy. Nor
have I such a peace as excludes the possibility either of fear or doubt. When
holy men have told me, "I had no faith," I have often doubted, whether I had or
no. And those doubts have made me very uneasy, till I wa^ relieved by prayer
and the holy scriptures.

Yet upon the whole, although I have not yet that joy in the Holy Ghost, nor
the full assurance of faith, much less am I, in the full sense of the words, in
Christ a new creature: I nevertheless trust that I have a^ measure of faith,
and am accepted in the Beloved: I trust, the handwriting that was against me
is blotted out, and that I am reconciled to God through his Son.

Sund. 15. I preached twice at the castle, and afterward expounded at three
societies. Wednesday evening I came to London again, and on Friday met a
society (of soldiers chiefly) at Westminster. On Sunday 22, I preached at
Bloomsbury in the morning, and at Shadwell in the afternoon. Wednesday 25, I
preached at Basingshaw church: on Friday morning at St. Antholin's: on Sunday
at Islington and at London-Wall.

In the evening being troubled at what some said, of the kingdom of God within
us, and doubtful of my own state, I called upon God, and received this answer
from his word, He himself also waited for the kingdom of God. "But should not I
wait in silence and retirement?" was the thought that immediately struck into
my mind. I opened my testament again, on those words, See thou not, how faith
wrought together with his works? And by works was faith made perfect.

Friday Nov. 3. I preached at St. Antholin's, Sunday 5, in the morning at St.
Botolph's, Bishops-gate, in the afternoon at Islington, and in the evening to
such a congregation as I never saw before, at St. Clement's in the Strand. As
this was the first time of my preaching here, I suppose it is to be the last.

On Wednesday my brother and I went, at their earnest desire, to do the last
good office to the condemned malefactors. It was the most glorious instance I
ever saw, of faith triumphing over sin and death. One observing the tears run
fast down the cheeks of one of them in particular, while his eyes were steadily
fixed upwards, a few moments before he died, asked, "How do you feel your heart
now?" He calmly replied, "I feel a peace, which I could not have believed to be
possible. And I know it is the peace of God, which passes all understanding."

My brother took that occasion of declaring the gospel of peace, to a large
assembly of publicans and sinners. O Lord God of my fathers, accept even me
among them, and cast me not out from among thy children!

In the evening I proclaimed mercy to my fellow-sinners at Basingshaw church:
and the next morning at St. Antholin's. Friday 10, I set out, and Saturday 11,
spent the evening with a little company at Oxford. I was grieved to find,
prudence had made them leave off singing psalms. I fear it will not stop here.
God deliver me, and all that seek him in sincerity, from what the world calls
Christian prudence!

Sunday 12. I preached twice at the castle. In the following week, I began more
narrowly to enquire what the doctrine of the church of England is, concerning
the much controverted point of justification by FAITH. And the sum of what I
found in the homilies, I extracted and printed for the use of others.

Sund. 19. I only preached in the afternoon at the castle. On Monday night I
was greatly troubled in dreams, and about eleven o'clock waked in an
unaccountable consternation, without being able to sleep again. About that time
(as I found in the morning) one who had been designed to be my pupil, but was
not, came into the Porter's lodge (where several persons were sitting) with a
pistol in his hand. He presented this, as in sport, first at one and then at
another. He then attempted twice or thrice to shoot himself, but it would not
go off. Upon his laying it down, one took it up, and blew out the p^iming. He
was very angry, went and got fresh prime, came in again, sat down, beat the
flint with his key; and about twelve, pulling off his hat and wig, said, "He
would die like a gentleman," and shot himself through the head.

Thurs. 23. Returning from preaching at the castle, I met once more with my old
companion in affliction, C. D. who stayed with me till Monday. His last
conversation with me was as follows:

"In this you are better than you was at Savannah. You know that you was then
quite wrong. But you are not right yet. You know that you was then blind. But
you do not see now.

"I doubt not but God will bring you to the right foundation. But I have no
hope for you, while you are on your present foundation. It is as different from
the true, as the right hand from the left. You have all to begin anew.

"I have observed all your words and actions, and I see you are of the same
spirit still. You have a simplicity: but it is a simplicity of your own. It is
not the simplicity of Christ. You think you do not trust in your own works. But
you do trust in your own works. You do not believe in Christ.

"You have a present freedom from sin. But it is only a temporary suspension of
it, not a deliverance from it. And you have a peace. But it is not a true
peace. If death were to approach, you would find all your fears return.

"But I am forbid to say any more. My heart sinks in me like a stone."

I was troubled. I begged of God an answer of peace, and opened on those words,
As many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and upon
the Israel of God. I was asking in the evening, that God would fulfill all his
promises in my soul, when I opened my testament on those words, My hour is not
yet come.

Sund. Dec. 3. I began reading prayers at Bocardo (the city prison) which had
been long discontinued. In the afternoon I received a letter, earnestly
desiring me, to publish my account of Georgia: and another as earnestly
dissuading me from it, "because it would bring much trouble upon me." I
consulted God in his word and received two answers; the first Ezekiel. xxxiii. 2
-- 6. The other, Thou therefore endure hardship, as a good soldier of Jesus
Christ.

Tues. Dec. 5. I began reading prayers and preaching in Gloucester-green
workhouse, and on Thursday in that belonging to St. Thomas's parish. On both
days I preached at the castle. At St. Thomas's was a young woman, raving mad,
screaming and tormenting herself continually. I had a strong desire to speak to
her. The moment I began she was still. The tears ran down her cheeks all the
time I was telling her, "Jesus of Nazareth is able and willing to deliver you."
O where is faith ^p^n (...) Why are these poor wretches left under (...) ^ndage
of Satan? Jesus, Master! Give the med^ to heal their sickness: and deliver
those who are (...) vened with unclean spirits!

About this time, being desirous to know how the work of God went on among our
brethren at London, I wrote to many of them concerning the state of their
souls. One or two of their answers I have subjoined.

My dear friend, whom I love in the truth.
I Know my Savior's voice, and my heart burns with love and desire to follow
him in the regeneration. I have no confidence in the flesh. I loath myself and
love him only. My dear brother, my spirit even at this moment rejoices in God
my Savior, and the love which is shed abroad in my heart by the Holy Ghost,
destroys all self-love, so that I could lay down my life for my brethren. I
know that my Redeemer lives, and have confidence toward God, that through his
blood my sins are forgiven. He has begotten me of his own will, and saves me
from sin, so that it has no dominion over me. His Spirit bears witness with my
spirit, that I am his child by adoption and grace. And this is not for works of
righteousness which I have done. For I am his workmanship, created in Christ
Jesus unto good works: so that all boasting is excluded. It is now about
eighteen years since Jesus took possession of my heart. He then opened my eyes
and said unto me, Be of good cheer, thy sins are orgiven thee. My dear friend,
bear with my relating, after what manner I was born of God. It was an
instantaneous act. My whole heart was filled with a divine power, drawing all
the faculties of my soul after Christ, which continued three or four nights and
days. It was as a mighty rushing wind, coming into the soul, enabling me from
that moment to be more than conqueror over those corruptions which before I was
always a slave to. Since that time, the whole bent of my will has been toward
him day and night, even in my dreams. I know that I dwell in Christ, and Christ
in me; I am bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh. That you and all that
wait for his appearing, may find the consolation of Israel, is the earnest
prayer of

Your affectionate brother in Christ, W. F.


My most dear and honored father in Christ,

IN the twentieth year of my age, 1737, God was pleased to open my eyes, and to
let me see that I did not live as became a child of God. I found my sins were
great (though I was what they call a sober person) and that God kept an account
of them all. However I thought, if I repented, and led a good life, God would
accept me. And so I went on for about half a year, and had sometimes great jay.
But last winter, I began to find, that whatever I did, was nothing, and the
enemy of souls laid so many things to my charge, that sometimes I despaired of
heaven. I continued in great doubts and fears till April 9, when I went out of
town. Here for a time I was greatly transported, in seeing the glorious works
of God: but in about three weeks I was violently assaulted again. God then
offered a Savious to me, but my self-righteousness kept me from laying hold on
him.

On Whitsunday I went to receive the blessed sacrament, but with a heart as
hard as a stone. Heavyladen I was indeed, when God was pleased to let me see a
crucified Savior. I saw there was a fountain opened in his side for me to wash
in and be clean. But alas! I was afraid to venture, fearing I should but too
presumptuous. And I know, I at that time refused the atonement which I might
then have has Yet I received great comfort. But in about nine days time, my
joy went out, as a lamp does for want of oil, and I fell into my old state. Yet
I was not without hope; for ever after that time I could not despair of
salvation: I had so clear a fight of the fountain opened in the side of our
Lord* But still when I thought of death, or the day of judgment, it was a great
terror to me. And yet I was afraid to venture to lay all my sins upon Christ.

This was not all. But whenever I retired to prayer, I had a violent pain in my
head. This only seized me when I began to pray earnestly, or to cry out aloud
to Christ. But when I cried to him against this also, he gave me ease. Well, I
found God did love me, and did draw me to Christ. I hungered and thirsted after
him; but was still afraid to go boldly to Christ, and to claim him as my
Savior.

July 3. My dear sister came down to see me. She had received the atonement on
St. Peter's day. I told her, I thought, Christ died for me, but as to the
assurance she mentioned, I could say nothing.

July 5. She went. That night I went into the garden, and considering what she
had told me, I saw him by faith, whose eyes are as a flame of fire, him who
justifies the ungodly. I told him I was ungodly, and it was for me that he
died. His blood did I plead with great faith, to blot out the handwriting that
was against me. I told my Savior, that he had promised to give rest, to all
that were heavy-laden. This promise I claimed, and I saw him by faith, stand
condemned before God in my stead. I saw the fountain opened in his side. I
found, as I hungered, he fed me: as my soul thirsted, he gave me out of that
fountain to drink. And so strong was my faith, that if I had had all the sins
of the world laid upon me, I knew and was sure one drop of his blood was
sufficient to alone for all. Well, I clave unto him, and he did wash me in his
blood. He heath presented me to his Father and my Father, to his God and my
God, a pure, spotless Virgin, as if I had never committed any sin, It is on
Jesus I stand, the Savior of sinners. It is he that (...) loved me, and given
himself for me, I cleave unto him, as my surety, and he is bound to pay God the
debt. While I stand on this rock, I am sure the gates of hell cannot prevail
against me. It is by faith that I am justified, and have peace with God through
him. His blood has made reconciliation to God for me. It is by faith I have
received the atonement. It is by faith I have the Son of God and the Spirit of
Christ dwelling in me. And what then shall separate me from the love of God
which is in Christ Jesus my Lord?

You must think what a transport of joy I was then in, when I that was lost and
undone, dropping into hell, felt a Redeemer come, who is mighty to save, to
save unto the uttermost. Yet I did not receive the witness of the Spirit at
that time. But in about half an hour, the devil came with great power to tempt
me. However I minded him not, but went in and lay down pretty much composed in
my mind. Now St. Paul says after ye believed, ye were sealed with the Spirit of
Promise. So it was with me. After I had believed on him that justifies the
ungodly, I received that seal of the spirit, which is the earnest of our
inheritance.

July 6. In the morning, being by myself, I found the work of the spirit was
very powerful upon me (although you know God does not deal with every (...) same
way). As my mother bore me wish great pain, so did I feel great pain in my soul
in being born of God. Indeed I thought the pains of death were upon me, and
that my soul was then taking leave of the body. I thought I was going to him
whom I saw with strong faith standing (...) to receive me. In this violent
agony I continued about four hours; and then I began to feel the spirit of God
bearing witness with my spirit, that I was born of God. Because I was a child
of God he (...) forth the spirit of his Son into me, crying, Abba, Father. For
that is the cry of every newborn soul. O mighty, powerful, happy change! I who
had nothing but devils ready to drag me to hell, now found I had angels to
guard me to my reconciled father, and my judge, who just before stood ready to
condemn me, was now become my righteousness. But I cannot express what God has
done for my soul. No; this is to be my everlasting employment when I have put
off this frail, finful body, when I join with that great multitude which no man
can number, in singing praises to the Lamb that loved us, and gave himself for
us! O how powerful are the workings of the Almighty in a newborn soul! The
love of God was shed abroad in my heart, and a flame kindled there, so that my
body was almost torn asunder. I loved. The Spirit cried strong in my heart. I
trembled. I sung. I joined my voice with those that excel in strength. My soul
was got up into the holy mount. I had o thoughts of coming down again into the
body. I who not long before had called to the rocks to fall on me, and the
mountains to cover me, could now call for nothing else but come, Lord Jesus,
come quickly. Then I could cry out with great boldness, there, O God, is my
surety! There, O death, is thy plague! There, O grave, is thy destruction!
There, O serpent, is the seed, that shall for ever bruise thy head. O I thought
my head was a fountain of water! I was dissolved in love. My beloved is mins,
and I am his. He has all charms. He has ravished my heart. He is my comforter,
my friend, my all. He is now in his garden, feeding among the lilies. O I am
sick of love. He is altogether lovely, the chiefest among ten thousand.

Sunday 10. I administered the Lord's Supper at the Castle. At one I expounded
at Mr. Fox's as usual. The great power of God was with us, and one who had been
in despair several years, received a witness that she was a child of God.

Mond. 11. Hearing Mr. Whitefield was arrived from Georgia, I hastened to
London; and on Tues. 12. God gave us once more to take sweet counsel together.

Fri. 15. I preached at St. Antholin's.

Sat. 16. One who had examined himself by the reflections wrote Oct. 14, made
the following observations on the state of his own soul.

1. I judge thus of myself. But I feel it not. Therefore there is in me still,
the old heart of stone.

2. I judge thus of happiness. But I still hanker after creature-happiness. My
soul is almost continually running out after one creature or another, and
imagining how happy I should be in such or such a condition. I have more
pleasure in eating and drinking and in the company of those I love, than I have
in God. I have a relish for earthly happiness. I have not a relish for
Heavenly. I savor ((...)) the things of men, not the things of God. Therefore
there is in me still the carnal heart, the (...).

But the eyes of my understanding are not yet fully opened.

II. "This is the design of my live." But a thousand little designs are daily
stealing into my soul. This is my ultimate design; but intermediate designs are
continually creeping in upon me; designs (though often disguised) of pleasing
myself, of doing my own will; designs, wherein I do not eye God, at least, not
him singly.

Therefore my eye is not yet single; at least, not always so.

III. Are my desires new? Not all. Some are new, some old. My desires are like
my designs. My great desire is, To have Christ formed in my heart by faith. But
little desires are daily stealing into my soul. And so my great hopes and fears
have respect to God. But a thousand little ones creep in between them.

Again, my desires, passions and inclinations in general are mixed: having
something of Christ and something of earth. I love you, for instance. But my
love is only partly spiritual, and partly natural. Something of my own cleaves
to that which is of God. Nor can I divide the earthly part from the heavenly.

Sund. 17. I preached in the afternoon at Islington: in the evening at St.
Swithin's, for the last time. Sund. 24. I preached at Great St. Bartholomew's
in the morning, and at Islington in the afternoon; where we had the blessed
sacrament every day this week, and were comforted on every side.

Wed. 27. I preached at Basingshaw church; Sund. 31, to many thousands, in St.
George's, Spital-Fields. And to a yet more crowded congregation at Whitechapel,
in the afternoon, I declared those glad tidings (O that they would know the
things which make for their peace!) I will heal their backsliding: I will love
them freely.

Monday, January 1, 1739. Messrs. Hall, Kinchin, Ingham, Whitefield, Hutchins,
and my brother Charles, were present at our love-feast in Fetterlans, with
about sixty of our brethren. A (...) three in the morning, as we were
continuing instant in prayer, the power of God come mightily upon us, insomuch
that many cried out for exceeding joy, and many fell to the ground. As soon as
we were recovered a little from that awe and amazement at the presence of his
Majesty, we broke out with one voice, We praise thee, O God: we acknowledge
thee to be the Lord.

Thursd. 4. One who had had the form of godliness many years, wrote the
following reflections.

"My friends affirm I am mad, because I said I was not a Christian a year ago.
I affirm, I am not a Christian now. Indeed what I might have been I know not,
had I been faithful to the grace then given, when expecting nothing less, I
received such a sense of the forgiveness of my sins, as till then I never knew.
But that I am not a Christian at this day, I as assuredly know, as that Jesus
is the Christ.

"For a Christian is one who has the fruits of the Spirit of Christ, which (to
mention no more) are love, peace, joy. But these I have not. I have not any
love of God. I do not love either the Father or the Son. Do you ask, How do I
know whether I love God? I answer by another question, How do you know, whether
you love me? Why, as you know, whether you are not or cold. You feel this
moment, that you do or do not love me. And I feel this moment, I do not love
God; which therefore I know, because I feel it. There is no word more proper,
more dear, or more strong.

"And I know it also by St. John's plain rule, If any man love the world, the
love of the Father is not in him. For I love the world. I desire the things of
the world, some or other of them, and have done all my life. I have always
placed some part of my happiness in some or other of the things that are seen.
Particularly in meat and drink, and in the company of those I loved. For many
years I have been, yea, and still am hankering after a happiness, in loving,
and being loved by one or another. And in these I have from time to time taken
more pleasure th^^ in God.

"Again, joy in the Holy Ghost I have not. I have now and then some starts of
joy in God: but it is not that joy. For it is not abiding. Neither is it
greater than I have had on some worldly occasions. So that I can in no wise be
said to rejoice evermore; much less to rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of
glory.

"Yet again; I have not the peace of God; that peace, peculiarly so called. The
peace I have may be accounted for on natural principles. I have health,
strength, friends, a competent fortune, and a composed, cheerful temper. Who
would not have a sort of peace in such circumstances? But I have none which can
with any propriety be called, a peace which passes all understanding.

"From hence I conclude (and let all the saints of the world hear, that
whereinsoever they boast, they may be found even as I) though I have given, and
do give all my goods to feed the poor, I am not a Christian. Though I have
endured hardship, though I have in all things denied myself and taken up my
cross, I am not a Christian. My works are nothing; my sufferings are nothing; I
have not the fruits of the Spirit of Christ. Though I have constantly used all
the means of grace, for twenty years, I am not a Christian."

Wednesday 17. I was with two persons, who I doubt are properly enthusiaests.
For, first, they think to attain the end without the means, which is
enthusiasin, properly so called. Again, they think themselves inspired by God,
and are not. But false, imaginary inspiration is enthusiasm. That theirs is
only imaginary inspiration appears hence, it contradicts the law and the
testimony.

Sund. 21. We were surprised in the evening, while I was expounding in the
Minories. A welldressed, middle-aged woman, suddenly cried out, as in the
agonies of death. She continued so to for some time, with all the signs of the
sharpest anguish of spirit. When she was a little recovered, I desired her to
call upon me the next day. She then told me, that about three years before, she
was under strong convictions of sin, and in such terror of mind, that he had no
comfort in any thing, nor any rest, day or night: that she sent for the
minister of her parish and told him the distress she was in: upon which he told
her husband she was stark mad, and advised him to send for a physician
immediately. A physician was sent for accordingly, who ordered her to be
blooded, blistered, and so on. But this did not heal her wounded spirit. So
that she continued much as she was before: till the last night, he whose word
she at first found to be sharper than any two-edged sword, gave her a faint
hope, that he would undertake her cause, and heal the soul which had sinned
against him.

Thurs. 25. I baptized John Smith (late an Anabaptist) and four other adults at
Islington. Of the adults I have known baptized lately, one only was at that
time born again, in the full sense of the word, that is, found a thorough,
inward change, by the love of God filling her heart. Most of them were only
born again in a lower sense, i. e. received the remission of their sins. And
some (as it has since too plainly appeared) neither in one sense nor the other.

Sund. 28. I went (having been long importuned thereto) about five in the
evening, with four or five of my friends to a house where was one of those
commonly called French prophets. After a time, she came in. She seemed about
four or five and twenty, of an agreeable speech and behavior. She asked, Why
we came? I said, "To try the spirits, whether they be of God." Presently after
she leaned back in her chair, and seemed to have strong workings in her breast,
with deep sighings intermixed. Her head and hands, and by turns, every part of
her body seemed also to be in a kind of convulsive motion. This continued about
ten minutes, till (at six) she began to speak (though the workings, sighings,
and contortions of her body, were so intermixed with her words, that she seldom
spoke half a sentence together) with a clear, strong voice, "Father, Thy will,
thy will be done. Thus faith the Lord, if of any of you that is a father, his
child ask bread, will he give him a stone? If he ask a fish, will he give him a
scorpion? Ask bread of me, my children, and I will give you bread. I will not,
will not give you a scorpion. By this judge of what ye shall now hear."

She spoke much (all as in the person of God, and mostly in scripture words) of
the fulfilling of the prophecies, the coming of Christ now at hand, and the
spreading of the gospel over all the earth. Then she exhorted us, not to be in
haste, in judging her spirit, to be or not to be of God; but to wait upon God,
and he would teach us, if we conferred not with flesh and blood. She added,
with many inforcements, "That we must watch and pray, and take up our cross,
and be still before God."

Two or three of our company were much affected, and believed she spoke by the
Spirit of God. But this was in no wise clear to me. The motion might be either
hysterical or artificial. And the same words, any person of a good
understanding and well versed in the scriptures might have spoken. But I let
the matter alone: knowing this, that if it be not of God, it will come to
naught.

Sund. Feb. 4. I preached at St. Giles's on Whosoever believes on one, out of
his belly shall flow rivers of living water. How was the power of God present
with us! I am content to preach her^ no more.

Frid. 9. A note was given me at Wapping, in (nearly) these words: SIR,
YOUR prayers are desired for a child that is lunatic and sore vexed day and
night, that our Lord would be pleased to heal him, as he did those in the days
of his fest, and that he would give his parents faith and patience till his
time is come.




Tuesday 13. I received the following note.

SIR,
I Return you hearty thanks for your prayers on Friday for my tor^ured son. He
grows worse and worse, I hope, the nearer deliverance. I beg your prayers still
to our Redeemer, who will cure him, or give us patience to bear the rod, hoping
it is dipped in the blood of the Lamb.

Sir, he is taken with grievous weeping, his heart beating, as if it would
would beat there' his ribs, he swells ready to burst, sweats great drops, runs
about beating and tearing himself. He bites and pinches me, so that I carry his
marks always on me. He lays his hands on the fire, and sticks pins in his
flesh. Thus he has been these five years. He is in his 11th year, a wonder of
affliction: I hope, of mercy also; and that I shall yet praise him who is my
Redeemer and my God.


Sat. 17. A few of us prayed with him; and from that time (as his parents since
informed us) he had more rest (although not a full deliverance) than he had had
for two years before.

Sund. 18. I was desired to preach at Sir George Wheeler's Chapel, in
Spital-Fields, morning and afternoon. I did so in the morning, but was not
suffered to conclude my subject (as I had designed) in the afternoon; a good
remembrance, that I should, if possible, declare at every time, the whole
counsel of God.

Sund. 25. I preached in the morning to a numerous congregation, at St.
Katherine's, near the tower; at Islington in the afternoon. Many here were (as
usual) deeply offended. But the counsel of the Lord it shall stand.

Frid. March 2. It was the advice of all our brethren, that I should spend a
few days at Oxford, whither I accordingly went on Saturd. 3. A few names I
found here also, who had not denied the faith, neither been ashamed of their
Lord, even in the midst of a perverse generation. And every day we were
together, we had convincing proof, such as it had not before entered into our
hearts to conceive, that he is able to save unto the uttermost all that come
unto God through him.

One of the most surprising instances of his power which I ever remember to
have seen, was on the Tuesday following; when I visited one who was above
measure enraged at this new way, and zealous in opposing it. Finding argument
to be of no other effect, than to inflame her more and more, I broke off the
dispute and desired we might join in prayer, which she so far consented to, as
to kneel down. In a few minutes she fell into an extreme agony, both of body
and soul; and soon after cried out with the utmost earnestness. "Now I know, I
am forgiven for Christ's fake." Many other words she uttered to the same
effect, witnessing a hope full of immortality. And from that hour, God has set
her face as a flint to declare the faith which before she persecuted.

Thurs. 8. I called upon her and a few of her neighbors, who were met together
in the evening, among whom I found a gentleman of the same spirit she had been
of, earnestly laboring to pervert the truth of the gospel. To prevent his
going on, as the less evil of the two, I entered directly into the controversy,
touching both the cause and the fruits of justification: In the midst of the
dispute, one who sat at a small distance, felt as it were the piercing of a
sword, and before she could be brought to another house, whither I was going,
could not avoid crying out aloud, even in the street. But no sooner had we made
our request known to God, than he sent her help from his holy place.

At my return from hence, I found Mr. Kinchin, just come from Dummer, who
earnestly desired me, instead of setting out for London the next morning (as I
designed) to go to Dummer and supply his church on Sunday. On Friday morning I
set out, according to his desire, and in the evening came to Reading, where I
found a young Mr. Cennick
man who had in some measure known the power of the world to come. I spent the
evening with him and a few of his serious friends; and it pleased God much to
strengthen and comfort them.

Sat. 10. In the afternoon I came to Dummer; and on Sunday morning had a large
and attentive congregation. I was desired to expound in the evening at
Basingstoke. The next day I returned to Reading, and thence on Tuesday to
Oxford, where I found many more and more rejoicing in God their Savior.
Wednesday 14, I had an opportunity of preaching once again to the poor
prisoners in the Castle. Thursd. 15. I set out early in the morning, and in the
afternoon came to London.

During my stay here, I was fully employed; between our own society, in
Fetter-lane, and many others, where I was continually desired to expound: so
that I had no thought of leaving London, when I received (after several others)
a letter from Mr. Whitefield, and another from Mr. Seward, entreating me in the
most pressing manner, to come to Bristol without delay. This I was not at all
forward to do; and perhaps a little the less inclined to it (though I trust, I
do not count my life dear unto myself, so I may finish my course with joy)
because of the remarkable sriptures which offered as often as we enquired,
touching the consequence of this removal: probably permitted for the trial of
our (...). Deuteronomy. xxxii. 49, 50.
Get thee up into this mountain -- and die in the (...), whither thou go up,
and be gathered unto thy people. Chapter xxxiv. 8.
And the children of Israel wept for Moses in the plains of Mo^b thirty days.
Acts ix. 16.
I will show him, how great things he must suffer for my name's sake. Chapter 2.
And devout men carried Stephen to his burial, and made great lamentation over
him.

Wed. 28. My journey was proposed to our society in Fetter-lane. But my brother
Charles would scarce bear the mention of it; till appealing to the oracles of
God, he received those words, as spoken to himself, and answered not again: Son
of man, behold I take from thee the desire of thine eyes with a stroke: Yet
shall thou not mourn or weep, neither shall thy tears run down. Our other
brethren however continuing the dispute, without any probability of their
coming to one conclusion, we at length all agreed, to decide it by lot. And by
this it was determined, "I should go." Several afterward desiring, we might
open the bible, concerning the issue of this, we did so on the several portions
of scripture, which I shall set down without any reflection upon them. 2 Samuel
iii. 1.
Now there was long war between the house of Saul and the house of David; but
David waxed stronger and stronger, and the house of Saul waxed weaker and
weaker. Chapter iv. 11.
When (...) men have slain a righteous person in his own house upon his bed:
Shall I not now require his blood at your hands, and take you away from the
earth? (...) Chron xxix. 30.
And Ah^^ slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city, even in
Jerusalem.

Perhaps it may be a satisfaction to some, if before I enter upon this new
period of my life, I give the reasons, why I preferred for so many years an
university life before any other: then especially, when I was earnestly pressed
by my father, to accept of a cure of souls. I have here therefore subjoined the
letter I wrote several years ago on that occasion: Dear Sir, Oxford, Dec. 10,
1734.
1. THE authority of a parent and the call of providence are things of so
sacred a nature, that a question in which these are any way concerned, deserves
the most serious consideration. I am therefore greatly obliged to you, for the
pains you have taken to set our question in a clear light; which I now intend
to consider more at large with the utmost attention of which I am capable. And
I shall the more cheerfully do it, as being assured of your joining with me in
imploring his guidance, who will not suffer those that trust in him, to seek
death in the error of their life.

2. I entirely agree, "That the glory of God and the different degrees of
promoting it, are to be our sole consideration and direction in the choice of
any course of life:" and consequently, that it must wholly turn upon this
single point, which I ought to prefer, a college life, or that of rector of a
parish? I do not say, the glory of God is to be my first or my principal
consideration: but my only one; since all that are not implied in this, are
absolutely of no weight. In presence of this, they all vanish away: they are
less than the small dust of the balance.

3. And indeed, till all other considerations were set aside, I could never
come to any clear determination: till my eye was single, my whole mind was full
of darkness. Whereas so long as it was fixed on the glory of God, without any
other consideration, I have no more doubt of the way wherein I should go, than
of the shining of the midday sun.

4. Now that life tends most to the glory of God, wherein we most promote
holiness in ourselves and others; I say, of ourselves and others, as being
fully persuaded, that these can never be put asunder. And if not, then whatever
state is best on either of these accounts, is so on the other likewise. If it
be on the whole best for others, so it is for ourselves: if it be best for
ourselves, it is so for them.

5. However, when two ways of life are proposed, I would choose to consider
first, which have I reason to believe, will be best for my own soul? Will most
forward me in holiness? By holiness meaning, not fasting (as you seem to
suppose) or bodily austerities; but the mind that was in Christ. A renewal of
soul in the image of God. And I believe the state wherein I am, will most
forward me in this, because of the peculiar advantages I now enjoy.

6. The first of these is daily converse with my friends. I know no other place
under heaven, where I can have some always at hand, of the same judgment, and
engaged in the same studies; persons who are awakened into a full conviction,
that they have but one work to do upon earth; who see at a distance, what that
one work is, even the recovery of a single eye and a clean heart; who in order
to this, have according to their power, absolutely devoted themselves to God,
and follow after their Lord, denying themselves and taking up their cross
daily. To have even a small number of such friends, constantly watching over my
soul, and administering, as need it, reproof or advice with all plainness and
gentleness, is a blessing I know not where to find, in any other part of the
kingdom.

7. Another blessing which I enjoy here in a greater degree than I could expect
elsewhere, is retirement. I have not only as much, but as little company as I
please. Trifling visitants I have none. No one takes (...) into his head, to
come within my doors, unless I (...) him, or he has business with me. And even
then, as soon as his business is done, he immediately goes away.

8. Both these blessings are greatly endeared to me when I spend but one week
out of this place. The far greatest part of the conversation I meet with
abroad, even with the better sort of men, turns on points that are quite wide
of my purpose, that no way forward the end of my life. Now, if they have time
to spare, I have not. It is absolutely needful for such a one as me, to follow
with all possible care and ^igilance that wise advice of Mr. Herbert; "Still
let thy mind be bent; still plotting how,
"And when, and where, the business may be done."


And this, I bless God, I can in some measure do, while I avoid that bane of
all religion, the company of good sort of men, as they are called; persons who
have a liking to, but no sense of religion. But these insensibly undermine all
my resolution, and steal away what little zeal I have. So that I never come
from among these faints of the world (as John Valdesso terms them) faint,
dissipated and shorn of all my strength, but I say, "God deliver me from a half
Christian."

9. Freedom from care is yet another invaluable blessing. And where could I
enjoy this as I do now; I hear of such a thing as the cares of the (...); but I
feel them not. My income is ready for me on so many stated days: all I have to
do in, to carry it home. The grand article of my expense in food. And this too
is provided without any care of mine. The servants I employ are always ready as
quarter-day; so I have no trouble on their account, And what I occasionally
need to buy, I can immediately have, without any expense of thought. Here
therefore I can be without carefulness. I can attend upon the Lord without
distraction. And I know what a help this is to the being holy both in body and
spirit.

10. To quicken me in making a diligent and thankful use of these peculiar
advantages, I have the opportunity of communicating weekly, and of public
prayer twice a day. It would be easy to mention many more, as well as to show
many disadvantages, which one of greater courage and skill than me, could
scarce separate from the way of life you speak of. But whatever others could
do, I could not. I could not stand my ground one month, against intemperance in
sleep, self-indulgence in food, irregularity in study: against a general
lukewarmness in my affections, and remissness in my actions, against a softness
directly opposite to the character of a good soldier of Jesus Christ. And then
when my spirit was thus dissolved, I should be an easy prey to every
temptation. Then might the cares of the world and the desire of other things,
roll back with a full tide upon me: and it would be no wonder, if while I
preached to others, I myself should be a castaway. I cannot therefore but
observe, that the question does not relate barely to the degrees of holiness,
but to the very being of it: Agitur de Vita and Sanguine Turni:

The point is, whether I shall or shall not work out my solution? Whether I
shall serve Christ or Belial?

(...). What still heightens my fear of this untried ^ate, is that when I am
once entered into it, I am entered irrecoverably, once for all; Vestigia nulla
Retrorsum.

If I should ever be weary of the way of life I am (...) in. I have frequent
opportunities of quitting it: but whatever difficulties occur in that, foreseen
or unforeseen, there is no return any more than from the grave. When I have
once launched out into the unknown sea, there is no recovering my harbor. I
must go on, through whatever whirlpools, or rocks, or sands, though all the
waves and storms go over me.

13. Thus much as to myself. But I cannot deny, "That we are not to consider
ourselves alone; seeing God made us all for a social life, to which academical
studies are only preparatory." I allow too, "That he will take an exact account
of every talent which he has lent us, not to bury them, but to employ every
^ite we have received according to his will, whose rewards we are." I own also,
"That every follower of Christ, is, in his proportion, the light of the world.:
that whosoever is such, can no more be concealed, than the fun in the midst of
heaven; that if he is set as a light in a dark place, his shining must be the
more conspicuous; that to this very end was his light given, even to shine on
all around him:" and indeed, That "there is only one way to hide it, which is,
to put it out." I am obliged likewise, unless I will lie against the truth, to
grant, "That there is not a more contemptible animal upon earth, than one that
drones away life. (...) laboring to promote, either the glory (...) ^he good
of man; and that, whether he (...), learned or unlearned, in a college (...)
granting, "The superlative degree (...) be on all accounts due to a
college-drone:" a wretch who has received ten talents, and employs none; that
is not only promised a reward hereafter, but is also paid beforehand for his
work, and yet works not at all. But allowing all this, and whatever else you
can say (for I own, you can never say enough) against the drowzy ingratitude,
the lazy perjury of those, who are commonly called harmless men, a fair
proportion of whom I must, to our shame, confess, are to be found in colleges:
allowing this, I say, I do not apprehend, it concludes against a college life
in general. For the abuse of it, does not destroy the use. Though there are
some here who are the mere lumber of the creation, it does not follow, that
others may not be of more service to the world, in this station than they could
be in any other.

13. That I in particular, could, might (it seems) be inferred, from what has
been shown already, viz. that I may myself be holier here than any where else,
if I faithfully use the blessings I enjoy. But to wave this, I have other
reasons so to judge; and the first is, the plenteousness of the harvest. Here
is indeed a large scene of various action. Here is room for charity in all its
forms: there is scarce any possible way of doing good, for which here is not
daily occasion. I can now only touch on the several heads. Here are poor
families to be relieved. Here are children to be educated. Here are workhouses,
wherein both young and old gladly receive the word of exhortation. Here are
prisons, and therein a complication of all human wants. And, lastly, here are
the schools of the prophets. Of these in particular we must observe, that he
who gains one, does thereby do as much service to the world, as he could do in
a parish in his whole life. For his name is legion; in him are contained all
those who shall be converted to God by him. He is not a single drop of the dew
of heaven, but a river to make glad the city of God.

14. "But Epworth, you say, is a larger sphere of action than this. There I
should have the care of two thousand souls!" Two thousand souls? I see not how
it is possible for such an one as me, to take care of one hundred. Because the
weight that is now upon me is almost more than I can bear, shall I increase it
tenfold? -- imponere pelio ossam
Scilicet, atq. ossoe frondosum involvere olympum!
Would this be the way to help either myself or others up to heaven? Nay, the
mountains I reared would only crush my soul, and so make me utterly useless to
others.

15. I need but just glance on several other reasons, why I am more likely to
be useful here than elsewhere; as, because I have the advice of many friends in
any difficulty, and their encouragement in any danger: because we have the eyes
of multitudes upon us, who even without designing it, perform the most
substantial office of friendship; apprizing us, if we have already done any
thing wrong, and guarding us against doing so again; lastly, because we have a
constant fund to supply the bodily wants of the poor, and thereby open a way
for their souls to receive instruction.

16. If you say, "The love of the people of Epworth to me, may balance these
advantages:" I ask, how long will it last? Only till I come to tell them
plainly, that their deeds are evil; and particularly to apply that general
sentence, to say to each, Thou art the man! Alas, sir, do not I know, what love
they had to you once? And how have many of them used you since: Why, just as
every one will be used, whose business it is, to bring light to them that love
darkness.

17. Notwithstanding therefore their present prejudice in my savor, I cannot
see that I am likely to do that good either at Epworth or any other place,
which I may hope to do in Oxford. And yet one terr^^^ objection lies in the
way. "Have you found it so i^ fact? What have you done there in fourteen years!
Have not your very attempts to do good there, for want either of a particular
turn of mind for the business you engaged in, or of prudence to direct you
(...) the right method of doing it, been always unsuccessful? Nay, and brought
such contempt upon you as has in some measure disqualified you for any future
success? And are there not men in Oxford, who are not only better and holier
than you, but who having I reserved their reputation, and being universally
esteemed, are every way sitter to promote the glory of God in that place?"

18. I am not careful to answer in this matter. It is not my part to say,
whether God has done good by my hands, whether I have a particular turn of
mind for this, or not: and whether want of success (where our attempts did not
succeed) was owing to imprudence, or to other causes. But the latter part of
the objection, "That one who is despised can do no good, that without
reputation a man cannot be useful," being the strong-hold of all the
unbelieving, the vainglorious, the cowardly Christians (so called) I will, by
the grace of God, see, what reason there is for this, thus continually to exalt
itself against the gospel of Christ.

19. With regard to contempt then (under which word I include all the passions
that border upon it, as hate, envy, etc. and all the fruits that spring from
it, such as calumny and persecution in all its forms) my first position in
defiance of worldly wisdom, is, Every true Christion is contemned wherever be
lives, by those who are not so, and who know him to be such, that is in effect
by all with whom he converses, since it is impossible for light not to shine.
This position I prove, has from the example of our Love, and from his express
assertion. First, from his example: If the disciple is not above his master;
nor the servant above his Lord, then as our master was despised and rejected of
men, so will every one of his true disciples. But the disciple is not above his
master, nor the servant above his Lord. Therefore -- the consequence will not
fail him an hair's breadth. I prove this, secondly, from his own express
assertion of this consequence. If they have called the master of the house
Beelzebub, how much more them of his household? Remember (ye that would fain
forget or evade this) the word which I said unto you, the servant is not
greater than his Lord: If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute
you. And as for that vain hope, that this belongs only to the first followers
of Christ, hear ye him; All these things they will do unto you, because they
know not him that sent me. And again, Because ye are not of the world,
therefore the world hates you. Both the persons who are hated, the persons who
hate them, and the cause of their hating them, are set down. The hated are all
that are not of the world, that know and love God: the haters are all that are
of the world, that know not, love not God. The cause of their hatred is the
entire, irreconcilable difference between their designs, judgments and
affections: because these know not God, and those we determined to know and
pursue nothing beside him. These esteem and love the world: and those count it
dung and dross, and singly desire the love of Christ.

20. My next position is this: till he is thus despised no man is in a state of
(...). And this is a plain consequence of the former: for if all that are not
of the world, are therefore despised by these that are, then ^ill a man is
despised he is of the world, that is, out of a state of salvation. Nor is it
possible for all the ^rimmers between God and the world, to elude the
consequence, unless they can prove, that (...) be of the world, and yet be in a
state of salvation. I must therefore, with or without the consent of these,
keep close to my Savior's judgment, and maintain, that contempt is a part of
the cross, which every man bears who follows him: that it is the badge of his
discipleship, the stamp of his profession, the constant seal of his calling;
insomuch that though a man may be despised without being saved, yet he cannot
be saved, without being despised.

21. I should not spend any more words on this great truth, but that it is at
present voted out of the world. The masters in Israel, learned men, men of
renown, seem absolutely to have forgotten it: nay, and censure those who have
not forgotten the words of their Lord, as Setters forth of strange doctrine.
Yet they who hearken to God rather than man, must lay down one strange position
more, that the being despised is absolutely necessary to our doing good in the
world: if not to our doing some good (for God may work by Judas) yet to our
doing so much good as we otherwise might: seeing we must know God, if we would
fully teach others to know him. But if we do, we must be despised of them that
know him not. Where then is the scribe? Where is the wise? Where is the
disputer of this world? Where is the replier against God with his sage maxims,
"He: that is despised can do no good in the world? To be useful, a man must be
esteemed: to advance the glory of God, you must have a fair reputation." --
Says the world so? Well; what says the scripture? Why, that God has laughed
all this Heathen wisdom to scorn. It says that twelve despised followers of a
despised master, all of whom were of no reputation, who were esteemed -- as she
filth and offscouring of the world, did more good in it, than all the twelve
tribes of Israel. It says, that their despised master, left an express
declaration to as and to our children, Blessed are ye (not accursed with the
heavy curse of doing no good, of being useless in the world) when men shall
revile you and persecute you, and say all manner of evil of you, falsely, for
my ^ame's sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad; for great is your reward (...)
heaven.

22. These are a part of my reasous for choosing to abide as yet in the station
wherein I now (...). As to the flock committed to your care, whom you have many
years fed with the sincere milk of the word, I trust in God, your labor shall
not be in vain. Some of them you have seen gathered into the garner. And for
yourself, I doubt not, when your warfare is accomplished, when you are made
perfect through sufferings, you shall follow the children whom God has given
you, full of years and victories. And he that took care of those poor sheep
before you was born, will not forget them when you are dead.




Thurs. March 29. I left London, and in the evening expounded to a small
company at Basingstoke. Sat. 31. In the evening I reached Bristol, and met Mr.
Whitefield there. I could scarce reconcile myself at first to this strange way
of preaching in the fields, of which he set me an example on Sunday; having
been all my life (till very lately) so tenacious of every point relating to
decency and order, that I should have thought the saving of souls almost a sin,
if it had not been done in a church.

April 1. In the evening (Mr. Whitefield being gone) I begun expounding our
Lord's sermon on the mount (one pretty remarkable precedent of field-preaching,
though I suppose there were churches at that time also) to a little society
which was accustomed to meet once or twice a week in Nicholas-street.

Mond. 2. At four in the afternoon, I submitted to be more vile, and proclaimed
in the highways the the glad tidings of salvation, speaking from a little
eminence in a ground adjoining to the city, to about ^^ree thousand people. The
scripture on which I spoke was this (is it possible may one should be ignorant,
that is in fulfilled in every (...) minister of Christ?) The Spirit of the Lord
is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor. He
has f^^^ me ^o h^^^ the (...); to preach deliverance to the captives, and
recovery of sight to the blind: To (...) liberty thou that are ^ruised, to
proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord.

At seven I began exp^^^ding the Acts of the Ap^^^ (...), to a society meeting
in Baldwin-street: and the next, day the gospel of St. John in the chapel of
Newgate; where I also daily read the morning service of the church.

Wednes. 4. At Baptist-Mills (a sort of a suburb or village about half a mile
(...) Beistol) I offered the grace of God to about fifteen hundred persons from
these words, I will heal their ^^^^sliding, I will love them freely.

In the evening three women agreed to meet together weekly, with the same
intention as those at Lo^^^n, viz. To ^oufess their faults one to another, and
pray one for another, that they may be b^aled. At eight, four young men agreed
to meet, in pursuance of the same design. How dare any man deny this to be (as
to the substance of it) a means of grace, ordained by God? Unless he will
affirm (with Luther in the fury of his folifadianism) that St. James's epistle
is an opistle of straw?

Thurs. 5. At five in the evening I began at a society in Castle-street,
expounding the epistle to the Roman^; and the next evening at a society in
Gloucester-lane, the first epistle of St. John. On Saturday evening at
Weaver's-Hall also I begun expounding the epistle to the Romans, and declared
that gospel to all, which is the power of God unto salvation, to every one that
believes.

(...) At seven in the morning I preached to about a thousand persons at
Bristol, and afterward to about fifteen hundred, as the top of Hannam-Mount in
Kingswood. I called to them in the words of the angelical prophet. Ho! Every
one that thirs^^th, come (...) to the watert; come and buy wine and milk,
without money, and without price. About five thousand were in the afternoon at
Rose-Green (on the other side of Kingswood) among whom I stood and cried, in
the name of the Lord, If any men thirst, let him come unto us and drink. He
that believes on me, as the scripture both said, out of his belly shall flow
rivers of living water.

Tues. 10. I was defired to go to Bath; where I offered to about a thousand
souls, the free grace of God to heal their backslidings, and in the morning to
(I believe) more than two thousand. I preached to about the same number, at
Baptist-Mills in the afternoon on Christ, made of God unto us, wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.

Sat. 14. I preached at the poor-house; three or four hundred more within, and
more than twice that ^ber without: to whom I explained these comfortable words,
When they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both.

Sund. 15. I explained at seven to 5 or 6000 persons, the story of the pharisee
and the publican^ About three thousand were present at Hannam-Mount. I preached
at Newgate after dinner to a crowded congregation. Between five and fix we went
to RoseGreen: it rained hard at Bristol, but not a drop fell upon us, while I
declared to about five thousand, Christ our wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctifications and redemption. I concluded the day by showing at the society
in Baldwin ^treet, That his blood elevenseth (...) from all son.

Tuesday 17. At five in the afternoon, I was at a little society in the
Back-Lane. The room in which we were was propped beneath; but the weight of the
people made the floor give way, so that in the beginning of the expounding the
post which propped it, fell down with a great noise. But the floor sunk no
further, so that after a little surprise at first, they quietly attended to the
things that were spoken.

Thence I went to Baldwin-street, and expounded as it came in course, the 4th
chap. of the Acts. We then called upon God to confirm his word. Immediately one
that stood by (to our no small surprise) cried out aloud, with the utmost
vehemence, even as in the agonies of death. But we continued in prayer, till a
new song was put in her mouth, a thanksgiving unto our God. Soon after, two
other persons (well known in this place, as laboring to live in all good
conscience toward all men) were seized with strong pain, and constrained to
roar for the disquietnes^ of their heart. But it was not long before they
likewise burst forth into praise to God then Savior. The last who called upon
God as out of the belly of hell, was I -- E -- a stranger in Bristol. And in a
short space he also was overwhelmed with joy and love, knowing that God had
healed his backslidings. So many living witnesses has God given, that his hand
is still stretched out to heal, and that signs and wonders are even now
wrought, by his holy child Jesus.

Wednes. 18. In the evening L -- a S -- (late a quaker, but baptized the day
before) R -- a M -- and a few others, were admitted into the society. But R --
a M -- was scarcely able, either to speak or look up. The sorrows of death
compassed her about, the pains of hell got hold upon her. We poured out our
complaints before God, and showed him of her trouble. And he soon showed, he is
a God that heureth prayer, she felt in herself, that being justified freely,
she had peace with God, through Jesus Christ. She rejoiced in hope of the glory
of God, and the love of God was shed abroad in her heart.

April 20. Being Good Friday, E -- th R -- n, T -- l W -- s, and one or two
others first knew they had redemption in the blood of Christ, the remission of
their sins.

Sat. 21. At Weaver's-hall a young man was suddenly seized with a violent
trembling all over, and in a few minutes, the sorrows of his heart being
enlarged, sunk down to the ground. But we ceased not calling upon God, till he
raised him up full of peace and joy in the Holy Ghost.

On Easter Day, it being a thorough rain, I could only preach at Newgate at
eight in the morning, and two in the afternoon; in a house near Hannam-Mount at
eleven: and in one near Rose-green at five. At the society in the evening, many
were cut to the heart, and many comforted.

Mond. 23. On a repeated invitation I went to Pensford, about five miles from
Bristol. I sent to the minister, to ask leave to preach in the church, but
having waited some time and received no answer, I called on many of the people
who were gathered together in an open place, If any man thirst, let him come
unto me and drink. At four in the afternoon there were above three thousand, in
a convenient place near Bristol, to whom I declared, The hour is coming, and
now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that
hear shall live.

I preached at Bath to about a thousand on Tuesday morning, and at four in the
afternoon to the poor colliers, at a place about the middle of Kingswo^d,
called Two-Mile-hill. In the evening at Baldwinstreet, a young man, after a
sharp (though short) agony, both of body and mind, found his soul filled with
peace, knowing in whom he had believed.

Wed. 24. To above two th^usand at Baptist-mi^^, I explained that glorious
scripture (deseribed in the state of every true believer in Christ, every one
who by faith is born of God) Ye have not received the spirit of bondage again
unto fear, but ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba,
Father.

Thursd. 25. While I was preaching at Newgate on these words, He that believes
has everlasting life; I was insensibly led, without any previous design, to
declare strongly and explicitly, That God wills all men to be thus saved; and
to pray that, If this were not the truth of God, he would not suffer the blind
to go out of the way; but if it were, he would bear witness to his word.
Immediately one, and mother, and another sunk to the earth: they dropped on
every side as thunderstruck. One of them cried aloud. We besought God in her
behalf, and he turned her heaviness into joy. A second being in the same agony,
we called upon God for her also; and he spoke peace unto her soul. In the
evening I was again pressed in spirit to declare, that Christ gave himself a
ransom for all. And almost before we called upon him, to set to his seal, be
answered. One was so wounded by the sword of the spirit, that you would have
imagined she could not live a moment. But immediately his abundant kindness was
showed, and she loudly sang of his righteousness.

Fr^^ 26. All Newgate rang with the cries of those whom the word of God cut to
the heart. Two of whom were in a moment filled with joy, to the astonishment of
those that beheld them.

Sund. 28. I declared the free grace of God to about four thousand people, from
those words, He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all,
how shall be not with him also freely give us all things? At that hour it was,
that one who had long continued in fin, from a despair of finding mercy,
received a full, clear sense of his pardoning love, and power to sin no more. I
then went to Clifton (a mile from Bristol) at the minister's desire, who was
dangerously ill, and thence returned to a little plain, near Hannam-mount,
where about three thousand were present. After dinner I went to Clifton again.
The church was quite full at the prayers and sermon, as was the churchyard at
the burial which followed. From Clifton we went to Rose-green, where were (by
computation) near seven thousand, and thence to Gloucester-lane Society. After
which was our first Love-feast in Baldwin-street. O how has God renewed my
strength! Who used ten years ago to be so faint and weary, with preaching twice
in one day!

Mond. 29. We understood that many were offended at the cries of those on whom
the power of God came: among whom was a physician, who was much afraid there
might be fraud or imposture in the case. Today one whom he had known many
years, was the first (while I was preaching at Newgate) who broke out into
strong cries and sears. He could hardly believe his own eyes and ears. He went
and stood close to her, and observed every symptom, till great drops of sweat
ran down her face, and all her bones shook. He then knew not what to think,
being clearly convinced, it was not fraud, nor yet any natural disorder. But
when both her soul and body were healed in a moment, he acknowledged the finger
of God.

Tues. May 1. Many were offended again, and indeed, much more than before. For
at Baldwin-street my voice could scarce be heard amidst the groanings of some,
and the cries of others calling aloud to him that is mighty to save. I desired
all that were sincere of heart, to beseech with me the Prince exalted for us,
that he would proclaim deliverance to the captives. And he soon showed that he
heard our voice. Many of those who had been long in darkness, saw the dawn of a
great light: and ten persons (I afterward sound) then began to say in says,
my Lord and my God!

A Quaker who stood by, was not a little displeased at the dissimulation of
those creatures, and was biting his lips and knitting his brows, when he
dropped down as thunderstruck. The agony he was in, was even terrible to
behold. We besought-God, not to lay folly to his charge. And he soon lifted up
his voice and cried aloud, "now I know, Thou art a prophet of the Lord."

Wed. 2. At Newgate, another mourner was comsorted. I was desired to step
thence to a neighboring house to see a letter wrote against me, as a deceiver
of the people, by teaching that God wills all men to be saved. One who long
had asserted the contrary was there, when a young woman came in (who could say
before, "I know that my Redeemer lives") all in tears and in deep anguish of
spirit. She said, "She had been reasoning with herself, how these things could
be, ^^ll she was perplexed more and more, and she now found the Spirit of God
was departed from her." We began to pray, and she cried out, "He is come! He is
come! I again rejoice in God my Savior." Just as we rose from giving thanks,
another person reeled four or five steps, and then dropped down. We prayed with
her, and left her strongly convinced of sin, and earnestly groaning for
deliverance.

I did not mention one J -- n H -- n, a weaver, who was at Baldwin-street the
night before. He was (I understood) a man of a regular life and conversation,
one that constantly attended the public prayers and sacrament, and was zealous
for the church, and against dissenters of every denomination. Being informed
that people fell into strange fits at the societies, he came to see and judge
for himself. But he was less satisfied than before; insomuch that he went about
to his acquaintance one after another, till one in the morning, and labored
above measure to convince them "It was a delusion of the devil." We were going
home, when one met us in the street and informed us, "That J -- n H -- was
fallen raving mad." It seems he had sat down to dinner, but had a mind first to
end a sermon he had borrowed on Salvation by says. In reading the last page,
he changed color, fell off his chair, and began screaming terribly and beating
himself against the ground. The neighbors were alarmed and flocked together to
the house. Between one and two I came in, and found him on the floor, the room
being full of people, whom his wise would have kept without; but he cried
aloud, "No; let them all come, let all the world see the just judgment of God."
Two or three men were holding him as well as they could. He immediately fixed
his eyes upon me, and stretching out his hand, cried, Ay, this is he, who I
said was a deceiver of the people. But God has overtaken me. I said, it was all
a delusion. But this is no delusion. He then roared out, "O thou devil! Thou
cursed devil! Yea, thou legion of devils! Thou can not stay. Christ will cast
thee out. I know his work is begun. Tear me to pieces, if thou will: but thou
can not hurt me." He then beat himself against the ground again; his breast
heaving at the same time, as in the pangs of death, and great drops of sweat
trickling down his face. We all betook ourselves to prayer. His pangs ceased,
and both his body and soul were set at liberty.

Thence I went to Baptist-mills, -and declared him whom God has exalted to be
a prince and a Savior, to give repentance unto Israel and remission of sins.
Returning to J -- n H --, we found his voice was lost, and his body weak as
that of an infant. But his soul was in peace, full of love, and rejoicing in
hope of the glory of God.

The women of our society met at seven. During our prayer, one of them fell
into a violent agony: but soon after began to cry out with confidence, My Lord
and my God! Sat. 5. I preached at the desire of an unknown correspondent, on
those excellent words (if well understood as recommending faith, resignation,
patience, meekness) Be still, and know that I am God.

Sund. 6. I preached in the morning, to 5 or 6000 people, on, Except ye be
converted and become as little children, ye cannot enter into the kingdom of
heaven. (The same words on which I preached the next day, and on Wed. at
Baptist-mills.) On Hannam-mount I preached to about three thousand, on The
scripture has concluded all under sin: at two at Clifton church, on Christ our
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption; and about five, at
Rose-green, on the promise by faith of Jesus Christ, which is given to them
that believe.

Mond. 7. I was preparing to set out for Pensford, having now had leave to
preach in the church, when I received the following note:

Sir, Our minister, having been informed, you are beside yourself, does not
care you should preach in any of his churches. -- I went however, and on
Priest-Down, about half a mile from Pensford, preached Christ our wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption.

Tues. 8. I went to Bath, but was not suffered to be in the meadow where I was
before: which occasioned the offer of a much more convenient place; where I
preached Christ to about a thousand souls.

Wed. 9. We took possession of a piece of ground, near St. James's churchyard,
in the Horse Fair, where it was designed to build a room, large enough to
contain both the societies of Nicholas and Baldwin-street, (...) such of their
acquaintance as might desire to be present with them, at such time as the
scripture was expounded. And on Sat. 12. the first stone was laid, with the
voice of praise and thanksgiving.

I had not at first the least apprehension or design, of being personally
engaged, either in the expense of this work, or in the direction of it: having
appointed eleven feoffees, on whom I supposed these burdens would fall of
course. But I quickly found my mistake; first with regard to the expense: for
the whole undertaking must have stood still, had not I immediately taken upon
myself the payment of all the workmen; so that before I knew where I was, I had
contracted a debt of more than an hundred and fifty pounds. And this I was to
discharge how I could; the subscriptions of both societies not amounting to one
quarter of the sum. And as to the direction of the work, I presently received
letters from my friends in London, Mr. Whitefield in particular, backed with a
message by one just come from thence, that neither he nor they would have any
thing to do with the building, neither contribute any thing toward it, unless
I would instantly discharge all feoffees, and do every thing in my own name.
Many reasons they gave for this; but one was enough, viz. "That such feoffees
always would have it in their power, to control me, and if I preached not as
they liked, to turn me out of the room I had built." I accordingly yielded to
their advice, and calling all the feoffees together, cancelled (no man
opposing) the instrument made before, and took the whole management into my own
hands. Money, it is true, I had not, nor any human prospect or probability of
procuring it. But I knew the earth is the Lord's, and the fullness thereof, and
in his name set out, nothing doubting.

In the evening, while I was declaring, that Jesus Christ had given himself a
ransom for all, three persons almost at once, sunk down as dead, having all
their sins set in array before them. But in a short- time they were raised up,
and knew that the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world, had taken
away their sins.

Sund. 13. I began expounding in the morning, the xiiith chapter of the first
epistle to the Corinthians. At Hannam I farther explained, the promise given by
faith; as I did also at Rose-green. At Clifton it pleased God to assist me
greatly, in speaking on those words, He that drinks of this water shall
thirst again; but whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him shall never
thirst: but the water which I shall give him shall be in him a well of water,
springing up into everlasting life.

My ordinary employment (in public) was now as follows: Every morning I read
prayers and preached at Newgate. Every evening I expounded a portion of
scripture, at one, or more of the societies. On Monday in the afternoon I
preached abroad near Bristol; on Tuesday at Bath and Two-Mile-hill alternately.
On Wednesday at Baptist-mills. Every other Thursday near Pensford. Every other
Friday in another part of Kingswood. On Saturday in the afternoon and Sunday
morning, in the Bowling-green (which lies near the middle of the city.) On
Sunday at eleven near Hannam-mount. At two at Clifton, and at five on
Rose-green. And hitherto as my day is, so my strength has been.

Tues. 15. As I was expounding in the Back-lane, on the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, many who had before been righteous in their own eyes,
abhorred themselves as in dust and ashes. But two, who seemed to be more deeply
convinced than the rest, did not long sorrow as men without hope; but found in
that hour, that they had an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous: as did three others in Gloncester-lane the evening before, and three
at Baldwin-street this evening. About ten, two who after seeing a great light,
had again reasoned themselves into darkness, came to us, heavy laden. We cried
to God, and they were again filied with peace and joy in believing.

Wednes. 16. While I was declaring at Baptist-mills, He was wounded for our
transgressions, a middle-aged man began violently beating his breast, and
crying to him by whose stripes we are healed. During our prayer, God put a new
song in his mouth. Some mocked and others owned the hand of God. Particularly a
woman of Baptist-mills, who was now convinced of her own want of an advocate
with God, and went home full of anguish, but was in a few hours filled with
joy, knowing he had blotted out all her transgressions.

The scripture which came in turn at Newgate today, was the viith of St. John.
The words which I chiefly insisted on as applicable to every minister of
Christ, who in any wise follows the steps of his Master, were these, The world
cannot hate you; but me it hates, because I testify of it, that its deeds are
evil. There was a murmuring therefore concerning him among the multitude; for
some said, He is a good man: others said, Nay, but he deceives the people.
After sermon I was informed the sheriffs had ordered, "I should preach he^ for
the future, but once a week." Yea, and this is once too often, if he deceives
the people: but if otherwise, why not once a day?

Satur. 19. At Weaver's-hall, a woman first, and then a boy (about fourteen
years of age) was overwhelmed with sin, and sorrow, and fear. But we cried to
God, and their souls were delivered.

Sund. 20. Seeing many of the rich at Clifton church, my heart was much pained
for them, and I was earnestly desirous that some even of them might enter into
the kingdom of heaven. But full as I was, I knew not where to begin, in warning
them to flee from the wrath to come, till my testament opened on those words, I
came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance: in applying which,
my soul was so enlarged, that methought I could have cried out (in another
sense than poor, vain Archimedes) "Give me where to stand, and I will shake the
earth." God's sending forth lightning with the rain, did not hinder about
fifteen hundred from staying at Rose-green. Our scripture was, It is the
glorious God that muketh the thunder. The voice of the Lord is mighty in
operation, the voice of the Lord is a glorious voice. In the evening, he spoke
to three whose souls were all storm and tempest, and immediately there was a
great calm.

During this whole time, I was almost continually asked, either by those who
purposely came to Bristol, to enquire concerning this strange work, or by my
old or new correspondents, How can these things be? And innumerable cautions
were given me (generally grounded on gross misrepresentations of things) "Not
to regard visions or dreams; or to fancy people had remission of sins, because
of their cries, or tears, or bare outward professions." To one who had many
times wrote to me on this head, the sum of my answer was as follows:

"The question between us turns chiefly, if not wholly, on matter of fact. You
deny, that God does now work these effects: at least, that he works them in
this manner. I affirm both; because I have heard these things with my own ears,
and have seen them with my eyes. I have seen (as far as a thing of this kind
can be seen) very many persons changed in a moment, from the spirit of fear,
horror, despair, to the spirit of love, joy and peace; and from sinful desire
till then reigning over them, to a pure desire of doing the will of God. These
are matters of fact, whereof I have been, and almost daily am, an eye or
ear-witness, What I have to say touching visions or dreams is this: I know
several persons in whom this great change was wrought, in a dream, or during a
strong representation to the eye of their mind, of Christ either on the cross
or in glory. This is the fact; let any judge of it as they please. And that
such a change was then wrought, appears (not from their shedding tears only, or
falling into fits, or crying out: these are not the fruits, as you seem to
suppose, whereby I judge, but) from the whole tenor of their life, till then
many ways wicked; from that time, holy, just and good.

"I will show you him that was a lion till then, and is now a lamb; him that
was a drunkard, and is now exemplarily sober: the whoremonger that was, who now
abhors the very garment spotted by the flesh. These are my living arguments for
what I assert, viz. That God does now, as aforetime, give remission of sins and
the gift of the Holy Ghost, even us and to our children: yea, and that always
suddenly, as far as I have known, and often in dreams or in the visions of God.
If it be not so, I am found a false witness before God. For these things I do,
and by his grace will, testify."

"Perhaps it might be, because of the hardness of our hearts, unready to
receive any thing, unless we see it with our eyes, and hear it with our ears,
that God in tender condescension to our weakness, suffered so many outward
signs of the very time when he wrought this inward change, to be continually
seen and heard among us. But although they saw signs and wonders (for so I must
term them) yet many would not believe. They could not indeed deny the facts;
but they could explain them away. Some said, These were purely natural effects;
the people fainted away, only because of the heat and closeness of the rooms.
And others were sure, It was all a cheat: they might help it if they would.
Else why were these things only in their private societies? Why were they not
done in the face of the sun? Today Mond. 2^, our Lord answered for himself.
For while I was enforcing these words, Be still and know that I am God, he
began to make bare his arm, not in a close room, neither in private, but in the
open air, and before more than two thousand witnesses. One, and another, and
another was struck to the earth; exceedingly trembling at the presence of his
power. Others cried, with a loud and bitter cry, What must we do to be saved^
And in less than an hour, seven persons, wholly unknown to me till that time,
were rejoicing, and singing, and with all their might giving thanks to the God
of their salvation.

In the evening, I was interrupted at Nicholas-street, almost as soon as I had
begun to speak, by the cries of one who was pricked at the heart, and strongly
groaned for pardon and peace. Yet I went on to declare what God had already
done, in proof of that important truth, That he is not willing any should
perish, but that all should come to repentance. Another person dropped down,
close to one who was a strong asserter of a contrary doctrine. While he stood
astonished at the sight, a little boy near him was seized in the same manner. A
young man who stood up behind, fixed his eyes on him, and sunk down himself as
one dead: but soon began to roar out and beat himself against the ground, so
that six men could scarcely hold him. His name was Thomas Maxfield. Except J --
n H -- n, I never saw one so torn of the evil one. Mean while many others began
to cry out to the Savior of all, that he would come and help them, insomuch
that all the house (and indeed all the street for some space) was in an uproar.
But we continued in prayer; and before ten, the greater part found rest to
their souls.

I was called from supper to one who feeling in herself such a conviction as
she never had known before, had run out of the society in all haste, that she
might not expose herself. But the hand of God followed her still, so that after
going a few steps, she was forced to be carried home, and when she was there,
grew worse and worse. She was in a violent agony when we came. We called upon
God, and her soul found rest.

A^ out twelve I was greatly importuned, to go and visit one person more. She
had only one struggle after I came, and was then filled with peace and joy.

I think twenty-nine, in all, had their heaviness turned into joy, this day.

Tues. 22. I preached to about a thousand at ^ath. There were several fine, gay
things among them, to whom especially I called, Awake thou that sleep, and
arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light!

Sat. 26. One came to us in deep despair; but after an hour spent in prayer,
went away in peace. The next day, ha^ing observed in many, a zeal which did not
suit with the sweetness and gentleness of love, I preached at Rose-green on
those words (to the largest congregation I ever had there, I believe upwards of
ten thousand souls) Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of. For the Son of
Man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them. At the society in the
evening, eleven were deeply convinced of sin, and soon after comforted.

Mond. 28. I began preaching at Weaver's-hall, at eleven in the forenoon; where
two persons were enabled to cry out in faith, My Lord and my God! As were
seven, during the sermon in the afternoon, before several thousand witnesses;
and ten in the evening at Baldwin-street; of whom two were children.

Tues. 29. I was unknowingly engaged in conversation, with a famous Infidel, a
confirmer of the unfaithful in these parts. He appeared a little surprised, and
said, He would pray to God to show him the true way of worshipping him.

On ascension-day in the morning, some of us went to King's-Weston-Hill, four
or five miles from Bristol. Two gentlemen going by, sent up to us in sport,
many persons from the neighboring villages: to whom therefore I took occasion
to explain those words, Thou art ascended up on high, thou have led captivity
captive; and received gifts for men, yea, even for the rebellious, that the
Lord God might dw^ll among them.

Sund. June 3. In the morning to about six thousand persons, in concluding the
xiiith chapter of the first epistle to the Corinthians, I described a truly
charitable man. At Hannam-mount I enforced those words, That every mouth may be
stopped, and all the world become guilty before God: And again in the afternoon
at Rose-green, to I believe eight or nine thousand. In the evening not being
permitted to meet in Baldwin-street, we met in the shell of our new
society-room. The scripture which came in course to be explained, was, Marvel
not, if the world hate you. We sung Arm of the Lord, awake, awake,
Thine own immortal strength put on:


And God, even our own God, gave us his blessing

M^nd. 4. Many came to me and earnestly advised me, "Not to preach abroad in
the afternoon, because there was a combination of several persons, who
threatened terrible things." This (...) being spread abro^d brought many
thither, or the better sort of people (so called) and added, I believe, more
than a thousand to the ordinary congregation. The ser^ture to which, not my
choice, but the providence of God directed me was, Fear not thou, for I am with
thee: he not dismayed, for I am thy God. I will strengthen thee, yea, I will
help thee, yea, I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness. The
power of God came with his wor^ so that none scoffed, or interrupted, or opened
his mouth.

Tues. 5. There was great expectation at Bath, of what a noted man was to do to
me there: and I was much entreated, "Not to preach; because no one knew what
might happen." By this re^ort I also gained a much larger audience, among whom
were many of the rich and great. I told them plainly, The scripture had
concluded them all under sin, high and low, rich and poor, one with another.
Many of them seemed to be a little surprised, and were sinking a-pace into
seriousness, when their champion appeared, and coming close to me, asked "By
what authority I did these things?" I replied, By the authority of Jesus
Christ, conveyed to me by the (now) Archbishop of Canterbury, when he laid his
hands upon me and said, "Take thou authority to preach the gospel." He said,
"This is contrary to act of parliament. This is a conventicle." I answered,
"Sir, the conventicles mentioned in that act (as the preamble shows) are
seditious meetings. But this is not such. Here is no shadow of sedition.
Therefore it is not contrary to that act." He replied, "I say it is. And
b^side, your preaching frightens people out of their wits." Sir, did you ever
hear me preach? No. How then can you judge of what you never heard? Sir, by
common report. Common report is not enough. Give me leave, Sir, to ask, is not
your name Nash? My name is Nash. Sir, I dare not judge of you by common report.
I think it not enough to judge by. Here he paused awhile, and having recovered
himself, said, "I desire to know, what this people comes here for?" On which
one replied, "Sir, leave him to me. Let an old woman answer him." "You, Mr.
Nash, take care of your body. We take care of our souls, and for the food of
our souls we come here." He replied not a word, but walked away.

As I returned, the street was full of people, hurrying to and fro, and
speaking great words. But when any of them asked, "Which is he?" and I replie^.
"I am he," they were immediately silent. S^^eral ladies following me into Mr.
Merchant's house, the servant told me, "There were some wanted to speak to me."
I went to them and said, "I believe, ladies, the maid mistook: you only wanted
to look at me." I added, "I do not expect that the rich and great should want
either to speak with me, or to hear me; for I speak the plain truth; a thing
you hear little of, and do not desire to hear." A few more words past between
us, and I retired.

Tues. 7. I preached at Priest-Down, on What must we do to be saved? In the
midst of the prayer after sermon, two men (hired, as we afterward understood,
for that purpose) began singing a ballad. After a few mild words (for I saw
some that were angry) used without effect, we all began singing a psalm, which
put them utterly to silence. We then poured out our souls in prayer for them,
and they appeared altogether confounded. O may this be a day much to be
remembered by them, for the loving kindness of the Lord!

Mond. 11. I received a pressing letter from London (as I had several others
before) to come thither as soon as possible; "Our brethren in Fetter-lane being
in great confusion, for want of my presence and advice." I therefore preached
in the afternoon on these words, I take you to record this day, that I am pure
from the blood of all men; for I have not shun^d to declare unto you all the
counsel of God. After sermon, I commended them to the grace of God, in whom
they had believed. Surely God has yet a work to do in this place. I have not
found such love, no not in England; nor so childlike, artless, teachable a
temper, as he has given to this people.

Yet during this whole time I had many thoughts, concerning the unusual manner
of my ministering among them. But after frequently laying it before the Lord,
and calmly weighing whatever objections I heard against it, I could not but
adhere to what I had some time since wrote to a friend, who had freely spoken
his sentiments concerning it. An extract of that letter I here subjoin: that
the matter may be placed in a clear light.

DEAR SIR,
THE best return I can make for the kind freedom you use, is to use the same to
you. O may the God whom we serve sanctify it to us both, and teach us the whole
truth as it is in Jesus!

You say, "You cannot reconcile some parts of my behavior with the character I
have long supported." No, nor ever will. Therefore I have disclaimed that
character on every possible occasion. I told all in our ship, all at Savannah,
all at Frederica, and that over and over, in express terms, "I am not a
Christian; I only follow after, if happily I may attain it." When they urged my
works and self-denial, I answered short, Though I give all my goods to feed the
poor, and my body to be burned, I am nothing. For I have not charity. I do not
love God with all my heart. If they added, Nay, but you could not preach as you
do, if you was not a Christian; I again confronted them with St. Paul, Though I
speak with the tongue of men and angels, and have not charity, I am nothing.
Most earnestly therefore, both in public and private did I inculcate this, Be
not ye shaken however I may fall: for the foundation stands fure.

If you ask, "On what principle then I acted?" It was this, A desire to be a
Christian, and a conviction that whatever I judge conducive thereto, that I am
bound to do; wherever I judge I can best answer this end, thither it is my duty
to go. On this principle I set out for America; on this, I visited the Moravian
church; and on the same, am I ready now (God being my helper) to go to
Abyssinia or China, or whithersoever it shall please God by this conviction to
call me.

As to your advice, "That I should settle in college," I have no business
there, having now no office, and no pupils. And whether the other branch of
your proposal be expedient for me, viz. "To accept of a cure of souls," it will
be time enough to consider, when one is offered to me.

But in the mean time, you think I ought to sit ^ill; because otherwise I
should invade another's office, if I interfered with other people's business,
and intermeddled with souls that did not belong to me. You accordingly ask, How
is it that I assemble Christians who are none of my charge, to sing psalms, and
pray, and hear the scriptures expounded: and think it hard to justify doing
this in other men's parishes, upon Catholic principles?

Permit me to speak plainly, If by Catholic principles, you mean any other than
scriptural, they weigh nothing with me: I allow no other rule, whether of faith
or practice than the holy scriptures. But on scriptural principles, I do not
think it hard to justify whatever I do. God, in scripture commands me,
according to my power, to instruct the ignorant, reform the wicked, confirm the
virtuous. Man forbids me to do this, in another's parish; that is, in effect,
to do it at all; seeing I have now no parish of my own, nor probably ever
shall. Whom then shall I hear? God or man? If it be just to obey man rather
than God, judge you. A dispensation of the gospel is committed to me, and woe
is me if I preach not the gospel. But where shall I preach it upon the
principles you mention? Why, not in Europe, Asia, Africa, or America: not in
any of the Christian parts, at least, of the habitable earth. For all these
are, after a sort, divided into parishes. If it be said, Go back then to the
Heathens from whence you came. Nay, but neither could I now (on your
principles) preach to them. For all the Heathens in Georgia belong to the
parish either of Savannah or Frederica.

Suffer me now, to tell you my principles in th^s matter. I look upon all the
world as my parish; thus far I mean, that in whatever part of it I am, I judge
it meet, right and my bounden duty, To declare unto all that are willing to
hear, the glad tidings of salvation. This is the work which I know God has
called me to. And sure I am, that his blessing attends it. Great encouragement
have I therefore to be faithful in fulfilling the work he has given me to do.
His servant I am, and as such am employed according to the plain direction of
his word, As I have opportunity, doing good to all men. And his providence
clearly concurs with his word; which has disengaged me from all things else,
that I might singly attend on this very thing, and go about doing good.

If you ask, "How can this be? How can one do good, of whom Men say all manner
of evil?" I will put you in mind (though you once knew this, yea, and much
established me in that great truth) the more evil men say of me for my Lord's
sake, the more good will he do by me. That it is for his sake, I know and he
knows, and the event agrees thereto; for he mightily confirms the words I
speak, by the Holy Ghost given unto those that hear them. O my friend, my heart
is moved toward you. I fear you have herein made shipwreck of the faith. I
fear, Satan transformed into an angel of light, has assaulted you, and
prevailed also. I fear, that offspring of hell, worldly or mystic prudence, has
drawn you away from the simplicity of the gospel. How else could you ever
conceive, that the being reviled and hated of all men, should make us less fit
for our Master's service? How else could you ever think, of saving yourself and
them that hear you, without being the filth and offscouring of the world? To
this hour, is this scripture true. And I therein rejoice, yea, and will
rejoice. Blessed be God, I enjoy the reproach of Christ! O may you also be
vile, exceeding vile for his sake! God forbid that you should ever be other
than generally scandalous. I had almost said universally. If any man tell you
there is a new way of following Christ, he is a liar and the truth is not in
him.

I am, etc.


Wed. 13. In the morning I came to London, and after receiving the holy
communion at Islington, I had once more an opportunity of seeing my mother,
whom I had not seen since my return from Germany.

I cannot but mention an odd circumstance here. I had read her a paper in June
last year, containing a short account of what had passed in my own soul, till
within a few days of that time. She greatly approved it and said "She heartily
blessed God, who had brought me to so just a way of thinking." While I was in
Germany, a copy of that paper was sent (without my knowledge) to one of my
relations. He sent an account of it to my mother; whom I now found under
strange fears concerning me, being convinced by " an account taken from one of
my own papers, that I had greatly erred from the faith." I could not conceive,
what paper that should be; but on enquiry found, it was the same I had read her
myself. -- How hard is it to form a true judgment of any person or thing, from
the account of a prejudiced relater! yea, though he be ever so honest a man:
For he who gave this relation, was one of unquestionable veracity. And yet by
his sincere account of a writing which lay before his eyes, was the truth so
totally disguised, that my mother knew not the paper she had heard from end to
end, nor I that I had myself wrote.

At six I warned the women at Fetter-lane (knowing how they had been lately
shaken) not to believe every spirit, but to try the spirits, whether they were
of God. Our brethren met at eight, when it pleased God to remove many
misunderstandings and offenses that had crept in among them: and to restore in
good measure the spirit of love and of a sound mind.

Thurs. 14. I went with Mr. Whitefield to Blackheath, where were, I believe, 12
or 14000 people. He a little surprised me, by desiring me to preach in his
stead; which I did (though nature recoiled) on my favorite subject, Jesus
Christ, who of God is made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and
redemption.

I was greatly moved with compassion for the rich that were there, to whom I
made a particular application. Some of them seemed to attend, while others
drove away their coaches from so uncouth a preacher.

Frid. 15. I had much talk with one who is called a quaker. But he could not
receive my saying. I was too strict for him, and talked of such a perfection,
as he could not think necessary: being persuaded, there was no harm in costly
apparel, provided it was plain and grave: Nor in putting scarlet or gold upon
our houses, so it were not upon our clothes.

In the evening I went to a society at Wapping, weary in body and faint in
spirit. I intended to speak on Romans iii. 19. but could not tell how to open
my mouth: and all the time we were singing, my mind was full of some place, I
knew not where, in the epistle to the Hebrews. I begged God to direct, and
opened the book on Heb. x. 19. Having therefore, br^thren, boldness to enter
into the holiest, by the blood of Jesus: by a new and living way which he has
consecrated for us, through the veil, that is to say, his flesh. -- Let us draw
near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith: having our hearts sprinkled
from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water. While I was
earnestly inviting all sinners to enter into the holiest by this new and living
way, many of those that heard, began to call upon God with strong cries and
tears. Some sunk down and there remained no strength in them; others
exceedingly trembled and quaked; some were torn with a kind of convulsive
motion in every part of their bodies, and that so violently, that often four or
five persons could not hold one of them. I have seen many hysterical and many
epileptie fits: but none of them were like these, in many respects. I
immediately prayed, "That God would not suffer those who were weak to be
offended. But one wowan was offended greatly; being sure " they might help it
if they would, no one should persuade her to the contrary;" and was got three
or four yard^, when she also dropped down, in as violent an agony as the rest.
Twenty-six of those who had been thus affected (most of whom during the prayers
which were made for them, were in a moment filled with peace and joy) promised
t^ call upon (...) the next day. But only eighteen came; by talking closely
with whom I found reason to believe, that some of them had gone home to their
house justified. The rest seemed to be patiently waiting for it.

Sat. 16. We met at Fetter-lane, to humble ourselves before God, and own he had
justly withdrawn his Spirit from us, for our manifold unfaithfulness. We
acknowledged our having grieved him by our divisions, one saying, I am of Paul,
another, I am of Apollos. By our leaning again to our own works, and trusting
in them, instead of Christ; by our resting in those little beginnings of
sanctification, which it had pleased him to work in our souls; and above all,
by blaspheming his work among us, imputing it either to nature, to the force of
imagination and animal spirits, or even to the delusion of the devil. In that
hour, we found God with us as at the first. Some fell prostrate upon the
ground. Others burst out, as with one consent, into loud praise and
thanksgiving. And many openly testified, there had been no such day as this
since January the first preceding.

Sund. 17. I preached at seven in Upper Moor^ields, to (I believe) six or seven
thousand people on, Ho! every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters. In the
afternoon I saw poor R -- d T -- n, who had left our society, and the church.
We did not dispute, but pray; and in a short space the scales fell off from his
eyes. He gladly returned to the church, and was in the evening readmitted into
our society.

At five I preached on Kennington-common, to about fifteen thousand people, on
those words, Look unto him, and be ye saved, all ye ends of the earth.

Mond. 18. I left London early in the morning, and the next evening reached
Bristol, and preached (as I had appointed, if God should permit) ^o a numerous
congregation. My text now also was, Look unto him, and be ye saved, all ye ends
of the earth. Howel Harris called upon me an hour or two after. He said, "He
had been much dissuaded from either hearing or seeing me, by many who said all
manner of evil of me. But, said he, as soon as I heard you preach, I quickly
found what spirit you was of. And before you had done, I was so overpowered
with joy and love, that I had much ado to walk home."

It is scarce credible, what advantage Satan had gained during my absence of
only eight days. Disputes had crept into our little society, so that the love
of many was already waxed cold. I showed them the state they were in the next
day (both at Newgate and at Baptists-mills) from those words, Simon, Simon,
behold Satan has desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat. And when
we met in the evening, instead of reviving the dispute, we all betook ourselves
to prayer. Our Lord was with us. Our divisions were healed. Misunderstandings
vanished away. And all our hearts were sweetly drawn together, and united as at
the first.

Frid. 22. I called on one who did run well, till he was hindered by some of
those called French prophets. Woe unto the prophets, says the Lord, who
prophesy in my name, and I have not sent them. At Weaver's-hall, I endeavored
to point them out, and earnestly exhorted all that followed after holiness, to
avoid as fire, all who do not speak, according to the law and the testimony.

In the afternoon I preached at the Fish Ponds, but had no life or spirit in
me; and was much in doubt, whether God would not lay me aside, and send other
laborers into his harvest. I came to the society full of this thought; and
began in much weakness to explain, ' Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try
the spirits whether they be of God. I told them, "They were not to judge of the
spirit, whereby any one spoke, either by appearances, or by common report, or
by their own inward feelings. No, nor by any dreams, visions or revelations,
supposed to be made to their souls, any more than by their tears, or any
involuntary effects wrought upon their bodies." I warned them, "all these were
in themselves, of a doubtful, disputable nature: they might be from God, and
they might not; and were therefore not simply to be relied on (any more than
simply to be condemned) but to be tried by a farther rule, to be brought to the
only certain test, the law and the testimony." While I was speaking, one before
me dropped down as dead, and presently a second and a third. Five others sunk
down in half an hour, most of whom were in violent agonies. The pains (...) of
hell came about them; the suares of death over^^^^ them. In their trouble we
called upon the Lord, and he gave us an answer of peace. One indeed continued
an hour in strong pain; and one or two more for three days. But the rest were
greatly comforted in that hour, and went away rejoicing and praising God.

Sat. 23. I spoke severally with those who had been so troubled the night
before. Some of them, I found, were only convinced of sin; others had indeed
found rest to their souls. This evening another was seized with strong pangs,
But in a short time her soul was delivered.

Sund. 24. As I was riding to Rose-green, in a smooth, plain part of the road,
my horse suddenly pitched upon his head, and rolled over and over. I received
no other hurt than a little bruise on one side, which for the present I felt
not, but preached without pain to 6 or 7000 people on that important direction,
Whether ye eat or drink, or whatever you do, do all to the glory of God. In the
evening a girl of 13 or 14, and four or five other persons, some of whom had
felt the power of God before, were deeply convinced of sin, and with sighs and
groans which could not be uttered, called upon God for deliverance.

Mond. 25. About ten in the morning, J -- e C -- r, as she was sitting at work,
was suddenly seized with grievous terrors of mind, attended with strong
trembling. Thus she continued all the afternoon; but at the society in the
evening God turned her heaviness into joy. Five or six others were also out to
the heart this day: and soon after found him whose hands make whole: as did one
likewise, who had been mourning many months, without any to comfort her.

Tues. 26. I preached near the house we had a few days before began to build
for a school, in the middle of Kingswood, under a little sycamore-tree, during
a violent storm of rain, on those words, As the rain comes down from heaven,
and returns not thither, but waters the earth and makes it bring forth and
bud: -- So shall my word be that goes out of my mouth: it shall not return
unto me void. But it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper
in the thing whereto I send it.

Three persons terribly felt the wrath of God abiding on them, at the society
this evening. But upon prayer made in their behalf, he was pleased soon to lift
up the light of his countenance upon them.

Frid. 29. I preached in a part of Kingswood, where I never had been before.
The places in Kingswood where I now usually preached were these; once a
fortnight, a little above Connam, a village on the south side of the wood; on
Sunday morning, near Hannam-m^^mt: once a fortnight, at the school-house, in
the middle of Kingswood. On Sunday in the evening at Rose-gr^; and once a
fortnight near the Fishponds, on the north side of the wood.

Satur. 30. At Weaver's-hall, seven or eight persons were constrained to roar
aloud, while the sword of the spirit was dividing asunder their souls and
spirits, and joints and marrow. But they were all relieved upon prayer, and
sang praises unto our God, and unto the Lamb that lives for ever and ever.

I gave a particular account, from time to time, of the manner wherein God here
carried on his work, to those whom I believed to desire the increase of his
kingdom, with whom I had any opportunity of corresponding. Part of the answer,
which I received (some time after) from one of these, I cannot but here subjoin.

I Desire to bless my Lord, for the good and great news your letter bears,
about the Lord's turning many souls from darkness to light, and from the power
of Satan unto God; and that such a great and effectual door is opened among
you, as the many adversaries cannot shut. O may He that has the key of the
house of David, that opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no man
opens, set the door of faith more and more open among you, till his house be
filled and till he gather together the outcasts of Israel. And may that prayer
for the adversaries be heard, Fill their faces with shame, that they may seek
thy name, O Lord.

As to the outward manner you speak of, wherein most of them were affected who
were cut to the heart by the sword of the Spirit, no wonder that this was at
first surprising to you, since they are indeed so very rare, that have been
thus pricked and wounded. Yet some of the instances you give seem to be
exemplified, in the outward manner wherein Paul and the jailor were at first
affected: as also Peter's hearers, Acts ii. The last instance you gave, of some
struggling as in the agonies of death, and in such a manner as that four or
five strong men can hardly restrain a weak woman from hurting herself or
others: this is to me somewhat more inexplicable: if it do not resemble the
child spoke of, Mark ix. 26. and Luke ix. 42. of whom it is said, that while he
was yet a coming, the devil threw him down and tare him. Or what influence
sudden and sharp awakenings may have upon the body I pretend not to explain.
But I make no question Satan, so far as he gets power, may exert himself on
such occasions, partly to hinder the good work in the persons thus touched with
the sharp arrows of conviction, and partly to disparage the work of God, as if
it tended to lead people to distraction. -- However, the merciful issue of
these conflicts in the conversion of the persons thus affected, is the main
thing.

When they are brought by the saving arm of God to receive Christ Jesus, to
have joy and peace in believing, and then to walk in him, and give evidence
that the work is a saving work at length, whether more quickly or gradually
accomplished, there is great matter of praise, --

All the outward appearances of people's being affected among us, may be
reduced to these two sorts; one is, hearing with a close, silent attention,
with gravity and greediness, discovered by fixed looks, weeping eyes, and
sorrowful or joyful countenances: another sort is, when they lift up their
voice aloud, some more depressedly, and others more highly; and at times, the
whole multitude in a flood of tears, all as it were crying out at once, till
their voice be ready to drown the minister's, that he can scarce be heard for
the weeping noise that surrounds him. -- The influence on some of these, like a
land-flood, dries up; we hear of no change wrought. But on others, it appears
in the fruits of righteousness, and the tract of a holy conversation.

May the Lord strengthen you, to go on in his work! And in praying for the
coming of his kingdom with you and us, and I hope you shall not be forgotten
among us, in our joint applications to the throne of grace.

I am, reverend, and dear Sir, Your very affectionate brother and servant in
Christ, Ralph Erskine.


Sund. July (...). I preached to about five thousand, on the favorite advice
of the infidel in Ecclesiastes (so zealously enforced by his brethren now) Be
not righteous overmuch. At Hannam and at Rose-green, I explained the latter
part of the viith of St. Luke: that verse especially, When they had nothing to
pay, he frankly forgave them both.

A young woman sunk down at Rose-green, in a violent agony both of body and
mind: as did five or six persons in the evening at the New-room, at whose cries
many were greatly offended. The same offense was given in the morning by one at
Weaver's-hall, and by eight or nine others, at Gloucester-lane in the evening.
The first that was deeply touched was L -- W --; whose mother had been not a
little displeased a day or two before, when she was told, how her daughter had
exposed herself before all the congregation: the mother herself was the next
who dropped down, and lost her senses in a moment; but went home with her
daughter, full of joy, as did most of those that had been in pain.

Soon after the society, I went to Mrs. T -- 's, whose nearest relations were
earnestly dissuading her, from being righteous overmuch; and by the old motive,
Why should thou destroy thyself? She answered all they advanced with meekness
and love, and continued steadfast and immovable. Endure hardship still, thou
good soldier of Christ! Persecuted, but not forsaken: torn with inward, and
encompassed with outward temptations: but yielding to none. O may patience have
its perfect work!

Tues. 3. I preached at Bath to the most attentive and serious audience I have
ever seen there. On Wednesday I preached at Newgate on those words, Because of
the Pharisees, they durst not confess him. -- For they loved the praise of men
more than the praise of God. A message was delivered to me when I had done,
from the sheriffs, "That I must preach there no more."

Frid. 6. I pressed a serious quaker to tell me, Why he did not come to hear me
as formerly? he said, "Because he found we were not led by the Spirit; for we
fixed times of preaching beforehand; whereas we ought to do nothing unless we
were sensibly moved thereto by the Holy Ghost." I asked, "Whether we ought not
to do what God in scripture commands, when we have opportunity? Whether the
providence of God thus concurring with his word, were not a sufficient reason
for our doing it, although we were not at that moment sensibly moved thereto by
the Holy Ghost?" He answered, "It was not a sufficient reason. This was to
regard the letter that kills." God grant, that I may so regard it all the
days of my life!

In the afternoon I was with Mr. Whitefield just come-from London, with whom I
went to Baptist-mills, where he preached concerning the Holy Ghost, which all
who believe, are to receive; not without a just, though severe, censure of
those, who preach as if there were no Holy Ghost.

Sat. 7. I had an opportunity to talk with him of those outward signs, which
had so often accompanied the inward work of God. I found his objections were
chiefly grounded on gross misrepresentations of matter of fact. But the next
day he had an opportunity of informing himself better. For no sooner had he
begun (in the application of his sermon) to invite all sinners, to believe in
Christ, than four persons sunk down close to him, almost in the same moment.
One of them lay without either sense or motion. A second trembled exceedingly.
The third bad strong convulsions all over his body, but made no noise, unless
by groans. The fourth, equally convulsed, called upon God, with strong cries
and tears. From this time I trust, we shall all suffer God to carry on his own
work in the way that pleases him.

Thurs. 13. I went to a gentleman who is much troubled with what they call
lowness of spirits. Many such have I been with before; but in several of them,
it was no bodily distemper. They wanted something, they knew not what, and were
therefore heavy, uneasy, and dissatisfied with every thing. The plain truth is,
they wanted God, they wanted Christ, they wanted faith. And God convinced them
of their want, in a way their physicians no more understood than themselves.
Accordingly nothing availed till the Great Physician came. For in spite of all
natural means, he who made them for himself, would not suffer them to rest,
till they rested in him.

On Friday in the afternoon I left Bristol with Mr. Whitefield, in the midst of
heavy rain. But the clouds soon dispersed, so that we had a fair, calm evening,
and a serious congregation at Thornbury.

In the morning we breakfasted with a quaker, who had been brought up in the
church of England: but being under strong convictions of inward sin, and
applying to several persons for advice, they all judged him to be under a
disorder of body, and gave advice accordingly. Some quakers with whom he met
about the same time, told him, it was the hand of God upon his soul; and
advised him to seek another sort of relief than those miserable comforters had
recommended. Woe unto you, ye blind leaders of the blind! How long will ye
pervert the right ways of the Lord? Ye who tell the mourners in Zion, Much
religion has made you mad! Ye who send them whom God has wounded to the devil
for cure; to company, idle books or diversions! Thus shall they perish in their
iniquity; but their blood shall God require at your hands!

We had an attentive congregation at Gloucester in the evening. In the morning,
Mr. Whitefield being gone forward, I preached to about five thousand there, on
Christ our wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption. It rained
violently at five in the evening; notwithstanding which two or three thousand
people stayed, to whom I expounded that glorious vision of Ezekiel, of the
resurrection of the dry bones.

Monday 16. After preaching to two or three thousand on, What must I do to be
saved? I returned to Bristol, and preached to about three thousand, on those
words of Job, There the wicked cease from troubling; there the weary are at
rest.

Tues. 17. I rode to Bradford, five miles from Bath, whither I had been long
invited to come. I waited on the minister, and desired leave to preach in his
church. He said, "It was not usual to preach on the weekdays: but if I could
come thither on a Sunday, he should be glad of my assistance." Thence I went to
a gentleman in the town, who had been present when I preached at Bath, and with
the strongest marks of sincerity and affection, wished me good l^ck in the name
of the Lord. But it was past. I found him now quite cold. He began disputing on
several heads, and at last told me plainly, one of our own college had informed
him, "They always took me to be a little crack-brained at Oxford."

However some persons who were not of his mind, having pitched upon a
convenient place (called Bear-field or Bury-field) on the top of the hill under
which the town lies: I there offered Christ to about a thousand people, for
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. Thence I returned to
Bath, and preached on, What must I do to be saved? to a larger audience than
ever before. I was wondering the God of this world was so still: when at my
return from the place of preaching, poor R -- d M -- l told me, He could not
let me preach any more in his ground. I asked him, why? He said, "The people
hurt his trees, and stole things out of his ground. And besides (added he) I
have already by letting thee be there, merited the displeasure of my
neighbors." O fear of man! Who is above thee, but they who indeed worship God
in spirit and in truth? Not even those who have one foot in the grave! Not even
those who dwell in rooms of cedar; and who have heaped up gold as the dust, and
silver as the sand of the sea!

Sat. 21. I began expounding a second time our Lord's sermon on the mount. In
the morning, Sunday 22, as I was explaining Blessed are the poor in spirit, to
about three thousand people, we had a fair opportunity of showing all men what
manner of spirit we were of. For in the middle of the sermon, the press-gang
came, and seized on one of the hearers (ye learned in the law, what becomes of
magna charta, and of English liberty and property? Are not these mere sounds,
while, on any pretense, there is such a thing as a press-gang suffered in the
land?) all the rest standing still, and none opening his mouth or lifting up
his hand to resist them.

Mond. 23. To guard young converts from fancying, that they had already
attained or were already perfect, I preached on those words, So is the kingdom
of God, as when a man casts seed into the ground -- And rises day and night,
and the seed buddeth forth and springs up he knows not how -- first the
blade, then the ear, then the full corn in the ear.

On several evenings this week, and particularly on Friday, many were deeply
convinced; but none were delivered from that painful conviction, The children
came to the birth; but there was not strength to bring forth. I fear we have
grieved the Spirit of the jealous God, by questioning his work: and that
therefore he is withdrawn from us for a season. But he will return and
abundantly pardon.

Mond. 30. Two more were in strong pain, both their souls and bodies being
well-nigh torn asunder. But though we cried unto God, there was no answer,
neither did he as yet deliver them at all.

One of these had been remarkably zealous against those that cried out and made
a noise, being sure that any of them might help it if they would. And the same
opinion she was in still, till the moment she was struck through as with a
sword, and fell trembling to the ground. She then cried aloud, though not
articulately, her words being swallowed up. In this pain she continued twelve
or fourteen hours, and then her soul was se^ at liberty. But her master (for
she was a servant till that time, at a gentleman's in town) forbid her
returning to him, saying, He would have none in his house who had received the
Holy Ghost.

Tues. 31. I preached at Bradford to above two thousand, many of whom were of
the better rank, on What must I do to be saved? They all behaved with decency,
and none went away till the service was ended. While I was preaching at Bath,
on my return, some of the audience did not behave so well; being, I fear, a
little too nearly concerned, when I came to the application of those words, Not
only this our craft is in danger to be set at naught: but also that the temple
of the great goddess Diana should be despised -- whom all Asia and the world
worshippeth.

Having a caution against religious delusion, put into my hands about this
time, I thought it my duty to write to the author of it: which I accordingly
did, in the following terms:

Reverend Sir,
1. YOU charge me (for I am called a Methodist, and consequently included
within your charge) with vain and confident boastings, rash, uncharitable
censure, damning all who do not feel what I feel; not allowing men to be in a
salvable state, unless they have experienced some sudden operation, which may
be distinguished as the hand of God upon them, overpowering as it were the
soul: with denying men the use of God's creatures, which he has appointed to
be received with thanksgiving, and encouraging abstinence, prayer, and other
religious exercises, to the neglect of the duties of our station. O Sir, can
you prove this charge upon me? The Lord shall judge in that day!

2. I do indeed go out into the highways and hedges to call poor sinners to
Christ. But not in a tumultuous manner, not to the disturbance of the public
peace, or the prejudice of families. Neither herein do I break any law which I
know; much less set at naught all rule and authority. Nor can I be said to
intrude into the labors of those, who do not labor at all; but suffer
thousands of those for whom Christ died, to perish for lack of knowledge.

3. They perish for want of knowing, that we as well as the Heathens, are
alienated from the life of God; that every one of us by the corruption of our
inmost nature, is very far gone from original righteousness; so far, that every
person born into the world, deserves God's wrath and damnation: that we have
by nature no power either to help ourselves, or even to call upon God to help
us; all our tempers and works, in our natural state, being only evil
continually. So that our coming to Christ, as well as theirs, must infer a
great and mighty change. It must infer, not only an outward change, from
stealing, lying and all corrupt communication; but a thorough change of heart,
an inward renewal of the spirit of our mind. Accordingly, the old man implies
infinitely more than outward, evil conversation, even an evil heart of
unbelief, corrupted by pride and a thousand deceitful lusts. Of consequence,
the new man must imply infinitely more than outward, good conversation, even a
good heart, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness: a
heart full of that faith, which working by love, produces all holiness of
conversation.

4. The change from the former of these states to the latter, is what I call
The new birth. But you say, I am not content with this plain and easy notion of
it, but fill myself and others with fantastical conceits about it. Alas, Sir,
how can you prove this? And if you cannot prove it, what amends can you make,
either to God, or to me, or to the world, for publicly asserting a gross
falsehood?

5. Perhaps you say, You can prove this of Mr. Whitefield. What then? This is
nothing to me. I am not accountable for his words. The journal you quote I
never saw till it was in print. But indeed you wrong him as much as me: first,
where you represent him as judging the notions of the Quakers in general
(concerning being led by the Spirit) to be right and good; whereas he speaks
only of those particular men, with whom he was then conversing. And again,
where you say, he supposes a person believing in Christ, -- to be without any
saving knowledge of him. He supposes no such thing. To believe in Christ is the
very thing he supposed wanting; as understanding that term believing to imply,
not only an assent to the articles of our creed, but also a true trust and
confidence of the mercy of God through our Lord Jesus Christ.

6. Now this it is certain a man may want, although he can truly say, I am
chaste, I am sober, I am just in my dealings, I help my neighbor and use the
ordinances of God. And however such a man may have behaved in these respects,
he is not to think well of his own state, till he experiences something within
himself, which he has not yet experienced, but which he may be beforehand,
assured he shall, if the promises of God are true. That something is, a living
faith: A sure trust and confidence in God, that by the merits of Christ his
sins are forgiven, and he reconciled to the favor of God. And from this will
spring many other things, which till then he experienced not; as, the love of
God shed abroad in his heart, the peace of God which passes all understanding,
and joy in the Holy Ghost, joy though not unfelt, yet unspeakable and full of
glory.

7. These are some of those inward fruits of the Spirit, which must be felt,
wheresoever they are: and without these, I cannot learn from holy writ, that
any man is born of the Spirit. I beseech you, Sir, by the mercies of God, that
if as yet you know nothing of such inward feelings, if you do not feel in
yourself these mighty workings of the Spirit of Christ, at least you would not
contradict and blaspheme. When the Holy Ghost has fervently kindled your love
toward God, you will know these to be very sensible operations. As you hear
the wind and feel it too, while it strikes upon your bodily organs, you will
know you are under the guidance of God's Spirit the same way, namely, by
feeling it in your soul: by the present peace and joy and love which you feel
within, as well as by its outward and more distant effects.

I am, etc.


I have often wished, that all calm and impartial men, would consider what is
advanced by another writer, in a little discourse concerning enthusiasm or
religious delusion, published about this time. His words are,

"A minister of our church, who may look upon it as his duty to warn his
partshioners, or an author who may think it necessary to caution his readers,
against such preachers or their doctrine (enthusiastic preachers, I suppose,
such as he takes it for granted the Methodist preachers are) ought to be very
careful to act with a Christian spirit, and to advance nothing but with temper,
charity, and truth. -- Perhaps the following rules may be proper to be observed
by them.

1. Not to blame persons for doing that now, which scripture records holy men
of old to have practiced, lest had they lived in those times, they should have
condemned them also.

2. Not to censure persons in holy orders, for teaching the same doctrines
which are taught in the scriptures and by our church; lest they should
ignorantly censure, what they profess to defend.

3. Not to censure any professed members of our church, who live good lives,
for resorting to religious assemblies in private houses, to perform in society
acts of divine worship; when the same seems to have been practiced by the
primitive Christians; and when alas! there are so many parishes, where a person
piously disposed, has no opportunity of joining in the public service of our
church, more than one hour and an half in a week.

4. Not to condemn those who are constant attendants on the communion and
service of our church, if they sometimes use other prayers in private
assemblies. since the best divines of our church have composed and published
many prayers, that have not the sanction of public authority; which implies a
general consent, that our church has not made provision for every private
occasion.

5. Not to establish the power of working miracles as the great criterion of a
divine mission; when scripture teaches us, that the agreement of doct^ (...)
truth as taught in those scriptures, is the only (...).

6. Not to drive any away from our church, by opprobriously calling them
dissenters, or treating them as such, so long is they keep to her communion.

7. Not lightly to take up with silly stories that may be propagated to the
discredit of persons of a general good character.

"I do not lay down (says he) these negative rules so much for the sake of any
persons whom the unobservance of them would immediately injure, as of our
church and her professed defenders. For churchmen, however well-meaning, would
lay themselves open to censure, and might do her irretrievable damage, by a
behavior contrary to them."

Friday, August 3. I met with one who did run well, but Satan had hindered her.
I was surprised at her ingenuous acknowledgment of the fear of man. O how
hardly shall even they who have rich acquaintance enter into the kingdom of
heaven.

Sund. 5. Six persons at the New-room were deeply convinced of sin: three of
whom were a little comforted by prayer; but not yet convinced of righteousness.

Having frequently been invited to Wells, particularly by Mr. --, who begged me
to make his house my home, on Thursday the 9th I went thither, and wrote him
word the night before; upon which he presently went to one of his friends, and
desired a messenger might be sent to meet me and beg me "To turn back,
otherwise (said he) we shall lose all our trade." But this consideration did
not weigh with him, so that he invited me to his own house: and at eleven I
preached in his ground, on Christ our wisdom, righteousness, sanctification,
and redemption, to about 2000 persons. Some of them mocked at first, whom I
reproved before all; and those of them who stayed were more serious. Several
spoke to me after, who were for the present much affected. O let it not pass
away as the morning dew!

Frid. 10. I had the satisfaction of conversing with a Quaker, and afterward
with an Anabaptist, who, I trust, have had a large measure of the love of God
shed abroad in their hearts. O may those, in every persuasion, who are of this
spirit, increase a thousandfold, how many so ever they be!

Sat. 11. In the evening two were seized with strong pangs, as were four the
next evening, and the same number at Gloucester-lane on Monday, one of whom was
greatly comforted.

Tues. 14. I preached at Bradford to about three thousand, on, One thing is
needful. Returning through Bath, I preached to a small congregation suddenly
gathered together at a little distance from the town (not being permitted to be
in R -- M -- 's ground any more) on, The just shall live by faith. Three at the
New-room this evening were cut to the heart. But their wound was not as yet
healed.

Wednes. 15. I endeavored to guard those who were in their first love, from
falling into inordinate affection, by explaining those strange words at
Baptist-mills, Henceforth know we no man after the flesh.

Friday 17. Many of our society met, as we had appointed, at one in the
afternoon, and agreed "That all the members of our society should obey the
church to which we belong, by observing all Fridays in the year, as days of
fasting or abstinence." We likewise agreed, that as many as had opportunity
should then meet, to spend an hour together in prayer.

Wedn. 22. I was with many that were in heaviness: two of whom were soon filled
with peace and joy. In the afternoon I endeavored to guard the weak against
what too often occasions heaviness, levity of temper or behavior, from, I said
of laughter, it is mad; and of mirth, What does it?

Mond. 27. For two hours I took up my cross, in arguing with a zealous man, and
laboring to convince him, That I was not an enemy to the church of England. He
allowed, I taught no other doctrines than those of the church; but could not
forgive my teaching them out of the church-walls. He allowed too (which none
indeed can deny, who has either any regard to truth or sense of shame) that by
this teaching many souls who till that time were perishing for lack of
knowledge, have been, and are brought from darkness to light and from the power
of Satan unto God. But he added, No one can tell, what may be hereafter; and
therefore I say, these things ought not to be suffered.

Indeed the report now current in Bristol was, "That I was a Papist, if not a
Jesuit." Some added, That I was born and bred at Rome; which many cordially
believed. O ye fools, when will ye understand, that the preaching justification
by faith alone, the allowing no meritorious cause of justification, but the
death and righteousness of Christ, and no conditional or instrumental cause,
but faith, is overturning popery from the foundation? When will ye understand,
that the most destructive of all those errors, which Rome, the mother of
abominations has brought forth (compared to which transubstantiation and a
hundred more, are trifles light as air) is, That we are justified by works (or
to express the same thing a little more decently) by faith and works. Now, do I
preach This? I did for ten years; I was (fundamentally) a papist, and knew it
not. But I do now testify to all (and it is the very point for asserting which
I have to this day been called in question) that "no good works can be done
before justification, none which have not in them the nature of sin."

I have often enquired, who are the authors of this report; and have generally
found they were either bigoted dissenters, or (I speak without fear or favor)
ministers of our own church. I have also frequently considered, what possible
ground or motive they could have thus to speak: seeing few men in the world
have had occasion so clearly and openly to declare their principles, as I have
done, both by preaching, printing, and conversation, for several years last
past. And I can no otherwise think, than that either they spoke thus (to put
the most favorable construction upon it) from gross ignorance: they knew not
what popery was; they knew not what doctrines those are which the Papists
teach: or they wilfully spoke what they knew to be false, probably thinking
thereby to do God service. Now, take this to yourselves, whosoever ye are, high
or low, dissenters or churchmen, clergy or laity, who have advanced this
shameless charge, and digest it how you can.

But how have ye not been afraid, if ye believe there is a God, and that he
knows the secrets of your hearts (I speak now to you, preachers, more
especially, of whatever denomination) to declare so gross, palpable a lie, in
the name of the God of truth? I cite you all before the Judge of all the earth,
either publicly to prove your charge; or by publicly retracting it, to make the
best amends you can, to God, to me, and to the world.

For the full satisfaction of those who have been abused by these shameless
men, and almost brought to believe a lie, I will here add my serious judgment
concerning the church of Rome, wrote some time since to a priest of that
communion.

SIR,
I Return you thanks both for the favor of your letter, and for your
recommending my father's proposals to the Sorbonne.

I have neither time nor inclination for controversy with any; but least of all
with the Romanists. And that, both because I cannot trust any of their
quotations, without consulting every sentence they quote in the originals: and
because the originals themselves can very hardly be trusted, in any of the
points controverted between them and us. I am no stranger to their skill in
mending those authors, who did not at first speak home to their purpose; as
also in purging them from those passages, which contradicted their emendations.
And as they have not wanted opportunity to do this, so doubtless they have
carefully used it, with regard to a point that so nearly concerned them, as the
supremacy of the bishop of Rome. I am not therefore surprised, if the works of
St. Cyprian (as they are called) do strenuously maintain it: but I am, that
they have not been better, corrected; for they still contain passages that
absolutely overthrow it. What gross negligence was it, to leave his 74th
epistle (to Pompeianus) out of the Index Expurgatorius? Wherein Pope Cyprian so
flatly charges Pope Stephen, with pride and obstinacy, and with being a
defender of the cause of Hereties, and that against Christians and the very
church of God? He that can reconcile this with his believing Stephen the
infallible head of the church, may reconcile the gospel with the (...).

Yet I can by no means approve the scurrility and contempt with which the
Romanists have often been treated. I dare not rail at or despise any man: much
less those who profess to believe in the same Master. But I pity them much;
having the same assurance, that Jesus is the Christ, and that no Romanist can
expect to be saved, according to the terms of his covenant. For thus says our
Lord, Whosoever shall break one of the least of these commandments, and shall
teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven. And if any
man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are
written in this book. But all Romanists as such, do both. Ergo -- The minor I
prove, not from Protestant authors, or even from particular writers of their
own communion: but from the public, authentic records of the church of Rome.
Such are The canons and decrees of the council of Trent. And the edition I use,
was printed at Colen, and approved by authority.

And first, All Romanists, as such, do break and teach men to break, one (and
not the least) of those commandments; the words of which, concerning images are
these, (...) Now (...)(as every smatterer in Hebrew knows) is incurvare se, To
bow down before any one, in token of honoring him.
procumbere, honoris exhibendi causa (and is accordingly rendered by the
seventy in this very place (by a Greek word of the very same import, (...)) but
the council of Trent (and consequently all Romanists, as such, all who allow
the authority of that council) teaches section 25. paragraph 2. That it is i.
e. The proper use of images is, to honor them, by bowing down before them.
Legitimus imaginum usus, -- eis honorem exhibere, procumbendo coram eis.

Secondly, All Romanists, as such, do add to those things which are written in
the book of life. For in the bull of Pius IV. subjoined to those canons and
decrees, I find all the additions following:

1. Seven Sacraments, 2. Transubstantiation, 3. Communion in one kind only, 4.
Purgatory, and praying for the dead therein, 5. Praying to saints, 6.
Veneration of relics, 7. Worship of images, 8. Indulgences, 9. The priority,
and universality, of the Roman church, 10. The supremacy of the bishop of Rome.
All these things therefore do the Romanists add to those which are written in
the book of life.

I am, --


Tuesd. 28. My mouth was opened, and my heart enlarged, strongly to declare to
above two thousand people at Bradford, That the kingdom of God (within us) is
not meat and drink, but righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost. At
Bath I once more offered Christ to justify the ungodly. In the evening I met my
brother, just come from London. The Lord has indeed done great things for us
already. Not (...) us, but unto thy name be the praise.

Wednesday 29. I rode with my brother to Wells and preached on, What must I do
to be saved? In the evening I summed up at the New-room, what I had said at
many times, from the beginning, of faith, holiness and good works, as the root,
the tree and the fruit, which God had joined, and man ought not to put asunder.

Friday, Aug. 31. I left Bristol, and reached London, about eight on Sunday
morning. In the afternoon I heard a sermon wherein it was asserted, that our
repentance was not sincere, but feigned and hypocritical, 1. If we relapsed
into sin, soon after repenting: especially if 2. We did not avoid all occasions
of sin, or if 3. We relapsed frequently; and most of all, if 4. Our hearts were
hardened thereby. O what a hypocrite was I (if this be so) for near twice ten
years! But I know it is not so. I know every one under the law, is even as I
was. Every one when he begins to see his fallen state, and to feel the wrath of
God abiding on him, relapses into the sin that most easily besets him, soon
after repenting of it. Sometimes he avoids, and at many other times cannot
persuade himself to avoid the occasions of it. Hence his relapses are frequent,
and of consequence his heart is hardened more and more. And yet all this time,
he is sincerely striving against sin. He can say unseignedly, without
hypocrisy, the thing which I do, I approve not; the evil which I would not,
that I do. To will is even then present with him; but how to perform that which
is good, he finds not. Nor can he, with all his sincerity avoid any one of
these four marks of hypocrisy, till being justified by faith, he has peace
with God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

This helpless state I took occasion to describe at Kennington, to eight or ten
thousand people, from those words of the psalmist, Innumerable troubles are
come about me; my sine have taken such hold upon me, that I am not able to look
up: yea, they are more in number than the hairs of my head, and my heart has
failed me.

Mond. Sept. 3. I talked largely with my mother, who told me, that till a short
time since, she had scarce heard such a thing mentioned, as the having
forgiveness of sins now, or God's Spirit bearing witness with our spirit: much
less did she imagine, that this was the common privilege of all true believers.
"Therefore (said she) I never durst ask for it myself. But two or three weeks
ago, while my son Hall was pronouncing those words, in delivering the cup to
me, The blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was given for thee; the words
struck through my heart, and I knew God for Christ's sake had forgiven me all
my sins."

I asked, Whether her father (Dr. Annesley) had not the same faith? And whether
she had not heard him preach it to others? She answered, "He had it himself,
and declared a little before his death, that for more than forty years, he had
no darkness, no fear, no doubt at all, of his being accepted in the Beloved.
But that nevertheless, she did not remember to have heard him preach, no, not
once, explicitly upon it: whence she supposed he also looked upon it as the
peculiar blessing of a few, not as promised to all the people of God."

Both at Mr. B -- 's at six, and at Dowgate-hill at eight, were many more than
the houses could contain. Several persons who were then convinced of sin, came
to me the next morning. One came also, who had been mourning long, and
earnestly desired us to pray with her. We had scarce begun, when the enemy
began to tear her, so that she screamed out as in the pangs of death. But his
time was short: for within a quarter of an hour, she was full of the peace that
passes all understanding.

I afterward called on Mrs. E -- r, with whom was one lately come from
Bristol, in deep anguish of spirit. We cried to God, and he soon declared his
salvation, so that both their mouths were filled with his praise.

Thence I went to a poor woman who had been long in despair. I was glad to meet
with Mrs. R -- there; the person mentioned in Mr. Whitefield's journal, who
after three years madness (so called) was so deeply convinced of sin at
Beach-lane, and soon after rejoiced in God her Savior.

Thurs. 6. I was sent for by one who began to feel herself a sinner. But a fine
lady unexpectedly coming in, there was scarce room for me to speak. The fourth
person in the company was a poor unbred girl; who beginning to tell what God
had done for her soul, the others looked one at another, as in amaze, but did
not open their mouths. I then exhorted them, not to cease from crying to God,
till they too could say, as she did, "My beloved is mine, and I am his: I am as
sure of it, as that I am alive. For his spirit bears witness with my spirit,
that I am a child of God."

Sund. 9. I declared to about ten thousand in Moorfields, what they must do to
be saved. My mother went with us about five to Kennington, where were supposed
to be twenty thousand people. I again insisted on that foundation of all our
hope, Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved. From Kennington I
went to a society at Lambeth. The house being filled, the rest stood in the
garden. The deep attention they showed gave me a good hope, that they will not
all be forgetful hearers.

Thence I went to our society at Fetter-lane, and exhorted them to love one
another. The want of love was a general complaint. We laid it open before our
Lord. We soon found, he had sent us an answer of peace. Evil surmisings
vanished away. The flame kindled again as at the first, and our hearts were
knit together.

Mond. 10. I accepted a pressing invitation to go to Plaistow. At five in the
evening I expounded there, and at eight again. But most of the hearers were
very quiet and unconcerned. In the morning therefore I spoke stronger words.
But it is only the voice of the Son of God, which is able to wake the dead.

Wednes. 12. In the evening at Fetter-lane, I described the life of faith, and
many who had fancied themselves strong therein, found they were no more than
newborn babes. At eight I exhorted our brethren to keep close to the church,
and to all the ordinances of God, and to aim only at living a quiet and
peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty.

Thurs. 13. A serious clergyman desired to know, in what points we differ from
the church of England? I answered, "To the best of my knowledge, in none: the
doctrines we preach, are the doctrines of the church of England: indeed the
fundamental doctrines of the church, clearly laid down, both in her prayers,
articles, and homilies."

He asked, in what points then do you differ from the other clergy of the
church of England? I answered, "In none from that part of the clergy who adhere
to the doctrines of the church; but from that part of the clergy who dissent
from the church (though they own it not) I differ in the points following:

First, They speak of justification, either as the same thing with
sanctification, or as something consequent upon it. I believe justification to
be wholly distinct from sanctification, and necessarily antecedent to it.

Secondly, They speak of our own holiness or good works, as the cause of our
justification; or, that for the sake of which, on account of which we are
justified before God. I believe, neither our own holiness nor good works, are
any part of the cause of our justification; but that the death and
righteousness of Christ, are the whole and sole cause of it; or, that for the
sake of which, on account of which, we are justified before God.

Thirdly, They speak of good works, as a condition of justification,
necessarily previous to it. I believe no good work can be previous to
justification, nor consequently a condition of it: but that we are justified
(being till that hour ungodly, and therefore incapable of doing any good work)
by faith alone, faith without works, faith (though producing all, yet)
including no good work.

Fourthly, They speak of sanctification (or holiness) as if it were an outward
thing, as if it consisted chiefly, if not wholly, in these two points, 1. The
doing no harm, 2. The doing good (as it is called) i. e. The using the means of
grace, and helping our neighbor.

I believe it to be, an inward thing, namely, The life of God in the soul of
man; a participation of the divine nature; the mind that was in Christ; or, the
renewal of our heart, after the image of him that created us.

Lastly, They speak of the new birth, as an outward thing, as if it were no
more than baptism; or, at most, a change from outward wickedness to outward
goodness; from a vicious to (what is called) a virtuous life. I believe it to
be an inward thing; a change from inward wickedness to inward goodness; an
entire change of our inmost nature from the image of the devil (wherein we are
born) to the image of God: a change from the love of the creature to the love
of the Creator, from earthly and sensual, to heavenly and holy affections: in a
word, a change from the tempers of the spirits of darkness, to those of the
angels of God in heaven.

There is therefore a wide, essential, fundamental, irreconcilable difference
between us: so that if they speak the truth as it is in Jesus, I am found a
false witness before God. But if I teach the way of God in truth, they are
blind leaders of the blind.

Sund. 16. I preached at Moorfields to about ten thousand, and at Kennington
common to I believe near twenty thousand, on those words of the calmer Jews to
St. Paul, We desire to hear of thee what thou think: for as concerning this
sect, we know that every where it is spoken against. At both places I described
the real difference between what is generally called Christianity, and the true
old Christianity, which under the new name of Methodism (...) spoken against.

Mond. 17. I preached again (...) are those that mourn. It pleased God to give
us in that hour, two living instances of that piercing sense both of the guilt
and power of sin, that dread of the wrath of God, and that full conviction of
man's inability either to remove the power, or atone for the guilt of sin
(called by the world despair) in which properly consist that poverty of spirit
and mourning which are the gate of Christian blessedness.

Tues. 18. A young woman came to us at Islington, in such an agony as I have
seldom seen. Her sorrow and fear were too big for utterance; so that after a
few w^^ds, her strength as well as her heart failing, she sunk down to the
ground. Only her sighs and her groans showed she was yet alive. We cried unto
God in her behalf. We claimed the promises made to the weary and heavy-laden:
and he did not cast out our prayer. She saw her Savior, as it were, crucified
before her eyes. She laid hold on him by faith, and her spirit revived.

At Mr. B -- 's at six, I was enabled earnestly to call all the weary and
heavy-laden: and at Mr. C -- 's at eight, when many roared aloud; some of whom
utterly refused to be comforted, till they should feel their souls at rest in
the blood of the Lamb, and have his love shed abroad in their hearts.

Thurs. 20. Mrs. C -- being in deep heaviness, had desired me to meet her this
afternoon. She had long earnestly desired to receive the holy communion, having
an unaccountably strong persuasion, "That God would manifest himself to her
therein, and give rest to her soul." But her heaviness being now greatly
increased, Mr. D -- e gave her that fatal advice, "Not to communicate till she
had living faith." This still added to her perplexity. Yet at length she
resolved to obey God father than man. And he was made known unto her in
breaking of bread. In that moment she (...) her load removed, she knew she was
accepted in the beloved; and all the time I was expounding at Mr. ^ -- 's, was
full of that peace which cannot be uttered.

Frid. 21. Another of Dr. Monro's patients came to desire my advice. I found no
reason to believe she had been any otherwise mad than every one is, who is
deeply convinced of sin. And I cannot doubt, but if she will trust in the
living God, he will give medicine to heal her sickness.

Sund. 23. I declared to about ten thousand in Moorfields, with great
enlargement of spirit, The kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but
righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost. At Kennington I enforced to
about twenty thousand, that great truth, One thing is needful. Thence I went to
Lambeth and showed (to the amazement, it seemed, of many who were present) how
he that is born of God does not commit sin.

Mond. 24. I preached once more at Plaistow, and took my leave of the people of
that place. In my return, a person galloping swiftly, rode full against me, and
overthrew both man and horse: but without any hurt to either. Glory be to him
who saves both man and beast!

Tues. 25. After dining with one of our brethren who was married this day, I
went (as usual) to the society at St. James's, weary and weak in body. But God
strengthened me for his own work; as he did at six at Mr. B -- 's; and at eight
in Winchester-yard, where it was believed were present eleven or twelve hundred
persons: to whom I declared, if they had nothing to pay, God would frankly
forgive them all.

Thurs. 27. I went in the afternoon to a society at Deptford, and thence at six
came to Turner's-hall; which holds (by computation) two thousand persons. The
press both within and without was very great. In the beginning of the
expounding, there being a large vault beneath, the main beam which supported
the floor, broke. The floor immediately sunk, which occasioned much noise and
confusion among the people. But, two or three days before a man had filled the
vault with hogsheads of tobacco. So that the floor, after sinking a foot or
two, rested upon them, and I went on without interruption.

Frid. 28. I m^t with a fresh proof, that whatsoever ye ask, believing, ye
shall receive. A middle-aged woman desired me to return thanks for her to God,
who as many witnesses then present testified, was a day or two before really
distracted, and as such tied down in her bed. But upon prayer made for her, she
was instantly relieved, and restored to a found mind.

Mond. October 1. I rode to Oxford; and found a few who had not yet forsaken
the assembling themselves together: to whom I explained that holiness without
which no man shall see the Lord.

Tues. 2. I went to many, who once heard the word with joy; but when the sun
arose, the seed withered away. Yet some still desired to follow their Lord. But
the world stood fawning or threatening between them. In the evening I showed
them the tender mercies of God, and his readiness still to receive them. The
tears ran down many of their cheeks. O thou lover of souls, seek and save that
which is lost!

Wednes. 3. I had a little leisure to take a view of the shattered condition of
things here. The poor prisoners both in the castle and in the city prison, had
now none that cared for their souls, none to instruct, advise, comfort and
build them up in the knowledge and love of the Lord Jesus. None was left to
visit the workhouses, where also we used to meet with the most moving objects
of compassion. Our little school, where about twenty poor children, at a time,
had been taught for many years, was on the point of being broke up; there being
none now, either to support, or to attend it. And most of those in the town,
who were once knit together, and strengthened one another's hands in God, were
torn asunder and scattered abroad. It is time for thee, Lord, to lay to thy
hand!

At eleven, a little company of us met to entreat God, for the remnant that was
left. He immediately gave us a token for good. One who had been long in the
gall of bitterness, full of wrath, strife and envy, particularly against one
whom she had once tenderly loved, rose up and showed the change God had wrought
in her soul, by falling upon her neck, and with many tears kissing her. The
same spirit we found reviving in others also; so that we left them, not without
hope, that the seed which had been sown even here, shall take root downward,
and bear fruit upward.

About six in the evening I came to Burford: and at seven preached to, it was
judged, twelve or fifteen hundred people, on, Christ made unto us wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption. Finding many approved of
what they had heard, that they might not rest in that approbation, I explained
an hour or two after the holiness of a christian: and in the morning I showed
the way to this holiness, by giving both the false and the true answer to that
important question, What must I do to be saved?

About three in the afternoon, I came to Mr. Benjamin Seward's, at Bengeworth,
near Evesham. At five I expounded in his house (part of the xiiith chapter of
the first of Corinthians) and at seven in the school-house, where I invited all
who had nothing to pay, to come and accept of free forgiveness. In the morning
I preached near Mr. Seward's house to a small, serious congregation, on those
words, I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

In the evening I reached Gloucester. Sat. 6. At five in the evening I
explained to about a thousand people, the nature, the cause, and the condition
or instrument of justification, from these words, To him that works not, but
believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his says is counted to him for
righteousness.

Sand. 7. A few, I trust, out of two or three thousand, were awakened by the
explanation of those words, God has not given unto you the spirit of bondage
again, to fear; but he has given unto you the spirit of adoption, wherely we
cry, Abba, Father. About eleven I preached at Runwick, seven miles from
Gloucester. The church was much crowded, though a thousand or upwards stayed in
the churchyard. In the afternoon I explained further the same words, What must
I do to be saved? I believe some thousands were then present, more than had
been in the morning. O what a harvest is here! When will it please our Lord, to
send more laborers into his harvest?

Between five and six I called on all who were present (about three thousand)
at Stanley, on a little green near the town, to accept of Christ, as their only
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. I was strengthened to
speak as I never did before, and continued speaking near two hours: the
darkness of the night, and the little lightning not lessening the number, but
increasing the seriousness of the hearers. I concluded the day by expounding
part of our Lord's sermon on the mount, to a small, serious company at (...).

Mond. 8. About eight I reached Hampton-common, nine or ten miles from
Gloucester. There were, it was computed, five or six thousand persons. I
exhorted them all, to come unto God, as having nothing to pay. I could gladly
have stayed longer with this loving people: but I was now straitened for time.
After sermon I therefore hastened away, and in the evening came to Bristol.

Tues. 9. My brother and I rode to Bradford. Finding there had been a general
misrepresentation of his last sermon, as if he had asserted reprobation
therein, whereby many were greatly offended; he was constrained to explain
himself on that head, and to show in plain and strong words, that God wills
all men to be saved. Some were equally offended at this. But whether men will
hear or whether they will forbear; we may not shun to declare unto them, all
the counsel of God.

At our return in the evening not being permitted to meet at Weaver's hall, we
met in a large room on Temple-backs, where (having gone through the sermon on
the mount and the epistle of St. John) I began that of St. James, that those
who had already learned the true nature of inward holiness, might be more fully
instructed in outward holiness, without which also we cannot see the Lord.

Wednes. 10. Finding many to be in heaviness, whom I had left full of peace and
joy, I exhorted them at Baptist-mills, to look unto Jesus, the author and
finisher of our faith. We poured out our complaint before him in the evening,
and found that he was again with us of a truth. One came to us soon after I was
gone home, who was still in grievous darkness. But we commended her cause to
God, and he immediately restored the light of his countenance.

Thurs. 11. We were comforted by the coming in of one who was a notorious
drunkard and common swearer. But he is washed, and old things are passed away.
Such power belongs unto God. In the evening our Lord rose on many who were
wounded, with healing in his wings: and others who till then were careless and
at ease, felt the two-edged sword that comes out of his mouth.

One of these showed the agony of her soul by crying aloud to God for help, to
the great offense of many, who eagerly rebuked her that she should hold her
peace. She continued in great torment all night, finding no rest either of soul
or body. But while a few were praying for her in the morning, God delivered her
out of her distress.

Frid. 12. We had fresh occasion to observe the darkness which was fallen on
many who lately rejoiced in God. But he did not long hide his face from them.
On Wednesday the spirit of many revived: on Thursday evening many more found
him in whom they had believed, to be a present help in time of trouble. And
never do I remember the power of God to have been more eminently present than
this morning: when a cloud of witnesses declared his breaking the gates of
brass, and smiting the bars of iron in sunder.

Yet I could not but be under some concern, with regard to one or two persons,
who were tormented in an unaccountable manner, and seemed to be indeed lunatic
as well as sore vexed. But while I was musing, what would be the issue of these
things, the answer I received from the word of God was, Glory to God in the
highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men.

Soon after I was sent for to one of those, who was so strangely torn by the
devil, that I almost wondered her relations did not say, "Much religion has
made thee mad." We prayed God to bruise Satan under her feet. Immediately we
had the petition we asked of him. She cried out vehemently, "He is gone, he is
gone!" And was filled with the spirit of love and of a found mind. I have seen
her many times since, strong in the Lord. When I asked abruptly, "What do you
desire now?" She answered, "Heaven." I asked, "What is in your heart?" She
replied, "God." I asked, "But how is your heart when any thing provokes you?"
She said, "By the grace of God, I am not provoked at any thing. All the things
of this world pass by me as shadows." Ye have seen the and of the Lord. Is he
not very pitiful and of tender mercy?

We had a refreshing meeting at one with many of our society; who fail not to
obser^e as health permits, the weekly fast of our church, and will do so by
God's help, as long as they call themselves members of it. And would to God,
all who contend for the rites and ceremonies of the church (perhaps with more
zeal than meekness of wisdom) would first show their own regard for her
discipline, in this more important branch of it!

At four I preached near the Fish Ponds (at the desire of one who had long
labored under the apprehension of it) on the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost,
that is, according to the plain scriptural account, The openly and maliciously
asserting, that the miracles of Christ were wrought by the power of the devil.

Sat. 13. I was with one, who being in deep anguish of spirit, had been the day
before to ask a clergyman's advice. He told her, "Her head was out of order,
and she must go and take physic." In the evening we called upon God for
medicine, to heal those that were broken in heart. And five who had long been
in the shadow of death, knew they were passed from death unto life.

The sharp frost in the morning, Sunday 14, did not prevent about 1500, from
being at Hannam, to whom I called, in the words of our gracious Master. Come
unto me, all ye that are weary and heavy-laden, and I will give you rest. In
the evening we claimed and received the promise for several who were weary and
heavy-laden.

Mond. 15. Upon a pressing invitation, some time since received, I set out for
Wales. About four in the afternoon, I preached on a little green, at the foot
of the Devauden (a high hill, two or three miles beyond Chepstow) to three or
four hundred plain people, on, Christ our wisdom, righteousness, sanctification
and redemption. After sermon, one who I trust is an old disciple of Christ,
willingly received us into his house: whither many following, I showed them
their need of a Savior, from these words, Blessed are the poor in spirit. In
the morning I described more fully the way to salvation. Believe in the Lord
Jesus, and thou shall be saved: and then taking leave of my friendly host,
before two came to Abergavenny.

I felt in myself a strong aversion to preaching here. However I went to Mr. W
-- (the person in whose ground Mr. Whitefield preached) to desire the use of
it. He said. "With all his heart -- if the minister was not willing to let me
have the use of the church;" after whose refusal (for I wrote a line to him
immediately) he invited me to his house. About a thousand people stood
patiently (though the frost was sha^p, it being after sunset) while from Acts
xxviii. 2^. I simply described the plain, old religion of the church of
England, which is now almost every where spoken against, under the new name of
Methodism. An hour after I explained it a little more fully, (...) ^^ighbouring
house, showing how God has exalted Jesus to be a Prince and a Savior, to give
repentance and remission of sins.

Wednes. 15. The ^rost was sharper than before. However five or six hundred
people stayed, while I explained the nature of that salvation which is through
faith, yea, faith alone: and the nature of that living faith, through which
comes this salvation. About noon I came to Usk, where I preached to a small
company of poor people, on those words, The Son of man is come, to save that
which is lost. One grey-headed man wept and trembled exceedingly: and another
who was there (I have since heard) as well as two or three who were at the
Devauden, are gone quite distracted: that is, they mourn and refuse to be
comforted, till they have redemption through his blood.

When I came to Ponty-pool in the afternoon, being unable to procure any more
convenient place, I stood in the street, and cried aloud to five or six hundred
attentive hearers, To believe in the Lord Jesus, that they might be saved. In
the evening I showed his willingness to save all who desire to come unto God
through him. Many were melted into tears. It may be, that some will bring forth
fruit with patience.

Thursd. 18. I endeavored to cut them off from all false supports and vain
dependencies, by explaining and applying that fundamental truth, To him that
works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is
counted to him for righteousness.

When we were at the Devauden on Monday, a poor woman who lived six miles off,
came thither in great heaviness. She was deeply convinced of sin, and weary of
it; but found no way to escape from it. She walked from thence to Abergavenny
on Tuesday, and on Wednesday from Abergavenny to Usk. Thence in the afternoon
she came to Ponty-pool; where between twelve and one in the morning, after a
sharp contest in her soul, our Lord got unto himself the victory: and the love
of God was shed abroad in her heart, testifying that her sins were forgiven
her. She went on her way rejoicing to Cardiff; whither I came in the afternoon.
And about five (the minister not being willing I should preach in the church on
a weekday) I preached in the Shire-hall (a large convenient place) on Believe
and thou shall be saved. Several were there who labored much to make a
disturbance. But our Lord suffered them not. At seven I explained to a ^uch
more numerous audience, the blessedness of mourning and poverty of spirit. Deep
attention sat on the faces of the hearers; many of whom, I trust, have believed
our report.

Friday 19. I preached in the morning at Newport, on What must I do to be
saved? To the most insensible, ill-behaved people I have ever seen in Wales.
One ancient man, during a great part of the sermon, cursed and swore almost
incessantly: and toward the conclusion took up a great stone, which he many
times attempted to throw. But that he could not do. -- Such the champions! Such
the arms against field-preaching!

At four I preached at the Shire-hall of Cardiff again, where many gentry, I
found were present.

Such freedom of speech I have seldom had, as was given me in explaining those
words. The kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness and peace
and joy in the Holy Ghost. At six almost the whole town (I was informed) came
together, to whom I explained the six last beatitudes, but my heart was so
enlarged, I knew not how to give over, so that we continued three hours. O may
the seed they have received, have its fruit unto holiness, and in the end,
everlasting life!

Sat. 20. I returned to Bristol. I have seen no part of England so pleasant for
sixty or seventy miles together, as those parts of Wales I have been in. And
most of the inhabitants are indeed ripe for the gospel. I mean (if the
expression appear strange) they are earnestly desirous of being instructed in
it: and as utterly ignorant of it they are, as any Creek or Cherokee Indians. I
do not mean they are ignorant of the name of Christ. Many of them can say both
the Lord's prayer and the belief. Nay, and some, all the catechism: but take
them out of the road of what they have learned by ro^e, and they know no more
(nine in ten of those with whom I conversed) either of gospel salvation, or of
that faith, whereby alone we can be saved, than Chicali or Tomo Chachi. Now,
what spirit is he of, who had rather these poor creatures shoule perish for
lack of knowledge, than that they should be saved, even by the exhortations of
Howel Harris, or an itinerant preacher?

Finding a slackness creeping in among them who had begun to run well, on
Sunday 21, both in the morning and afternoon, I enforced those words, As ye
have received the Lord Jesus Christ, so walk ye in him. In the evening I
endeavored to quicken them farther, by describing pure and undefiled religion:
and the next day, to encourage them in pursuing it, by enforcing those words of
our blessed Master, In the world ye shall have tribulation; but be of good
cheer: I have overcome the world.

Tues. 23. In riding to Bradford, I read over Mr. Law's book on the new birth:
philosophical, speculative, precarious; Behmenish, void and vain! O what a fall
is there! At eleven I preached at Bearfield to about three thousand, on the
nature of the spirit of bondage, and of adoption.

Returning in the evening, I was exceedingly pressed to go back to a young
woman in Kingswood. (The fact I nakedly relate, and leave every man to his own
judgment of it.) I went. She was nineteen or twenty years old, but (it seems)
could not write or read. I found her on the bed, two or three persons holding
her. It was a terrible sight. Anguish, horror and despair, above all
description, appeared in her pale face. The thousand distortions of her whole
body showed, how the dogs of hell were gnawing her heart. The shrieks
intermixed were scarce to be endured. But her stony eyes could not weep. She
screamed out, as soon as words could find their way, "I am damned, damned; lost
for ever. Six days ago you might have helped me. But it is past. I am the
devil's now. I have given myself to him. His I am. Him I must serve. With him I
must go to hell. I will be his. I will serve him. I will go with him to hell. I
cannot be saved. I will not be saved. I must, I will, I will be damned." She
then began praying to the devil. We began "Arm of the Lord, awake, awake!" She
immediately sunk down as asleep; but as soon as we left off, broke out again,
with inexpressible vehemence, "Stony hearts, break! I am a warning to you.
Break, break, poor, stony hearts! Will you not break? What can be done more for
stony hearts? I am damned, that you may be saved. Now break, now break poor
stony hearts! You need not be damned, though I must." She then fixed her eyes
on the corner of the cieling and said, "There he is, ay, there he is, Come,
good devil, come. Take me away. You said, you would dash my brains out. Come,
do it quickly. I am yours. I will be yours. Come just now. Take me away." We
interrupted her by calling again upon God: on which she sunk down as before:
and another young woman began to roar out as loud as she had done. My brother
now came in, it being about nine o'clock. We continued in prayer till past
eleven; when God in a moment spoke peace into the soul, first of the first
tormented, and then of the other. And they both joined in singing praise to
him, who had stilled the enemy and the avenger.

Wed. 24. I preached at Baptist-mills on those words of St. Paul, speaking in
the person of one under the law (that is, still carnal, and sold under sin,
though groaning for deliverance) I know that in me dwells no good thing. A
poor woman told me afterward, I does hope as my husband wont hinder me any
more. For I minded he did shiver every bone of him, and the tears ran down his
cheeks like the rain. I warned our little society in the evening, To beware of
levity, slackness in good works, and despising little things; which had caused
many to fall again into bondage.

Thurs. 25. I was sent for to one in Bristol, who was taken ill the evening
before. (This fact too I will simply relate, so far as I was an ear, or
eyewitness of it.) She lay on the ground furiously gnashing her teeth, and
after a while roared aloud. It was not easy for three or four persons to hold
her, especially when the name of Jesus was named. We prayed; the violence of
her symptoms ceased, though without a complete deliverance.

In the evening, being sent for to her again, I was unwilling, indeed afraid to
go: thinking it would not avail, unless some who were strong in the faith, were
to wrestle with God for her. I opened my testament on those words, I was
afraid, and went and hid thy talent in the earth. I stood ^proved and went
immediately. She began screaming before I came into the room; then broke out
into a horrid laughter, mixed with blasphemy, grievous to hear. One who from
many circumstances apprehended a preter-natural agent to be concerned in this,
asking, "How did thou dare to enter into a Christian?" Was answered, "She is
not a Christian. She is mine." Q. "Do thou not tremble at the name of Jesus?"
No words followed, but she shrunk back and trembled exceedingly. Q. "Art thou
not increasing thy own damnation?" It was answered faintly, "Ay, ay:" which was
followed by fresh cursing and blaspheming.

My brother coming in, she cried out, "Preacher! Field-preacher! I do not love
field-preaching." This was repeated two hours together, with spitting and all
the expressions of strong aversion.

We left her at twelve, but called again about noon, on Friday 27. And now it
was that God shows, he hears prayer. All her pangs ceased in a moment. She
was filled with peace, and knew that the son of wickedness was departed from
her.

Saturday 28. I was sent for to Kingswood again, to one of those who had been
so ill before. A violent rain began just as I set out, so that I was thoroughly
wet in a few minutes. Just at that time the woman (then three miles off) cried
out, "Yonder comes Wesley, galloping as fast as he can." When I was come, I was
quite cold and dead, and fitter for sleep than prayer She burst out into a
horrid laughter and said, "No power, no power; no faith, no faith. She is mine.
Her (...) is mine. I have her and will not let her go."

We begged of God to increase our faith. Mean while her pangs increased more
and more: so that o^^ would have imagined, by the violence of the throes, her
body must have been shattered to pieces. One who was clearly convinced this was
no (...) disorder, said, "I think, Satan is let loose. I fear, he will not stop
here." And added, "I command thee, in the name of the Lord Jesus, (...) tell if
thou have commission to torment any other soul?" It was immediately answered,
"I have. L -- y C -- r, and S -- h J -- s." (Two who lived at some distance,
and were then in perfect health.)

We betook ourselves to prayer again, and ceased not, till she began, about six
o'clock, with a clear voice, and composed, cheerful look, "Praise God from whom
all blessings flow!"

Sund. 28. I preached once more at Bradford at one in the afternoon. The
violent rains did not hinder more, I believe, than ten thousand, from earnestly
attending to what I spoke on those solemn words, I take you to record this day,
that I am pure from the blood of all men. For I have not shunned to declare
unto you all the counsel of God.

Returning in the evening, I called at Mrs. J -- 's in Kingswood. S -- y J -- s
and L -- y C -- v were there. It was (...) a quarter of an hour^ before L -- y
C -- r fell into a str^nge agony, and presently after, S -- y J -- s. The
violent (...) all over their bodies, were such as words cannot describe. Their
cries and groans were too horrid to be borne: till one of them in a tone not to
be expressed, said, "Where is your faith now? Come, go to prayers. I will pray
with you. Our Father which art in heaven." We took the advice, from whomsoever
(...) came, and (...) out our souls before God, till L -- y C -- r's agonies so
increased, that it seemed she was in the pangs of death. But in a moment God
spoke; she knew his voice, and both her body and soul were healed.

We continued in prayer till near one, when S -- ^ -- 's voice was also
changed, and she began strongly to call upon God. This she did for the greatest
part of the night. In the morning we renewed our ^rayers, while she was crying
continually, "I burn, I burn; O what shall I do? I have a fire within me. I
cannot bear it. Lord Jesus! Help!" Amen, Lord Jesus! When thy time is come.

Wednes. 31. I strongly enforced on those who imagine they believe, and do not,
As the body without the spirit is dead, so says without works is dead also.
The power of God was in an unusual manner present at the meeting of the bands
in the evening. Six or seven were deeply convinced of their unfaithfulness to
God, and two filled again with his love. But poor Mary W -- remained as one
without hope. Her soul refused comfort. She could neither pray herself, nor
bear to hear us. At last she cried out, Give me the book and I will sing. She
began giving out line by line (but with such an accent as art could never
reach.)

"Why do these cares my soul divide,
If thou indeed have set me free?
Why am I thus, if God has died,
If God has died to purchase me?
Around me clouds of darkness roll:
In deepest night I still walk on:
Heavily moves my damned soul --
Here we were obliged to interrupt her; we again betook ourselves to prayer,
and her heart was eased, though not set at liberty.

Thurs. Nov. 1. I set out and the next evening came to Reading, where a little
company of us met in the (...), at which the zealous mob was so enraged, they
were ready to tear the house down. Therefore I hope God has a work to do in
this place. In thy time let it be fulfilled.

About this time I received a letter from the author of those reflections which
I mentioned July 31. An extract of which I have subjoined.

Reverend Sir,
AS I wrote the rules and considerations [in No. 25. of Country Common-Sense]
with an eye to Mr. Whitefield, yourself and your opposers, from a sincere
desire to do some service to Christianity, according to the imperfect notions I
had at that time of the real merits of the cause: I at the same time resolved,
to take any opportunity that should offer for my better information.

On this principle it was, that I made one of your audience, Oct. 23, at
Bradford. And because I thought I could form the best judgment of you and your
doctrines from your sermon, I resolved to hear that first: which was the
reason, that although by accident, I was at the same house, and walked two
miles with you, to the place you preached at, I spoke little or nothing to you.
I must confess, Sir, that the discourse you made that day, wherein you pressed
your hearers in the closest manner, and with the authority of a true minister
of the gospel, not to stop at faith ONLY, but to add to it all virtues, and to
show forth their faith, by every kind of good works, convinced me of the great
wrong done you by a public report, common in people's mouth, that you preach
faith without works. For, that is the only ground of prejudice which any true
Christian can have: and is the sense in which your adversaries would take your
words, when they censure them. For that we are justified by faith ONLY, is the
doctrine of Jesus Christ, the doctrine of his apostles, and the doctrine of the
church of England. I am ashamed, that after having lived twenty-nine years,
since my baptism into this faith, I should speak of it in the lame, unfaithful,
I may say, false manner I have done in the paper abovementioned! What mere
darkness is man, when truth bideth her face from him!

Man is by nature a sinner, the child of the devil, under God's wrath, in a
flate of damnation. The Son of God took pity on this our misery: he made
himself man, he made himself sin for us; that is, he has borne the punishment
of our sin, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes we
are healed. To receive this boundless mercy, this inestimable benefit, we must
have faith in our Benefactor, and through him in God. -- But then, true faith
is not a lifeless principle, as your adversaries se^^, to understand it. They
and you mean quite another thing by says. They mean, A bare believing, that
Jesus is the Christ. You mean a living, growing, purifying principle, which is
the root both of inward and outward holiness; both of purity and good works:
without which no man can have faith, at least no other than a dead faith.

This, Sir, you explained in your sermon at Bradford, Sund. Oct. 28, to near
ten thousand people, who all stood to h^^^ you, with awful silence and great
attention. I have since reflected, how much good the clergy might do, if
instead of shunning, they would come to hear and converse with you; and in
their churches and parishes, would farther enforce those catholic doctrines
which you preach: and which I am glad to see have such a surprising good
effect, on great numbers of souls.

I think indeed, too many clergymen are culpable, in that they do not inform
themselves better, of Mr. Whitefield, yourself and your doctrines, from your
own mouth^: I am persuaded, if they did this with a Christian spirit, the
differences between you would soon be at an end. Nay, I think, those whose
flock resort so much to hear you, ought to do it, out of their pastoral duty
to them: that if you preach good doctrine. they may edify them, on the
impressions so visibly made by your sermons, or if evil, they may reclaim them
from error. --

I shall conclude this letter with putting you in mind, in all your sermons,
writings and practice, nakedly to follow the naked Jesus: I mean, to preach the
pure doctrine of the gospel without respect of persons or things. Many
preachers, many reformers, many missionaries, have fallen by not observing
this; by not having continually in mind, Whoever shall break the least of these
commandments, and teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of
heaven.


END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
THE FOLLOWING BOOKS, ARE PUBLISHED BY JOHN DICKINS, No. 44, North
Second-street near Arch-street, PHILADELPHIA; For the Use of the Methodist
Societies in the United States of America; AND THE PROFITS THEREOF APPLIED FOR
THE General Benefit of the said Societies. Sold by the Publisher, and the
Ministers and Preachers in the several Circuits.
THE Rev. Mr. John Wesley's Notes on the New Testament, in three volumes, well
bound, 178. -- The same, lettered, 18 s. 6 d. The Arminian Magazine, vols. Is It
and IId, at 128. per volume. Thomas a Kempis, bound, 2 s. The Form of
Discipline for the Methodist Church, as revised at the General conference,
1792; with Treatises on Predestination, Perseverance, Christian Perfection,
Baptism, etc. all bound together, 4 s. 3 d. The Experience and Travels of Mr.
Freeborn Garrettson, well bound, 3 s. A Pocket Hymn-Book, containing three
hund^^^ Hymns, well bound and lettered, 3 s. 9 d. An Extract on Infant Baptism,
stitched, 9 d. Children's Instructions, stitched, 6 d. The excellent Works of
the Rev. Mr. John Fletcher, published one volume at a time; the whole will
consist of about six or seven volumes: the Is It, IId, IIId, IVth, and Vth
volumes now published, well bound and lettered, at 5 s. 7^ d. per volume. An
Abridgment of Mrs. Rowe's Devout Exercises of the Heart, bound, 1 s. 10^ d. A
Funeral Discourse on the death of that great divine, the Rev. John Wesley,
stitched, 11 d. The Saints Everlasting Rest, well bound, 5 s. 7 d. Minutes of
the Methodist Conferences, 5 d. The Is It volume of Mr. Francis Asbury's Journal,
5 s. 7 d. A Tract on Slavery, 6 d. The Rev. John Wesley's Life, handsomely
bound and lettered, 7 s. 6 d. -- N. B. Some of the British copies of this Life,
in a larger type, have been sold in America, bound, at 15 s. The Family Adviser
and Primitive Physic, bound, 3 s. 9 d. Extract from Law's Serious Call to a
devout and holy Life, bound, 3 s. 9 d. Spiritual Letters, etc. by the Rev. John
Fletcher, 5 s. 7 d. Appeal to Matter of Fact and Common Sense, by the Rev. John
Fletcher, 5 s. 3 d. Sermons by the Rev. John Wesley, published one volume at a
time, the Is It volume published, and the IId in the press, 5 s. 7 d. each.
Doddridge's Sermons to Young People, full b^und, 3 s. 6 d. A Scriptured
Catechism. 5 d.
As the Profits of these Books are for the general Benefit of the Methodist
Societies, it is humbly recommended to the Members of the said Societies, that
they will purchase no Books which we publish, of any other Person than the
aforesaid JOHN DI^KINS, or the Methodist Ministers and Preachers in the several
Circuits, or such Persons as fell them by their Consent.


