

THE DISAPPOINTMENT; OR, THE FORCE OF CREDULITY. A NEW COMIC-OPERA, IN THREE
ACTS.

BY ANDREW BARTON, Esquire.

Second Edition, revised and corrected, with large additions by the Author.

Enchanting gold! thou do conspire to blind
Man's erring judgment, and misguide the mind;
In search of thee, the wretched worldling goes,
Nor danger fears, though FIENDS of night oppose.
PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR AND SOLD BY FRANCIS SHALLUS No. 40, VINE-STREET.

M.DCC.XCVI.

COPY RIGHT SECURED ACCORDING TO ACT OF CONGRESS.

PREFACE.
THE fo^lowing local piece (The Disappointment, or, the Force of Credulity,)
was originally written for the amusement of myself and a few of my particular
friends, who were pleased to signify their approbation of it in such a manner,
as to en^ross a considerable part of the conversation of all ranks of people,
who expressed their desire to see it and have it published. -- Under these
circumstances, I was greatly at a loss how to proceed, (as I could discover
little merit in it and never intended it for the press) I was loath to expose it
to the criticisms of critics in dramatic or scholastic knowledge, to ridicule
my ignorance, or condescend to those, who I thought were no better judges than
myself, and who might, perhaps, out of compliment, or flattery to me, or to
gratify their own de^^^es, have represented it in a more favorable light than
it really deserves. -- Conscious therefore of its insufficiency, I determined
to excuse myself to all, and in this determination persisted for some time,
till at length wearied out with fresh and repeated solicitations I was obliged
to surrender on the following stipulations.

1. The infrequency of dramatic compositions in America. 2. The necessity of
contributing to the entertainment of the city. 3. To put a stop (if possible)
to the foolish and pernicious practice of searching after supposed hidden
treasure. Many people to this day, are possessed with a foolish notion of the
Pirates burying money along the riverside, and are so infatuated with the
hopes of obtaining it, that they neglect their business by day with the
thoughts of it, by which means their families suffer, and at night, like so
many m^schievous musk^ats, spoil the meadows and banks to the very great injury
of their respective owners.

These terms, I have with reluctance been forced to submit for I am therefore
obliged to assure the public, that the story is founded on fact, transacted
near this city not long since and recent in the memory of thousands, and for
the truth of which I appeal to my fellow citizens.

But in order to give strangers, and others unacquainted with the s^ory, some
idea of it, the following short history is thought necessary.

The scheme was planned by four humorous gentlemen, Hum, Parchment* Quadrant,
and Rattletrap, to divert themsel^es, and friends and to try what lengths
credulity and the love of money would carry me* --

In order to put their scheme in execution they framed a plau^^ble, well
connected, story of hidden treasure, and to gloss the matter, adapted sundry
papers to their purpose and pitched upon two suitable old fellows* Washball and
Raccoon (as principal dupes, with others, who had all been at times on seve^al
digging ex^ursions) to try the success of their scheme, and put (if possible) a
final stop to such ridiculous practices in future, which had the desired
effect. The moral shows the folly of an over credulity and desire of money, and
how apt men are (especially old men) to be unwarily drawn into such schemes,
where there is but a shadow of gain, and concludes with love and virtue well
rewarded, and these observations, that mankind ought to be contented with their
respective stations, to follow their different vocations with honesty and
industry, the only sure and reputable way to gain riches.

I do not figure to myself the least advantage accruing from it but the
satisfaction of contributing my m^te to stop the current of such folly. -- Such
as it is, I submit to the public for their sanction or condemnation, and should
any merit appear in the performance, I shall not vainly attribute it to myself,
but place it to the credit of mere chance.

I am the public's most obedient, humble, devoted and faithful servant, ANDREW
BARTON.

PROLOGUE.
THOUGH distant far, from famed Britannia's isle.
Where comic scenes call cynics forth to smile.
Our artless muse, has made her first essay*
TO instruct and please you with a modern play.
Theatric business was, and still should be
To point out vice in its deformity;
Make virtue fair! shine eminently bright,
Rapture the breast and captivate the sight!
No matter which, the pulpit or the stage,
Condemn the vice and folly of the age;
These are our boast and on sure ground we stand
Plead virtue's cause, throughout this infant land.
We mount the stage and lend an helping hand.
Wits, fools, a knave and conjuror to night,
The objects make both of your ears and sight,
A band of dupes are humm'd with idle schemes*
Quit solid sense for any golden dreams,
Who boldly venture on enchanted ground,
And dig in mystic mud, no treasure found,
Still fondly hope, to plunder that old thief
BLACKBEARD! who plundered thousands, pirate chief!
Till disappointed, though they labored hard
For shadows, stones, and anguish, their reward!
Our flattering muse thinks she is some merit gained
Pursuing truth and things like truth, well feigned.
The subject suited to our present times,
No person's touched, although she lash their crimes;
Nor gall, nor venom tincture her design,
But gay good humor, breathe in every line.
If you condemn her, -- she for ^ensure stands;
But if applaud! -- then thundering clap your hands!
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
Humourists.
Hum, A Tavern-keeper. Parchment, A Scrivener. Quadrant, A mathematical
instrument maker. Rattletrap, A supposed conjuror.
Dupes.
Raccoon, An old debauchee. Washball, An avaracious old barber. Trushoop, A
Cooper. Buckram, A Tailor. Trowell, A Plaisterer.

Meanwell, A young gentleman in love with Washball's niece. Topinlift, A
Sailor. Spitfire, An old Artillery-man, assistant to Rattletrap. Old Gabriel,
Servant to Washball. Terrance* Servant to Trushoop. Collector, Tailors,
Watchman, Blackbeard's ghost, etc. etc.
WOMEN.
Mrs. Trowell, Wife to Trowell. Mrs. Trushoop, Wife to Trushoop. Miss Lucy.
Washball's niece in love with M^anwell. Moll Placket, A woman of the town in
keeping by Ra^coon. Dolly, Servant to Mrs. Trushoop.
THE DISAPPOINTMENT; OR, THE FORCE OF CREDULITY.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- A Tavern, Sign of the Tun.
Scene opens and discovers HUM, PARCHMENT, and QUADRANT, seated at a table,
with wine and glasses. (PARCHMENT pouring out a glass of wine, sings.) SONG I.
COME now my boys, let us jovial be,
The cash we'll soon disclose;
And spurn at sneaking poverty,
Though Gorgons dire! oppose.
The joyful night draws on apace*
Each moment joy inspires!
Whilst steady hope in every face,
Add faith to our desires.
We soon can face the rich and great,
(Whose supercilious squint.
Like Basilisks often made us quake.)
Or else the devil's in it! --
But stop ye sons of slush and mire,
Ye sons of projects rare!
If disappointed we retire,
Faith! then, -- we are as we were.
Sing tantara rara, fools all, fools all, fools all,
Sing tantara rara, fools all, fools all,
Sin^ tantara rara, fools all.
Quad. Well ^'d at the opening of the ball. He* he. he!


Hum* Come success to us. ( all drink success) Well gen^lemen how goes our
scheme! -- Have you made any new proselytes since our last meeting!


Hum. Why really, wh^le credulity and the love of money prevail, I think it no
merit to make proselytes of one half the town, but that* you know, is not our
purpose, we only want to draw in four or five of the most credulous, some of
whom have actually been engaged, in vain, visionary, and fruitless schemes of
money digging* to the great prejudice of their families and injury of their
neighbors, and still entertain the most sanguine hopes of making their
fortunes, at one ^ap, one of those odd nights by sin^ing the lucky spot. -- I
baited the hook for old Soap-sudds, he gaped, snap'd, and swallowed it as
voraciously as a cringing courtier would a pension, -- As for Raccoon, I ju^t
threw out a few hints, he sagaciously discovered (as he thought) the foundation
and soon raised an imaginary fabric.


Quad. Oh! -- if he smells money, as great a coward as they say he is, he would
venture to the gates of h -- ll for it. He, he, he!


Hum. I Have hitherto kept him in suspense, he haunts me like a ghost, he thinks
something but knows nothing, -- he will be here presently, and I have contrived
matters so, that he shall make the discovery himself.


Quad. Very good, -- so far we have sailed propitiously, and I have not been
idle, for I Have drawn in Buckram, Trushoop, and Trowell, they are perpetually at
my house -- I can scarce do a stroke of work for one or other of them -- I wish
the matter speedily settled, for faith! they are so elevated, I Am afraid
they will run crazy. He, he, he! Trushoop talks of building a chapel at his own
expense and of employing a score or two of priests to keep up a continual
rotation of prayers for the repose of the souls of those poor fellows who
buried the money, As for Buckram he intends to knock off business, go to London
and purchase a title. He, he, he! they will all be here in half an hour.


Parch. The devil! -- Then I suppose they will not be in a humor for work, till
this affair is over -- I Would some thoughts of a new suit of clothes, but I must
drop them, till these chimeras are out of Buckram's b^ain.


Hum. That Is the only reason, why I want the business dispatched; for, though I
like the diversion, I would not hurt their families -- Oh! I Would like to have
forgot -- Washball in particular is so full of sanguinity, on account of the
treasure, that it has quite renovated him, perfectly grateful and so generous
as to dub me a bashaw! by making me a present of a magnificent new wig of three
tails. Ha* ha, ha!


Parch. The devil he has? Ha, ha, ha! -- you would better had one of nine, then you
would have been a Bashaw of nine tails at once. Ha, ha!


Hum. No, no, three will do pretty well for a beginning, I Have not quite so much
ambition yet; he told me that he was sure when we got the money* I should be
chosen President of the United States, or chief counselor at law, at least,
and if only the latter, three tails you know will be quite sufficient. Ha, ha!


Quad. True, -- gratitude and generosity in the superlative! a rare example of
faith and good works united.


Hum. Very rare indeed -- though it is but temporary, we shall soon see Messrs.
Faith and Good Works at variance.


Quad. Very soon! very soon! they are but short lived, he, he, he! but Mr.
Parchment, have you prepared the papers?


Parch. Yes, yes, I have 'em in my pocket.


Quad. Do let us see 'em, for they are the foundation of our undertaking.


Parch. ( pulling them out) here they are, placed in regular order and enclosed
in a letter to Mr. Hum.


Hum. Aye, aye, let us see; ( reads) the letter will do to a tittle, but what
the devil's this ancient, worm-eaten piece?


Parch. That Is the will, authenticated and ratified.


Quad. Ratified with the devil to it. He, he, he! why they have knaw'd the one
half up!


Parch. So much the better, the greater the deception.


Hum. Ha, ha! Why it looks as old as if it had been preserved in the temple of
Apollo, or the tower of Babel!


Quad. Egad! you might have said Noah's-Ark at once. He, he, he! for it looks
old enough, -- and pray what is this other weather-beaten piece!


Parch. Why that is the draft of the place, together with the memorandum signed
by the officers present, at the time the money, etc. etc. were deposited, I Have
had them all these three weeks smoking up the chimney.


Quad. Faith I thought so! for I took them for flitches of Bacon. He, he, he!
they have truly the appearance of genuine antiquity, or baconosity. (sings.)


SONG II.
In all the town there is none like you
When you're on mischief bent sirs,
With pen and ink, one well can write
What you do both invent sirs*
Its you my boys, its you can do it,
Parchment you're my darlingpunc;
Ra^coon may curse and Washball burst,
We value not their snarling.
Tol, de roll, etc.
Hum. Very good, very good, -- well I must take them into my care, as they are
directed to me, (gathers up the papers) -- but I wonder what detains Jack
Rattletrap?


Quad. Oh! I Will be bound for his appearance -- I just came from his house and
left him poring over the canto of Hud^b^ass and Sydrophel, in order to furnish
himself with a set of hard superfrostical, callepophricating words, which added
to his knowledge in the mathematics, will completely qualify him for a modern
conjuror. -- but, here he comes! -- talk of the devil and his imps appear, --
as the saying is. He, he, he!


(Enter RATTLETRAP singing.) SONG III.
Behold you my magical phiz
How solemn and sober I look;
Here, here my good friends, here is,
My brass bound magical book.
This book many wonders contain,
'Twou'd deceive the devil himself,
And puzzle a conjuror's brain,
Who has got no more sense than an elf.
Who has, etc.
Parch. Excellentissimo says! Ha, ha! We began to look for you with
impatience, are you almost prepared for your office?


Rat. Yes, dress and books are already provided, but for apparatus I must apply
to Mr. Quadrant.


Quad. Yes, yes, I Will cut you a hazel-rod off our cherry-tree, a magnet,
nocturnal, tellescope, spy-glass, and forestaff, shall be all ready, also a
curious piece of antiquity, of full as much virtue as Fortunatus's-cap. He, he,
he! its nothing less than my great, great, great, great, grand-mother's quilted
nightcap. He, he, he! and I can furnish you as Hudibrass says, with a -- Moon
dial and Napier's bones
With store of constellation stones.
He, he, he! But say, have you seen the papers?


Rat. Yes, yes, I saw them this morning at Mr. Parchment's office -- but
hark'ee, -- we want a fifth person to act as a familiar spirit, or demi-devil.


Hum. Leave that to me, -- I Am acquainted with an old artillery-man, who told
me his father was a bombardier, that he himself was begot and born in the large
mortar-piece at Gibraltar, and that when only three years of age, the
commanding officer (lord Something) taking a fancy to him and determining to
make him truly a soldier, ordered him to be ramm'd in, and fired out of the
mortar-piece, and he was blown over into the Spanish lines, and that he
received not the least hurt, only a little marked with gunpowder. -- He Is a
snug, hickory faced, dry dog* the most finished fellow in the world for this
sort of sport, -- he was also in the Carthagena expedition and would make
nothing of cracking with his teeth, (like hazle nuts) and swallowing two or
three bomb-shells every morning before breakfast [out of bravado only] -- the
devilishest fellow you ever saw, -- but* poor fellow! he is lost most of his
teeth by it. -- I Will introduce him to you; with his assistance and a proper
habit, you will cut as droll a figure as old Merlin himself.


Quad. Well said, he, he, he! that is a hum with the devil to it superlatively
hyperbolical faith! no wonder he is lost some of his teeth, he, he, he! a truly
eccentric genius.


Rat. Excellent ha, ha! Introduce him by all means, he is the very identical
devil I want, I love such a superlative devil! -- I Will soon make him a super
superlative devil, we may th^^ defy the power of Lucifer, Beelzebub and the
whole host of devils united. Ha* ha, ha! -- As to the loss of some of his
teeth, it is a matter of no great consequence, as we shall only want him to chew
a few ^ire-balls. Ha! ha! now and then, -- But we must have a place provided
for his reception under ground, -- Mr. Quadrant and myself will see that done
-- drop the conversation here comes old Raccoon.


( Enter RACCOON.) Rac. Your serbent gentlemen, brudder Hum, and brudders all
I Am berry glad to see you all well.


Parch. Leave ceremonies brother Raccoon and take hold of the bottle. (drinks.)


Hum. Gentlemen, I must beg your patience a few minutes, I Will be with you
shortly. Exit, Hum.


[As he went out he purposely dropped the papers, Raccoon picked them up,
stepped aside, and looked over them.] Rac. (Aside) Hah! brudder Hum hab I found
you secret? I tought dear was someting in de wind, dis is a lucky bout, dad
I Will keep dese papers -- dey shall not hab them, widout dey gib me de share. (He
crams them in his pocket and sits down.)


( Re-enter HUM, looking confused.) Hum. Did you see any thing of a bundle of
papers gentlemen.?


Parch. No, I saw none.


Quad. Nor I. -- What papers are they?


Hum. Zounds! -- If you have got them, don't keep me in suspense!


Rat. Upon my honor, I saw nothing of them.


Rac. What was dey about brudder Hum?


Hum. About, Zounds! they are pap^rs of the utmost consequence, of inestimable
value -- pray put me out of my pain, if you have them -- if they are lost, we are
ruined -- you're each of you as much interested in the recovery of them as
myself, -- for God's sake! gentlemen look about. ( All rise shake their clothes
and search about.) Oh! that I had kept them to myself when I had them safe!
fool tha^ I was ( stamps about the stage and wrings his hands) what shall I do?


Parch. There are no signs of them Mr. Hum.


Rat. Not the least.


Hum. Then we are ruined [Clapping his hands, etc. etc.] and our scheme is
abortive -- ^f they are not here the damned waiter must have picked my pocket,
when he brought up the wine -- (...) the villain. [Rings the bell.]


Wait. (Below) Coming sir.


( Enter WAITER, WASHBALL, TRUSHOOP, DUCKRAM, and TROWELL.) Hum. you scoundrel,
where is the papers you took?


Wait. Sir, I didn't take any.


Hum. You lie you rascal!


Wait. I -- I --


Wash. What Is the matter! what is the matter Mr. Hum?


Hum. we are undone! the villain has ^^o^e my papers. --


Wash. What papers? deliver the papers you dog! (Lifts up his cane.)


Wait. Upon my honor and soul gentlemen, I saw no papers at all.


Trus. Damn your honor you tief -- I hope its no defense, gentlemen.


Buck. Onor! -- what, a waiter in a tav'yrn have onor!


Quad. His countenance condemns him.


Hum. you rascal, I Will send for a constable, you shall be hanged you villain.


Wait. For God's sake! gentlemen, hear me! hear me!


Hum. (Rings the bell) Who waits below there!


Trus. O you tief of de w^rld, when I fish for the devil, I Will bate my hook wid
you.


Buck. Gin Ize g^ng to him, Ize --


Hum. A constable -- a constable below there!


Wait. O Lord! O Lord! Oh! Oh! Oh!


Buck. Produce the pappers this constant, or by Saint Andra I'ze sacrafeese ye!
[He seizes and shakes him.]


Wait. Have mercy on me -- don't kill me!


Wash. Kill the dog! -- kill him! kill him! [Strikes him with his cane.]


Wait. (On his knees) As I hope for mercy I Am innocent.


Buck. Ye've but ane moment to live, deliver! deliver ye dug ye, or I'ze cut
your damm'd throt!


Trow. Hold your hand Mr. Buckram -- let us search him.


Trus. Let me come to the slubberdegullion and I Will skin him like a Munster
potatoe.


Rac. Come gentlemen, be merciful -- don't kill de poor fellow, search him.
[They search him but find none.]


Hum. They Are not about him -- Zounds! what shall we do? (Aside) violent
measures will not avail, we must bribe him, -- come my lad, heark'ee! be ingenuous
with us, they are of no value to you, but of infinite consequence to us and if
you will produce them, we'll give you something handsome, and nothing more shall
be said about them.


Wait. Sir, Sir!


Hum. Perhaps I Have dropped them -- do my lad step down and look about.


Wait. I will indeed Sir. Exit Waiter.


Hum. O most unfortunate affair! -- how strange are the vicissitudes of human
life? -- one moment raised to the highest pinnacle of human felicity, the next,
sunk to the lowest pit of disappointment, and despair! -- alas! alas! how cruel
is my fate? -- how --


Parch. Don't let us despair, Mr. Hum. -- perhaps --


Hum. Undone! inevitably undone! ruined! -- past redemption! my hopes are fled!


Rac. Come, come budder Hum, make yourself easy, I did pick up de papers at de
door.


Hum. Gracious fortune!


Rac. Budder Hum dropped them as he goed out.


Hum. How thankful ought --


Rac. I did see de contents of them -- here dey are -- ( Gives the papers.)


Hum. O blessed papers! -- once more --


Rac. And I hope you will let me come in for de share.


Hum. Ce^tainly, -- I am almost overcome with joy! -- it affects me more than
the most poignant grief I ever yet experienced, yet, however, I may be rejoiced
at the recovery of the papers, I must say brother Raccoon, your imprudence,
caution, and jealousy in detaining them so long, when you saw the anxiety of my
soul, during the severe trial, was to say no worse, extremely cruel and unkind
-- However I impute it not to a sinister or dishonest motive* but, rather to a
thoughtless curiosity as to the consequences* being fully convinced of the
generosity of your disposition and well knowing the best of men, do not at all
times act wisely.


Wash. Ah! Mr. Raccoon, it was very foolish of you, god knows what I suffered
too -- O dear! -- what a pesterment I was in -- but I charitably hope you had
no selfish views in it -- indeed I do.


Rac. No upon my honor, I hab not Mr. Washball, I only did it for fun or de
want of tought.


Wash. Devilish fun! -- children's play -- worse than shooting, firebrands,
arrows, and death, to throw me into such a flusteration, Oh! dear Oh! --


(TRUSHOOP sings.) SONG IV.
You seem in a flutter
And pray what is the matter
Now, now wid you all, now, now wid you all.
And cannot you be azy
And not be so crazy
Dear Master Washball, dear Master Washball.
Now the papers are found,
And all safe and sound
And cannot you be quiet, and cannot you be quiet.
By my sowl! an I Am tir^d
And almost expired
To hear such a riot, to hear such a riot.
What would you have more
You son of fourscore?
Hoot leave off your bawling, hoot leave off, etc.
Sit down and be azy
And no longer taze me
Wid your caterwauling, wid your caterwauling.
If money you're wanting
Why leave off your grunting.
You scullio^ curmudgeon, you scullion curmudgeon.
Sure the money's in store,
What would you have more,
You slubberdegullion, you slubberdegullion.
Hum. Aye indeed we had all like to have been frustrated, come sit down
gentlemen, we ought to be sincerely thankful* the papers are sa^e. (All sit
down.)


Parch* ( To Washball) What can those papers mean?


Wash. Oh dear! Oh dear! how my heart beats for joy!


Trus. So do mine, I tought it would tump my liver out.


Buck. Troth, an I had ^a been stapp'd* I should h^ cut the waiter's throt, Ize
g^ad ye prevented me; let us (...) him up and gie him sam^hing*


T^^u^. Aye do! -- poor dog he was t^rribly frightened.


Hum. Really, no wonder! I was much enraged at him -- poor fellow. (Rings the
bell.)


( Re-enter WAITER.) Wait. Did you call gentlemen?


Buck. We'll lad, we have ^oond the pappers* and here is samthing to make ye
ameends for the freight y^ got (Gives him money) and meend ye tell na ane* but
keep it till your^^l ^^d.


Wait. I will Sir -- Thankee kindly Sir -- God bless your honor, -- Thank your
honor. [Bowing.]


Wash. Aye, Aye, a clos^ tongue makes a wise head -- remember that young man.
[Gives money.]


Wait. I will Sir -- heaven bless your honor, (As he goes out bowing, the
others throw money after him, he picks it up) the lord prosper you gentlemen!
-- heaven preserve your honors -- [Bowing] thank your kind honors. [Aside]
Faith and its no bad collection, I should like such another flourish very well.
Exit Wait.


Parch. ( To Trushoop) I say Mr. Trushoop, what are the contents of those
papers?


Trush. The devil a hare do I know about it, at all, at all.


Hum. Well gentlemen* I look upon you all to be men of honor, I suppose most of
you are not altogether strangers to the busin^ss in agitation, you have all in
miniature been informed of it, except Mr. Parchment and Mr. Trowell who are
present and shall soon be informed.


Parch. (Starting up suddenly) Gentlemen. I expected when I was invited here,
it was to take a cheerful glass with my friends, I had no idea of a secret to
be divulged, not I -- and I earnestly request, that, if it is any scheme, plot,
association, combination, machination, contrivance, secret conclave, cabal,
privy conspiracy, rout, riot, rebellious-meeting or unlawful assembly. -- In
fine, if it is any thing against the illustrious President of the United
States, or of the Society of Cincinnati, whom God preserve! -- the honorable
the Vice President of the honorable Senate -- the honorable the Senate
collectively, or individually -- The honorable the House of Representatives of
the United States that standing Bulwark of American freedom, in Congress
assembled* or not assembled, or either of them* -- The honorable the Secretary
of State. -- The honorable the Secretary of the treasury, -- the honorable the
Secretary at war -- the honorable the chief justice of the United States -- the
honorable the associate judges, in their j^dicial capacity or, otherwise -- the
honorable the Attorney general of the United States. -- The Right Reverend the
bishops and clergy of the United States of all denominations, whether in
church, or out of it -- the constitution, laws, and government under which we
live -- to be beief -- I say gentlemen, if it is any scheme, plot, association,
combination, machination, contrivance, s^cret conclave, cabal, privy
conspiracy, rout, riot, rebellious meeting* or unlawful assembly as aforesaid
once more, keep it to yourselves, don't let me know a tittle of it -- I wash my
hands of it -- for if I know it, I Will be a swift witness against you, as I
profess myself a worthy Citizen a true republican a man of honor and a
gentleman by birth and education -- I Will immediately to the Attorney General,
lodge an information against you and hang you every mother's son!


Wash. Dear, dear sir! don't think of such a thing.


Parch. Don't tell me sir. (Raising his voice.)


Wash. Sir! Sir! -- you have known me these many, many long years, I Have always
lived-peaceably and never was concerned in any of those disturbances you have
mentioned as all my neighbors can testify -- Lord! Lord! Mr. Parchment --


Parch. Mr. Washball, I Have nothing to charge you with -- but, Sir, my
suspicions are --


Wash. Are what? -- Lord! Sir, what?


Parch. Sir, it carries a mysterious countenance! -- a damned rebellious look
--


Wash. Good god sir! -- speak to him somebody -- do! do! Oh dear! Oh! I Am out
of breath.


Rat. Sir I believe there is none in this company but what are as true
republicans as yourself.


Buck. By my sawl mon! an I ha as grate a regord for the illustrious President
of the United States, as ye ha there is na rabels in America mon.


Parch. I hope there are not -- nevertheless, it has a Guy-Fau^ appearance a
damned romantic look.


Trow. How can you say so?


Quad. I Am surprised at you Mr. Parchment.


Trus. The devil burn me, but so am I too!


Parch. I tell you gentlemen, it smells of Gunpowder, treason, blood,
assassination, slaughter, massacre, and murder.


Wash. I Will give you my bond for five hundred pounds, it is no such thing,
indeed, indeed it an't Mr. Parchment, -- Oh dear! speak to him somebody.


Buck. Deel damme mon, say that again and by St. Andra, Ize cut aff your heed.


Parch. I Am not to be frightened by you Mr. Buckram, damme Sir you're mistaken.


Hum. (Aside) Moderate your passion Mr. Buckram, don't be too rash, let me
speak to him -- I hope Mr. Parchment you don't suppose any of us capable of
conspiring against the government, no Sir! -- I answer for all present
(yourself excepted) the United States has not more faithful republican's --
the whole business that you were desired to attend upon here this evening, I Will
instantly communicate, -- if you will hear -- but, if not -- why Sir --


Trow. Aye, do hear -- if you don't like it, you can be off, as well as myself.


Trus. Arra my dear! an have a little pashence an we'll tell you all an more
too, honey.


Buck. Deel damme mon, If you will not hear, ye may even gang aboot your buz'ness.


Rat. I think him totally unworthy of any communication whatever.


Quad. Your behavior is very extraordinary -- let me tell you Mr Parchment, --
I l^ttle expected the like from you.


Parch. I cannot help that Sir, -- my duty. --


Hum. If you are suspicious of us Sir, you're at liberty to quit the company
and make what use of our proceedings you think proper* -- we can answer for
ourselves.


Trus. Aye, and hang us too, and then turn States Evidence, you devil you!


Parch. You being my old friends, I still regard you* therefore I drop those
thoughts, I would not injure your persons or families -- I confess I was over
zealous, when I made use of the expression.


Buck. Domme mon and thot's m^n leek.


Rac. Come, come, Mr. Parchment consider.


Trow. Hear, Sir, hear!


Hum. I promise you you will have no cause to repent of it? it is out of pure
regard to you, we gave you the invitation. [Aside] I could wish him to be one
of us he would be of infinite service.


Parch. On condition it is none of those things I have mentioned I am ready to
hear.


Hum. I give you my honor and the sacred word of a mason it is not, and here is
my hand upon it. [Shakes hands.]


Parch. I Am satisfied Mr. Hum.


Trow. Now this is clever, it is just^ like brethren dwelling together in unity.


Trus. Fa^h'an it is -- it looks well on our side again -- by my soul! an it is
for all the world now, like too hoores fighting and quarreling and soon make it
up again.


Trow. A bad beginning sometimes, makes a good ending.


Trus. That Is true for you my dear, ( To Parchment) mind that honey.


Hum. Well silence gentlemen! -- you must know then, that I have very
unexpectedly and to my very great joy, received a letter from my loving
sister-in law in England, who is heiress to the famous Captain Blackboard [of
blessed memory] enclosing sundry papers, such a^ original letters, a will, a
power of attorney* plans, charts, drafts and memorandums of a vast quantity of
of treasure, etc. etc. that was buried by the pirates, above a century ago,
here in America and these are the papers gntlemen, please to look over them.
[They look over them.]


Parch. Aha! -- I beg you ten thousand pardons gentlemen. -- since it is an
affair of this nature, I join you with all my heart.


Trus. The devil doubt you my jewel and welcome.


^ac. (Pointing to one of the papers in Parchments hand) What^ dat? -- do Mr.
Parchment read it -- I cannot see widout my spectacles.


Wash. Aye do read it* let us hear every thing.


Parch. May I presume to read it Mr. Hum?


Hum. By all means sir, -- as your'e a gentlem^n of the quill a chirog^aphist,
your'e best acquainted with these old fashioned writings.


Parch. Annoque Dommini 1687. Why I find, -- (but I Will (...) the preamble) it is
a particular account of the treasure. It is as follows, verbatim et litera^im,
to wit* viz. Imprimis. 17 large golden candlesticks, 13 golden chalices, 11
cruc^^^es of gold, set round with large table diamonds, 30,000 Portugal pieces,
120,000 Spanish pistoles, ^70,000 pisto^e^es, 73 Ing^^s of gold* 1 small box of
diam^nds, 160,000 pi^ces of eight of Mexico, 3 large boxes of pearls, 1^0
pounds weight of gold dust and the picture of his holiness Pope, Gregory
Hildeb^and, in a frame of solid gold embellished with 3,000 rose diamonds and
enclosed in a gold box.

This instrument is signed by Edward Te^^h, alias Black^eard Captain. Moses
Brimstone 1^^. Lieutenant. Brian Fire b^ll 2d Lieutenant. Judas Guz^le^ire
Gunner. Harry Split-throat ^o^tswain. Jeffery Ea^devil Co^k.



Wash. O? what a treasure! -- what do you think of our plot now, eigh! Mr.
Parchment, He! he! he.


Parch. I like it extremely well sir -- I wish I had been concerned in such a
plot, twenty years ago.


Trus. The devil a word a lie in all that; and would not you be after turning
states evidence now honey?


Parch. O! no -- god fo^bid Mr. Trushoop -- nor h^ng you neither.


Trus. The devil trust you Mr. Gunpowder and blood.


Him. Ha! ha! too close -- well ^ere's enough for us all.


Trus. By St. Patrick it is a very fine ting if a body could but get their
fingers in it.


Quad. He! he! he!


Hum. -- Ha! ha! ha!


Buck. By my saul, ^se awa we ^ me dranken (...) n^ ^on an ke^k the sha^ --
board out a the wandow.


Wash. I Will shave no more. I Will keep my hands out of the sudds^


Rac. Dis will make me cut de figure in life, and appear in de world wid de
propper importance and den I Will do sumting for poor-ting.


Trow. For my part, I Will not boast about it. -- But the world shall see I Will
put it to a pious use.


Rat. Very good, very good gentlemen, but let us proceed to business -- Our
work must be carried on, with Secrecy and dispatch -- beside it will be
attended, with some trifling expense at the first out set, for refreshments
etc. etc. -- I believe it will be necessary to appoint Mr. Parchment our
Secretary and Treasurer, if it be agreeable to him.


All say. With all our hearts!


Parch. [Rising up] Gentlemen! -- you have already laid me under many
obligations and those appointments I look upon as an indubitable proof of your
esteem -- I accept of them with gratitude and heartily thank you for your kind
information and adoption into your company, and the great confidence, you have
(so unworthily) reposed in me, and you may depend upon the most religious
secrecy, faithfulness, accuracy, dispatch, and punctuality.


Trus. Well now an that is a very fine spach! by my soul a^ father Duffy, nor
Murtagh O'Lowery, never made a be^ter.


Hum. Ha! ha! -- a queer dog.


Quad. What sum do you imagine Mr. Rattletrap, will be necessary for e^ch to
^eposit?


Rat. O trifling* trifling, I suppose about half a Joe per man for the present,
for tavern expenses and a few etc's.


Rat. Before I make use of my art, to discover this treasure, I must insist
that each of yo^ go to Mr. Parchment's office and be sworn to secrecy and
honesty to each other and there deposit your respective quotas.


All say. Agreed! agreed!


Hum. Well gentlemen, it grows late* -- let us break up for the present. I
expect to see you all to morrow evening, at six o'clock, mean while let it
remain a profound secret, -- remember you are now going to be sworn, so don't
let your nearest friends, or even your wives know it!


Trus. That Is true for you, -- let me alone for that, honey!


Trow. Not a soul living shall get a word out of me.


( All rise.) (PARCHMENT sings.) SONG V.
Now let us join hands and unite in this cause.
It Is glorious gold, that will gain us applause;
How happy are we? with such treasure in store!
We'll clothe all the naked and feed all the poor.
We'll clothe, etc.
How happy for me, to this country I came?
You all my dear friends now can witness the same*
In wealth to abound. Oh! the thought is most sweet,
No more will I write for one farthing a s^eet.
No more, etc.
Buck. Now my braw lads, an stand true.


Trus. Ara sath! will we that is true for you.


Exeunt. SCENE II. An alley.
Watchman. ( Going his round) Pa phaast thurrce un glock, un rainy mo^^ or
(...). --


( Enter TRUSHOOP, on the opposite side.) Trus. ^ath an that fellows hit it --
by my sowl! but I believe Noak's Ark never rained harder. -- Now, an what the
devil will I be after saying to my wife? -- an what excuze will I make? -- by
my sowl! an she looked as black as a Carolina tunder-squall at me t'oder night,
when I cumm'd home in the morning -- By the holy stone! an I Am very af^ard to
^^mp at the dure -- but I cannot stand this way in the morning, lying out in the
cowl rain all night -- by my sowl! and this sitting up all night will be the
det of me -- fath an I Will tell her all the secret -- hut that will not do nather,
for I Am book sworn, an I Will not sell my sowl to the devil, for a hanful of
scowldings. -- Well, if I had the wusdom of the holy St. Patrick -- St. Dominic
-- St. Kullumkill -- Murtagh O'Lavery -- the venerable Lab^e, an all the p^ush
shaints of Ireland, I wou^dn't be ab^e to ^ell what to do, -- but fath an I
must cum in somehow, or t'oder. Knocks at the door.


Mrs. Trus. (At the window) Who Is there?


Trus* Who else my jewel but your own deer Trushoop? open the du^e if you plaze
my jewel.


Mrs. Trus. Not I, by my conshence! -- go back to the hoores* where you cum
from, I Will not be disturbed by you this way so I will not.


Trus. Open the dure, my deer if you plaze, the nabours will make a grate tawk
if you would, for nabour glibtungs people are all up.


Mrs Trus. What do I care for the nabours, they know I Am an honest vartuous
woman, an that is more than they can say of you, a^ it is no matter how soon they
know of your goings on, if you stay out every night in the morning.


Trus. Well if you will not open it yourself my swatest, why then call Tarrance,
if you plaze.


Mrs. Trus. Indeed, an indeed an I Will call no Tarrance, if you want Tarrance,
why then call him yourself, I Will not be staying up in the cowl, killing my life
this way so I will not.


She retires from the window. Trus. (Knocks at the door) Tarrance! -- Tarrance!
-- Tarrance!


Tar. (Answers within) Cumming Sir.


Trus. Well then come away, an says! I an you will go to work togeder, so we
will, for by my sowl the shap will be the stillesht place in the house for me,
for by St. Patrick, an I Would rather hear the Coopers march, than the sound of my
wife's tung the day, ( Knocks again) Tarrance! -- Tarrance! --


Tar. ( Within) Cumming.


Trus. Augh! th^s oath -- this day will be a bad night to me -- Well the devil
a hare I care -- when I get the money she will soon make it up wid me -- fath
I Will make her as grate as the Arle of ^ortledown's own wife -- Lady Barrymore
shall not be finer than she! (He knocks and calls Tarrance) why you tief of the
wurld! if you don't cum down in a minute, I Will give you shelaley! -- why,
Tarrance!


Tar. (Within) I Am just here.


Trus. This fellow's enough to wurry the pashence of St. Ignatius, or the holy
Pope himself. Tarrance! -- you devil you!


Tar. (Opens the door) Shure I^m just here.


Trus. You tief of the wurld, what made you let me in when I tumpt!


Tar. Shure I cumm'd when I heard you cawl --


Trus. You lie you tief!


Tar. (Scratching his head and grumbling) Shure if you cumm'd home in time we
would not have all this bodtheration, so we would not.


Trus. Give us none of your gum, you spawlpene of perdition* -- by my soul an
I Will give you Shelaley. ( He beats him.)


Tar. (Bawls out aloud) O murder! -- murder! master deer lave off, don't kill
one.


Mrs. Trus. ( Returns to the window) Ar'n't you ashamed to be making a grate
noise in the Alley this morning, killing the poor boy for notting?


Tar. Arra mistress dare speak till him -- master dare lave off, for shure I
was asleep, when I heard you cawl.


Trus. (Pushing Tarrance from him) To the devil I pitch all liars -- go to your
work, you tief of the wurld, and if you don't make me five tight keggs the day
(that will howled no water) I Will bate you as long as I am able and longer too.
( They cross the alley to the sh^p.) Exeunt.


SCENE III. A Room in Moll Placket's house.
( Enter RACCOON, with a Spit, Pick-axe, and Spade, shouldered.) Rac. What
shall I do wid dese tings? -- dad I Will put them under de bed [He steps into the
next room, puts them under the bed, and returns] but where is Mrs. Placket? --
She Will be oberjoyed when I tell her, -- dad I Will dress her off as fine as de
Queen of Skebey, when she come to see brudder Solomon -- she shall go to de
play every night, wid a coach and two footmen to tend her [He calls] P^acket!
Pet! Pet!


Plack. ( Within) Pets a-coming -- Pets a-coming* dear Cooney.


(Enter PLACKET.) Rac. Buss me my dear, and I Will tell you someting, dat will
make you happy.


Plack. What! is your wife dead? say -- tell me -- for I know that will make us
both happy!


Rac. No, no -- but its bery near so good -- but you will tell --


Plack. No, indeed, indeed and double deed -- I will not my dear Cooney.


Rac. Well den -- I Will not keep my dear Pet in suspense any longer -- but you
must buss me, when I say any ting dat ple^ses you.


Plack. Well! so I will* a hundred and a hundred times.


Rac. Well den -- but you will tell? If you do I Will neber forgib you.


Plack. Trust me dear Cooney -- did I ever betray any of your secrets?


Rac. Why no pet -- den I Will tell you. Mr. Hum has receib'd a letter from his
sister-in law in England* wid an account of two or tree hundred tousand pound,
and some oder tings, dat was buried by old Blackbeard de pirate wid de draft
where it ^s hid, and we know de berry spot -- ( she kisses him) and I Will gib
you ^e hundred a year for pin money ( k^ss^s) and we'll ride in de coach
togedder ( kisses) and we'll go to de play togedder ( kisses) and den we'll
come home and go to bed togedder ( kisses) and den we'll -- a you little rogue
you, ( kisses again.)


Plack. And do you really think you will find it?


Rac. Why yes, to be sure child; we know de berry spot!


Plack. Why if you knew where all the treasure in the world was buried, you would
never obtain it without a conjuror.


Rac. Yes my dear, but we hab a conjuror, weeb got Mr. Rattletrap, he
understands 'strology and de magic-art, better den Doctor Foster, or any man in
de gubberment, and dis night we intend to make de trial, -- and I must go dis
instant and settle de place of meeting.


Plack. And can you leave me so soon, my dear Cooney?


[RACCOON sings.] SONG VI.
O! how joyful shall I be,
When I get de money,
I will bring it all to dee;
O! my diddling honey. Exit singing.
Plack Bye, bye, Cooney. Good luck attend him, for my sake. Poor old fool! he
thinks I have a prodigious fondnes^ for him, and so I have for his better part
-- that is his money. He has been deficient in payment for some time past, and
now tells me a cock and a bull story of hidden treasure, to amuse and deceive
me -- accompanied with a deluge of soft slobbering language, such as, his pet,
his dove, his poor ting, and a thou^and such childish expressions and I think
I Am up with him, for I call him Cooney, cock-a-pidgeon* sugar-plumb,
cock-a-dandy, and all the sweet things I can think of, and was any one to
overhear us, they would think us two little children playing baby; and really
we do l^ttle more. But thank fortune! I Am not at a loss for a friend to make up
his deficiency, t^o' he thinks me as innocent as a dove: and indeed I Am like a
do^e, in one respect; for when I lose ou^ mate, I mourn till I get another --
but I hope the worst is past.


SONG VII.
Though I hate the old wretch, full as ba^ as Jack Ketch,
My necess^ties tell me to please him;
I will ogle and whine till I make the gold mine;
For that is the best method to ease him.
I Will simper and leer, and I Will call him my dear,
And be loving as ever I can be;
Then hasten dear Cooney, and fetch me the money:
For that will exact to my plan be. Exit singing.
SCENE IV. A Street.
( Enter QUADRANT and HUM, meeting RATTLETRAP.) Hum. Hey! Rattletrap, which way?


Rat. I Have just returned from the place of action. We go on gloriously!
Quadrant and I must set out half an hour before the rest, to have all things in
readiness -- I Have left Spitfire there and given him his proper cue.


Hum. Very good! What do you think? Ha! ha! I just now saw brother Raccoon,
with a long catalogue of all his military achievements, both in Jamaica and on
the Continent, together with a Treatise he wrote on Tactics, last war, for the
instruction not only of our militia, but the regular officers likewise. The
same he exhibited in the Coffee-house -- you remember it -- I could scarcely
refrain from laughing, while he was so earnest in explaining to me de hollow
square, and de ebolutions, as he called 'em. He Is gone in great haste, to lay
'em before the Governor, to procure his recommendation to the Secretary at War,
for a Kurnel^'s Commission, as he termed it. I find nothing less than a
Regiment will satisfy him, which, he thinks his transcendant merit alone,
entitles him to. But whether or not, he swears he will make his gold subservient
to his ambition, when he obtains it.


Quad. Bravo! I believe he will truly, when he obtains it. Ha! ha! ha!


Hum. I Am at a loss to guess how he will bear up, under his disappointment.
Nothing can equal his folly but his vanity. But I Am in hopes this experiment,
this campaign will cure him.


R^t. No matter how much he is disappointed. I Am doubtful, fellows of his turn,
are incapable of proper reflection.


Hum. True -- but its a great pity for all. Well, remember we are all to m^et at
the Tun, precisely at six. (Looks at his watch.) We Have but half an hour to
spare. Adieu! Adieu?


Exeunt different ways. SCENE V. A Taylor's shop.
( Tailors at work, some singing, others whistling, etc.) ( Enter BUCKRAM, with
his broad-sword.) Buck. Awa! awa! we ye a, awa, begane ye skoondrels, oo^ o me
hoose this meneete, or by St. Andra, Ize chap aff the heeds o every vullain o
ye! oot ye vile scum, na gabble oot o yer heeds or Ize make a sacrafeeze o ye a.
( He makes a few flourishes with his sword, and cuts off the brass knob of the
door. The Tailors all jump off the shop board in confusion, tumbling over each
other with their stockings about their heels, etc. and exit) Na mare me h^ose
sal be a ^esaptacle for thie^es, ye preckloose cabbaging sins o hoores: their
thirte years Ize been a ser^an to ye a -- Awa! awa Stay-tape, Bockrum, Moohare,
Guze, Clips an a. ( He ki^ks and th^ows them with remnants, skirts of cloth,
and old clothes about the stage.) Na mare casion ha I for ye; no Ize clared
the s^ap board, the next thing is to clare the hall o its rubbage, [He kicks
the scraps, old rags, etc. about from under the shop-board.] Ize fut up this
room for the reception o Congress and gentlemen o the foorst ra^k, -- then Ize
gang till Bretain and buy a title, it sa^ be na^thing less than Lord
Chaumberlain, scorst Lord o the bed cha^mber, or meester o the wardrobe, then
Ize be a g^de free^ till America, an no Ize eased me m^ne o the parplax^ty o
bu^^ness, -- no for the gowd, -- Ize gang and meet my com^any. Sings.


SONG VIII.
Ize cut oot political claith,
To patch an men the sta^e.
My bodkin an my thamble ^a^th
Combine to make me grate.
Ize meesur'd out a pleece at coort,
That best wae grandeur suits;
Ize scorn ane o the meaner sort,
Leke silly pau^try brutes.
Oh! the gowd, the bonny, bonny gowd,
That Is buried near the mull,
Oh! could I get ane grup o thee
Then I should ha me wull.
Exit. SCENE VI. A Room in Washball's house.
( Enter MEANWELL and LUCY.) Mean. I cannot conceive my dear Lucy, the meaning
of your uncle's displeasure, his churlish behavior for some days past, gives
me great concern.


Lucy. He never uttered a s^llable to your disad^antage, till within these
three days, during which, he has been perpetually dinning in my ears, that,
provided I marry agreeably to his will, he would give me ten thousand pounds for a
portion! and further, declared, that if ever I spoke to you again, or kept your
company, he would disown me.


Mean. Strange! -- but where is he to get the money?


Lucy. The Lord knows! he is certainly bend himse^f, or, he could not entertain
such preposterous ideas, he told me la^^ night, he intended shortly to sail for
old Spain, and there get himself dubbed a Knight of the Golden-fleece.


Mean. Unaccountable! why he must be out of his senses* or, he never could talk
so inconsistently, and to appoint tomorrow for the celebration of our nuptials,
make the necessary preparations, then of a sudden change his mind! -- I cannot
account for it.


Lucy. I hope this humor will shortly change, then we shall bring matters to a
conclusion: for it would be much more a^reeable to me, with, than without his
^^nal consent.


Mean. Certainly! it would be so to u^ both; but fu^ther consent, or not, it
must be done!


Lucy. Our affair, is now carr'ed on too far for us to retract, without
subjecting ourselves to the ridicule of the whole town; be^^de, my dear
Meanwell, you know a girl's character, under such circumstances, seldom escapes
censure.


Mean. True my dear Lucy! the world's very censorious, and slander (like a
snow-ball) always gathers by rolling, whatever malice can invent, or envy
suggest, shall never lessen you in my esteem; I know your virtue and you know
my honor! my love to you, is of the most pure and evangelical kind! it runs
spontaneously through my veins, like a "fountain of living water*" It Is fixed
irrevocably, firm as a rock, imposs^ble to be shaken, by the blasts of an
universe of scandalous tongues!


Lucy. Be assured my dearest Meanwell, your generous love, shall be repaid with
virtue, tenderness, respect, and obedience, and could I possess the Ten
thousand pounds, my uncle has shaddow'd out for me: I should esteem it as so
much dross. -- 'Twou'd only serve to accelerate my misery without you!

SONG IX.
Mean. My dear Lucy, you ravish my heart,
I am blessed with such language as this,
To my arms then O come! we'll never part,
And now mutually seal with a kiss. (Kisses.)

Lucy. Ten thousand sweet kisses I Will give,
O! be you but contented with me,
Then for you my dear Meanwell I Will live;
And as happy as constant I Will be.

Lord! here is my uncle!


( Enter WASHBALL.) Wash. Hey-d^y! here is fine doings indeed! you're a singing
master, are you? how dare you enter my house, after I forbid you? -- Eigh
sirrah?


Mean. Sir, your niece -- and --


Wash. And what? -- sirrah! -- what have you to do with my niece? out of my
house, with your sole-fam-ela: you're a pretty fellow truly! to marry a girl of
ten thousand pounds fortune, eigh! sole-fam ela indeed! -- I suppose you intend
to ^eed her with wind and you're giving her a sample of it, eigh! ar'n't you
fellow?


Mean. Sir, I beg --


Wash. Beg what? -- I suffer no beggars in my house: begone you rascal! -- get
out of my house I say -- what, do you want to rob me* and debauch my niece?
eigh! out of my house or I Will break your head, sirrah!


Lucy. Dear uncle, be patient!


Wash. Patient eigh? what, you want him to stay do you? hussy, get to your
room! to your room this instant! ( He attempt^ to strike her with his cane,
Meanwell interposes and receives the blow.) Get out of my house, you rascal! --
away to your room baggage! -- out of my house villain!


Exit Meanwell and Lucy different ways. Wash. (Out of breath.) If ever I find
you here again, you sole-fam-ela dog you, I Will send you to the work house,
sirrah! ten thousand pounds eigh! to an upstart coxcomb, who hasn't so much as
a coat of arms: Meanwell! mean enough, God knows! I Am sure, there is no such
name to be found, in all the books of heraldry; -- no, no! I Will match my niece
to a nobleman, who can trace his genealogy as far back, as Edward the
Confessor, William the Conqueror, Charles the Fat, or Pope Gregory Hildebrand,
and settle a good jointure on her equal to that I intend to give her. I Will away
to Spain and get myself created a Knight of the Golden-fleece! then, I shall
have a greater coat of arms, than any peer of Great Britain! I shall be then
called Mr. Sir John Washball Esquire, Knight of the most noble order of the
Golden-fleece! and then I Will seek out for some handsome noble blooded young
virgin (if I can find one of that character, among that class of people, which
I Am a little doubtful of these fornicating times) with whom I Will light the
hymeneal torch, at the connub^al altar: though I Have past my octogenary years of
age! what of that? Abra'm, Isaac, and Jacob, were forty times older than I and
begat Sons and daughters innumerable and so may I! nothing like trying -- Oh!
how I exult in the prospect, but stop* let me see; what if some young cicisbeo,
should Crim. Con. (...) ^eg^d I ^hou'dn't like that very well! but then, if he
should, I shall have some consolation in knowing I cannot help it and that I
must do the same, ^ince its become now adays fash^onable among the great and
that will be tit for tat, for a body, (as the saying is) may as well be out of
the world as out of the fa^hion: He, he, he! egad. I Will even run the risque o^
it: but I must away and meet my friends; the lucky hour appro^ches, when gold,
diamonds and rubies, shall make their appearance, for, the diamond so fine,
when lodged in the mine, to no purpose its brilliance lies wasting.

Which now lie dormant, in our mother earth.
But I must labor hard, to give em birth!
For money I Will have and am resolved to ^^y
My fate, or ^ailing in the adventure die* Exit.

ACT II.
SCENE I.
(Scene opens and discovers Mrs. Trowell at work in her parlour.) ( A knocking
at the door.) Mrs. Trow. Who Is there? walk in.


( Enter Mrs. TRUSHOOP.) Mrs. Trus. An how are you Mrs. Trowell?


Mrs. Trow. Oh! my dear Mrs Trushoop, I Am rejoiced to see you, take a chair: I
made bold to request the favor of your good company to take a dish of tea;
you have become a great stranger of late.


Mrs. Trus. Indeed an indeed, the whole wurld and every thing in it seems
strange to me of late -- all going to destruction.


Mrs. Trow. Lord! how? -- tell me -- I have been very uneasy for some time
past, thinking I might have unknowingly offended you: God knows my heart! we
used to be as intimate as two lovers, and nothing would give me half so much
pleasure as a continuance of our old sweet intimacy.


Mrs. Trus. Augh! an its all over with the like of that now.


Mrs. Trow. The like of what? speak plain, have I offended you?


Mrs. Trus. No, indeed an you hav'n't.


Mrs. Trow. Then why do you absent yourself and look so dejected of late? what
is the matter -- tell me, do?


Mrs. Trus. Matter enough God knows!


Mrs. Trow. You astonish me! -- you know I Am your friend, hide nothing from me;
it may be I can serve you.


Mrs. Trus. Impossible? say no more about it, I know your goodness. ( Cries.)
What did this carpet cost you?


Mrs. Trow. Pshaw! fifteen pounds -- but pray tell me?


Mrs. Trus. My worthless husband promised me one long ago, but poor devil vary
soon an he will not be able to buy a housecloth to wipe the flure. ( Cries.)


Mrs. Trow. O! tell me what is the matter, I vow my heart bleeds for you.


Mrs. Trus. I cannot.


Mrs. Trow. You can.


Mrs. Trus. I mus'n't.


Mrs. Trow. You must, you shall.


Mrs. Trus. No, never.


Mrs. Trow. I insist upon it! remember the many hours, we and our husbands have
passed together, in social mirth and conversation, in visiting, in
card-parties, in going to plays, in sleighing, and in tripping to Gray's
Gardens, they calling each other brother, on account of their being
Free-masons, and we in consequence of it calling each other sister.


Mrs. Trus. Curse the name! that I fear is the source of all my sorrows.


Mrs. Trow. What name, Sister?


Mrs. Trus. No, indeed.


Mrs. Trow. Brother.


Mrs. Trus. No.


Mrs. Trow. What then pray?


Mrs. Trus. Free-mason. (Cries.)


Mrs. Trow. Gracious goodness! -- how?


Mrs. Trus. Why now Mrs. Trowell, you force me to spoke, when I don't want to
spoke. Why, Trushoop (an I Will say that for him) ever since we were man and
wife, which is now two and twenty years, twelve months, an I think, thirty four
days, kept good hours, till he got into that cursed club of Free-masons, an
they have been the ruin of him, sowl an body! an my own self an family in the
bargin, an we shall all in a little time be beggars!


Mrs. Trow. I hope not! Lord don't say so! quite opposite principles they
profess: you are certainly mistaken Mrs. Trushoop.


Mrs. Trus. Profess: -- Troth, but I Am not mistaken at all, at all.


Mrs. Trow. Why, their principles are Charity, Brotherly-love and Cha^^ity.


Mrs. Trus. Hypocracy, drinking an hooring. Clasping her hands.


Mrs. Trow. O fie! O fie! How? how?


Mrs. Trus. Why, don't you see? They have larnt Trushoop to kape company, go to
the lodge, naglact his buzness, and carry him away to the hoore-houses in ^rish
town, an about; s^aying out all night in the morning, ^umping at the du^e an
disturbing my ^ast an all the nabours in the alley: why now an what signi^^es
tawking* sure an you heard him tump many an many a times, hav'n't you now, say?


Mrs. Trow. I have so: but at the same time, I cannot bear to hear any
refle^tions cast on the Free masons. They are a soc^ety of sober, virtuous
gentlemen, well acquainted with Philosophy, Architecture, Morality, and the
very quintesience of religion.


Mrs. Trus. Hoot! Hoot! you tawk vary ^^ne indeed -- sure an yea know b^tter
than all that Mrs. Trowell.


Mrs. Trow. I know this, and its a truth, that ever since my husband has been a
Free-mason, he has grown more sober, goes to church more frequently than he
used to do, says his prayers, every night and morning and never m^^ses saying
grace, before and a^^er meals.


Mrs. Trus. Augh! hoogh! but that is a devil of a reformation, sure enuff. By
my con^hence now, an it is not so with Trushoop. The devil a prayer he prays, or
grace, or goes to Church, (...) my thing like it. But what of all that? Fath an
I Have often heard your man of God t^mp at your own du^e an vary lately two, at
(...) un^a^o^able hours.


Mrs. Trow. I don^t de^y that Mrs. Trushoop, but yet the Free-mason^ are not to
blame.


Mrs. Trus. By m^ conshence! but they are, an I believe Trushoop an yo^^ s^int
of a mason goes ^^geder. The devil a ba^^el he better shad -- I w^nd^^ ^ow an
how you can be to (...)?


Mrs. Trow. Why I must confess, I was for some time very uneasy and jealous
like yourself, but I have learned patience and resignation, and considering
that my husband continued to go to church and say his prayers and graces as
usual -- I thought, that possibly, I might be jealous without su^^^cient cause.


Mrs. Trus. Shure! an he don't pray at night, only to be let in, in the
morning, 'pon my sowl! now Mrs. Trowell, an you may tawk an tawk till you're as
black as a nager, about his going to church, an prayers, an graces, an
resignations, an pashences -- I tell you now, an its all de^^^t -- why now, an
did you never hare of the Fillisten in the gospel, how he opened his winde^s,
to let the paple see him pray? an he was as grate a rascal, as ever tr^d
shoe-lea^her! an a Free-mason too, I warrant the dog! -- fath! an I will not be
put off so -- so I would not.


Mrs. Trow Lord! how you talk! Mrs. --


Mrs. Tr^s. Tawk! aye ^ath! an I towl'd Trushoop t'oder day, I would know the
tru^e -- I razon'd with him* so I did, -- I ^az'd him -- I ^spostelated with
him again an again -- I raved -- I raged -- I ^tampt -- I ^^orm'd -- I wow'd --
I protasted -- I swore (an ^ath I cursed him! God forgive me for cursing a brute
^aast,) that he should never ^ut his futt in bed with me, (an God forgive me
for taking such a rash oath) till he towl^d me the razon of his kaping such bad
hours -- an don't you think it, Mrs. Trowell? the devil a word I got out of
him, at all at all -- an he went over to the shap, and I went after, and I
razon'd again an aga^n with him* till my poor heart was next dure to bursting,
-- an he ba^e the koopers march on the barrel, an made such a confounded noise
all the time, an would not hare me spoke a word, at all at all -- so I was
de^ilish mad* that I bate him with the tick end of the hoop-pole about twenty
tumps -- so I would not give him a toot-full to ate, an poor devil he has been
starving for this week to cum, an by my conshence an he shall have none from
me, so he shall -- let him go eat with the hoores where he cum from.


Mrs. Trow. O! gracious! -- if ever I heard the like! -- you cruel creature! --
how could you serve him so?


Mrs. Trus. Cruel! -- fath! an he ought to be sent to the Bastile, an
Buttony-bay in the bargin.


Mrs. Trow. Merciful father, how you talk!


Mrs. Trus. Tawk indeed!


Mrs. Trow. Well, thank God! I took a contrary method with my husband, and have
succeeded to the utmost of my wishes having thereby discovered the mystery.


Mrs. Trus. An what mystery? pray now?


Mrs. Trow. So don't fret your husband, nor make yourself uneasy, any more;
take my word for it, it will all -- [coughs.]


Mrs. Trus. All what, pray now?


Mrs. Trow. Turn out for the better.


Mrs. Trus. O Jasus! better! an better! may be it would; if they would leave off
hooring.


Mrs. Trow. Let 'em alone -- let 'em go on in their own way.


Mrs. Trus. Go on their own way! my conshence! to destruc^ion! spending their
time, health an substance! do you call that "turn out for the better?" Lord!
how you tawk! -- I Am ashamed of you, indeed an I am Mrs. Trowell -- you're
strangely altered to what you was.


Mrs. Trow. No, no, that is not the case, nor consequence.


Mrs. Trus. I am shure but it is -- shure an your out of your senses.


Mrs. Trow. No, God forbid.


Mrs. Trus. You must be near it.


Mrs. Trow. I am not.


Mrs. Trus. Fath are you; alse what do you mane by your mysteries -- an all for
the better -- fath, an its vary misterious sort of tawk, so it is.


Mrs. Trow. Come, come, don't be angry -- I Will tell you, and you will be as well
pleased with the happy discovery as I was, after suffering much anxiety of
mind, and knowing the soft and loving temper of my husband, I wheedled, I
coax'd, I fondled, I hugged, I squeezed, I caressed, and I kissed him, till I
got the whole secret o^ of him; though I confess, in some degree, I was obliged
to act the Delilah, for you know a man of feeling and sensibility, cannot long
withstand the solicitations of a woman he loves -- they are all Sampsons, I
assure you. In short, he unriddled the whole riddle to me, and if I had been so
minded, I could have got the whole secret of Free-masonry out of him, but I
despised taking that advantage of him, knowing he must have perjured himself.


Mrs. Trus. An what is it? pray let us hear you have been a long time about it.


Mrs. Trow. Have a little patience* and I hea^tily congratulate you, on our
pleasing prospect of flowing in wealth, and notwithstanding your forebodings of
poverty, it will turn out the happiest circumstance of our lives, enable us to
live, not only independent, but in a superlative s^ation.


Mrs. Trus. My God! arn't you humbugging me now? Mrs. Trowell.


Mrs. Trow. No indeed, I Am not capable of it.


Mrs. Trus. An can you be sarious?


Mrs. Trow. I am upon honor.


Mr^. Trus. An how is this maricle to be roght? Oh! I shall faint.


Mrs. Trow. Pshaw! never faint at good news -- don't be so weak Mrs. Trushoop,
keep a steady even temper. [She brings a small bottle of cordial and a glass.]
Drink a little of this. [She drinks.] I hope you feel more composed Mrs.
Trushoop?


Mrs. Trus. Troth on I sale a good dale better -- do give me another glass Mrs.
Trowell, an that will compose me. [Gives her another glass.] Augh! an I Am
bravely now. But, pray go on, where you last off -- don't kape me so long, or
alse I shall faint again.


Mrs. Trow. Resume your former cheerfulness -- banish jealousy and suspicion --
keep your spirits up, "be not faithless, but believe." Well, now I Will tell you.
Mr. Hunt and Mr. Quadrant, both Free-masons, have a certain knowledge of a vast
sum of money, and rich jewels, that was formerly hid by the pirates, and they
meet every night at the Tun, to consult together and prepare themselves, to go
one of these nights to dig it up -- out of brotherly love to my husband an
yours, an two or tree others, have communicated the secret in confidence to
them, and they are to come in for equal shares, and this accounts for their
staying out so late -- the Tun is the bawdy house they frequent, and now I hope
Mrs. Trushoop, you will make yourself easy, and treat your husband with more
humanity and kindness.


Mrs. Trus. Troth! an I will -- if its trute -- but how will they find the
plashe?


Mrs. Trow. Why bless you! -- by the virtue and power of masonry, and the
knowledge of Mr. Rattletrap, the conjurer; and they have got magic lanthorns,
dark-lanthorns, spy-glasses, telescopes, compasses, quadrants, spades, shovels,
boring-augers, spits, and other implements, in great forwardness.


Mrs. Trus. Good luck to 'em, an^ blassings on masons and masonary: an
ten-thousand blassings on Rattletrap. Oh! my dare Trushoop, how ill I have
trated you, my heart is vary sorry for it, but poor sowl! I Will come and make it
up with you. (Rises.)


Mrs. Trow. O no! not yet! -- you shall stay tea first.


Mrs. Trus. Not I, by my conshence, do you think now an I can sit azey here, an
see him, poor sowl! starving at home? -- not I indeed! I never could, Mrs.
Trowell. (Going.)


Mrs. Trow. Psha! -- what nonsense! stay, do -- tea is nearly ready.


Mrs. Trus. No, indeed! an indeed! an I cannot. I Will go this instant, and make
him a good dish of grane-tay at home, for poor sowl! he is starved to death
already, and he may die with starvation, or the hyperphobe, for he is ate
nutting but vater in my houshe for this two weeks to come, so he has. (Going.)


Mrs. Trow. Poh! p^h! what nonsense -- do stay.


Mrs. Trus. Not for the wurld! how hard-harted you are now.


Mrs. Trow. You're always on the extremes -- I Will send for him to drink tea
with us.


Mrs. Trus. No, No! -- I want a little private tawk with him, I Will cum again
tomorrow -- Good bye, good bye.


Mrs. Trow. Well, see you do. Good bye. (Exit Mrs. Trushoop.) An unsteady
woman! soon raised and soon depressed. But I was short; I didn't caution her
against giving any cause of suspicion of what is going on. I fear, she by her
indiscretion may ruin the project, by blabbing it out, among the neighbors in
^he alley, who are not very remarkable for taciturnity, any more than herself;
-- it would be a fata^ discovery, and the blame all fall upon me. -- I must see
her directly, and settle that point. Exit.


SCENE II. Scene opens and discovers RATTLETRAP, HUM, QUADRANT, RACCOON,
BUCKRAM, TRUSHOOP, WASHBALL, and TROWELL, seated round a table, with wine, etc.
( Enter PARCHMENT.) Parch. My old friend, Mr. Trushoop, how are you?


Trus O hone a cree! O! my deer, at your sarvish -- but I don't care how I am
-- so you are well. Shakes hands.


Parch. Hah! hah! -- I hope you're all well, gentlemen.


Trow. Come, Mr Parchment, sit down.


Hum. Are we all here, gentlemen?


Trus. Troth! an here is the hole-^ote of us, burds of a fedder flock togedder.


Hum. Then we'll proceed to business: -- Well, gentlemen, every thing seems to
go on prosperously, and bear a favorable aspect -- I think mymyself happy, in
not having disclosed this important secret, to any of the vain or profligate
part of mankind -- but to you, gentlemen, who, by a long series of
acquaintance, I Have found to be men of the strictest honor and integrity; which
leaves me no room to doubt, but that the treasure, we are now about to discover
and divide amongst us, will be so disposed of, as to render each of us useful
members of society, and shining ornaments to the government under which we
^ive. -- It would grieve my heart to see any of you act inconsistent with the
character of a man of piety and a gentlemen!


Trus A^^a! my deer, that is true for you! (Aside) Don't you ^ee, that vary fine
spache he made just now? -- by my s^wl! an he is a jantelman of grate larnedness
sath! an he is. I Will warrant him now, an he is got Egypt's fab^es all by heart,
so he has.


Q^ad. (^side.) He is certainly a man of great cognescence.


Trus. (Aside.) No sense? -- fath! an he is got forty times more sense than you
honey.


Trow. (Aside) Hah! -- hah! what a queer dog!


Rac. We tank brudder Hum, for his kind admonitions, what he says it tru^e* and
springs from de be^^y fountain of sense; and as my ^alons lie in de milita^y; I
intend to buy de reg'ment -- den I Will show them, what de 'mericans can do,
(rises and imitates the salute of the pike with his cane) "Safe bind, safe
find!" -- ha! brudder Him? -- I ha^ engaged wid M^. Trappick, and hab it from
under his own hand, for a bill of exchange for ten thousand pound at
sixty-five, at de rate of twenty-eight shilling de pistole, and gold dust at
six pound de ounce.


Hum. It Is very commendable, brother Raccoon, you have, to be sure, an
excellent idea of honor and trade.


Rac. And beside all dis brudder Hum -- I will build at my own expense, a
comfitable hospital, for de reception of de poor penitent female prostitute^ --
o^ersee them myself, take care of de poor tings, and dey shall hab all I can gib
them.


Hum. (Aside) What a libidinous old dog! -- No doubt of it, brothe^ Raccoon,
it is highly meritorious! none so fit to endow and superintend so heaven-born an
institution! as yourself; even Solomon, in all his glory -- with all his wisdom
and experience in these matters, will be eclipsed by you; -- excuse me, brother
Raccoon, I almost envy your happiness! -- What Bashaw! Grand Signior! or
Sultan! will be equal to you? -- or what Seraglio on earth, comparable to
yours? -- It will be a Paradise in reality, and in perfection! far exceeding
the imaginary paradise of Mahomet! Oh! happy, happy man! But as I would by no
means, presume to direct one so well qualified and conversant in these delicate
effeminate matters -- yet, methinks, brother Raccoon, were you also to erect a
foundling hospital, it would reflect additional luster on your charity, fame,
honor, and glory!


Rac. No, no! brudder Hum -- I tink I hab done enough, -- let Mr. Washball do
dat.


Wash. No, no! I will not -- I Will maintain no body's bastards but my own; -- every
body would laugh at me, and call me an old fool! -- I Will not be pestered with
your brats, I warrant you! -- I am far advanced in years, and have lost that
sprightliness and activity, I possessed in my youthful days.


Trow. No doubt of it, Mr. Washball, but you carry your age well.


Buck. Troth! an he does mon.


Wash. Aye, aye! -- no matter -- but I hope to do some good with my money too,
I purpose to go to Spain -- get myself made a Knight of the Golden-fleece --
then to London, and marry my niece to a nobleman -- I Have no ambition, not I,
but to be called Mr. Sir John Washball, Esquire. and have a coat of arms.


Trus. A night of the whupping-post, you mane -- well, the devil a hare myself
cares for a cote of arms, or, a cote of legs -- by my sowl! but I Will buy myself
a good pair of wusted stockings, lined wid silk ones; and myself will bild a
chapel, and help the poor preests, who havn't a tootful to put in their mouts.
-- Augh! how I will like to see the poor French emigrants bawling at me? --
"Charity pour l'amour de Dieu!" An the devil a baggar shall lave my howshe,
widout a hungry bally! let me alone for that! And when I would be after dying,
-- surely they will call me Shaint Patrick, junior, and long life to you honey!


Hum. I applaud your pious resolutions, M^. Trushoop; your intentional charity
and glorious designs, are certainly disinterested, and worthy of none but
yourself!


Trus. The devil a word a lie in all that!


Parch. H^^tory cannot produce men of more liberal, generous, philanthropic,
humane, christian, charitable, and patriotic sentiments, so truly
characteristic of yourselves! Your names, gentlemen, will be handed down with
ec^at, to the remotest periods of eternity! -- Temples -- monuments -- pillars
-- obelisks -- statues -- spires -- bustos -- and triumphal arches, will rise
spontaneously over each of your graves, like so many phoenixes out of their own
ashes, and defy the efforts of envy or malice to destroy them! -- Nay, should
even the old gentleman, Time! himself, that pertinacious destroyer of bodies
attempt it, he would find himself (perhaps, for the first time) woefully
disappointed.


Trus. Arra! fath! would ^e -- that is true for you!


Hum. Depend upon it -- volumes will swell in your praise -- and I myself,
(though vastly inferior to the task) will write an encomiastic on each of you,
and have them printed in a folio-volume, neatly bound, gilt, and lettered, as
large as a church bible.


Rac. Do so, brudder Hum, we tank you for your kind intention.


Trus. None of that, fath! an I would not suffer Goliath, nor Phin M'Cool
himself, to comb my head wid a stick!


Quad. (Aside.) He! he! he! Surely you will not refuse the honor, Mr. Trushoop?


Trus. Fath! an there is no honor thereabouts, honey!


Parch. (Aside.) Hah! hah! hah! surprising^y humorous.


Quad. (Aside.) He is so excessively witty and comical, it is almost impossible
to do any business where he is.


Rat. Well, gentlemen, -- have you seriously considered what you're going
about? -- Our warfare is not with the men of this world, we have to engage with
principalities and powers of darkness, with inv^sibles, dem^n^, and hobgoblins;
far more powerful than the united legions of the most invincible monarchs on
earth: therefore, the utmost exertion of your courage and every nerve, will be
absolutely and indispensibly necessary.


Parch. The thoughts of those infernals shocks me so, I can scarcely help
trembling!


Rac. I tink I hab courage enough! --


Hum. Not the least shadow of a doubt, brother Rac^oon, you have ever been
super-eminently distinguished for your superior courage and military skill!


Quad. Aye, aye, you're a happy man! your courage is constitutional!


Wash. So it is -- so it is -- but for me -- Oh dear! oh dear!


Buc. Hoot, mon! awa, awa! we a year yealping, na mare o year whigmeleeries!
(Sings.)


SONG X.
It Is money maks the coward brave,
An freedom gies to every slave,
My good brod-sword, Ize soon displa',
An drive those warlocks far awa. A^ drive, etc.
Stan' ye a still an see how tight,
A Scotchman we ^he deel wull fight,
Ize toozle him even at my ease;
Drive imps and warlocks down the braes.
Drive imp^, etc.
My life Ize lay to a Scotch bawbee,
Ize grup him faust ye soon sal see,
Rare sport, my lads, troth! soon Ize show,
What a bonny highland lad can do!
What a bonny, etc.
Be he the deel, or what he wu^l,
By Andra's-saint! he will ha his full,
Quick 'boot his heed, my sword shall pla',
Make 'im quut his legs, an' gang awa
Make 'im quut, etc.
Wash. Excellent indeed! that song has inspired me with a little courage.


Hum. I Am glad to hear it! I hope it will inspire us all, and have the same
effect as the Marsellois'-hymn!


Rat. Well, are you all furnished with tools?


Rac. I provide de pick-axe, de spade, and de spit, -- I left them wid a friend,
but I can soon get them.


Rat. Now, gentlemen, let us fix on a watchword, whereby we may know each other
in the dark.


Parch. Right, Sir! the papers inform us, the treasure was carried up the
creek, on board a canoe.


Wash. A very good watchword! Mr. Parchment.


Parch. Then let it be canoe! as it has a reference to the concealment of the
treasure.


Hum. Be it so -- I like the word well.


Buc^. Troth! Ize na objection, sae we con understond ane anither.


Trow. I like the word, it has a soft sound, and readily conveyed.


Trus. The devil a hare mysalf ca^ how it is, or what it is, canoe! or bote!
(...) the money!


SONG XI.
By Shaint Patrick, deer honey's, no longer let us stay,
But take lave altogather an bundle away,
To the plashe under ground, where the trazure's exposed;
An bring that to light, which shall never be disclosed.
An now we have got it, my jewels, ohone!
For kaaping it snug -- arra! let me alone!
We'll sing Phillalew! at the sight of the pelf,
An, as to the sharing -- lave that to myself.
Arra! fale how I Will wurk, wid my peck ax an spade,
For sure I was nursed to the turf-cutting trade,
In bright Tipperara an smiling Tyrone;
An if you will all help me, we'll all dig alone.
Come, come then away, to the plashe we'll retrate,
If the devil should mate us, he would surely get bate,
I Will fassen my leg wid a pare of good brogues;
An I Will follow before, all the way my sweet rogues.
An now we have got it, we'll roar an we'll bawl,
An sing, fath! like locusts in winter an fall,
With shamrough in hat, deel a down will we lay;
But dance all night long, on St. Patrick's day,
The bagpipes shall fiddle Graamudgey gramagh,
While we swill down Skolrankey an good usquebagh,
When I wawk in the strate, I Will be led by a trupe;
Coming after an crying, -- "Long life to Trushoop!"
Hum. An excellent song 'pon my soul! well composed and well sung!


Quad. And well timed too! he! he! he! -- Is it one of your own composition,
Mr. Trushoop?


Trus. Why you devil you! -- do you tink now, an I Would sing any body's songs but
my own! -- by my sowl! now, an I Will challenge the whole college of Dublin it is
self, to fellow me the like of it!


Hum, Quad. and Parch. Ha! ha! ha!


Rat. (Aside.) Hah! ha! ha! -- a queer dog! an eccentric genius! -- Well,
gentlemen* at eleven o'clock we are to meet at the stone bridge, near the mill;
-- it will not be prudent to go altogether, lest we be discovered; whoever
arrives there first, let him wait for the rest, and as they approach they must
hail with the watchword, canoe! -- those within must answer with the same
word; by observing this, we shall prevent mistakes and discovery.


Hum. Aye! -- aye! the utmost care and circumspection are necessary, we cannot
be too cautious; the object we are pursuing is equal to one whole year's
revenue of the United States!


Trus. Fath! and I Will hollow canew! an canew! all night long in the morning, if
you plaze.


Rat. Unless you're determined to follow implicitly my directions, when we come
to action, 'twill be in vain to proceed.


Wash. I Will do nothing but what you order, Mr. Rattletrap, indeed I will not! the
spirits will not hurt us, I hope?


Rat. Don't be afraid -- take no rash steps -- follow my directions, and not a
hair of your heads shall be injured! Now, gentlemen, it is time to close, it is
needless to say any more, now the plan's settled. Remember eleven o'clock, at
the stone bridge, each of you repair home, and bring all your tools with you,
we'll break up for the present, I Will away home, and put on my magic habit --
otherwise, I shall have no power over the invisibles!


Rac. I Will go and get de tools, and bring a little refreshment wid me.


Trus. Fath! an I Will fatch my gauging-rod, an all the tools in the shop, if you
want um, becaze why -- I Will have no 'casion to uze um after this, honey!


Buc. Ize feetch my Andra we me, an then Ize fece the deel hims^^^! (...) he
appear.


Quad. And I Will bring ^he instruments with me, they are all in excellent order,
and well prepared.


Rat. Now gentlemen, l^t's go with good hearts, there is nothing like putting a
good face on these matters. If you will bear chorus, I Will sing you a song before
we set off. Come, fill your glasses.


All, say, With all my hear^! They fill their glasses*


SONG XII.
The merchant roams from climes to climes,
Rega^dless of his pleasure,
To hardships and fatigue resigns,
When in pursuit of treasure.
Chorus -- And a digging, and^*
See now the lucky hour it comes,
With pick-axe and with f^ade,
A little digging, -- oh! my sons,
And then our fortune's made! Chorus.
Let Us boldly venture on the ground!
And seize the glorious chest,
No joy on earth like gold is found,
To ease the human breast! Chorus.
All drink, Huzza, and Exeunt. SCENE III. A Room in Trushoop's House.
( Enter Mrs. TRUSHOOP in haste.) Mrs. Trus. Dolly! -- Dolly! --


Dolly. Ma'am!


Mrs. Trus. Come hither, girl! -- quick! quick!


Dolly. Coming, Ma'am. -- (Aside.) What the deuce i^ the matter now? -- sure
the house is on fire!


Mr. Trus. Why Doll Sword^ I say --


( Enter DOLLY, running and looking affrighted.) Dolly. Here, ma'am.


Mrs. Trus. How ^ong you stay, hussy? -- a body must split their troats before
you cum -- go your ways, an put on the tay-kittel, quick! make haste girl! do
you hare?


Dolly. Yes ma'am -- (Aside.) -- Is that all? Exit Dolly.


Mrs. Trus. How she stands? -- Gaping -- I seem in a flutter -- my heart fales
as light as a fedder, -- I don't know what ales me -- poor Trushoop! an I
wonder what he will think, when I tell him all poor devi^! an why didn't he tell
me himself then? an I shou'dn't have scowlded him, an bate him, an starved him
so; but sure, an its his own fault, but I Will soon make it up with him, Dolly! I
say.


Dolly. Ma'am!


Mrs. Trus. Does the kittle bile? -- you're a plagey while about it.


Dolly. Just now, ma'am. (Aside.) Plague on yourse'f! you're in a devil of a
hurry, I think! -- will not give one time to blow the fire, and just come from
stuffing herself at Mrs. Trowell's, and not satisfied; I Will warrant her, she is
drank twenty dishes of tea, and eat half a cord of toast and butter! -- I hate
such gormandizing devils!


Mrs. Trus. It seems every minnet was an hour with me, I fale vary comical --
well, it will be over bye an bye, an fath! an I Will have a better carpet than
Mrs. Trowell's, an all these old fashion chairs, an tables, an luckin-glasses.
-- I Will pack to the vandue, an I Will buy good Moll-Hoggeny ones -- plate, china,
an every thing alse, shall be of the newest taste an highest cut, an why
shou'dn't it? sure an I can afford it now? Augh! an good luck to 'um, I say. --
Dolly, now an what are you about?


Dolly. Blowing the sire, ma'am. (Aside.) What the devil do you think?


Mrs. Trus. Why now! an how long will you blow it?


Dolly. 'Till it boils, ma'am. -- (Aside.) To be sure.


Mrs. Trus. Why don't you cum then you pokeing toad you!


Dolly. Coming Ma'am. (aside.) I believe in my soul! she is got the influenza,
or the ravenous fever, or something!


Mrs. Trus. Well, an that self same Mrs. Trowell, is a Jewel of a woman, --
what pashence she has; an I wish I had half so much; but fath! an I never will
-- An why don't you come, you stomakin, with the tay-kittel? bring it along, I
say!


Dolly, Yes, ma'am! I Am coming. (Aside) Curse the kettle, it will never boil, I
cannot make it boil for my soul! smoking my eyes out, and be bother'd so, I
swear! I Will plague myself no longer about it, she shall have it as it is, boil
or not boil, the devil a bit I care!


Mrs. Trus. Well cum away then, you pokeing toad you!


Dolly. (aside.) O! hold your jaw! you brimstone devil! -- Coming ma'am!


( Enter DOLLY, with the tea-kettle.) Mrs. Trus. An did it bile now?


Dolly. Yes, ma'am, over and over again.


Mrs. Trus. Curse you, an what made you so long then?


Dolly. To make it boil well, ma'am.


Mrs. Trus. Set it down, how you stand gaping? an go your ways over to the
shap, and give my complisance to your master, an tell him to cum over, I want
to spoke till him immediately, while I make a bowl of punch, your master loves
punch; (Aside.) an fath! an I don't like it vary badly nather. Pull up, my girl!


Dolly. Yes, ma'am. (Aside.) Hitey titey, and what is all this going on? some
fun, I believe in my soul! Hah! hah! hah! -- Oh! goodee, goodee oh! we shall
see presently. Exit DOLLY.


Mrs. Trus Well indeed! an I believe it is true enuff, an I have dram't it, or
read it in some old alminac somewhere, that "there is great joy over one
sinner that rapanteth." Troth! an I Am shure an I rapant of of starving him so,
an poor Trushoop will have grate joy now, when he knows what I Am going about to
do for him, poor sowl! an he must be vary hungry, so he must, not a drop has he
ate in my houshe, this six days to cum, an indeed, an indeed, he is one of the
best husbands I ever see! Exit.


SCENE IV. A Room in Moll Placket's House.
( Enter TOPINLIFT, meeting MOLL-PLACKET.) Top. What cheer, Moll? let us taste
your head, (Kisses her.) How stands the wind? is the coast clear? no danger of
the enemy?


Plack. No, no, he has no certain time of coming, except after church on
Sundays; and then he never fails, if the old fellow succeeds in this night's
enterprise, I Will make your fortune for you, my boy!


Top. Why! what the devil has Raccoon spied now? is there a galloon in chase?
or, is he going to turn pirate?


Plack. No, no, but he may thank the pirates for it!


Top. How, how Moll? tell me, you little dear dog you, ( Chucking her under the
chin.)


Plack. I tell you indeed! -- a body would -- well, can you keep a secret then?


Top. Aye! can I, as snug as a Free-mason; If ever I blow you, blast me! you
know me better: If one word goes through my head rails, the devil blow me to
Halifax, or Botany-Bay. -- Aye Moll! the next hurricane blow me off the
main-top-gallant-yard! three leagues astern, and be swallowed up like Jonathan
swallowed the whale! That Is enough! and now I Will kiss the book on it. ( Kisses
her.)


Plack. Well, come, I Will te^l you -- You must know, that Mr. Hum has got a
letter, and a heap of papers, from his sister-in-law in England, giving an
acco^n^, where there is a vast deal of money, that was formerly buried by the
pirates!


Top. Money! buried by the pirates? the ^evil! -- aye Moll, that is true! I Have
often heard that Blackbeard hid his money, somewhere by the river's side; but
how the devil came she by the papers?


Plack. Why you fool! -- she is Captain Blackbeard's great-grand-daughter, and
they were preserved in the family till they were sent to Mr. Hum, and you know
Raccoon is a Free-mason too, so he is to assist him, and they are to go shares.


Top. But how do you know that Hum's a Free-mason?


Plack. Why he told me so, and they always call one another brother, and they
keep this business as secret as their masonry, but I wheedled Raccoon out of
it, in spite of all his cunning.


Top. By heavens! I shou'dn't like him on board the Europa! -- he would make a
damned fist in the Killecranky trade -- he would throw out a signal, and the
custom-house officers would soon bear down on us -- away goes ship and cargo by
the mast -- by the Lord Harry, he would soon make beggars of my owners -- But tell
us, Moll, how the devil did you pump it out of him?


Plack. That Is none of your business, sauce-box -- women like me, have always a
lure to catch the men's secrets!


Top. True Moll -- but we'll talk further on this subject another time, this
sort of chit-chat keeps us at long shot, let us step into the state-room, you
know the old saying, "Time and tide waits for no one."


Plack. Softly! -- don't be too hasty, let us make the door fast first. (She
locks the door.) Though I love your little finger better than Raccoon's whole
body; yet I must keep in with him.


Top. Aye! that is true Moll -- I should be loath to quarrel with an owner,
because he did not understand navigation!


Plack. You know he maintains me, (after some sort) finds me a house to live
in, fathers all my children, and a husband can do no more.


Top. Right, Moll! now we are all snug, the hatches all secured. Sings.

SONG XIII.
No girl with Placket can compare,
She is so charming, sweet, and fair!
Such rosy cheeks, and nut-brown hair!
There Is none like Molly Placket.
When'ere from sea I do return,
I for my Placket singe and burn,
Good luck, Raccoon, it is now my turn,
Come, come my lovely Placket.
Come Moll, now I Will try what the clues of your hammock are made of.


(As they walk toward the upper part of the stage, a scene opens, and
discovers a bed, table, and two bottles on it, with a broken glass over one,
and a candle stuck in the other. -- A knocking at the door.) Top. Zounds!
what is this? the devil has owed me a spite this long time, and now he has
brought the enemy upon me, now I Am land locked!


Plack. Who Is there? -- who is there?


Rac. ( Without.) It Is only me, my liddle dear pet -- open de door.


Plack. ( Aside.) Oh! curse his head! -- Pet's a coming! Pet's a coming, dear
Cooney!


Top. Where the devil shall I stow myself? by the Lord Harry! -- there is no
dropping astern here.


Plack. Creep under the bed, and your as safe as a thief in a synagogue!


Top. Aye, Moll! down the fore-s^uttle, or, any port in a storm, damme!


Topinlift goes under the bed, and she opens the door. ( Enter RACCOON.) Plack.
What brings my dear Cooney back so soon? no misfortune, I hope.


Rac. No, no; no misfortune, only I left sum tings under de bed.


Plack. (Aside.) Curse your contrivance, now I Am blown. What things, my dear
Cooney, did you leave there? (Aside.) Oh! invention! thou darling genius of my
sex, assist me, or I Am ruined!


Rac. Nutting, my dear pet, but de spade, de pick-axe, and de spit. But, what
makes you look so suppris'd! child?


Plac. Why, I was afraid you would catch me, and indeed you had like to have done
so, (affects a laugh.) He! he! he!


Rac. Seech what? seech how? What de debil do you mean by seech? Dad! I begin
to tink it is not all lies dat I hear about you, Mrs. Placket, tell me this
instant who you hab wid you, or I Will shake you like de debil! (He shakes her,
and she bawls.) What ^^ ^ebil, you tink to impose upon me, wid you he! he! he!
I Will know de trute before I done, hussy!


Plac. Oh! my dear Cooney! -- do let me go, and I Will tell you the truth --
indeed I will.


Top. ( Peeping.) Oh! the brimstone whore! -- I wish I was on board the Europa!


Rac. Well, come den -- confine youself to de tru^e, hussy!


Top. ( Peeping.) By the Lord Harry! the storm gathers, we shall have foul
weather soon -- I must bowse taught my rolling tackles!


Plack. Lord Sir! I Am afraid to tell you -- you look so angry -- I Will tell you
in the morning, when your passion's over.


Rac. I Will know it instantly, you vile strumpet you -- or I Will shake you to
atoms. ( Shakes her again, and she bawls.)


Top ( Pe^ping.) It comes thicker and faster, -- here is a damned stink of
bildge water along-side.


Plack. I Will tell you all -- if you will let me go.


Rac. Tell den hussy! dis minnet!


T^p (Peeping.) Ava^^! there -- belay that, I must out tomkins, and prepare for
a broadside -- damme.


Plack. Look at this book. ( Gives him a Dutch almanac.)


Top. ( Peeping.) No nea^! steady there!


Rac. What of dat? -- why it is High Dutch.


Plack. Cannot you read it?


Rac. No -- not I.


Plack (Aside.) I Am glad of it! -- Why then, you must know* when I was about
fifteen years of age, I lived at Germantown with my uncle, a high German
Doctor, who could tell fortunes, find stolen goods, discover hidden treasure,
lay spirits, and raise the devil. And his whole art is contained in this little
book.


Top. ( Peeping.) By the Lord! she steers well through the breaker^ I was damned
afraid she had sprung a leak, he pumped her so hellishly!


Rac. You don't say so, pet?


Plack. But I do! -- you shall hear -- I Would just taken the book in my hand, and
raised a familiar spirit, to enquire of him if you would succeed in your
undertaking, and he had just risen through the floor, when you knocked at the
door.


Rac. ( Stares and trembles.) I declare you supprise me! let me get de tings,
and I Will go.


Plack. You must not yet, it is as much as your life is worth, to touch any
thing before I have laid him.


Top. ( Aside.) By my soul! she acts her part well; she would outface truth, and
out-brazen the devil! a girl after my own heart, damme.


Rac. Can you lay him den? -- my dear pet.


Plack. Why yes! -- I Have raised and laid five hundred in my time.


Top. ( Aside.) That Is true enough, my girl! but I Will secure the spit for fear
of the worst.


Rac. Oh! my dear pet, do lay him den.


Plack. Have you courage enough to see him, dear Cooney?


Rac. No, no, no, no! -- dear pet.


Plack. But there no avoiding it now, you will see him only in part.


Rac. Oh! oh! oh! ( Trembling) I bish he was gone!


Plack. ( Places Raccoon's back toward the bed.) Stand you here; don't stir an
inch, bend your head a little that way, you may shut your eyes -- he is visible,
but don't be afraid, he shall not hurt you. ( She beckons to Topinlift, he comes
from under the bed, she meets him and puts an old blue petticoat over his head
and shoulders, and reads.) Dunder unt vetter schleemer hoont, ein blixum kindt,
ri^um tenealis amissee. ( Topinlift oversets Raccoon, drops the spit, and runs
off.)


Rac. ( Looking frightened.) Mercy on me, here am I? Oh! oh!


Plack. Get up, dear Cooney! -- did you see him? -- you an't hurt I hope, my
dear? -- let me help you up. ( She raises him) don't be frightened, he will
trouble you no more, he is a thousand leagues off by this time. ( She applies a
sm^lling bottle to his nose, he starts.)


Rac. Oh! my dear pet! I -- I -- I nebber was so frightened in all my life! is
he gone?


Plack. Aye, far enough -- didn't you see him go?


Rac. I hab de glimp of him as he goed by, I tought he did carry away de corner
of de house wid him. Oh! oh!


Plack. (Runs to the bottle, and brings him a dram.) Drink this, dear Cooney,
and you will soon recover your spirits.


Rac. ( Trembling, drinks.) Oh! I was'nt not afraid, a -- a -- only --


Plack. Courage man! -- you will see ten times more before morning!


Rac. I tink he look like de sailor.


Plack. Yes! -- why he is the apparition of one of Blackbeard's crew, and as a
confirmation that you will obtain the treasure, he threw, that spit on the floor
as he went off.


Rac. ( Takes up the spit.) Why dis is de berry spit dat I put under de bed!


Plack. So much the better, it was a signal to be gone.


Rac. Well, I get de pick-ax and de spade, and den I Will go, but I must have dis
liddle book to show Mr. Rattletrap.


Plack. No, no -- it is high Dutch, he cannot read it. ( Takes it from him.)


Rac. ( Goes to the bed and takes the pick-axe and spade.) Now one buss, my
dear pet, and den --


Kisses her and sings. SONG XIV.
Oh! when I get de welt,
Dat's buried by de mill,
Enjoy long life an helt,
An pleasure at my will.
What store of gold I'^l bring,
My lovely pet to dee,
Den none but my poor ting
Shall share de same wid me. Exit Raccoon.
Plac. Well, -- it is an old saying, and I think a true one: -- When poverty
comes (...) the door, love flies out at the window. Really I have experienced
the truth of it lately, and had not it been for Topinlift, and a few transient
friends, I should have been in a poor situation; for I Am sure Raccoon's nothing
belonging to him that can please me but his money, and I see very little of
that. He p^omises mountains of gold! ^ut I fancy he will be deceived as well as
myself! I Will trust no longer to bare promises, when a woman finds herself
deceived, and deprived of most of the comforts of life, she has it always in
her power, and she must be a fool, if she don't take her revenge in a way the
most pleasing to herself. Sings. SONG XV.
Sure gold is the fuel that kindles the fire,
And serves for to fan up a woman's desire,
To a fumbling fool that is decrepid and old:
For in all scenes of life, from the great to the little,
The bench, bar and pulpit, it suits to a tittle;
You're surely condemned, if you hav'n't the gold.
But if you have money* never mind what your cause is,
But tickle their palms and you will gain their applauses;
No statesman so great, so cunning, and bold,
But will truckle to you, for the sake of your gold;
And should you lack that -- you are certainly sold.
But hang this disappointmen^!

Let women of business take care of their men,
If one will not suffice them -- why, let them have ten.

Exi^* SCENE V. A Room at Mrs. Trushoop's.
Mrs. Trus. Here he cums! -- poor sowl! -- how magre he looks! I vow to St.
Patrick! an I pity him!


( Enter TRUSHOOP and DOLLY.) (MRS. TRUSHOOP meeting him with a bowl of punch.)
Trus. And was you after wanting me, my deer?


Mrs. Trus. To be sure an I was, honey, an hares to you my jewel, and sussex to
your undertakins, dare! ( Drinks.)


Trus. I thank you kindly, my deer! -- but I don't know what you mane!


Mrs. Trus. Never mind! drink hearty! ( Drinks.) Take anudder pull at it, dare!
( Drinks again.) Shure! an it is vary good punch.


Trus. By my sowl! -- and it is so, it drinks for all the world like
nectar-ambrosial! so it does.


Mrs. Trus. Cum give me one of your swate old fashion kisses, dare! ( Kisses
him.) troth, an it seems like old times now, just for all the wurld -- let me
take off your apern, honey, for shure an you will have no more 'casion for it
after this. ( She takes off his apron and throws it from her.)


Trus. Why now, deer! -- an what do you mane?


Mrs. Trus. Never mind, sit down, honey! sure an you must be vary hungry?


Trus. Indeed, and I am so!


Mrs. Trus. Poor sowl! -- Dolly cum hither child.


Dolly. Here! ma'am.


Mrs. Trus. Here, my good child, take the kays an the big market basket, an go
your ways an open the pantry, an fetch up them two cowl roast ducks. --


Dolly. Yes, ma'am!


Mrs. Trus An the capers --


Dolly. Yes, ma'am!


Mrs. Trus. An the anchobies, an the gammon --


Dolly. Yes, ma'am! ( Going.)


T^us. ( Aside, looking surprised.) By my sowl! this looks well on our side!


Mrs. Trus. Come hither girl! an your going without half your arrant; an the
packeld sammon, an the horse-raddish, an the cowl roast-beef --


Dolly. Yes, ma'am. ( Going.)


Trus. ( Aside.) Augh hoogh! better and better.


Mrs. Trus. Stop girl! I say -- don't be in such a hurry, an the kagg of
lobsters, the packeld iceters, an the swate-oyl, you know your maaster loves
oil, an it is vary haling to the belly. --


Dolly. ( Smiling aside.) Yes, ma'am -- any thing else?


Mrs. Trus. Why yes, hussy! the jarr of olives -- the Chaster chaze -- the
nates-tung, the sous'd rock, the potted pigeons, the apple-pie, the cowl
potatoes, the whaskey-jugg, an a hundred things more, but do tha^ first.


Dolly. ( Smiling aside.) Why ma'am! this big basket will not hold the half of
them!


Mrs. Trus. Why then, go an fatch the the other big basket, you fool you! have
you no contraption?


Dolly. ( Going and laughing aside.) Hah! hah! hah! Well, I wonder what all
this means? for this week past she is been starving him, and now she is going to
cram him like a stuffed turkey! I believe in my conscience, she is lightheaded!
Exit Dolly.


Trus. Blassings on you, deer! but you're too good. Why now, when you are good,
why then you are too good!


Mrs. Trus. No indeed! an indeed! an I an't, I cannot be good enuff -- fath! an
you desarve it all an more too. -- Shall I send for some sassages an aggs? an
will you have a nice spare-rib broyl'd, with some apple sauce, honey?


Trus. No fath, deer! I think in my conshence and here is enuff! why now, if I
was an allephant, I could not ate the half of it? so I could!


Mrs. Trush. Shure, but you must be vary hungry?


Trus. Fath! an I am so and more too, but I musn't make a beast of myself for
all that! you know, deer!


( Enter DOLLY, with the two big market baskets heaped up.) Mrs. Trus. An have
you forgot every thing, girl?


Dolly. Yes, ma'am.


Mrs. Trus. Why then fatch them in the parler, an lay the damask table cloth on
the big table girl, an set i^ off han'some an nate, your maaster shall sup in
the parler, so he shall; an when your done all that, why, go your ways
presently, (not just now) an warm my bed vary well, an sprad the curtins, do
you hare, I say?


Dolly. Yes, ma'am. Exit Dolly.


Trus. Indeed, my deer! and I Am vary sorry, you give yourself a grate dale of
trubble for me!


Mrs. Trus. No, ind^ed honey, an I do not! -- an you know I was always plaz'd
to see you ate hearty.


Trus. Yes, my deer -- but I forgot it lately!


Mrs. Trus. Well! never mind it dare, I wish you good luck in your undertakins.


Trus. I thank you my deer, -- but what would you be after now?


Mrs. Trus. Augh, fath! -- the trazure, to be shure!


Trus. What trazure?


Mrs. Trus. Cum -- cum, don't think to kape it a sacre^ from me -- shure an I
know all about it now!


Trus. About what pray?


Mrs. Trus. Hav'n't I towld you now?


Trus. ( Aside.) By my sowl! and we are all ruined* some traitor has blowed us!
Some nonsense in your head.


Mrs. Trus. Fath! an it is not nonsense though -- shure an Mrs. Trowell towld me
all about it -- as how you are going to dig for trazure, an a graite dale more
--


Trus. And how does Mrs. Trowell know?


Mrs. Trus. Fath! an vary well, shure an Trowell towld her all about it.


Trus. Augh! the book-sworn? oath-breaking dog! oh! the traito^! oh! the Judas!
Augh! and Trowell and you must do grant p^n^ance for all this. Well, thank God!
and I Am not book-sworn!


Mrs Trus. No, my dare, no more you arn't; cum, never mind honey, let us go into
supper.


Trus. I Will follow, deer. ( Aside.) Augh! the s^ubber-degullion dog! Exeunt.


SCENE VI. A Room.
( Enter DOLLY, with a warming p^n, and TERRANCE meeting her.) Dolly. Oh!
Terrance -- I Am glad you're come! he! he! he!


Ter. I suppose so! you want me to fatch a bucket of vater, an then kiss you?
don't you? say? ( Chucking her under the chin. -- Kisses her.)


Dolly. No faith! I don't -- but here is the devil to pay! he! he! you never saw
the like in all your born days!


Ter. What? -- what the devil is it? --


Dolly. Why you must go and fetch the priest! he! he! master and mistress has
made it up, and they are going to be married over again!


Te^. Hoot! the girl tawks like a fool!


Dolly. No faith! I don't, the wedding supper's on the table, and she is going
to make him eat our two great big market baskets full, all up at once, and
faith! I don't know but the baskets in the bargain he! he!


Ter. By my sowl! Dolly but I believe your'e crazy! -- or


Dolly. No, I an't! -- you fool! -- but you cannot think, how kind she has been
to him, kissing and slobbering his chops about, like all the world -- and the
Lord? knows what, and treating him with punch -- but I watched her, and she
took care to have the largest share to herself.


Ter. Fath! -- but I believe an you had a large share too, by your tawk.


Dolly. No -- the devil a drop I got of it!


Ter. Then your'e humbugging me, arn't you now Dolly?


Dolly. No, I an't 'pon honor! -- only peep through the keyhole, and see what an
elegant variety there is, for the wedding supper!


Ter. Hoot you fool!


Dolly. Peep through here! -- cannot you?


Ter. (Peeps.) Oh! Jasus! -- a grate fast by my sowl! -- shure enuff! -- why
there is enuff for the howl Kongrass! -- an nobody to ate it! the divil burn me!
-- but I Will have sum of it! -- if they don't ate it all! but what the divil's
all this for? say Dolly?


Dolly. The Lord above knows! -- I swear! I don't, no more than a horse! -- if
I did, I would tell you indeed, Terrance. -- We shall know more about it
tomorrow, I think.


Ter. The forerunner of anudder damned quarrel!


Dolly. The devil may care for me!


Ter. An me too -- but sure Dolly, an you can tell us a little more, about the
maning of it?


Dolly. No faith! I cannot -- only mistress went over the way this evening, to
drink tea with Mrs. Trowell, and presently after, she came running home, quite
out of breath, and bawled out, like a mad cow, bawling for her calf! -- Dolly!
-- Dolly! three or four times, (I thought the house had been on fire! -- or
some develish thing, or, other) and ordered me to put on the tea-kettle, in all
haste -- and Oh! how she bothered me, she wanted it to boil, before the fire
was made, -- Lord! how vexed I was -- I could have cut her throat! -- "does it
boil? -- does it boil? -- make haste girl! -- how long you stay? -- what are
you poking about?" -- (mimicking her) and called me baggage, and trollop, and a
hundred bad names, you never heard such a Billingsgate! -- I never was so
cursedly vexed, and blinded with smoke, in all my life, -- and was obliged at
last to bring in the tea-kettle as it was, and the devil a boil it boiled, no
more than when I first put it on the fire -- so I don't care!


Ter. An serve her rite too -- the owl'd Jazzebel!


Dolly. But the beauty of it was, Terrance, -- she made me take the two big
market baskets, and go down into the cellar, and fetch up every thing there,
for master to eat and drink, (faith! I almost broke my back with them, they
were so heavy) -- and call him out of the shop? -- Oh! you never see such a
fidgetting as she made! --


Ter. I Will warrant the Brimstone made noise enuff! fath! an she is no slouch at
that! let us have anudder peep at um -- Augh hoogh! an how he tares away at the
roast ducks?


Dolly. I don't at all wonder at it -- he is almost starved!


Ter. By my sowl! -- but this is a queer sort of a revelushin -- there is
something brewing, Dolly! take my word for it, but what are you after wid the
wharming-pan?


Dolly. Why you fool! -- what do you think, when people's married? why they are
going to bed together after supper, and she ordered me to warm it.


Ter. Worse an worse -- by my sowl! -- but there'll be a grate earthquake
tonight! I expact -- but you slut you, why you hav'n't been up yet to warm it,
an the pans quite cowl'd.


Dolly. Faith! I don't care! then let 'em lie the closer, and warm it
themselves.


Ter. Hah! hah! hah! -- (A noise in the parlour, like moving of chairs.)


Dolly. Oh! gracious -- they are coming to bed! -- Run Terrance! don't let 'em
see you for all the world! -- hide yourself in the cow-stable, and when they are
gone to bed, we'll partake of the wedding feast.


Ter. That Is rite Dolly -- I Am divilish hungry and dry too!


Dolly. I wont forget you, fly you devil! -- fly! they are here. Exit Terrance.


( Enter MR. and MRS. TRUSHOOP, with a candle, meeting DOLLY.) Mrs. Trus. An
have you now, warmed the bed well girl?


Dolly. Yes ma'am, very well.


Mrs. Trus. And sprad the Kurtins?


Dolly. Yes ma'am.


Mrs. Trus. Then go your ways, an clare the table, an put out the fire, and
lock the dure, an go your ways bed.


Dolly. Yes ma'am.


Mrs. Trus. Where Is Terrance?


Dolly. Gone to bed ma'am.


Mrs. Trus. How long first?


Dolly. Two hours ago ma'am.


Mrs. Trus. How cum that?


Dolly. He said he was sleepy ma'am.


Mrs. Trus. Vary well, go your ways.


Dolly. Yes ma'am, (Aside) blatherum, lolling out her tongue and Exeunt.


ACT III.
SCENE I. The place of action, n^ar the Mill and Stone Bridge.
( Scene opens and discovers RATTLETRAP dressed in his magic habit, with a dark
lanthorn and candle, QUADRANT, with a magnet, rod, and wand, etc. etc. etc. an
old iron bound chest, and SPI^FIRE, with a copper figure, representing the head
and shoulders of BLACKBEARD.) Rat. Well done Spitfire! the hole I see is made.


Spit. Yes -- yes -- I Have not been idle, since you left me.


Quad. (Aside) He Is the very plan of a fellow!


Rat. (Aside) Not his fellow to be found -- He has performed wonders! -- But we
must lose no time, (looks at his watch) it is near eleven o'clock. (They poke in
the chest, stones, brickbatts, broken bottles, and two or three rusty looking
pieces of silver.)


Quad. Come! come! let us bury it at once. (All assist, and bury the chest.)


Rat. (To Spitfire) Now we have nothing more to do, at present, than to see you
descend into your subterranity -- step down! -- step down! and mind when I give
the signal, throw fireballs, and when they come to a sight of the chest, push
up the figure, and act as I have before directed you -- Now be sure you act the
devil, as if you were going to deceive the devil himself, and we'll reward you
devilishly well.


Spit. And the devil take me if I don't! (Spitfire goes down the hole, and
takes the figure, lanthorn, and candle with him.)


Quad. Now every thing is ready to receive them, and if our devil plays his
part well -- I think, we shall have a devilish merry night of it. He! he! he!
-- egad here is some of 'em coming! (They halloo without, Canoe! Canoe! those
within answer, Canoe! Canoe!)


( Enter HUM and PARCHMENT.) Rat. Where are the mud-mongers?


Parch. They Are just at hand, we heard them, as we came down the hill.
(Different voices without hallooing Canoe! Canoe! Canoe! Canoe! etc. those
within answering Canoe! etc.)


( Enter WASHBALL, TRUSHOOP, BUCKRAM, RACCOON and TROWELL, with pick-axes,
spades, shovels, spit, and ANDRA FERRARA shouldered.) Wash. I tore my shins
unaccountably, coming through the briers!


Trus. Fath! and I tumbled up the hill, 'till I got my futt in the boggs, and
if I had not held fast by the vater, I Would be drowned.


Hum and Quad. Hah! Hah! he! he!


Rac. Don't mind, gentlemen, what is de tore skin, or de cold foot, compared
wid de prospect of dese riches?


Buck. By me saul! mon -- and I chearg'd mesel we two bottles to Ieeghten me
nawse, and that's a bonny guede in a dark neeght, and for fear o meeting we any
skoondrels, Ize feetch'd me Andra we me, as good stuff as e're wa made in a
scoteland!


Rat. Well gentlemen, I see we are all here, don't let us waste time, let us be
serious; keep silence! by the calculation I made this morning, by the
Satellites, the treasure must be near this place, ( He takes an observation,
and works his magnetic hazel-rod) the magnet works this way --


Rac. I tought so.


Trus. Lave off your botheration!


Rat. Pray be silent! it draws excessive strong this way. I feel myself
interrupted by in visibles! I can scarcely keep the rod in my hands, there! now
I have it! it draws this way!


Rac. Dis is de berry place, gentlemen!


Trus. And cannot you now be azey, and howled your tung? you fool! you know
nothing about it.


Wash. Oh! dear! what interruptions?


Rat. Not a word! not a word! pray be silent! I Am near the place, the rod
points to this spot -- I Am near the center, I know the rod to be true, I Have
tried its virtue, 'twas cut on All-hallows eve, at 12 o'clock at night, with my
back to the moon, and the mercury injected while the sap was running.


Trus. ( Aside) By the holy stone! but I believe, he was born in the moon!


Rat. ( Draws a large circle with his wand, and says) Diapaculum interrav^,
tenebrossitas stravaganza! ( Goes round the circle, and sticks twelve pieces of
iron-wire in the Periphery; each piece having a bit of paper cut out in the
form of a star on its head -- as he sticks them down, he names the twelve signs
of the Zodiac.) Aries, Taurus, Germini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio,
Sagitarius, Capriconius, Aquarius, Pisces, make no noise else you will disturb
Jupiter, who is the most wakeful planet, and is now in his first sleep. ( He
puts on a large pair of spectacles) Let me see! its now 12 o'clock, Jupiter in
a sound sleep, a good omen! ( He calls WASHBALL, TRUSHOOP, BUCKRAM, RACOOON,
and TROWELL.) Take off your coats and jackets, ( they pull them off) now stand
within the cir^le, ( he places HUM, QUADRANT, and PARCHMENT, without the
circle, at different posts, and says) now keep a good look out, Canoe's the
word, so don't forget it.


Trus. ( Aside) The devil a forget, myself will forget! fath! and I will sooner
forget my prayers!


Rat. Now run down the spit and try this place -- Mr. Washball.


Wash. ( Thurst^ down the spit, and says) Oh dear! it is very soft and slushey.


Rat. Never mind! the better digging, -- try it again, I k^^w its the identical
spot!


Wash. Softer and softer, I feel it! I feel it! it strikes against something!


Rat. Then fall too all hands, and dig, and when the watchword is given, fall
flat on the ground. ( They dig, he views the stars) now the Dragons head and
the Scorpion's tail are in conjunction. Castor's in the wane, Procyon is
stationary, but Sagitarius seems obnubilated, and fast approaching to a state
of obtenebration! hah! I don't like that! it rather looks inauspicious and
portentous of ill! -- but Syrius's right foot --


Parch. ( Without) Canoe! ( They answer Cance! and fall down within the circle.
A fiddle is heard at a distance, playing badly.)


Rat. Inferno atum, gastro fagnum! -- Rise and go on! 'twas nothing but a blind
drunken fiddler, and some company returning from Batchelors-hall.


Trus. By my sowl! now, and I Have made a swate packle of my self, all over full
of mud! Augh! and I had the spawlpene here an I Would give him two or three
handfulls of bothers wid my shelaley, so I wou'd'nt.


Buck. Deel tak me mon! but I dinna leke this, it is a foul drumlie pleece, gin
I a wa we him, I'ze claw the tyke a we bit, and brok his damned feedle!


Wash. Ah me!


Rat. Not a word gentlemen! proceed, ( they dig) but Syrius's right foot, over
Orion's left shoulder, looks well, and the Swan's tail near the Hydra's heart,
has a promising appearance. (One fire-ball, the diggers frightened, and attempt
to run out of the circle.) Don't stir an inch! if you break the mounds, I Have no
power! -- dig! dig! Conjabetima, morentium habavo, omnibusque contubernalium!
and this leap-year is not unfavorable. ( Another fire-ball, with a roaring
below, at which they are terrified.)


Trus. ( Aside.) Augh! how my heart bates!


Wash. Come near Mr. Rattletrap! Oh! dear! Oh! dear! I shall faint!


Trow. I Would give all my share, I had never come! mercy on me!


Rac. Oh! Oh! -- I wish I was at home, I nebber would come again!


Buck. Hoot! canna ye a be queeit?


Rat. Never fear! I Will protect you! -- Hobonos cum verigos, omne croxibus
influvientum! dig! dig! ( viewing the stars) but yet certain appearances, puts
me to a stand, baffles my utmost skill, and indicates an infernal opposition!
I Will try my Omphaloptic glass. Aye! now I discover the cause of the opposition!
I now distinctly perceive, through a boundless radiant apperture, the tail of a
huge Comet! like a monstrous, overgrown ram-cat, with his hind legs, kicking
and scratching the Planets and Stars about, as though they were marbles or
snow-balls! strange Phenomenon! a glorious opportunity this would be, for a
young divine, to study Astro-Theology! one peep through this, would
instantaneously and eternally silence, the whole host of skeptics!

"Fierce meteors shoot their arbitrary light
And Comets march with lawless horrors bright!"

Hum. ( Without) Canoe! ( All answer Canoe! and fall down.)


Rat. Metantaborabulum, exultissimo ocabulum mongrabo! Rise! it was nothing but
an old cow passing along! go on! ( All rise and dig.)


Buck. Damn the Hawkie for a dorty beech! wha the deel does she want here? does
she tak us for Bulls an be damned to her?


Trus. Arra deer! and how my wife will scowld, when I fatch her the money, for
spileing my new brogues.


Rat. Sagitarius is now clear, and the Orb of the Moon, is in contact with
Jupiter, good! Sextile in conjunction with Quartile right! ( He waves his wand)
Saturn is a metallic planet, and though in common the most dull, is now perfectly
pellucid, and out shines even Venus herself! this is the best sign of all! (
Another fireball, a roaring below.)


Wash. Oh! dear! Oh dear!


Rac. Oh! Oh! Oh! -- what shall I do?


Trow. Defend us! defend us! -- Mr. Rattletrap! -- Oh! --


Rat. These invisibles will disturb you awhile, now your just upon it.
Conjunction, oppositorium, placabulum fomoso! -- dig away! Arcturus now
appears, Constellatione planetarium! Venus is now the morning star, and is
eclipsed four digits. ( Two or three fireballs, and a roaring below, the
diggers terrified.) Now their rage increases! we'er near the treasure, don't be
afraid, I am with you, their fiery darts will soon be over, dig! dig!
Cummeritantibus considerationibus, terrabandum ophagnum!


Wash. Oh! -- Oh! -- Oh! --


Buck. Quut mon! quut! wha the deel cares for em, dig mon! dig!


Rac. Oh! -- Oh! -- what will become of us?


Rat. Stick to it! -- Stick to it! ( They dig.) These nocturnal observations,
sometimes deceive the brightest astronomers! the whole planetary system now
changes and appears to have a centrifugal motion -- now whirls within a huge
vortex, with a velocity, beyond the power of mathematics to calculate, now
orbicular! now circumvolves! and Georgium Sidus, forms an obtuse angle, whose
Hypothenuse seems offuscated, or eclipsed by the horns of the Moon, and whose
perpendicular is geocentric with our earth! these appearances are new to me --
beyond my Talismanic powers to comprehend! preternatural! utterly
un^^^cogitable! In short, I have never experienced such a rare Synchronism,
since I have had any knowledge of the Occult sciences! however I now perceive a
ray of hope! Hiccius Doccius! now Cassiopaea and the Bears-tail, are on the
meridian! excessive lucky!


Hum. ( Aside) He performs to admiration!


Quad. ( Aside) Incomparably well, by Jupiter! He! he! he! ( Two or three fire
balls, and an increase of roaring below.)


Wash. Mercy on me! I shall faint -- Oh! oh!


Buck. Haud up mon!


Rac. O my poor ting, I wish I had stayed wid you!


Trow. I tremble every joint of me. O Lord! oh!


Trus. (Aside) Fath! and my knees tump togedder, like a pare of pot-hooks, but
I will not tell um for all that.


Rat. Gentlemen! -- summon up all your courage! -- don't be pusillanimous! dig!
dig! -- the enemy's fire is nearly exhausted! -- Tincturum, corrosivum,
sublimatum! ( Takes an observation.)


Quad. ( Without, aside.) Come let us drink while the fools are digging. He! he!
he! ( They drink, and point, and laugh at the diggers.) Poisonous exhalations
rise from this devilish swamp! I Am afraid old Washball will get the
Cholera-morbus. He! he! he!


Parch. ( Without, aside.) I Am rather of opinion he will get the Perip-no-money.
Ha! ha!


Hum. ( Without, aside.) By the Lord Harry! that is well said! I Am entirely of
your opinion -- no money. Ha! ha! ha!


Rat. Every thing now looks well! fine appearances! Spica, south eleven degrees
fifty eight minutes, good! tomorrow is Sexagesima sunday, good! Lyra, south,
sets nine minutes after one this morning, good! the horns of the moon in
Apogee, good! Bull's-eye rises, good again! Venus rises, very good! she sets S.
West obliquely toward the mines of Mexico and Peru, excellent! In short! the
macrocosm of the whole visible system of nature, are strongly in our favor! a
certain sign of success! occidental! occidental! glorious!


Trus. ( Aside) By St. Patrick! but I swatt swately! -- by my sowl! now but its
harder work than digging parat^es!


Trow. ( Aside) Only see how it drops off me! I wish it was all over.


Trus. ( Aside) It Is good for your helt, you devil you. Fath! and I would be
very sorry, but I had one good drink of whiskey just now my deer.


Rat. Have a little patience! the bull's eye is this moment stationary and
opacous! it would prove fatal to drink now! it would most assuredly bring on
the Hydrophobia! dig! dig! before the eclipse comes on! our success altogether
depends upon your industry, one second of time now well employed, is worth a
whole year! go on! go on! redouble your vigilance!


Parch. ( Aside, without) Let Us give 'em another tumble in the mud.


Quad. ( Without, aside) With all my heart, -- he! he! -- Canoe! ( The diggers
answer Canoe! and fall down.)


Rat. Facinorum, muddum, dashum, splashum. Rise and go on! it was nothing but a
distant barking of dogs. ( Viewing the stars.)


Wash. Oh dear! I cannot support it any longer! it will kill me! indeed it will!
these cursed dog days are coming fast upon us!


Trus. By my sowl and you're right -- fath an they bark all night long in our
alley! -- O Jasus! and what a packle I Am in?


Hum, Parch. and Quad. ( Without, aside) Hah! hah! he! he! ( alternately.)


Rat. Benedictum, atmosphericum! hold out only six minutes, three quarters and
the 197th part of a minute and we have it! ( Pointing to the stars with his
wand) luckily for us! the star Wormwood (as mentioned in the Revelations) is in
a state of occultation! Mars approaching omnolency! and Bacchus as drunk as a
piper, success is certain! ( Fireballs and a terrible roaring.)


Wash. Oh! I Am dead! I Am dead!


Rat. I Will soon vivificate you! here, take a little Aqua me Rabulus, it cost me
half a crown a spoonful. ( He drinks it off.)


Trus. Stop! stop! don't drink it all!


Trow. You needn't halloo to him, don't you know a man cannot hear while he is
drinking?


Trus. Fath 'an I never know'd that before! by my sowl next time I Will be up wid
him, and I Will halloo, stop, stop you devil you, before he begins.


Buck. That Is reeght mon!


Wash. How it revives the animal spirits?


Trus. The devil burst you, and that is all the harm I wish you!


Rat. ( Aside) Ha! ha! -- ( Looks at his watch) the time's just expired -- pray
be serious! dig away! dig away! now for your lives! I feel the ground move
under my feet! -- the treasure is struggling, it wants to be relieved from it is
long imprisonment, dig! -- dig! -- Theophrasticum, Privilegium! now the whole
host of devils are pulling against us, and levelling all the darts of infernal
fury at us!


Trow. I feel the chest! -- I feel the chest!


Wash. I see it! I see it!


Rat. Ne plus ultra! up with it, up with it* all is our own! ( The ghost appears
and spits fire, the diggers with uplifted hands, looking at it.)


Trow. How he squints.


Buck. The deel me care! troth mon an he looks leke auld Squintefego at
Aberdeen!


Trus. Fath an he squints sure enuff, but no more than a gentleman ought to
squint, but I Have a grate mind to wauk off wid myself, for the devil burn me*
but I believe he will burn us all up, by my soul! and he is no slouch of a fellow!


Buck. Troth mon! -- he cuts a shacking figure!


Trow. He Is got a beard like a ram-goat, and a nose like a bald-eagle! -- see!
see how he knits his brows!


Trus. Augh by my sowl, and he shall not brow bate, me!


Rat. He has truly a Colossean stature! a terrific appearance, and a
belligerous phiz! but I Will manage him for all that! ( The ghost continues to
spit fire; with fireballs and a roaring below. All kneel down.)


Wash. O! what an old sinner I have been -- I Have brought myself into a sad
scrape! Mea culpa --


Rac. Pray in English! pray in English! dese pirate spirits don't understand de
latin. (He lifts up his hands, and says) O! O! I don't know what to say. -- O!
O! I wish I hab lib'd a better life; do Mr. Washball say your prayers!


Wash. Dirrige, nos domine! I cannot pray in English, do you say something good
to it. Oh! Mr. Rattletrap, I Am dead! I Am dead. Oh! Oh! (The fireballs and
roaring continues.)


Trow. Lord! have mercy upon us, and keep this devil from us! O! how my heart
goes pit-a-pat? enough to break the Perricardum!


Rat. Cruciblarum, Advansum! Perrilorum! (The ghost disappears; they rise.)
He Is almost conquered now! (The ghost appears again; spits fire with
fireballs; a terrible roaring below, they tremble and fall on their knees
again.)


Rac. Right worshipful master, no -- As it was in de beginning -- no, no, what
is your name? Raccoon, who gib you dat name? my grand-moder and god-fader, no
dats wrong -- Our fader -- I cannot say it! Oh! Oh! Oh! for eber and eber, Amen.
Dare he comes, dare he comes again!


Trus. (To Raccoon.) Lave off you black-mout! you havn't it, ( he says)
Paternoster, mea culpa, Sinner^rum, helpum, deliverum, misserabulum,
tuscarorum.


Buck. By me saul mon! it is the deel himsel! Ize see his claven foot! -- (
Aside.) Troth and he makes me quack too, a wee-pickle!


Trow. Save us! Save us! from his fiery jaws! he is seeking whom he may devour.


Trus. Augh! and if he swallows me, by my sowl! and I Will kick his guts out in
the twinkling of a broomstick!


Wash. Oh! Oh! save me! -- save me too!


Rat. (To the ghost) Superiorum, lakeavi, hurorum! (The ghost disappears) now is
the lucky minute, the Serpent's-neck, is round the Poleaster! Raise the chest,
( They rise, the ghost appears, and spits fire, with fireballs, the roaring
below increases, the diggers shrieking and trembling, those without laugh at
them.) Now, gentlemen, raise the chest, banish fear! keep fast! ( he calls to
those without) your assistance gentlemen or we lose all! should it sink now,
it is irrecoverably lost! not all the magicians of Egypt, nor the witch of Endor
could not recover it! quick gentlemen! quick! nows the interesting moment!

"There is a tide in the affairs of men,
"Which if taken at the flood, leads on to fortune."
up with it.

(They run and assist in raising the chest.)
Rac. ( Looking toward the ghost.) Dats Old Blackbeard himself! by de birtue
and de power of de free and de accepted mason, to me gibben, ( here he gives
the free-mason's sign, or something like it) I command you to depaa^! Oh! Oh!
Oh what disturbs die poor soul from rest?


Rat. Horrificatabus, Profundum, Horridumque, Spectaculum, Demonium.


Buck. Haud faust, dinna quut year grup, (he steps toward the ghost) no I'ze
ken him, I'ze gang after him.


Rac. Pray don't Mr. Buckram, it be de pirate apparition, did'n't you see how
bery angry he look at me, when I did speak to him?


Trus. The devil be from me, and I believe its Doctor Foster!


Buck. The deel ma care, wha he be, Doctor Faustus, spirit, apparition,
B^ackbeard, or the deel himsel, gin he con stond a cut o me Andra, he mun be
the deel in troth. ( He takes up his broad sword, runs toward the ghost, makes
a cut at it, and falls down; the ghost disappears for a short time; ^eturns
again spitting fire, the roaring continues more violent. Buckram lies on the
ground, and says) Deil tak a warlocks I say, I ha leek to ha brok my neeke down
the brae!


Trus. By my sowl! and you would like to make a Somersault of i^! fath! and
Ricketts is a nincompoop to you honey!


Rat ( Aside) Ha! ha! ha! a comical dog. -- That was a very impetuous,
temerarius step! didn't you know he is invulnerable? if I had not been here, you
would have been incinerated, for your presumption. ( He steps up to the ghost,
and says) Horridum, Callefridum, Buscantivo, Interdenabulum! thus far will I
permit thee to come, ^ut no farther. Avaunt! Avaunt! Avaunt! and be thou laid
in Lake Huron! 'till the waters thereof be exhausted! ( The ghost disappears,
with a dreadful noise) now we are all safe! Consummatum et Triumphicatibus! up
with the chest! those fiends of darkness will trouble us no more.


Buck. ( Rises up and shakes himself.) The deel a seeght mare, ye'ell ha o him
no he is gatten a smell o me Andra! ( they hoist up the chest, some black rusty
pieces of silver tumble out.)


Rat. Now our toils are over, and we have caught our prey.


All. Huzza! huzza! huzza! etc.


Wash. ( Greedily taking up one of the pieces of silver, kisses it and says)
Oh! my dear! my dear! (he rubs it and takes it to the lanthorn.) Let me see --
(puts on his spectacles) One Thousand, Sixteen Hundred and Eighty Four, aye!
aye! this is the very money, that Blackbeard got at Panama, when he robbed the
churches! Oh! the poor priests! the poor priests! It seems very providentially
to have fallen into my hands! Come! come! let us take it away, before daylight
appears.


Hum. May we presume to take it away, Mr. Rattletrap?


Rat. Jubileetatebusque! -- Finis cum fistulum, populorum jigg! -- my business
is finished, therefore all is our own! away with it!


Hum. There Is one thing proper first to mention, gentlemen, my sister from whom
I received the information, and to whom we are all so much indebted for this
lucky turn of good fortune, is entitled to a share; besides, I think she highly
merits a handsome gratuitous present, as an acknowledgment of our gratitude to
her.


Rac. No, brudder Hum, I tink she is titled to no more den half de share, she is
no more den de woman. But, what do you mean by de present?


Hum. A whole share! I insist upon it, is her just due! but, as for the
present, that must be left to your generosity, and I dare answer you will not be
wanting in munificence! what think you of one of the boxes of diamonds, or some
such trifle?


Rat. By all means!


Parch. Little enough in all conscience!


Quad. I think so indeed! I would add one of the boxes of pearls to it!


Wash. Lord! Lord! no, no; I protest against a share and a present too! we
shall be ruined! ruined! Mr. Raccoon: indeed we shall, speak to 'em, do sir, do!


Buck. Damme mon! but I thin the lassie deserves em a, an mare too!


Rac. Consider! gentlemen, we hab run de risk of our libes wid dese spirits!
besides, what will de woman do wid so much of de dimonts, and de oder tings?


Wash. Aye, indeed! I say the diamonds truly! why they are of more value than
all the rest of the things together! why you are all going mad! -- mad! -- mad!
-- indeed you are!


Trus. Fath an! she shall have um all for me! and more too! by my sowl! but I
believe and you want 'um all yourself to hang up at your shop-winder, to make
paple think how you're a toot-drawer, and don't you now, honey?


Parch. Gentlemen, I Am surprised! nay, almost petrified, at this sudden change
of sentiments you have now expressed! you, who before you were possessed of
this immense* treasure, entertained such lofty and laudable ideas of ambition,
philanthropy and generosity! you, who were for purchasing titles, building and
endowing hospitals and the Lord knows what! I say, gentlemen, I am astonished
beyond measure at the change. Can it be possible! that you, who are now in
actual possession of this treasure, you so ardently wished for; and I say,
gentlemen, on the attainment of which your pious resolutions were sounded,
should so suddenly change and turn traitors to that heaven-born virtue,
gratitude! and that Satan, that malignant, malicious, malevolent, mischievous,
unpropitious, pestilential, pestiferious, envious, spiteful, ungrateful devil!
could so suddenly transform you into such Judases, as even that most avaricious
of all devils! Mammon himself! would blush at, hang down his head, and be
ashamed of. I must not! I cannot believe it!


Wash. Mighty fine talk indeed! but its nothing but wind!


Trow. Come, come! let us give the poor woman a full share, and the diamonds and
all; if it had not been for her we shou'dn't have had a copper!


Wash. No, no! I forbid it! -- I protest against it!


Trus. ( Aside) Hoot you owld brute.


Trow. Let Us put it to a vote?


Hum. That Is right! and should that fail I protest! I Will give my whole share to
my sister, and phillippic them to petrifaction!


Rac. ( Aside, To Washball.) Who de debil's dis Philip Pick?


Wash. ( Aside) I suppose some ruffian of a fellow! he is going to set upon us
to way-lay, rob and murder us!


Rac. ( Aside.) Yes, I tink so too! Dad I Will always carry my pistols in my
pocket.


Quad. Vote! vote! ( They vote and carry it for a full share, and a present of
a box of diamonds and a box of pearls.)


Trus. Fath an I Am glad of it!


Hum. Gentlemen, I Am satisfied! and I heartily thank you in my sister's name.


Rac. I tink its a bery great shame!


Wash. Oh, dear! -- we are ruined! -- we are ruined!


Rat. The day approaches; remove it immediately!


Parch. Where shall we carry it?


Wash. There Is a cunning place in my house, I Will take care of it! it will be
safe! I Will sleep on it all night!


All say. Agreed! -- agreed!


Hum. Now gentlemen, let us all meet precisely at six o'clock this morning and
divide it. I think some of us should assist Mr. Washball; as this chest
contains an immense treasure, we cannot be too careful; he is aged, and some
unlucky circumstance may intervene.


Wash. No, no, I can take care of it, well enough.


Rat. Dat's right, brudder Hum, I tink I Would better go too, as I understand de
military. If we should be attack, my service may be necessary.


Quad. Very true! and if Mr. Trowell, Mr. Trushoop, and Mr. Buckram will attend
you, it will be the safer.


Trus. The devil burn Trushoop, if he forsakes it!


Buck. Deel tak the mon, that lags beheend!


Rat. Well gentlemen! I think this great success, deserves a song; come bear
chorus!


All say. With all my heart.

Rattletrap sings. SONG XVI.
Though my art some despise, I appeal to your eyes,
For a proof of my magical knowledge,
Though the wisdom of schools, damn our art and our tools,
We can laugh at the fools of the college.
Chorus. We can, etc.
Now my friends we are possessed, of the glorious chest,
Join hands and rejoice beyond measure,
Let it be our first care, that great blessing to share;
Whose contents, are an infinite treasure!
Chorus. Whose, etc.
Now gentlemen bear off your prize!


Buck. Tak hauld Trowell, I'ze hurt me shouther in the fa' in gat down the
brae. I canna carry't lad! ( The dupes take up the chest, and bear it off
guarded by the humorists.)


Wash. It feels brave and ponderous.


Trus. That Is true for you! -- fath! I woud'nt care if I break my back wid it.
Arra deer! tread of my heels.


Trow. I beg your pardon!


Trus. Fath* an your very welcome -- for the devil burn me, if I care for my
heels at all, at all, -- so I don't! -- (Exeunt omnes, Buckram brings up the
rear, flourishing his broad sword, capering and singing a Scotch air.)


SCENE, II. A room in Washball's house.
( Enter MEANWELL and LUCY.) Lucy. Bless me! How could you venture (after the
severe reproof my uncle gave you,) to approach this house, at this late hour of
the night?


Mean. Love! angelic love! which knows no fear but your displeasure, has
brought me here on eagle's wings, to waft you hence, and seal that vow, already
ratified in heaven!


Lucy. But consider my dear Meanwell, what may be the consequence of such a
rash step, when, perhaps a few days perseverance, may bring it to a conclusion,
with his consent.


Mean. I cannot think of trusting to any thing so precarious, and as he has
already consented, by being my bondsman for the license, and publicly declared
his assent, we shall be looked upon by the honest, virtuous, and judicious, as
sufficiently justified in taking this step.


Lucy. I am confounded! my love to you spurs me to a slight! but my duty to my
uncle, commands me to wait his reconciliation. I know not what to do, or, what
to say!


Mean. Haste! haste my dear Lucy! the precious moments are swiftly passing!
each moment seems an hour 'till we are one, the clergyman waits, (with chosen
friends) to tie the nuptial knot, and crown our bliss!


SONG XVII.
Lucy. My throbbing heart must now give way
To love, to honor, and obey.
Lo! Hymen's torch is lighted.
Lo! Hymen's, etc.
My heart! my all! -- I now resign,
O! Meanwell! -- Meanwell! -- I Will be thine,
In wedlock's bands united!
In wedlocks, etc.

Mean. Of Venus' charms, let poets write!
Diana chaste, or, Juno bright!
Of Kitty, Doll, or, Susey!
Of Kitty, etc.
The charms of all, are centered here,
In Lucy! -- charming Lucy dear!
Haste! haste! my lovely Lucy!
Haste, etc.

They go off quick, hand in hand. SCENE III. A Street.
( Enter WASHBALL.) Wash. I cannot bear the thoughts of dividing, not I!
division! why I could never learn it at school! but, addition and
multiplication, were always my darlings! Two hundred and fifty thousand pounds,
divided into nine parts, let me see -- aye! I have it! nine times nine is, a,
a, sixty-two, no, that is wrong. Nine times eleven is, a, a hundred and six, and
four over, no that is too much, but I Am no scholar, never mind, no matter, I can
count a hundred as fast as any of 'em, and they cannot cheat me! Charity begins
at home, and he must be the greatest fool on earth, that cheats himself; I
never could forgive my self for such a sin as that, I think I am old enough to
have more wit. He that cheats another, can wipe off the sin, by restoring
fourfold, but he that cheats himself; poor soul! the sin will lie at his own
door, and it will never be in his power to make himself restitution! no, no, I
know better; that must be the crying, that is spoken of by Lazarus, Nicodemus,
Judas, or some other prophet, I forget who now; alack! its many years ago,
since I read the bible, no matter. I Will even go and inform the Collector, then
I shall have one half to myself, and the other will go the President of the
United States. They Will call me traitor and informer, but I don't care, let them
laugh that wins, ha! ha! It Is an old saying and a true one, aye, I have it!
"One bird in hand is better far, than two that is in the bush," -- no, no, "than
two that in bushes are." Aye, that is it! I remember it is so on my neighbor
Simmond's sign, I love to make rhimes, when they jingle so cleverly, but here is
two hundred and fifty thousand birds in the cage, and most of them pretty
yellow birds! Oh! they will make delightful music, and make me sing too! I
mus'n't lose any time, no, ind^ed! ( He looks up) I think this is the house,
aye! ( knocks at the door several times, and call*) Mr. Collector! Mr
Collector! (Collector appears at the window, in his shirt and nightcap.)


Col. Who Is there! and what is your urgent business, disturbing my rest so soon
in the morning?


Wash. Why, why sir, its business of very great importance!


Col. Importance, or not, I think you might have stayed 'till day light.


Wash. I coud'n't sir -- indeed I coud'n't!


Col. I Am not used to have my rest broke, at this unseasonable hour!


Wash. Sir, sir! -- we'll satisfy you handsom'ly for this extraordinary
inconvenience!


Col. (Aside.) That Is speaking to the point! -- Oh! very well! -- very well! --
what is the business, sir?


Wash. Why, why, sir! I have an information, to lay before you, concerning a
chest of treasure --


Col. A chest of treasure? sir.


Wash. Yes! sir.


Col. A chest of treasure? I don't understand you, sir!


Wash. ( Aside) The deuce you don't? the fellow's stupid. -- I say, a chest of
treasure.


Col. Explain yourself, sir!


Wash. It Is already explained! -- I tell you, sir! it is a chest of treasure
that we dug out of the ground last night.


Col. Last night! -- where?


Wash. Why, why, somewhere -- but I hav'n't time to tell you now. Come down!
sir -- pray come!


Col. What! a large chest?


Wash. ( Aside) What a fool he is. Yes! a large chest and very heav^: I know I
helped to carry it, and it almost killed me.


Col. Why, how long is it?


Wash. Why, why! six foot long; as long as a coffin, ( aside) and when it is
emptied, I wish you were buried in it.


Col. Can you be serious, sir?


Wash. ( Aside.) This fellow will exhaust all my patience. Yes, yes! I am, I
am! myself and several others are concerned in it, and it grieves my conscience
to cheat the President out of his lawful right; so, pray sir, seize it, seize
it, instantly, for me and the President. I expect all concerned will be at my
house directly to open and share it. Come, make haste sir, do! -- Put the broad
P on it, and then we shall be safe: you must act for me and the President, and
we'll reward you handsomely.


Col. I Am afraid you're too sanguine, and it is all deception!


Wash. ( Aside) What a cursed fool he is! -- No! no! it an't, it an't; it is a
real fact! here is occular demonstration! for this piece of money, (showing the
piece) dropped out of the chest when we took it out of the ground. Look here,
sir! see it! see it!


Col. Say you so?


Wash. True, sir, true! pray be expeditious, do sir, do, I insist upon it.


Col. Well sir! -- since you insist upon it, I mu^^ seize it.


Wash. I do! I do! my fidelity to the United States, obliges me to insist upon
it.


Col. Remember your promise.


Wash. We'll satisfy you, nobly.


Col. I shall look to you alone, sir.


Wash. Very well! very well! I Will be your paymaster. ( Aside) Since you're
afraid to trust my part'ner. Come down, sir! do, do.


Col. I Will wait on you instantly.


Wash. He Is cursedly afraid of trusting my part'ner. Ha! ha! ha! I shall soon
let him know what a servant he has; a dilatory, suspicious dog! I Will have him
turned out, as sure as he was put in. ( Collector enters the street.) This way,
sir! this way. Follow me, sir! quick! quick! or we shall be too late.


Col. Lead on, sir! lead on. ( Exeunt.)


SCENE IV. A Room in WASHBALL's House.
( Scene opens and discovers TRUSHOOP, RACCOON, TROWELL, and BUCKRAM, ^itting
on a chest, and OLD GABRIEL standing by.) ( Enter HUM, PARCHMENT, QUADRANT, and
RATTLETRAP. Parch. Gabriel, where is your master?


Gab. Just stepped out.


Hum. Will he be in soon?


Gab. Ave -- may be so.


Quad. Oh! -- here he comes, but who the devil's that with him?


Parch. The collector! egad! This is what I didn't expect. ( Aside.) It will
not do to dupe him, we must let him into the secret.


Hum. Leave that to me.


( Enter COLLECTOR and WASHBALL.) Hum. (Takes the collector aside and says)
Sir, I am sorry you have been put to this trouble; it is a scheme of diversion
only; please not to notice it; I Will acquaint you with the whole history of it
when it is concluded.


Col. (Aside) Ha! ha! Just as I thought knowing your funny character. -- Mr.
Hum, your servant -- gentlemen yours. ( Going.)


Wash. Sir! sir! stay, pray do your duty!


Col. Sir, -- its an affair too intricate for me at present, I must first
advise with the States Attorney General.


Wash You shall not go! -- I insist upon it, I charge you in the President's name,
seize it! seize it!


Col. I must first have advice, then I Will return again.


Wash. I forbid you to go at your peril! I Will inform the President, and you
shall be hanged for not doing your duty.


Col. I cannot help that! (Ex^t.) -- ( Washball attempts to go after him, they
stop him and he bawls.) Let me alone! let me alone!


Trus. Augh! -- you cursed owld traitor, arn't you ashamed now, to be chating
us after this way?


Quad. I never heard of such another villain.


Wash. O Lord, -- oh!


Gab. (Aside) There Is queer doings here.


Buck. Ye ^enfemous auld skoo^dre^! ye turned eenformer, and states-evedence,
to get the ane ^alf till year sell, but year oot no, troth and I'ze a mine to
leeghten year heed by ane o year luggs.


Gab. (Aside) Worse and worse.


Wash. O Lord, -- oh!


Rac. What did you tink, we are all fools to be cheated by you?


Hum. Nothing can equal this! open the chest, who knows but the States-attorney
may be on our backs immediately?


Rat. Had I suspected this before, I could have summoned a whole host of
infernals, to have carried him away in a whirlwind.


Trow. It Is a pity ^ut you had, indeed.


Trus. Arra my deer! and give me a little bit of an ^^der, and I Will fatch 'um
in a jiffin.


Rat. I shall have no more power, Mr. Trushoop, 'till the moon changes.


Trus. Fath, an I Am sorry for that honey.


Wash. O Lord, -- oh!


Parch. A traitor and an informer, gentlemen, of all mankind, are the most
despicable of all wretches; you see gentlemen, the turpitude of that old
curmudgeon's heart; after his most solemn oath of secrecy and honesty, he
thinks nothing of betraying his best friends, (Judas like) and his own soul,
for the sake of his body! without the least regard for a sacred and solemn oath!


Gab. ( Aside) How he abuses my master.


Quad. Mr. Trushoop where is your adz? open the chest.


Trus. Augh my deer, and here we are, bote at your sharviss.


Wash. ( Strives to prevent him, and call.) Mr. Collector! M^. Collector!


Trus. Stand off, you old slubberdegullion, ( opening the chest, Hum,
Parchment, Quadrant, and Rattletrap, holding Washball, he struggles to get from
them, and bawls out) where is the Collector? where is the Collector? touch it at
your perils, you villains! I Will swear robbery against you! help Gabriel, help!


Gab ( Aside) Lack-a-day, I believe they are going to rob my maste^! I would
help him with all my heart, but my scuffling days are all over long ago.


Parch. Go on with your business gentlemen, -- open the chest. -- ( Trushoop,
Trowell, Raccoon, and Buckram open the chest.)


Wash. Touch it at your peril, I say. It belongs to me and my partner.


Trus. Belongs to the devil, you ti^f -- we'll soon see who will fa^e the sharing
it.


Gab. ( Aside) I never see the like before.


Wash. Help -- help! -- murder -- murder -- fire -- thieves -- Betty, Betty,
bring down the bags you made -- Run Gabriel for the Collector! Oh, oh, I Am just
dead.


Gab. Yes, I will, and the Constable too. Sorrow on me, but I believe they will
murder my master.


Exit Gabriel. Rac. Dare! de chest opens. (They let Washball go, he runs
toward the chest, the dupes all striving to get their shares.)


Wash. Give me my share! -- give me my share.


Trus. The devil a copper you tief.


Buck. The deel a bawbie, ye shall have mon. -- (In the scuff^^ they overset the
chest, push down Washball, and out tumble the contents, the dupes looking at
each other confused.)


Buck. Hoo^ mon -- wha the deel's a this? -- naething but stanes! -- I ken
we'll enaugh, wha it is -- deil damme, but I'ze ha'gentelman's satisfaction.


Rac. De tivel -- dis de scheme of brudder Hum. I second your resolution, do
you gib de challenge Mr. Buckram.


Trow. Oh mercy! -- ( Exit Hum, Parchment, Quadrant, and Rattletrap.)


Trus. Augh hough! -- fath, and we are all humbugged.


Trow. Its all a cheat.


Trus. Augh! but this will be my heart breaking -- by my sowl! and I Have been
made a fool for the future, -- but I Will take care for the time to cum.


Rac. I didn't tink br^dder Hum would serve me so, but dad I Will inform de Lodge
of dis -- dare's Rattletrap too wid his stars and tings, -- plague on them all
-- and hab Mrs. Placket made de fool of me too, wid her conjur-book? I tink it
cannot be so nader, for she lobes me, or she would not call me her Cooney --
cock-a-pigeon -- cock-a-dandy, and all de fine tings, dad I Will --


Wash. Oh! I Am cheated -- I Am abused, and made a fool of -- I shall die, Oh!
dear I shall die! ( lifting up his hands) "poor Washball, disappointed
Washball."


( Enter GABRIEL.) Gab. (Looking surprised with his hands clench'd, aside.)
What Is all this! alack-a-day. ( Hum, Parchment, Quadrant, and Rattletrap,
peeping alternately, call Canoe! -- Washball chasing them, and endeavoring to
strike them with his ^ane,) "get out of my house you villains," ( Canoe!) "you
dogs," ( Canoe!) "you hell hounds," ( Canoe!) "O dear! O dear, I shall faint,"
( Canoe!) I Am dead! I Am dead," ( he sits down) "Oh, Oh, Oh, ( Canoe!) they
laugh, and run off.


Trow. A miserable disappointment.


Trus. Augh! fath and its all over now -- this is the devils own works, and
they are the devil's own children -- and by my sowl, and they will do grate
pannance for all this. -- ( Sings.)


SONG XVIII. To be Sung slow.
Arra! what a fool was I? -- by my sowl! -- I think I Will cry,
When I spoke of all this, -- it increases my bliss;
'Twill kill me before I die.
Fath! -- I Will now show my face, t'scape all disgrace,
For me, they will make a true j^st;
No more shall my foes,
Drive me by my nose,
In boggs, over my tose;
Spiling brogues and hose,
And carry the empty chaste.
Augh! fale now, my back is quite sore, becaze it made me roar,
How it broke all my bones, pulling brick-batts and stones,
To the mill, from Washball's dure.
To hear the pane and smart, I fale in my heart,
My futt is both sick and lame;
With canoe! and bote,
I mudded my cote,
My wife will cut my trote,
The devil take the tote;
Augh! me -- they will make a grate game.
Buck. Deel dam 'em aw.


Rat. Dis, dis is my own faut, for being too cred'lous, I put too much trust in
them I tought my friends, and dey deceived me. If I had been satisfied wid my
business and followed a birtuous course of libe, den I should be happy to dis
day, and hab nutting to trubble me, but now I hab seen my folly, and former
wickedness; I will take de resolution to lead a new libe, and follow my
business wid honesty and industry, and hab nutting to say to the banities and
bexations, of dis wicked world, and from dis time my studdy shall be birtue, to
de end of my libe.


Buck. Confusion to the vullians! -- I maun even gang and fut up my shap-boo^d
again.


Trow. I can never face my wife after this.


Trus. Nor I, by St Patrick! -- Augh, and she will make no more suppers for poor
Trushoop.


Wash. O^ dea^! I Am robbed of my money, my health, and my ease, nothings left
me now but to grieve and lament -- how shall I procure my peace again? Let me
see! a t^nd my business. What then? if a customer should laugh under the
operation of my razor, egad! I should think he laughed at me, for being such a
silly o'd dupe, and ten to one, but I might out his throat f^r madness -- dress
a wig eigh? why I should think my blocks grinn'd at me! I Will instantly go and
burn them all. If I should hear the noise of children in the street, I should
think they bawled Canoe! Canoe! confound the word, I would give five hundred
pounds, it were high treason to utter it, then I would hang every one of those
dogs. Oh dea^! what can I do? If I rail against them publicly, I shall only
have the cold comfort of "Its a piece of diversion only, nothing else," --
hellish diversion! suppose I should try to laugh it off? alas! alas! I cannot do
it, I shall not be in a laughing humor, these seven years I Am afraid.


( Enter MEANWELL and LUCY.) Mean. Sir, we crave your blessing. -- (They kneel
down.)


Wash. Go to the devil! you dog. -- ( Lifting up his cane, and stamping on the
floor.)


T^us. Augh! and deer Lucy, sure and you're not married?


Lucy. It is so Mr. Trushoop. (Aside.) Pray endeavor to pacify my uncle, pray
gentlemen interpose.


Wash. What does she say? eigh?


Trow. She says she is married, and begs your pardon.


Wash. Oh! the gipsey! -- I shall run stark-mad! and how dare you do it without
my consent? didn't I forbid you hussy? eigh!


Lucy. Pray dear uncle, pardon us!


Wash. Thief like! break the laws, and then have the assurance to ask for
pardon, eigh! no, no you cannot plead ignorance, you knew the terms and
consequences of disobeying me, now you have done it, and a pretty couple of
beggars you are truly! arn't you? (Aside.) But stop! I Am going too fast, hold
there, I forgot my own disappointment! the terms are void in themselves. --
Well --


Rac. Come, come Mr. Washball, how can you be so angry wid them, she is a pretty
young ting.


Wash. O! lack-a-day! she is old enough to know better.


Trow. Pardon them Mr. Washball.


Mean. Pray sir! pardon us.


Lucy. Pray uncle, give us your blessing.


Wash. (Aside.) So, so, pardon and blessing too, -- what comes next?


Trus. Let me intrate for 'um, fath, an they seem to be as well matched, as a
couple of coach horses.


Wash. ( Aside.) Now since I see the tide has turned against me, I mustn't be
too hard with 'em, they are both young and I am old, and I may possibly want
their assistance, before they will want mine.


Buck. Come, come mon, gie em year blessin, troth she is, a sonsie, blinkin
lass, and they are a bonnie pair.


Wash. O! lack-a-day! -- I charge you both, tell me the truth! -- are you
really married?


Mean. It Is really so, si^!


Lucy. Dear uncle it is true -- pray forgive!


Wash. Who married you?


Lucy. Parson Knottum, sir.


Wash. Eigh! -- who?


Mean. Parson Knottum, sir.


Wash. Aye! I thought so! if he did it, there is no untying the knot, he is just
such another fellow, as that a-a- what do you call him, a-a- Parson Holdfast.
Well since its so, God bless you both, ( they rise) but remember children, that
bare walls make but giddy housewives.


Mean. Sir! we thank you for your kind condescension, and I m^st now inform
you, that I have this day received a letter from Jamaica, giving an account of
my uncle's death, enclosing a copy of his will, by which I understand he has
bequeathed me fifteen thousand pounds sterling in cash, with all his real and
personal estate, consisting of four valuable windmill plantations, seven
hundred and eighty-four negroes, a large quantity of very valuable plate, a
part of which cash (as per bill of lading;) also, one hundred hogsheads of
proof spirit and seventy-five hogsheads of prime sugar is remitted me, per the
brig Welcome, captain Trusty.


Wash. I Am glad to hear it! my son -- I Am glad to hear it! indeed I am! let me
give you joy both of your spouse and fortune! (Embraces him.) It revives my
drooping spirits! come hither Lucy, my good child! you're a good girl! indeed
you are! and I wish you joy of your worthy husband and fortune. (Embraces her.)
I Am rejoiced very much. ( Aside) O dear! what a lucky turn for me.


Mean. Notwithstanding this flush of fortune, sir! I bear the same love for
your niece and veneration for yourself as heretofore; and you may rest assured,
sir! I shall make it my peculiar study to merit your esteem and her affection.


Wash. Aye! aye! it is very well my dear child, I believe you will, and indeed,
I always loved you with a paternal affection, notwithstanding sometimes it
happened (unluckily when you were present) that something had ruffled my temper,
and I might not have shown you the respect I otherwise would have done, and
which I was heartily sorry for, when you were gone. But you must forgive and
forget that, and in some measure attribute it to the imbecility and infirmity
of old age, and to make amends, you have both my blessing, (embraces them
again) and God bless you both, and may you live comfortably together, and see
many happy days, and be blessed with a train of dutiful children, like olive
branches round about your table, to comfort you in your old age; "cresite et
multiplicamini". -- And, oh! that I, who have one foot in the grave and the
other scarcely out, had but been contented, then, I should have been happy in
my old age and not have involved myself in this labyrinth of trouble and
confusion! But let it serve as a warning to others, not to listen to idle
schemes, nor give way to vain imaginations, which has proved so fatal to me!
for, he whose desires are unbounded, and is weak enough to listen to artful
designing men, stands upon a dangerous precipice, whose foundation must sink
and he inevitably perish! Sings slow and mournful. SONG XIX.
Ah! who is me, poor wretched I?
With broken heart, and down cast eyes!
To ease my mind, where shall I fly?
A prey to knaves, poor Washball dies*
Let future generations take
Example, by my dismal fall!
Nor gods of gold, or idols make;
So shun the fate of poor Washball!
And now my good f^iends and fellow-^^^erers, (strokes hands with them) I
expect you will honor us with your company at dinner, and do my dear son, write a
card of invitation to dinner, also, to the worthy Captain Trusty. We'll strive
to make ourselves as merry as we can, and forget our fol^y and disappointment.
-- Gab^iel call in the neighbors, and bring your fiddle and play for us, and
we'll have a dance.


Gab. I will, I wi^^, sorrow on me but I will! for we havn't had a dance since
last Christmas. Exit Gab.


Wash. In the mean time, my dear children, give me a s^^g to sooth my troubled
mind.


SONG XX.
M^^n. Banish sorrow, welcome joy!
Let Us strike up, the sprightly dance,
Mirth abound without alloy;
Tune your lutes, your pipes advance^*
Sound your notes in lofty strains,
Join ye nymph's and jovial swains,
Banish care and be at rest;
Of disappointment, make the best.

Lucy. Room for joy, how blessed am I,
In a husband and a friend?
Virtuous love shall never die,
Though our lives will surely end.
Virgins all example take,
Virtue love, for virtue's sake.
Constant be -- as turtle-dove;
Let your theme be virtuous love.
( Enter GABRIEL, with his fiddle and neighbors, they strike up a country
dance, after which WASHBALL says) In search of treasure, we a^e ^ed astray,
Believing fully, what deceivers say,
They tread unsure who against their senses run,
False steps pursue, and rush ^o be undone,
Cursed by themselves! laughed at by every one.

Exeunt omnes to dinner. EPILOGUE.
T'Reclaim the vicious, is a noble deed!
The virtuous sure, they less repentance need,
To knock down vice, it was our sole intent,
And, if we have had success, it is all we meant.
The avaricious wretch exposed to view,
Ungrateful man! -- more sordid than a Jew!
Whose miser'd soul -- wrapped up in hoards of pel^,
No charity for any, but himself!
Ambition humbled, -- virtuous love rewarded,
(For virtuous souls! -- will ever be recorded.)
Exposed the folly of the credulous,
Who put what sense they have, out to a nurse.
And vanity is checked -- whose pompous sound,
With it is vota^ies levelled with the ground.
To you our judges then, we must appeal,
Condemn or not -- we satisfaction feel
In thinking, we have caused a reformation,
Among'st the dupes of this our congregation.
(Viewing the Audience through a glass.) O! glorious sight! how close they
squeeze and touch,
As thick as hops -- or, like New York stage-coach,
The Boxes shine, with brilliant belles and beaus!
The Pit with critics, and Gallery overflows.
Each make remarks, well pleased, and with grimace,
They twist and screw the muscles of their face.
Hark! hark! they clap applause on every side,
Some mouths half open -- others opened wide;
Which show the audience are gratified.
We thank you friends, those marks of approbation;
Has saved our play, from what folks call damnation
And since we have feasted you with dainty dishes!
With thanks! we'll now feast on, -- the loaves an^ fishes.

