THE HASTY-PUDDING, A POEM, IN THREE CANTOS. Written in Chambery in Savoy, Jan.
1793.

Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci
He makes a good breakfast who mixes pudding with molasses.
NEW YORK, Printed, from the Author's Manuscript, for FELLOWS and ADAM. 1796.

PREFACE
A Simplicity in diet, whether it be considered with reference to the happiness
of individuals or the prosperity of a nation, is of more consequence than we
are apt to imagine. In recomending so important an object to the rational part
of mankind, I wish it were in my power to do it in such a manner as would be
likely to gain their attention. I am sensible that it is one of those subjects
in which example has infinitely more power than the most convincing arguments
or the highest charms of poetry. Goldsmith's DESERTED VILLAGE, though
possessing these two advantages in a greater degree than any other work of the
kind, has not prevented villages in England from being deserted. The apparent
interest of the rich individuals, who form the taste as well as the laws in
that country, has been against him; and with that interest it has been vain to
contend.

The vicious habits which in this little piece I endeavor to combat, seem to
me not so difficult to cure. No class of people has any interest in supporting
them; unless it be the interest which certain families may feel in vying with
each other in sumptuous entertainments. There may indeed be some instances of
depraved appetites, which no arguments will conquer; but these must be rare.
There are very few persons but what would always prefer a plain dish for
themselves, and would prefer it likewise for their guests, if there were no
risk of reputation in the case. This difficulty can only be removed by example;
and the example should proceed from those whose situation enables them to take
the lead in forming the manners of a nation. Persons of this description in
America, I should hope, are neither above nor below the influence of truth and
reason, when conveyed in language suited to the subject.

Whether the manner I have chosen to address my argments to them be such as to
promise any success is what I cannot decide* but I certainly had hopes of doing
some good, or I should not have taken the pains of putting so many rhymes
together -- The example of domestic virtues has doubtless a great effect. I
only wish to rank SIMPLICITY of DIET among the virtues. In that case I should
hope it will be cherished and more esteemed by others than it is at present.

THE AUTHOR.

The Hasty-Pudding,
CANTO I.
YE Alps audacious, through the heavens that rise,
To cramp the day and hide me from the skies;
Ye Gallic flags, that over their heights unfurled,
Bear death to kings, and freedom to the world,
I sing not you. A softer theme I choose,
A virgin theme, unconscious of the Muse,
But fruitful, rich, well suited to inspire
The purest frenzy of poetic fire.
Despise it not, ye Bards to terror steeled,
Who hurl your thunders round the epic field;
Nor ye who strain your midnight throats to sing
Joys that the vineyard and the still-house bring;
Or on some distant fair your notes employ,
And speak of raptures that you never enjoy.
I sing the sweets I know, the charms I feel,
My morning incense, and my evening meal,
The sweets of Hasty Pudding. Come, dear bowl,
Glide over my plate, and inspire my soul.
The milk beside thee, smoking from the kine,
Its substance mingled, married in with thine,
Shall cool and temper thy superior heat,
And save the pains of blowing while I eat.
Oh! could the smooth, the emblematic song
Flow like the genial juicies over my tongue,
Could those mild morsels in my numbers chime,
And, as they roll in substance, roll in rhyme,
No more thy awkward unpoetic name
Should shun the Muse, or prejudice thy fame;
But rising grateful to the accustomed ear,
All Bards should catch it, and all realms revere!
Assist me first with pious toil to trace
Through wrecks of time thy lineage and thy race;
Declare what lovely squaw, in days of yore,
(Ere great Columbus sought thy native shore)
First gave thee to the world; her works of fame
Have lived indeed, but lived without a name.
(...) tawny Ceres, goddess of her days,
First learned with stones to crack the well-dry'd maize,
Through the rough seive to shake the golden shower,
In boiling water stir the yellow flour:
The yellow flour, bestrew'd and stirred with yeast,
Swells at the flood and thickens to a paste,
Then puffs and wallops* rises to the brim,
Drinks the dry knobs that on the suface swim;
The knobs at last the busy ^^dle breaks,
And the whole mass its true consistence takes.
Could but her sacred ^ame, unknown so long,
Rise, like her labors, to the son of song,
To her, to them, I Would consecrate my lays,
And blow her pudding with the breath of praise.
If 'twas Oella, whom I sang before,
I here ascribe her one great virtue more.
Not through the rich Peruvian realms alone
The fame of Sol's sweet daughter should be known,
But over the world's wide climes should live secure,
Far as his rays extend, as long as they endure.
Dear hasty-pudding, what unpromis'd joy
Expands my heart, to meet thee in Savoy!
Doomed over the world through devious paths to roam,
Each clime my country, and each house my home,
My soul is soothed, my cares have found an end,
greet my long-lost, unforgotten friend.
For thee through Paris, that corrupted town,
How long in vain I wandered up and down,
Where shameless Bacchus, with his drenching hoard,
Cold from his cave usurps the morning board.
London is lest in smoke and steeped in tea;
No Yankey there can lisp the name of thee;
The uncouth word, a libel on the town,
Would call a proclamation from the crown. A certain king, at the time when
this was worsen was publishing proclamations to prevent American principles
from being propagated in his country.

For climes oblique, that fear the sun's full rays,
Chilled in their fogs, exclude the generous maize;
A grain whose rich luxuriant growth requires
Short gentle showers, and bright etherial fires.
But here, though distant from our native shore,
With mutual glee we meet and laugh once more.
The same! I know thee by that yellow face,
That strong complexion of true Indian race,
Which time can never change, nor soil impair,
Nor Alpine snows, nor Turkey's morbid air;
For endless years, through every mild domain,
Where grows the maize, there thou art sure to reign
But man, more fickle, the bold license claims,
In different realms to give thee different names.
Thee the soft nations round thy warm Levant
Polanta call, the French of course Polante;
Even in thy native regions, how I blush
To here the Pennsylvanians call thee Mush!
On Hudson's banks, while men of Belgie spawn
(...) and eat thee by the name Suppawn.
All spurious appellations, void of truth;
I Have better known thee from my earliest youth,
Thy name is Hasty-Pudding! thus our sires
Were wont to greet thee fuming from their fires;
And while they argued in thy just defense
With logic clear, they thus explained the sense: --
"In haste the boiling cauldron, over the blaze,
"Receives and cooks the ready-powder'd maize;
"In haste it is served, and then in equal haste,
"With cooling milk, we make the sweet repast.
"No carving to be done, no knife to grate
"The tender ear, and wound the stony plate:
"But the smooth spoon, just fitted to the lip,
"And taught with art the yielding mass to dip,
"By frequent journeys to the bowl well stored,
"Performs the hasty honors of the board."
Such is thy name, significant and clear,
A name, a sound to every Yankey dear,
But most to me, whose heart and palate chaste
Preserve my pure hereditary taste.
There are who strive to stamp with disrepute
The lucious food, because it feeds the brute;
In troops of high-strain'd wit, while gaudy prigs
Compare thy nursling man to pampered pigs;
With sovereign scorn I treat the vulgar jest,
Nor fear to share thy bounties with the beast.
What though the generous cow gives me to quaff
The milk nutritious; am I then a calf?
Or can the genius of the noisy swine,
Though nursed on pudding, thence lay claim to mine?
Sure the sweet song, I fashion to thy praise,
Runs more melodious than the notes they raise,
My song resounding in its grateful glee,
No merit claims; I praise myself in thee.
My father loved thee through his length of days;
For thee his fields were shaded over with maize;
From thee what health, what vigor he possessed,
Ten sturdy freemen from his loins attest;
Thy constellation ruled my natal morn,
And all my bones were made of Indian corn.
Delicious grain! whatever form it take,
To roast or boil, to smother or to bake,
In every dish it is welcome still to me,
But most, my Hasty-Pudding, most in thee.
Let the green Succatash with thee contend,
Let beans and corn their sweetest juices blend,
Let butter drench them in its yallow tide,
And a long slice of bacon grace their side;
Not all the plate, how famed soever it be,
Can please my palate like a bowl of thee.
Some talk of Hoe-cake, fair Virginia's pride,
Rich Johnny-cake this mouth has often tried;
Both please me well, their virtues much the same:
Alike their fabric, as allied their fame.
Except in dear New England, where the last
Receives a dash of pumpkin in the paste,
To give it sweetness and improve the taste.
But place them all before me, smoking hot,
The big round dumplin rolling from the pot;
The pudding of the bag, whose quivering breast,
With suet lined, leads on the Yankey feast;
The Charlotte brown, within whose crusty sides
A belly soft the pulpy apple hides;
The yellow bread, whose face like amber glows,
And all of Indian that (...)-pan knows --
You tempt me not -- my favorite greets my eyes,
To that loved bowl my spoon by instinct flies.
CANTO II.
TO mix the food by vicious rules of art,
To kill the stomach and to sink the heart,
To make mankind to social virtue sour,
Cram over each dish, and be what they devour;
For this the kitchen Muse first framed her book,
Commanding sweat to stream from every cook;
Children no more their antic gambols tried,
And friends to physic wondered why they died.
Not so the Yankey -- his abundant feast,
With simples furnished, and with plainness dressed,
A numerous offspring gathers round the board,
And cheers alike the servant and the lord;
Whose well-bought hunger prompts the joyous taste,
And health attends them from the short repast.
While the full pail rewards the milk-maid's toil,
The mother sees the morning cauldron boil;
To stir the pudding next demands their care,
To spread the table and the bowls prepare;
To feed the children, as their portions cool,
And comb their heads, and send them off to school.
Yet may the simplest dish some rules impart,
For nature scorns not all the aids of art.
Even Hasty-Pudding, purest of all food,
May still be bad, indifferent, or good;
As sage experience the short process guides,
Or want of skill, or want of care presides.
Whoever would form it on the surest plan,
To rear the child and long sustain the man;
To shield the morals while it mends the size
And all the powers of every food supplies,
Attend the lessons that the Muse shall bring.
Suspend your spoons, and listen while I sing.
But since, O man! thy life and health demand
Not food alone, but labor from thy hand,
First in the field, beneath the sun's strong rays,
Ask of thy mother earth the needful maize;
She loves the race that courts her yielding soil,
And gives her bounties to the sons of toil.
When now the ox, obedient to thy call,
Repays the loan that filled the winter stall,
Pursue his traces over the furrowed plain,
And plant in measured hills the golden grain.
But when the tender germe begins to shoot,
And the green spire declares the sprouting root,
Then guard your nursling from each greedy foe,
The insidious worm, the all devouring crow.
A little ashes, sprinkled round the spire,
Soon steeped in rain, will bid the worm retire;
The feathered robber with his hungry maw
Swift flies the field before your man of straw,
A frightful image, such as schoolboys bring
When met to burn the Pope, or hang the King.
Thrice in the season, through each verdant row
Wield the strong plow-share and the faithful hoe;
The faithful hoe, a double task that takes,
To till the summer corn, and roast the winter cakes
Slow springs the blade, while checked by chilling rains,
Ere yet the sun the seat of Cancer gains;
But when his fiercest fire emblaze the land,
Then start the juices, then the roots expand;
Then, like a column of Corinthian mould,
The stalk struts upward, and the leaves unfold;
The bushy branches all the ridges fill;
Entwine their arms, and kiss from hill to hill.
Here cease to vex them, all your cares are done;
Leave the last labors to the parent sun;
Beneath his genial smiles the well-drest field,
When autumn calls, a plenteous crop shall yield.
Now the strong foliage bears the standards high,
And shoots the tall top-gallants to the sky;
The suckling ears their silky fringes bend,
And pregnant grown, their swelling coats distend;
The loaded stalk, while still the burden grows,
O'erhangs the space that runs between the rows;
High as a hop-field waves the silent grove,
A safe retreat for little thefts of love,
When the pledged roasting-ears invite the maid,
To meet her swain beneath the new-form'd shade
His generous hand unloads the cumbrous hill,
And the green spoils her ready basket fill;
Small compensation for the twofold bliss,
The promised wedding and the present kiss.
Slight depredations these; but now the moon
Calls from his hallow tree the sly raccoon;
And while by night he bears his prize away,
The bolder squirrel labors through the day,
Both thieves alike, but provident of time,
A virtue rare, that almost hides their crime.
Then let them steal the little stores they can,
And fill their gran'ries from the toils of man;
We Have one advantage where they take no part, --
With all their wiles they never have found the art
To boil the Hasty-Pudding; here we shine
Superior far to tenants of the pine;
This envied boon to man shall still belong,
Unshar'd by them in substance or in song.
At last the closing season browns the plain,
And ripe October gathers in the grain;
Deep loaded carts the spacious corn-house fill,
The sack distended marches to the mill;
The laboring mill beneath the burden groans,
And showers the future pudding from the stones;
Till the glad house-wife greets the powdered gold
And the new crop exterminates the old.
CANTO III.
THE days grow short; but though the fallen sun
To the glad swain proclaims his day's work done,
Night's pleasant shades his various tasks prolong,
And yield new subjects to my various song.
For now, the corn-house filled the harvest home,
The invited neighbors to the husking come;
A frolic scene, where work, and mirth, and play,
Unite their charms, to chase the hours away.
Where the huge heap lies centre'd in the hall,
The lamp suspended from the cheerful wall,
Brown corn-fed nymphs, and strong hard-handed beax,
Alternate ranged, extend in circling rows,
Assume their seats, the solid mass attack;
The dry husks rustle, and the corn-cobs crack;
The song, the laugh, alternate notes resound,
And the sweet cider trips in silence round.
The laws of Husking every wight can tell;
And sure no laws he ever keeps so well:
For each red ear a general kiss he gains,
With each smut ear he smuts the luckless swains,
But when to some sweet maid a prize is cast,
Red as her lips, and taper as her waist,
She walks the round, and culls one favored bea
Who leaps, the luscious tribute to bestow.
Various the sports, as are the wits and brains
Of well-pleased lasses and contending swains;
Till the vast mound of corn is swept away,
And he that gets the last ear, wins the day.
Meanwhile the house-wife urges all her care,
The well-earn'd feast to hasten and prepare.
The sifted meal already wait, her hand,
The milk is strained, the bowls in order stand,
The fire flames high; and, as a pool (that takes
The headlong stream that over the mill-dam breaks)
Foams, roars and rages with incessant toils,
So the vexed cauldren rages, roars and boils.
First with clean salt she seasons well the food,
Then strews the flour, and thickens all the flood.
Long over the simmering fire she lets it stand;
To stir it well demands a stronger hand?
The husband takes his turn; and round and round
The ladle flies; at last the toil is crowned;
When to the board the thronging huskers pour,
And take their seats as at the corn before.
I leave them to their feast. There still belong
More copious matters to my faithful song.
For rules there are, though never unfolded yet,
Nice rules and wise, how pudding should be ate.
Some with molasses line the luscious treat,
And mix, like Bards, the useful with the sweet.
A wholesome dish, and well deserving praise,
A great resource in those bleak wint'ry days,
When the chilled earth lies buried deep in snow,
And raging Boreas dries the shivering cow.
Blessed cow! thy praise shall still my notes employ,
Great source of health, the only source of joy;
Mother of Egypt's God, -- but sure, for me,
Were I to leave my God, I Would worship thee.
How often thy teats these pious hands have pressed!
How often thy bounties prove'd my only feast!
How often I Have fed thee with my favorite grain!
And roared like thee, to find thy children slain!
Ye swains who know her various worth to prize,
Ah! house her well from Winter's angry skies.
Potatoes, pumpkins, should her sadness cheer,
Corn from your crib, and mashes from your beer;
When Spring returns she will well acquit the loan,
And nurse at once your infants and her own.
Milk then with pudding I should always choose
To this in future I confine my Muse,
Till she in haste some farther hints unfold,
Well for the young, nor useless to the old.
First in your bowl the milk abundant take,
Then drop with care along the silver lake
Your flakes of pudding; these at first will hide
Their little bulk beneath the swelling tide;
But when their growing mass no more can sink,
When the soft island looms above the brink,
Then check your hand; you have got the portion due,
So taught our sires, and what they taught is true.
There is a choice in spoons. Though small appear
The nice distinction, yet to me it is clear.
The deep bowl'd Gallic spoon contrived to scoop
In ample draughts the thin diluted soup,
Performs not well in those substantial things,
Whose mass adhesive to the metal clings;
Where the strong labial muscles must embrace.
The gentle curve, and sweep the hollow space
With ease to enter and discharge the freight,
A bowl less concave but still more dilate,
Becomes the pudding best. The shape, the size,
A secret rest unknown to vulgar eyes.
Experienced feeders can alone impart
A rule so much above the lore of art.
These tuneful lips, that thousand spoons have tried,
With just precision could the point decide,
Though not in song; the muse but poorly shines
In cones, and cubes, and geometric lines.
Yet the true form, as near as she can tell,
Is that small section of a goose-egg-shell,
Which in two equal portions shall divide
The distance from the center to the side.
Fear not to slaver; it is no deadly sin.
Like the free Frenchman, from your joyous chin
Suspend the ready napkin, or, like me,
Poise with one hand your bowl upon your knee;
Just in the zenith your wise head project,
Your full spoon, rising in a line direct,
Bold as a bucket, heeds no drops that fall,
The wide mouthed bowl will surely catch them all.
FINIS

