The Promised Seed.

A SERMON PREACHED TO GOD's ANCIENT ISRAEL THE JEWS, AT SION-CHAPEL,
WHITECHAPEL, On Sunday Afternoon, August 28, 1790.

By WILLIAM COOPER.

TO WHICH ARE ADDED, THE HYMNS THAT WERE SUNG, AND THE PRAYERS THAT WERE
OFFERED UP, BEFORE AND AFTER THE SERMON.

BOSTON: Printed by MANNING and LORING. June, 1796.

PREFACE.
HAVING frequently observed that some Jews attended my preaching, I was led to
reflect on the present state of that dear neglected people. The more
attentively I considered the matter, the more sensibly was my compassion
excited, and the more powerfully were my affections drawn out toward them. At
length my heart dissolved in pity; and I determined to preach to them on a
subject, in which, I conceive, they are deeply interested. This I did: and
multitudes of them, knowing my intention, honored me with a candid hearing.
The discourse itself I now publish; in compliance with the earnest solicitation
of several who heard it; in vindication of myself from the errors and
absurdities some mercenary printers and booksellers would father upon me in
their surreptitious editions; and in hopes that the profits, arising from the
sale of it among the Gentiles, will enable me to distribute the copies gratis
to the Jews.

WILLIAM COOPER.
LONDON, Sept. 5, 1796.
On perusing the following Discourse, the reader will be naturally led to
inquire, "Is it known whether this Sermon had any particular effect upon the
Jews?" To satisfy this inquiry, the following extracts are subjoined. --

The Rev. Mr. PIERCE, of Birmingham, in a letter of the 20th of November last,
to a Minister in Boston, thus writes --."It will give you pleasure to be
informed that many Jews in London have lately attended on the Gospel -- that a
Society for their instruction is formed -- that the second Sermon preached to
them under its patronage was delivered last night -- and that they express
gratitude for the respect shown them by these appropriate sorvices."

In another letter from the Rev. Mr. MANTLE, of Westbury, in England, to a
Clergyman in Newbury-Port, dated February ult. is the following -- "The clouds
of darkness which have long hung over God's ancient people the Jews begin to
dissipate, and the glorious purposes of Heaven beam forth in their progress to
perfect day. The Batavian Assembly has dissolved the unnatural alliance of
Church and State, and restored to the privileges of citizens, the Jews who are
distributed throughout their provinces in vast multitudes. In London, thousands
of the Jews attend under the ministry of Mr. COOPER, in Sion-Chapel. Vast
numbers of his first Sermon [the one here followin have been published and
distributed gratis among them, and considerable efforts are making to diffuse
the knowledge of Christianity among that long neglected people."

The Service commenced with singing the following HYMN.
THE God of Abr'ham praise.
Who reigns enthroned above;
Ancient of everlasting days,
And God of love:
Jehovah, great I AM!
By earth and heaven confessed:
I bow and bless the sacred name,
Forever blessed.
The God of Abr'ham praise,
At whose supreme command
From earth I rise -- and seek the joys
At his right hand.
I all on earth forsake;
Its wisdom, fame, and power;
And him my only portion make,
My shield and tower.
The goodly land I see,
With peace and plenty blessed,
A land of sacred liberty,
And endless rest.
There milk and honey flow,
And oil and wine abound;
And trees of life forever grow,
With mercy crowned.
The whole triumphant host
Give thanks to God on high;
"Hail, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,"
They ever cry;
Hail Abr'ham's God and mine;
I join the heavenly lays;
All might and majesty are thine,
And endless praise.
The PRAYER.
O THOU God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob! behold the company of poor
sinners, Jews and Gentiles this day in thy great presence. O Lord God! bow
down, and bless with thy smiles, this numerous congregation; be in the midst of
this people as thou wast in the midst of the camp of Israel of old, and let
that glory which went before them, be shown unto us. O Lord God Almighty!
behold the children of Israel; and stretch forth, for their deliverance, thy
hand, which is not shortened that it cannot save; and let thine ear, which is
not heavy, be inclined to our petitions. We desire to praise thy name for all
the wonders that are recorded in thy blessed word. Thou did take thy servant
Abraham of old out of the land where he was; thou did call him into a land
where he had never been; and thou did, contrary to nature, give him a son,
from whom thou did promise a seed should come, in which all the nations of
the earth should be blessed. Thou did, by wonderful mercies -- thou did by
wonderful providence protect them and their children, when they stood in need
of thy protection. Thine arm was stretched forth for their help. Thou did
call them to go, and it was of thy wisdom that they did go, into a land where
they were in captivity for an appointed time. There, Lord, thou did bless
them. Thou wast not forgetful of thy promise; but, notwithstanding their
rebellion, thou causedst them to multiply into an exceeding great nation; and
when the time appointed was come, in the very hour which thou had appointed,
notwithstanding their frequent rebellion against thee, thou wast regardful of
thy promise, and did deliver them. Thou did bring them out of Egypt with a
mighty hand; thou did divide the Red Sea, that thine Israel might pass
through. Their enemies, pursuing them, were overwhelmed in the deep, while they
passed through dry shod, singing thy praises. Again they rebelled against thee,
and thou did lead them about in a waste, howling wilderness; nevertheless,
thou did carry them like an eagle, and keep them as the apple of thine eye.
Though thou did bring down thy judgments upon them, yet justice was always
tempered with mercy; and thou did never punish them as their sins deserved.
Athougth, after forty years, thou did bring them into the land which thou
had prepared for them; their enemies, though mighty, falling before them:
there they worshipped thee, and there they enjoyed thy presence; till at length
thou did take thy presence for a little time from them, and sufferedst them
to fall before their enemies. Nevertheless, at the appointed time thou did
restore them. They offended again and again; and were again and again
captivated, and again delivered. They were under captivity, according to thy
prophecies, seventy years: but thou wast faithful, O God! and at the expiration
of the appointed time, thou did send thy servants of old to be their leaders;
and, according to thy promise, did bring them again to their land; and thy
temple was again restored to them. They continued there, in different states
and conditions, for many years; till at length the Romans, the people whom thou
had permitted to come, overpowered them, and the scepter departed from Judah,
and the lawgiver from between his feet. O Lord God! thou did say in thy word,
that there should then appear a wonderful man upon earth: Lord, teach us what
we should think of that man. Thou scatteredst them abroad; at this day they
have no priest, no sacrifice, no temple, nor can they worship thee according to
thy law. But thou have promised that Israel shall be saved in the Lord with an
everlasting salvation. Let this day, O God! be the beginning of their
deliverance. Now, O God of gods, Light of lights, shine down into our hearts,
chase away the clouds of unbelief and ignorance, and give us says in thee, as
Abraham thy servant had. Thou did say to Abraham, "In thy seed shall all the
nations of the earth be blessed." Many have arisen who have pretended to be
this promised seed, and have proved otherwise; but there was a man who, when
the scepter was about to depart, did great miracles, and the Jews themselves
bore witness of them. Teach us, O Lord! what we should think of that man. If he
be the Messiah O God! let us believe in him. Lead us into all truth, teach us
to understand thy word, and thine shall be the glory. O Lord! as this is my
birthday, let it be the birthday of thousands, and let thy presence be shown
to Israel in a peculiar manner today. Hear us, O God of Abraham, of Isaac, and
of Jacob! and do more and better for us, poor unworthy Gentiles, but more
especially for thine ancient Israel, thy dear people, the Jews, than we can ask
or think.

"Our Father, which art in heaven," etc.

HYMN, after Prayer.
BEFORE Jehovah's awful throne,
Ye nations, bow with sacred joy;
Know that the Lord is God alone,
He can create, and he destroy.
His sovereign power, without our aid,
Made us of clay, and formed us men;
And when, like wandering sheep, we strayed,
He brought us to his fold again.
We'll crowd thy gates with thankful songs,
High as the heavens our voices raise;
And earth, with her ten thousand tongues,
Shall fill thy courts with sounding praise.
Wide as the world is thy command;
Vast as eternity thy love;
Firm as a rock thy truth must stand,
When rolling years shall cease to move.
SERMON.
AND IN THY SEED SHALL ALL THE NATIONS OF THE EARTH BE BLESSED.

-- GENESIS xxii. 18.
BLESSED be the God of Abraham for the glorious sight which I now behold!
Thousands of diverse nations, Jews and Gentiles, are assembled beneath this roof
to hear the word of God! O may the Spirit of the Almighty enable me to preach
it faithfully, and may your hearts be opened cordially to receive it.

Gentile sinners, you are this day highly honored with the presence of a noble
nation. Behold the ancient Israel of God; and, conscious of your own
inferiority, reverence them as your superiors.

Ye ancient Israel of God, we view you with rapturous delight and veneration;
nor are we ashamed to acknowledge your great superiority. Our forefathers,
forgetting your high descent, may have insulted you, but we disclaim their base
actions, and would atone for their faults by double humiliation. You are the
lineal descendants of God's ancient chosen people; we are the children of
idolatrous and execrable Gentiles. To you were committed the lively oracles of
God, while our fathers groped in ignorance, and perished for lack of knowledge.
Yet your fathers prayed for us; and we, prompted by gratitude, would imitate
their conduct, and seek to do you good. Actuated by this motive, I, an unworthy
worm, presume this day to preach unto you the word of the Lord. Not that I am
wiser than you. No; I am only a poor child, completing this day my twentieth
year; but convinced of my own inability to instruct gray hairs, I earnestly
pray the Lord to be unto me a mouth and wisdom.

As I am standing before a company of Jews, among whom are many learned men, it
might be expected by some that I should address them in a learned manner. This,
however, I cannot do; for I heartily confess, in the presence of you all, that
I understand no language but the English. Craving, therefore, indulgence, if,
in pronouncing Hebrew names, my accent should be improper, and entreating the
most candid attention whilst I reason on the doctrines of this book with all
possible perspicuity and plainness -- I enter on the great work before me with
fear and trembling.

There is little occasion, I presume, for acquainting this assembly with the
remarkable occurrence which seems to be a prelude to the gracions promise in my
text. For the sake, however, of those who are uninformed, should any such be
here present, a brief recital may be necessary.

God having called Abraham from his native land into a strange country, gave
him the promise of a son, from whom a numerous progeny should descend; though at
that time, Abraham was an hundred years old, and Sarah, according to the course
of nature, past childbearing. Abraham believed in God; but so far was Sarah
from thinking such an event possible, that when the promise was given, she
laughed, saying with an air of incredulity, "Shall I bear a son?" Nevertheless,
Sarah did conceive, and bear a son to Abraham, in his old age, at the set time
of which God had spoken to him (Genesis xxi. 2:) and from him, thus miraculously
conceived, when the springs of nature were dried up, the Messiah himself was to
descend, in a manner as impossible in the eye of sense, as a root could spring
up out of dry ground.

For the further trial of Abraham's faith, God says to him, when Isaac was
grown up, "Take now thy son, thy only son Isaac, whom thou love, and get thee
into the land of Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt-offering, upon one of
the mountains which I will tell thee of." The good man rose early in the
morning, and taking his son, and the things needful for the sacrifice, began
his journey. On the third day, O! painful sight! he lift up his eyes, and
beheld the place afar off where his lamb must bleed. O! astonishing faith! that
enabled him to proceed at the divine command, while nature's persuasive voice,
like the tempting serpent, urges him to disobey. But nature, already bleeding,
receives another wound; for, as they went on both of them together, Isaac said,
"My father; and he replied, Here am I, my son. And he said, Behold the fire and
the wood, but where is the lamb for a burnt-offering?" And Abraham said, "My
son, God will provide himself a lamb for a burnt-offering." At such a question
what must he feel! how difficult to suppress the tears that were ready to burst
from his eyes! "Ah! dear child, little do thou think what I am about to do.
Thou art the lamb. My hand must six in thy beloved breast the deadly steel." He
struggles against the killing thought, and perseveres. At length they reach the
place. There Abraham builds the altar, and on the altar he lays the wood in
order. He binds his son, and lays him on the wood. Taking the fatal knife, he
stretches forth his hand, and stands prepared to slay his son. O Abraham,
forbear. If thy faith be deaf to nature's voice, listen one moment to what
reason has to say. "Art thou not to be the father of many nations? Is it not
said, "In Isaac shall thy seed be called?" How can the divine prediction be
fulfilled if Isaac dies without a child? Drop, therefore, the knife, and let
thy darling live." But no; the man of God obeys the voice of Heaven; and now,
behold the son of promise ready to receive the mortal wound. Just at that
instant the angel of the Lord called to him out of heaven, "Lay not thine hand
upon the lad, neither do you any thing unto him; for now I know thou fear
God, seeing thou has not withheld thy son, thine only son from me. And Abraham
looked, and behold behind him a ram caught in a thicket by his horns; and he
went and took the ram, and offered him up for a burnt-offering in the stead of
his son. And the angel of the Lord called to him out of heaven a second time,
and said, By myself have I sworn, says the Lord, for because thou have done
this thing, and have not withheld thy son, thine only son, that in blessing I
will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of
the heaven and as the sand upon the seashore; and thy seed shall possess the
gate of his enemies. And," then follows the GRAND PROMISE, "In thy seed shall
all the nations of the earth be blessed."

This promise is made to Abraham, that illustrious character, whom Jews and
Gentiles reverence, and whom God himself delighted to honor. His name was
Ab-ram, mighty-father, but God changed it to Abraham, the father of multitudes,
or nations, as it is said, Genesis xvii. 5. "the father of many nations have I
made thee." This could not be spoken of him in relation to his progeny after
the flesh, for he was the father of Israel only, a single nation; it must,
therefore, design that spiritual race that should spring from this SEED, in
whom all the nations of the earth are to be blessed. We join with you in
denominating Abraham, by way of eminence, "the father of the faithful." How
justly he deserves this title, may be inferred from what has been said. Not
because he is either the author of faith, or the object of it, but because his
faith was, of all men's the greatest and most conspicuous: and as you are his
children after the flesh, I pray God you may be imitators of his faithfulness.

He is likewise called "the friend of God;" the most dignified appellation that
ever was conferred on a mortal man. In consequence of his friendship, he was
admitted to the greatest confidence and familiarity, insomuch that God would
not destroy the cities of the plain without first acquainting him with his
design. "Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do?" I grant that in the
Canticles he calls his people collectively, friends; saying, "Eat, O friends!
and drink abundantly, O beloved!" but he never spoke to any individual of them
but Abraham, in terms of intimacy like these.

The Jewish nation, being the natural posterity of this faithful Abraham, this
friend of God, and bearing in their countenances the marks of their high
descent, derive no small honor from this very circumstance. The meanest Jew
has, in this respect, more dignity than the greatest Princes; for kingly
descent cannot be traced so high, nor can the proudest monarch upon earth boast
of such noble progenitors. What warrior can be compared with David, or who, for
wisdom and riches, can vie with Solomon? Yet these, Oye Jews! were your
ancestors, and so also were many prophets and kings, whose names God himself
has recorded with the highest honor, that they may be held in everlasting
remembrance. If we Gentile sinners do not, in a manner, honor you as kings,
and account ourselves your servants, we disgrace our profession. Your nation
was once the glow and terror of the world, and though that glory is now no
more, it would be shameful in us to despise you; for the chiefest glory of your
nation yet remains, that seed of Abraham in whom all the nations of the earth
are to be blessed.

The word seed confines the promise to one family, and indeed to one person,
that is the Messiah; but the blessing is unto all, and upon all them that
believe. Call us Gentile dogs, if you please; we are so, and the most
contemptible name is not too bad for us. Yet do not wish to exclude us from the
blessings comprehended in this promise. We also hope for eternal happiness
through the seed of Abraham, the MESSIAH; who we conceive is already come, and
we ought not to look for another. This you doubt. This I sirmly believe. If I
am wrong, may God convince me to day! O! convince me before this multitude, and
let thy Israel, if they are wrong, bow to the scepter of truth, that we may no
longer be at variance, but all consess the glory of God in the promised seed.

Let us, therefore, heartily inquire into these three particulars: first,
Whether the Messiah be actually come; secondly, If he be, who this Messiah is;
and thirdly, What blessings all nations derive from him?

First, is the Messiah come? It appears to me that he is. In support of this I
shall adduce, though I am but a child in knowledge, four Scriptures, which I
think are conclusive; wiser men, I dart say, could bring a thousand.

The first passage to which I shall refer, you will find in the forty-ninth
chapter of Genesis, where Jacob, blessing his sons, pronounces the following on
Judah: "Judah, thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise; thy hand shall be on
the neck of thine enemies; thy father's children shall bow down before thee.
Judah is a lion's whelp; from the prey, my son, thou art gone up; he stooped
down, he couched as a lion, and as an old lion; who shall rouse him up? The
scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet,
until Shiloh come; and unto him shall the gathering of the people be.

Setting aside all the needless objections of your nation concerning the
translation of these words, let us, for a moment, consider their import; for
men of wisdom and learning, like you, know that all objections of that sort are
merely cavils. Allowing the Hebrew word, which we translate scepter, to mean a
rod, as you say, yet there is no doubt but it means a staff or rod of power,
not of affliction. This is plain from what follows in the same sentence -- "nor
a lawgiver from between his feet;" for you cannot deny but the word rendered
lawgiver, is properly translated; so that if we leave out the word scepter, the
meaning will be plain enough; namerly, that governing power shall not depart
from Judah till Shiloh come; but Judah governs no more -- the scepter is
departed. I shall not attempt to prove the exact time when it did depart; you
are much wiser than I, and know much better than I can tell you. My arguments,
that the seeptre is now departed, and all knowledge of regal, sacerdotal and
tribal descent utterly lost. Eighteen hundred years, nearly, has Jerusalem
been destroyed, nor is there a trace of sovereignty remaining, or the hope of
it possible. Are these things so, or are they not? Have you a king, or have you
not? Where is your lawgiver? Where is the knowledge of your tribes? I defy the
most learned Jew to tell me which of you is of Judah, which of Levi, or to what
tribe he himself belongs. But this you all know, that the scepter is departed
from Judah, and a lawgiver from between his feet. Then it follows, either that
the unchanging God has fled from his promise, or that Shiloh is come. You also
know that about the time when the scepter departed, there appeared in the world
a CERTAIN MAN, who was afterward crucified at Jerusalem; and that about that
time many of your nation expected the Messiah; did they not? Let history, let
your own writers be witnesses. But if you will not believe that Shiloh is come,
why do you pretend to believe this promise, seeing, if he is not come, it
cannot be true?

The next proof I shall allege, is a passage in the ninth chapter of Daniel;
"Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people and upon thy holy city, to finish
the transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for
iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to seal up the vision
and prophecy, and to anoint the most holy. Know, therefore, and understand,
that from the going forth of the commandment to restore and build Jerusalem,
unto the Messiah the Prince, shall be seven weeks, and threescore and two
weeks; the street shall be built again, and the wall, even in troublous times.
And after threescore and two weeks shall Messiah be CUT OFF, (do you hear that,
O ye Jews!) MESSIAH SHALL BE CUT OFF, but not for himself; and the people of
the prince that shall come shall destroy the city and the sanctuary; and the
end thereof shall be with a flood; and unto the end of the war desolations are
determined. And he shall confirm the covenant with many for one week; and in
the midst of the week he shall cause the sacrisice and the oblation to cease,
and for the overspreading of abominations he shall make it desolate, even until
the consummation, and that determined shall be poured upon the desolate." You
pay more respect to your Rabbis and their sayings, than to God and his law.
One of them has passed a bitter curse on any one that dares to calculate the
time of the Messiah's coming. He prays that his bowels may gush out. They are
conscious that he is come, and wish, by imprecations like this, to deter you
from searching for the truth; but this will not deter me. I am too young and
unlearned to enter into accurate computations; but I appeal to the most learned
Jew, whether these seventy jubilee weeks, or weeks of years, must not have long
since expired, and consequently, whether the Messiah must not have appeared,
and been cut off, as history reports? Seventy weeks of years amount to four
hundred and ninety years. The period cannot be ascertained exactly when those
weeks commenced. Some fix one time, and some another. But that is immaterial.
Let this suffice, they are long since past. The text says, "seventy weeks are
determined to finish the transgression, to make an end of sins, to make
reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, (and
who can bring in an everlasting righteousness, but an everlasting God;) to seal
up the vision and prophecy and to anoint the most holy." Most of you will agree
that Messiah the Prince is here intended; and if not, you must confess he is
meant when his name is mentioned in the subsequent verses. "From the going
forth of the commandment to restore and build Jerusalem, to Messiah the Prince,
is seven weeks, and threescore and two weeks." Your own masters, if they would,
could calculate this time more exactly than I can. However, let me ask your
consciences, whether about the time when these seventy weeks drew to a
conclusion, there was not a remarkable person who gave out that he was the
Messiah; yea, whether many of your nation did not become his followers; and
whether your fathers did not CUT OFF that person? as it is said, "the Messiah
shall be cut off, but not for himself." Also, whether he did not pronounce at
his death, "It is finished?" After this is done, "The people of the prince that
shall come, shall destroy the city." Now you all know the city of Jerusalem is
here meant; but you will observe the destruction of it is not mentioned, till
after mention is made of Messiah's being cut off. But who are the people of the
prince that shall come? Are they not the Romans? Did they not destroy your
city, and desolate your nation? "To the end of the war desolations are
determined." Thousands, yea, tens of thousands of your countrymen, according to
Josephus, perished in that bloody war; the country was made a desolation, and
so it remains to this day. But you will observe, that the Messiah was to be cut
off, before the people of the prince should come and destroy your city. But
Jerusasalem is destroyed, therefore the Messiah is cut off. Why, O Jews, why
will you be blinded through unbelief? Why will you shut your eyes against the
clear shining of truth? First, Messiah must be cut off; and then in consequence
of that, the Romans shall come, and destroy your city. Is Jerusalem destroyed,
or is it not? It is destroyed; and your people remain, to this day, scatteted
up and down upon the face of the earth. God's promises can never fail. It is
therefore in vain for you to say, your sinfulness hinders their fulfillment,
This is not a conditional promise, but it is positive: "Seventy weeks are
DETERMINED; the Messiah shall be cut off." When Israel was in Egypt, and the
time came when God had promised to deliver them, their unworthiness did not
make God unfaithful; for he brought them out the self-same night: and shall the
seventy weeks expire, and shall not the Messiah come?

But it is said, "He shall confirm the covenant with MANY, for one week, that
is, seven years, and in the MIDST OF THE WEEK, he shall cause the sacrifice and
oblation to cease." That is, this Messiah, whoever he is, shall confirm the
covenant of God with your fathers concerning himself, by many infallible
miracles, as well as by his life and doctrines. "And in the midst of the week,"
that is, in about three years and a half after he begins his work of confirming
his covenant, "he shall cause the sacrifice and oblation to cease." I suppose
this means, that being cut off, not for himself, but as a sacrifice for the
people, he shall, by that one offering of himself, render his work perfect, and
make all those sacrifices and oblations of the ceremonial law ineffectual; for
types are like scaffolding, which is taken down when the building is completed.

I remember, concerning that remarkable person who appeared about the time
these seventy weeks were expired, that he wrought many miracles, and constantly
asserted that he was the Messiah; yea, that he was cut off in about three years
and a half after he had begun preaching; that his death happened about the time
of the evening sacrifice, some supposing that he groaned his last at the very
moment the seventy weeks of Daniel were completed, as the angel spoke to him,
about the time of the evening oblation.

The third passage I shall produce, you will find written in the fifth chapter
of Micah: "But thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the
thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me that is to be
ruler in Israel; whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting."
That the Messiah is here spoken of, and the place of his nativity pointed out,
the Jews themselves acknowledge; for when Herod inquired where the Messiah
should be born, the chief priests and scribes answered, in Bethlehern of Judah,
alleging this prophecy in proof. That this prophecy might be fulfilled, God
caused Caesar to make a decree that the whole land should be registered; for
which purpose all were commanded to go to their own city. Joseph, being of the
family of David, went to Bethlehem, where Jesus was born; declaring by his
enrollment, of what family he was, and likewise fulfilling the words of this
prophecy. Where is Bethlehem now? From thence, according to your own teachers,
Messiah is to come. But Bethlehem is destroyed: therefore Messiah is come.
Jerusalem is no more; Bethlehem is no more; therefore, either this prophecy
cannot be fulfilled, or it is already fulfilled; for, "out of thee shall he
come forth unto me, that is to be ruler in Israel;" he shall go out from me; do
the work which he has undertaken, and come to me again. "Therefore will he
give them up, until the time that she which travaileth has brought forth; then
the remnant of his brethren shall return unto the children of Israel." I cannot
tell how you may interpret this text; but I suppose it partly means that Israel
shall be given up, till the fullness of the Gentiles shall come in. Then shall
all Israel confess the Messiah, and be saved with an everlasting salvation.
When that glorious event will take place, God only knows; but I trust it is not
far off. I think it is very near: and he alone who rules above, knows whether
this day may not be the beginning of that glorious season; and whether the
conversion of the Jews may not be the means of spreading the Gospel from pole
to pole.

The last scripture, from which I shall argue the point, is contained in the
third chapter of Malachi: "Behold, I will send my Messenger, and he shall
propare the way before me: and the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his
temple, even the Messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight in: behold, he
shall come, says the Lord of hosts." To this I shall subjoin a passage in
Haggai: "And I will shake all nations, and the Desire of all nations shall
come; and I will fill this house with glory, says the Lord of hosts. The
silver is mine, and the gold is mine, says the Lord of hosts. The glory of
this latter house shall be greater than of the former, says the Lord of hosts:
and in this place will I give peace, says the Lord of hosts." I shall argue
from both these passages at once. Now there is no Jew but will acknowledge that
the second temple, built by Zerubbabel, was so far inferior to that of Solomon,
that there was no comparison between them; for though Herod beautified this
second temple, and lavished vast sums upon it, yet it was not in Herod's power
to make it like Solomon's in glory. Compared with that, it was contemptible;
but God, for the comfort of his people, here promises that its glory shall
exceed the glory of the former. "For the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come
to his temple -- even the Desire, or desirable Object, of ALL nations." And it
is evident that the presence of the Messiah, God incarnate, was, according to
this promise, to give it that superior glory.

Now, O Jews! your temple is destroyed, and you can have no reasonable
expectation of another. How then can this promise be fulfilled, if it is not
already fulfilled? How can the Messenger of the covenant come into that temple
which is now destroyed? But it is evident it was not to be destroyed till he
had come into it. As, therefore, it is destroyed, the Messenger, the Desire of
all nations, must have already come into it. It cannot be spoken of a third
temple, for God confined the promise to the second: "I will fill THIS house
with glory." And again, "The glory of this LATTER HOUSE shall be greater than
of the former."

O Jews! do ye not now believe? Shall God promise, and shall he not perform? Is
he slack concerning his promise? Will the God of truth amuse you with falsity?
By no means: all his promises shall be fulfilled, without the delay of a
moment. If he said the Messenger should come to his temple, depend upon it he
is come, as the Lord has said. May God Almighty enlighten you, that you may
see the meaning of these Scriptures.

It is evident, whoever the Messiah is, that he is come: and nothing but
blindness and unbelief, which have happened unto Israel, can engage them to
look for another. All their hopes, therefore, like the past, must end in
confusion, till they return unto him from whom they have so greatly departed.
But you will argue, that because of your sinfulness, God has withheld his
promise for a time. Was God ever wont to do so? When he promised you
deliverance from Egypt, did he not deliver you the self-same night as he had
promised? did he not bring you forth with a mighty hand -- lead you through the
Red Sea, and overwhelm your pursuers in the mighty deep? Did he not lead you
forty years through a waste howling wilderness? and, notwithstanding your
rebellion, brought you into the promised land? If then, God has been faithful
in lesser matters, shall he not keep his word concerning the Messiah? Yes, he
has kept his word, and Messiah is come. But who is the Messiah? This brings me
to inquire, as I proposed,

Secondly, who the Messiah is? And this I shall do by investigating in whom is
verified all that the prophets had foretold concerning him. To this end, I
shall direct your attention to many passages in the book of God. Look into the
twenty-second Psalm, and read the first verse. "My God! my God! why have thou
forsaken me?" These words are the language of prophecy, and seem to look
forward to something remarkable. They were spoken by Jesus of Nazareth, when he
was in the agonies of death, and thousands of the Jews heard him. Read also the
7th and 8th verses of the same Psalm. "All they that see me laugh me to scorn:
they shoot out the lip; they shake the head, saying, He trusted in the Lord,
that he would deliver him: let him deliver him, seeing he delighted in him."
These words were also spoken by the multitude, in derision of that same person,
while he hung on the cross. Mat. xxvii. 43.


In the 14th verse it is said, "I am poured out like water, and all my bones
are out of joint." This seems to allude to the dreadful death of crucifixion,
which, by the extending of the body and the sudden jerk it sustained when the
cross was put down into the hole dug for that purpose, must sometimes dislocate
the limbs; and perhaps it was so with Jesus of Nazareth; but it is very
remarkable concerning him, that a bone of him was not broken. Verse the 15th
says, "my strength is dried up like a potsherd, and my tongue cleaves to my
jaws, and thou have brought me into the dust of death." Who can the Psalmist be
speaking of? There is something very striking in the words. Whoever he is
speaking of, seems to be a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief. His
sorrows seem like a burning heat, which has dried up his strength, and caused
a parching thirst. I recollect also another passage in the Psalms, which says,
"They gave me also another passage in the Psalms, which says, "They gave me
also gall for my meat, and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink." Ps.
lxix. 21.
Is it not very surpring that all this should be fulfilled in Jesus of
Nazareth? for they gave him vinegar to drink mingled with gall. Matt. xxvii.
48. Mark xv. 25. John xix. 29.
O ye Jews! is not this very remarkable? But let us read again, a part of the
22d Psalm: "For dogs have compassed me; the assembly of the wicked have
enclosed me." O my God what do I see? -- "THEY PIERCED MY MANDS AND MY FEET."
Just so was it done to Jesus of Nazareth; and of a truth he was the Son of God
-- he is the Messiah that was to come. Hear, O Jews! hear the Psalmist speak,
"They pierced my hands and my feet." But who is pierced? They pierced ME, says
the mighty God of Jacobs. Zech. xii. 10.
But David proceeds in his prophecy, "They part my garments among them, and
cast lots upon my vesture." O my soul! who can resist the power of truth? This
also was exactly fulfilled in Jesus of Nazareth. The Roman soldiers took his
garments, and made four parts, to every soldier a part; but his coat being very
curiously wrought, they said, Let us not rent it, but cast lots for it, whose
it shall be: so they parted his raiment among them, and upon his vesture did
they cast lots. John xix. 23, 24.
And you elsewhere read of the person that betrayed him, "Yea, mine own
familiar friend, in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread, has lift up his
heel against me." Pf. xli. 9. lv. 12 -- 14.
Now Judas ate with his Master the very night in which he betrayed him, as you
all know; but from what motive did Judas betray his Master? Why he told him for
gain; and the very sum for which he was fold, is mentioned by one of your own
prophets; as also what use should be afterward made of the money. "And I said
unto them, if ye think good, give me my price; and if not, forbear: so they
weighed for my price thirty pieces of silver. And the Lord said unto me, cast
it unto the porter; a goodly price that I was prized at of them. And I took the
thirty pieces of silver, and cast them to the potter in the house of the Lord."
Zech. xi. 12, 13.
When Judas had sold his master for thirty pieces of silver, his conscience
would not suffer him to keep them; he came, therefore, to the chief priests and
elders, and confessing he had betrayed innocent blood, threw down the money
before them IN THE TEMPLE. How exactly does this agree with the prophecy just
quoted. "And I took the thirty pieces of silver, and cast them to the potter in
the house of the Lord," that is, the temple: "and the chief priests and elders
taking council, bought with them the potter's field to bury strangers in." Mat.
xxvii. 3-7.


When Jesus of Nazareth was taken by wicked hands, his disciples all forsook
him, and fled. And this was predicted by the prophet Zechariah. "Awake, O
sword! against MY shepherd, and against THE MAN that is my FELLOW, says the
Lord of hosts; smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered." Zech.
xiii. 7.
Read also in Isaiah, "I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them
that plucked off the hair: I hid not my face from shame and spitting." Isa. l.
6.
Not only was the back of Jesus scourged, as the Evangelist informs us, "but
they spit in his face, and buffeted him, and smote him with the palms of their
hands." Mat. xxvii. 67.
His death was foretold by the prophet Daniel, "Messiah shall be cut off." Dal.
ix. 26.
And the manner of his dissolution was prefigured by the brazen serpent, which
Moses fixed on a pole. Numb. xxi. 9.


I shall beg leave to read a part of the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah. "For he
shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground;
he has no form nor comeliness: and when we shall see him, there is no beauty
that we should desire him. He is despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows
and acquainted with griefs; and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was
despised, and we esteemed him not. Surely he has borne our griefs, and carried
our sorrows; yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted. But
he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities; the
chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are healed. All
we, like sheep, have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way; and
the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all. He was oppressed, and he was
afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought as a lamb to the
slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb; so he opens not his
mouth. He was taken from prison and from judgment, and who shall declare his
generation; for he was cut off out of the land of the living: for the
transgression of my people was he stricken. And he made his grave with the
wicked, and with the rich in his death; because he had done no violence,
neither was any deceit in his mouth." According to the acknowledgment of one of
your own teachers, this prophecy hampers you more than any other; and some of
you have wished it had not been written, or that it were expunged from the Old
Testament writings. It is a rule among some of you, that you must believe all
your teachers. Many of them have attempted to explain this Scripture; and most
of them have differed in their sentiments concerning it. Some have affirmed it
relates to David, some to Joshua, some to Zechariah, and others to Zerubbabel.
But, agreeably to your own rule, you must believe them all. Now one of them has
explained it as referring to the Messiah. Why then do ye not believe him? And
he has translated the words, "smitten of God and afflicted." God himself was
smitten and humbled. But wise men, like you, will not be blind followers of any
man's opinion. I ask you, therefore, of whom does the Prophet here speak? You
know, O Jews! that he speaks of the Messiah, who was "cut off" for your sins --
"who made his grave with the wicked" -- was crucified between two thieves, "and
with the rich in his death;" for he was buried in the grave of a rich man. O
Jews! through this man only, can you have hope of everlasting life.

But you will say, "I will not believe in a crucified God, a God that has been
hanged." But why not? because the veil is still upon your hearts; and unless
the Great God is pleased to remove it, I know that the foolishness of my
preaching will never convince you. So you say, you will not have a crucified
Savior? What! not have him whom the Psalmist personates, when he says, "They
pierced my hands and my feet." What! not believe in him "who has borne your
sorrows;" and, as the Prophet speaks, "cast your sins into the depths of the
sea?" Will you not have this Prince to reign over you? But you say, "it was
never designed that your Messiah should be a sufferer." You certainly know
otherwise; for it was sore-ordained that he should be cut off -- that the sword
should awake, and smite the shepherd, God's equal, and that the sheep should be
scattered, and all with a view that the saying might be verified, "I have
trodden the wine press alone, and of the people there was none with me." But
who is God's equal? Is the wisest Prophet -- is the greatest monarch, equal
with the great God? Nay, is the highest archangel in heaven his equal? No. --
You shudder to entertain such an idea. But the text says, "against the MAN that
is my FELLOW, my EQUAL;" and this is no other than that " Child which should be
born, that Son which should be given, the Wonderful Counselor, the Mighty God,
the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace." Isa. ix. 6.
"The God-man, the Messiah, the seed of the woman which has bruised the
scrpent's head; and in whom all the nations of the earth shall be blessed." But
your Messiah is spoken of in Scripture as a prophet, priest, and king. He is a
prophet. "I will raise them up a prophet from among their brethren, like unto
thee, and will put my word in his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that
I shall command him. And it shall come to pass, that whoever will not hearken
unto my words, which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him."
Deuteronomy. xviii. 18.
This prophet is to be "raised up from among their brethren." Jesus of Nazareth
answers to the character so far. He was born a Jew, of the seed of Abraham, of
the tribe of Judah, of the house of David, in Bethlehem of Judah. He is,
moreover, to be like Moses in meekness; "he was as a lamb dumb before the
shcarers." -- In power and working miracles, the winds and the waves obey him;
he discerned the thoughts, raised the dead, and healed all manner of diseases;
And his miracles were not merely as mavelous as those which Moses wrought,
but vastly more astonishing. Some of you, however, will say, it was all
delusion, and nothing better than enchantment. But an assertion is not a proof.
You also say, that he obtained the power of working miracles, by stealing the
great name of JEHOVAH, out of the temple. But in saying this; you do in effect
say, either that he overpowered God, and so stole the name against his will, or
that God was careless about it; or that being willing he should take it, set
his seal to a lie, and thus suffered thousands of poor sinners to be deluded.
But, I hope, you will be disposed to confess the truth, that this is the very
prophet which God had so long promised. If he had not been the anointed of the
Lord, never, never would those miracles have been wrought which so clearly
evince that he was the true Messiah. Jesus cast out devils; and if Satan cast
out Satan, his kingdom cannot stand; but evil spirits themselves confess, "Thou
art the Holy One of God;" and they ask, "Art thou come to torment us before the
time?" They had no power to enter into the swine till they had first obtained
his permission.

The last proof that Jesus is that prophet which was to arise, you will find in
the book of Deuteronomy, "When a Prophet speaks in the name of the Lord, if
the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that is the thing which the Lord has
not spoken." Deuteronomy. xviii. 22.
But it has not been so with our Prophet. He predicted concerning Jerusalem,
the three-walled city, that it should be destroyed, and that "one stone of the
temple should not be left upon another, that should not be thrown down." All
the efforts of wicked men to rebuild it have proved abortive, and the place
where it once stood can scarcely be ascertained. He also foretold, that "in the
latter days false prophets should arise, and deceive many." That prediction is
now fulfilling. He also foretold his own death, and various other things, which
we cannot now mention, all of which have been, or will be, exactly
accomplished. And as Moses instructed the people, so did Christ; and
particularly in the law of love. Is it not declared, "He that will not hearken
to my words, which he shall speak, I will require it of him." There appears to
be something more implied than spoken in this sentence. I am ready to believe
it refers to the bleeding sorrows of your nation for rejecting the Messiah: and
till you repent, and turn unto him, your wounds will not be healed. Come, dear
Jews, come and learn of our Prophet and yours. He will teach you the meaning of
all your types and shadows. He will show you the spirituality of the moral law,
and how you may be delivered from the wrath to come.

Your Messiah is a priest as well as a prophet. "The Lord has sworn, and will
not repent: thou art a priest forever after the order of Melchizedek." Ps. cx.
4.
He is the great, the everlasting High Priest of Israel. Does every high priest
offer a sacrifice? What does he say? "Sacrifice and offering thou did not
desire; burnt-offering, and sin-offering have thou not required. Then said I,
Lo, I come to do thy will, O God!" Ps. xi. 6-8.
And he offered not the blood of bulls and goats, but his own blood. "Thou have
made his soul," says Isaiah, "a sacrifice for sin:" and by that one offering
he has forever perfected them that believe. And now, "The Lord is gone up with
a shout" -- he is entered into the Holy of Holies -- the heaven of heavens,
where he now appears "making intercession for the transgressors." Isa. liii. 12.


Our Jesus of Nazareth is also a king. "Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion!
shout, O daughter of Jerusalem! behold, thy King comes unto thee: he is just,
and having salvation; lowly, and riding upon an ass, and upon a colt the foal
of an ass." Zech. ix. 9.
You expect your king to appear like a conquering Alexander, surrounded with
great wordly splendour: but hear, O ye Jews! he was to come "lowly, and riding
on an ass." Zech. ix. 9.
And did he not accomplish this Scripture, when he rode to Jerusalem,
alternately, on an ass and an ass's colt? while attending thousands, with
joyful acclamations, cried, "Hosanna to the Son of David! blessed is he that
comes in the name of the Lord!" But it was not a great while after, that these
very men, many of them, however, exclaimed, with the most implacable malice,
"Crucify him! crucify him!" What! crucify your King? Yes, O Jews! and you, of
the present generation, reject that very King. Be assured, notwithstanding,
that "God has set him upon his holy hill of Sion," and solemnly said, "Thou art
my Son, this day have I begotten thee. Ask of me, and I will give thee the
heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy
possession." Ps. ii. 6 -- 8.
-- "Thou shall have dominion from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends
of the earth." Ps. lxxii. 8.
-- "Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool." Ps.
cx. 1.
-- "Thy throne, O God, is forever and ever; the scepter of thy kingdom is a
right scepter. Thou love righteousness, and hate wickedness; therefore God,
thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows." Ps.
xlv. 6, 7.
If this last passage be not explained with reference to one who is both God
and man, it never can be explained at all. Such a person is Jesus of Nazareth,
the Son of God, and King of Israel, who was to reign in righteousness, and rule
in judgment. Isa. xxxii. 1.


There is one thing I might have mentioned before, but will not omit it in this
place. The Scriptures not only predict the death of Christ, but his
resurrection also. Jonah's deliverance from the whale's belly was an emblem of
this; and the Psalmist, in the person of the Messiah, says, "Thou will not
leave my soul in hell," the place of the dead, "neither will thou suffer thine
Holy One to see corruption." Ps. xvi. 10.
And, as though he were addressing him, "Thou have ascended on high, thou have
led captivity captive; thou have received gifts for men; yea, for the
rebellious also, that the Lord God might dwell among them." Ps. lxviii. 18.
But who is ascended? Why, "God has gone up with a shout, and our Lord with
the sound of a trumpet." But before he ascends, he must descend; and you all
very well know that God, as a Spirit, who fills every place, cannot be said to
ascend or descend: it is, without doubt, therefore, the incarnate God who is
here spoken of; the man who groaned on Calvary -- rose from the dead the third
day, and, by many infallible proofs, manifested himself to be the risen
Savior; and then, after forty days, in the presence of a great multitude, was
taken up, and a cloud received him out of their sight.

But all this, O Jews! you stumble at. But though a "stone of stumbling, and a
rock of offense to both the houses of Israel," Isa. viii. 14.
he is, nevertheless, the foundation, the tried stone, the precious
cornerstone, which God has laid in Sion; Isa. xxviii. 16.
nor is there salvation in any other. Dear Jews! are you not convinced? Behold
the rocks, the elements, are your instructors! for, at the death of Jesus, the
earth trembled -- the rocks were rent -- the graves were opened -- many
shrouded bodies arose from their sepulchers -- the sun withheld its wonted
light, and a tenfold darkness enveloped the face of day. Dionysius, a heathen
philosopher, beholding this dreadful fight, and knowing it to be contrary to
the common course of nature, for an eclipse of the sun to happen at the time of
the full moon, is reported to have exclaimed, "Either the frame of nature is
dissolving, or the God of nature suffers." And when I tell you that this man
was afterward a convert to Christianity, it may, perhaps, give energy to the
language he then uttered. Now, if the things I have been saying concerning
Jesus of Nazareth be not true, why did not some writers of that day, instead of
strengthening their evidence, as some of them have done, contradict them at the
time they were first propagated? Josephus, your own historian, so far from
denying what I have been preaching, seems to be half a convert. Hear what he
says upon this point. "About this time there was one Jesus a wise man, if a man
he may be called, who was a great worker of miracles, and a teacher of those
that were curious and desirous to learn the truth; and he had a great many
followers, both Jews and Gentiles. This was the Christ that was accused by the
princes and great men of our nation. Pilate delivered him up to the cross; and
all this notwithstanding, those that loved him at first did not forsake him. He
was seen alive again the third day after his crucifixion, as had been foretold,
with a thousand other things, by several prophets, and there are a sort of
people who, to this day, bear the name of Christians, as owning him for their
head." Josephus, book 18. chapter iii.
Who can withstand such evidence? Can you, O ye Jews! No; I am firmly persuaded
that many, I had almost said every one of you, are fully convinced that the
Messiah is come, and that Jesus of Nazareth is that Messiah.

I now proceed to the third thing proposed, the blessings promised to be
derived from him. "In thy seed shall all nations of the earth be blessed." I
hope you will excuse my brevity on this head, as I have preached till I have
nearly exhausted all my strength. There is a sweet promise for you, my dear
Jews, in the book of Isaiah, Isa. xi. 10
where the prophet speaks of the Root of Jesse, which you know is the Messiah,
as "standing for an ensign of the people, and says, to it shall the Gentiles
seek, and his rest shall be glorious; and in that day the Lord shall set his
hand again the second time to gather you from the nations where you are
dispersed." You say you are not restored from your former captivity; but that
is nonsense. God had fixed a time to deliver you, and he was faithful to his
word. He never was wont to punish even for the sin of idolatry, but to the
third or fourth generation. What then has Israel done, that he should cast
them off so long? O Jews! you have rejected the Messiah -- that is the reason;
and to this day you obstinately reject him. But if you now believe, the curse
shall be removed, and you shall be blessed in him. Pray do not any longer
reject him who is the only hope of Israel; he waits to be gracious to you, and
to bless you; but he cannot unless you believe in him. It is a truth most
certain, that the Jews are preserved a distinct people for the purpose of
accomplishing a variety of promises, and that when the fullness of the Gentiles
is brought in, all Israel will turn to the Lord Messiah; and probably their
conversion will be the great means of effecting the universal spread of the
Gospel. I am certain, however, that "God has not cast away his people whom he
foreknew." It is evident from their present condition, which is nothing less
than a standing miracle, that they are preserved for some very extraordinary
event. Never did any other people subsist, for a single century only, wholly
separate from their conquerors: Never did any other people, dispersed through
so many nations, continue as with a wall of fire round about them, not for one
age merely, but for thousands of years. Look at a Jew, and you see a miracle;
his nation is stamped on his countenance; and it is an honorable nation, Look
at a Jew, and you see a man tenacious of the traditions of his fathers; but
incapable of obeying one of the ordinances of Moses; without a temple, without
a priest, without a sacrifice, or a capability of offering to God an acceptable
service. Look at a Jew, and you are a witness of the accomplishment of all the
threatenings of Moses and the prophets. Behold a Jew, and you see an expectant
of the fulfillment of the Scriptures, and a monument of their veracity; for the
time will come, I hope it is near, when all Israel shall be saved. "I will make
an end of all nations, but I never will make a full end of thee." And how happy
I shall be, if God is pleased to make my words the beginning of salvation to
but one of Abraham's seed! that the Redeemer may come to him from Sion, and
turn away ungodliness from Israel.

And now, Sirs, what say you? Have I spoken to you, though in great weakness,
yet the words of truth? If I have been unfaithful, may I not speak another
word! But if I have displayed the truth of God, why, poor sinners, will ye be
still blinded? I am as certain, as that this book of God is given by
inspiration, that many of your nation are convinced that our Jesus is the
promised seed; for some of your teachers have exhorted their friends, when on
their dying-beds, to believe in the same Messiah which Christians acknowledge;
and yet these men, in public, will deny that he is the Messiah. What does all
this prove, but that they stubbornly resist the light, and stifle the
convictions of their conscience? I am persuaded that many of you are convinced
of the truth of what I have been saying; but you are attached to your old
religion, you are averse to the idea of changing it, and so you reject the
counsel of God, and the only Messiah. Some of you are learned men. Search the
Scriptures. You think you understand them better than we Gentiles do; but,
assure yourselves, there are many poor, unlearned, Gentile Christians, who can
better explain the types and shadows of your law, than the most learned of the
Jews. What say you to these things? If Jesus be not the Messiah, why were the
prophecies so exactly fulfilled in him? If you will not believe in Jesus, do
not believe your prophets. If you want another Savior, show us another law. If
you reject Jesus, reject Moses also; for Moses spoke of him.

Jesus is my Savior; my soul relies on him. And though he is the stone which
is "set at naught by you builders, he is, nevertheless, the head-stone of the
corner. Neither is there salvation in any other." If you reject him, you reject
everlasting life; you are condemned by your own law, being incapable of
worshipping God as that law requires; you have not the benediction pronounced
upon you, for none was permitted to pronounce it but the high priest. But in
Jesus all nations shall be blessed, Jews and Gentiles. The Gentiles, among whom
you dwell, believe in Jesus, and are blessed in him; and should you ask, I am
sure they would tell you, that they never knew what true joy and happiness
meant, till they believed in him. But, perhaps, you are ashamed to acknowledge
him. Why so? You will not be alone; others have done it before you. There was
Xeres the Jew, whose book I now hold up; he is a witness against you. He was
converted to the Christian faith in 1710, and has translated many passages of
your Hebrew Bible, and proved, from your own books, that Jesus is the true
Messiah. O may the Spirit of God dispose you to follow his example! And then
shall you be completely blessed in time, and to eternity.

The God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, look down upon you
with complacency, and enlighen your dark understandings; and may you become
witnesses with me, that Jesus of Nazareth is the true Messiah!

HYMN.
FROM all that dwell below the skies,
Let the Creator's praise arise!
Let the Redeemer's name be sung,
Through every land, by every tongue.
Eternal are thy mercies, Lord,
Eternal truth attends thy word:
Thy praise shall sound from shore to shore,
Till suns shall rise and set no more.
POSTSCRIPT.
A HAND-BILL of Brothers's Prophecies having been just given to me by a Jew, I
beg for a moment your farther attention.

MEN OF ISRAEL -- Many of you object to the embracing Christianity, because
there are amongst us so many sects and parties. But, let me heartily ask you,
were there not many parties and sects among yourselves in ancient days? Were
there not Pharisees, Sadducees, Herodians, and many others which I cannot
enumerate? A person has put into my hand a paper respecting the prophecies of
Brothers; but I give no sort of credit to the whims of such a madman. I
consider him, nevertheless, as a striking proof of the inspiration of the New
Testament; which has expressly foretold that, "in the latter days, many false
prophets shall arise, and shall deceive many." If any thing be predicted, and
it comes to pass, agreeably to the time foretold, you may have some reason to
believe it; but when a man has the confidence to prophesy what is never
accomplished, you are in duty bound to reject him as an impostor. The
prophecies of this enthusiast are not fulfilled, nor ever will be. He is,
undoubtedly, one of those false prophets the Scriptures speak of; and as he
has arisen, be not surprised if you hear of many more. Their pretensions do
but concur, though without design, to evince the authenticity of that Gospel,
which was preached by the apostles of Jesus of Nazareth.

The Lord God of Abraham bless you all.

PRAYER after Sermon.
O LORD God of Abraham! do thou be pleased to command thy blessing. Do thou now
unseal the dark things of prophecy, and give us a saving acquaintance with all
the truths of thy holy word. None can understand them aright, but as thou art
pleased to teach them. Lord, do thou show to this people that Jesus of Nazareth
is the Messiah; show them that he is the King that reigns in Zion, and that he
shall reign till all his enemies are under his feet. Do thou take the veil from
all our hearts, thou dear Lamb of God, who was crucified for our sins. At thy
death the sun was darkened, the rocks were shaken, the graves were opened, and
the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom. O! rend
thou the veil from the hearts of thy dear Israel now before thee; let them be
no longer deluded, but save them with an everlasting salvation. O Lord! dismiss
them and us with thy divine blessing, for the alone sake of Messiah, who was
cut off for our sins, who was raised from the dead for our justification, and
who ever lives to make intercession for us. Amen.

May the peace of God, which passes all understanding, come down from heaven
into all your hearts! May the Holy Spirit, by his sacred illuminations, lead
you into all truth; unfold to you the mysterious words of prophecy, and cause
you to believe in that Savior whom your fathers crucified! Then may you join
with us Gentiles, in ascribing to him, with the Father and the Holy Ghost,
everlasting praises. Amen.

FINIS.

