THE MARRIED MAN.

A COMEDY.

IN THREE ACTS.

FROM Le Philosophe Marie of M. N. Destouches.

AS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL, HAYMARKET, AND THE NEW THEATER,
PHILADELPHIA.

BY MRS. INCHBALD.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JAMES CAREY. 1796.

MEN.
Lord Lovemore, Sir John Classick, Mr. Classick, Mr. Tradewell Classick,
Dorimant, William, Mr. Moreton. Mr. Wignell. Mr. Marshall. Mr. Bates. Mr.
Green. Mr. Blissett.
WOMEN.
Lady Classick, Emily, Lucy, Mrs. Marshall. Mrs. Francis. Mrs. Harvey.
SCENE -- LONDON.

THE MARRIED MAN.
ACT I.
SCENE I. A library at SIR JOHN CLASSICK's.
SIR JOHN discovered at a table, musing. Sir John. A scholar, a philosopher, to
change his peaceful hours, his nights of study, and his days of fame! -- And
for what? -- A wife! -- A wife without a fortune too! -- Where was my wisdom?
-- But young and handsome! -- Where was my philosophy? -- Where my pride, to do
an act at which I blush? -- [ After sighing heavily, and showing evident signs
of uneasiness, he takes a book and begins to read -- Dorimant enters
unperceived by sir John, and seats himself at the table.]


Sir John. [Laying down the book.] Ah! Dorimant, my friend, it is you I have to
blame -- You were the cause of my marriage -- you painted wedlock with an
eloquence that deluded me -- Pictured my wife as soft, complying --


Dorimant. And is not she?


Sir John. [Starting.] You there! -- Why do you steal upon me thus?

[Angrily.
Dorimant. Steal upon you! -- Were you not talking to me?


Sir John. No.


Dorimant. Then you were guilty of very ungentelmanly-like behavior, to abuse
me when you did not know I was present to defend myself. And suppose I advised
you to marry; did not you ask my advice? -- Were you not charmed when I gave my
advice? -- Besides, is it possible you can repent? -- With what on earth have
you to reproach your wife?


Sir John. Her indiscretion -- which keeps me in perpetual torture. -- She
knows how much I feel on the occasion, and how earnestly I have entreated our
marriage might be kept secret; and yet it is her first pleasure the world
should know she has a husband -- and that I am the unfortunate man.


Dorimant. I can easily imagine your desire has not been strictly complied with
-- but you could not, surely, think to be married half your life without having
it sometime or other known in the world.


Sir John. A secret alliance, formed near two years ago, without my father's
consent or knowledge, would expose me to his just resentment.


Dorimant. His resentment will be easily overcome -- for his obligations to you
are so great -- his affection for you so tender --


Sir John. That I fear his sorrow, much more than his anger. -- But there is
another reason.


Dorimant. That, indeed, has some weight; for you mean your uncle, the old rich
contractor, whose obstinacy and inhumanity, if he knew you had married a lady
with a fortune unequal to that he means to give you, might cause him never
perhaps to give you a shilling.


Sir John. And, beside these, I have another reason yet; one, which (to my own
feelings) is of more consequence than any. -- You know I have always made a
jest of matrimony, laughed at, and ridiculed all husbands; I am therefore now
ashamed, and blush at the title -- There is something in marriage that takes
from the dignity --


Dorimant. Will it take from the dignity of knighthood, which you have gained
by your learned dissertations? No; nor can there be any reason but your uncle's
displeasure why it should be any longer concealed. Certainly you must pay some
attention to that; and it ought to be a weighty consideration with your lady.


Sir John. So it is, I dare say -- but the pleasure of telling a secret weighs
heavier far. -- After all, she is not the only one who takes pleasure in
propagating the news -- her sister, to whom you design yourself the happy
husband, has whispered the secret to most of her acquaintance.


Dorimant. I am vexed at such indiscretion, and will go to both ladies instantly
with my complaint -- [Going, returns.] And now do you apply yourself to study
-- and employ all your knowledge to obtain that degree of patience requisite to
your state.


Sir John. And do you furnish yourself with ample store against you marry my
sister-in-law; for, by Heaven, you will want it all.


Dorimant. I know Emily well -- know all her faults -- But love them all --
even that pride which disdains me I approve; for while my unfortunate quarrel
conceals from her my real name and family, she is right in treating me so
lightly. -- Yet that she loves me, I am convinced; and, the moment my
antagonist is pronounced out of danger, I will silence every scruple, by
revealing to her, that, instead of poor Dorimant, who has no other friend upon
earth but you, I have a fortune and family as much above hers, as she now
believes hers is above mine.

[Exit.
Sir John. Oh! I long to see you a husband -- How mischievous does ill luck
make a man! I have not one acquaintance at this moment that I do not wish to
see married!

[He sits down and begins to read.
Enter LUCY. Lucy. [Looking at sir John.] Always reading! And never thinking of
his wife day nor night. [Aside.] -- Sir, sir, her ladyship desired me to come
--


Sir John. "Her ladyship" -- Do speak a little louder --


Lucy. Her ladyship. Lady Classick.

[Bawling.
Sir John. [Starting up.] Silence! -- I thought, mrs. Lucy, I had a hundred
times forbidden you to make use of that name.


Lucy. Yes, sir -- but when one forgets, I cannot see what harm it can do.


Sir John. You know you were amongst the few who were entrusted with the secret
of our marriage.


Lucy. And I have kept it a secret these two years! -- Two years is a long time
to hold one's tongue.


Sir John. But do you know what I may forfeit by your indiscretion -- the
wealth of which the displeasure of my uncle may deprive me?


Lucy. I thought philosophers despised all such dirty dross as gold.


Sir John. But, mrs. Lucy, although I may be of that opinion, perhaps my
children may not, and I may one day be reproached for neglecting their fortunes.


Lucy. But, sir, your children are yet to come, and a philosopher's talent is
to reform the world, but very seldom to people it.


Sir John. Entrusting you with a secret, mrs. Lucy, has given you a freedom
that may very soon lose you your place.


Lucy. Oh, sir! I am sure you know better than to turn a servant away, whom you
have been obliged to trust with a secret. -- There are many better ways to keep
a servant silent.


Sir John. And this I suppose is one?

[Gives her money.
Lucy. Yes, sir -- and now I Will be silent for a month -- and if you repeat
this, at the end of that month, I Will be silent for the next -- and so on. But,
sir, I had almost forgot my errand -- her ladyship -- no -- my mistress -- not
her ladyship -- not your wife -- but my mistress -- sent me to ask if you will
permit her to wait upon you here -- as she has something particular to speak to
you about. -- Oh! she is here, sir.


Enter LADY CLASSICK -- exit LUCY. Sir John. Have I not desired you a thousand
times, madam, not to follow me here?


Lady. And I have as many times obeyed you -- but at present I want to speak to
you on a subject of so much importance, to us both, that I have ventured to
disobey your commands.


Sir John. "Commands!" -- You talk to me as if I were your tyrant. -- I have
but one command -- Keep our marriage secret.


Lady. To keep it an entire secret is impossible; our living so long together,
in the same house, though on a pretended visit to the mistress of it, is enough
to create suspicion -- The world has curiosity, and penetration.


Sir John. And has no longer any doubt but we are man and wife.


Lady. Indeed! -- Do they really think so?


Sir John. Yes -- and I fear, say so too. -- Why these expressions of joy?


Lady. To have you for a husband is a happiness so flattering -- a felicity of
which I feel myself so proud -- that to have it known, would give me infinite
delight.


Sir John. In contradiction to my will?


Lady. -- Perhaps the desire is wrong -- but if it be my fault (I must own) it
would constitute my greatest happiness.


Sir John. A woman's eloquence is irresistible. [Aside.] But did not you
promise me that your sister and your woman should be the only persons to whom
you would confide this secret?


Lady. And you should accuse my sister, not me -- It is she who has forfeited
her word, not I. -- I have kept mine but too well. Yet though by the
concealment my reputation may be wounded, I submit without complaint -- But, if
I make this sacrifice to you, suffer me to demand a small one in return.


Sir John. What is it?


Lady. That lord Lovemore, either by you or by me, may be made acquainted with
our marriage.


Sir John. The very person of all the world I would most conceal it from; for
to him more frequently than to any other person, have I declared my sentiments
of the marriage state; and in what a despicable light, to him, must my
inconsistency appear?


Lady. No -- notwithstanding you are married, neither his lordship, nor any
other person, most intimately acquainted with your former sentiments, can
accuse you of inconsistency.


Sir John. Did I not rail at marriage?


Lady. Do you not now?


Sir John. But had I not an utter aversion to it?


Lady. And have you not now?

[Weeping.
Sir John. But why should you be uneasy at that? I love you -- and should like
you better, if you were any thing but my wife.


Lady. And being my husband, I love you far better than if you were any thing
on earth beside.


Sir John. I will not have our marriage declared to any one.


Lady. Yes! to lord Lovemore -- you must consent.


Sir John. From what motive?


Lady. Excuse me -- but be assured it is indispensible; and why have you such a
particular apprehension of him; for although this lord is a fine gentleman, and
in high esteem with the gay world, yet I have frequently heard you speak but
slightly of his understanding?


Sir John. Therefore I fear him -- you know I always fear a fool -- It is the
fool, who laughs at the faults of wise men, because they are so unlike his own.
It Is the fool who traduces their character -- It Is the fool who stops at no
means to accomplish his evil wishes. -- Fools dress to seduce women; lisp,
chat, flutter, and even lie to win them. -- It Is fools, with whom men of sense
cannot submit to quarrel, but must fall, like a poor female, by their slander.


Lady. Why then this fool, in one respect, has shown himself like you; for he
never pays a visit to this house, that he does not immediately come to my
apartments to make the same declarations of love, and the same offer of his
hand and heart, you once did.


Sir John. [Starting.] To you?


Lady. To me. -- I once thought to keep it a secret. -- But --


Sir John. But that was impossible?


Lady. Yes -- for the increasing ardour of his addresses makes it impossible to
submit to the painful situation any longer -- and surely there is no method so
effectually and so delicately to put an end to his pursuit, as to declare I am
your wife. [Sir John starts.] At present I will not urge you for a decisive
answer -- but leave you to reflect upon it.

[Bows, with a tender humility, and retires.]
[He sits down to write as before, then starts from his seat and throws the
book down in a passion.] Sir John. No -- all my study is at an end for this day
-- my mind wholly dissipated with domestic concerns -- It is impossible for a
married man to be a philosopher -- and yet it is a state that requires more
philosophy than any other.

[Exit.
SCENE II. Another apartment of SIR JOHN's.
Enter Emily, followed by Lucy. Emily. Has lord Lovemore called this morning?


Lucy. Yes, madam.


Emily. Do you think he likes me?


Lucy. No, madam.


Emily. But, I am determined to make him -- and you know I will, if I say I
will.


Lucy. And if you should, what then?


Emily. Then I shall have the pleasure to tell him I despise him, and that his
title, birth, and fortune could not recompense me for a man who had previously
offered himself, and been refused by my sister.


Lucy. And I cannot help thinking he loves her still.


Emily. As much as a beau, who loves nothing so well as himself, can love; and
therefore it has long been my design to whisper to him, she is married.


Lucy. Do you suppose he will love her the less for that?


Emily. His love being but a mere compound of vanity and gallantry, I should
suppose not -- but at least the news will mortify his pride -- And why should
not other people meet with mortifications, as well as I, Lucy?


Lucy. And I am sure, madam, it is not your fault if they do not -- for you are
ever doing all you can to tease every body you know.


Emily. If I could please them I should be equally content -- but as in that my
endeavors are mostly rejected, the only alternative I have to preserve me from
idleness is to be mischievous.


Lucy. Nay, madam, do not say you please no one; consider mr. Dorimant.


Emily. And him I have no desire to please; for it is to my disadvantage we
should be charmed with each other. -- This is the hour he generally calls --
Now, Lucy, do something to put me out of humor, that I may break with him at
once -- Come, talk on some subject to vex me -- speak of my sister.


Lucy. Ay, my mistress -- the philosopher seems to have lost all his affection
for her.


Emily. Pshaw! you know this pleases me -- for it in some degree extinguishes
that surprise I feel, while I cannot discover by what art she gained possession
of a man of sense, of renown, in short, of such a man as sir John. -- If he
were my husband -- as you know I wished him to be -- I should have expected him
to love me -- but to have a tenderness for my sister! -- [Angrily.


Lucy. And I still believe he has, in his heart, a most affectionate one.


Emily. Do you see Dorimant coming?


Lucy. Why?


Emily. That you try to provoke me.


Lucy. Yes -- as I live -- here he is.


Emily. I thank you then -- for you have left me in excellent humor.

[ Exit Lucy. -- Emily sits down, and appears meditating.
Enter DORIMANT, who looks at her some time, while she pretends not to see him.
Dorimant. You wish to be alone, I perceive. [He waits for an answer, then goes
on.] But although I may disturb you, I cannot forbear --


Emily. Being very impertinent.


Dorimant. So, so -- I must be all submission, I find.


[Aside. [He moves to a corner of the room, and sits down, affecting a silent
dejection.] Emily. (After a pause.) I desire you will leave me instantly.


Dorimant. Certainly -- I will [rising] but condescend to tell me wherefore --
for if my affectionate ardour --


Emily. "If my affectionate ardour!" -- What romantic language! -- You treat me
as if I were a child.


Dorimant. But I know you are very far from one.


Emily. Indeed!


Dorimant. Yes -- nothing like a child.


Emily. This sneer is insufferable. -- I tell you what, Dorimant, I wish to
hate you -- for indeed you have so many imperfections --


Dorimant. What are they?


Emily. Oh, innumerable! -- You are vain of your person -- ashamed of your
birth -- submissive to your enemies -- insincere to your friends -- with a
thousand worse faults; and yet, with them all -- I cannot help liking you.


Dorimant. As you call my sincerity in question, I will give you a proof of it
immediately -- You are haughty, envious, peevish, conceited, capricious,
imprudent -- with a thousand faults, and yet with them all -- "I cannot help
liking you."


Emily. No man shall marry me who does not think me perfect.


Dorimant. That resolution will not exclude me.


Emily. No? --


Dorimant. No -- for I think you a perfect woman


[Bowing. Emily. But you shall believe I have not one fault. Go, sir, leave me
-- yonder comes my sister, and I am tired of your company.


Dorimant. I am all obedience, to show you how you must hereafter behave to me.

[Exit on one side -- Lady Classick enters on the other.
Emily. How dare he to see one fault in me?


Lady. Dear sister, would you have poor Dorimant blind?


Emily. Why not, as well as sir John, when he married?


Lady. You think he was.


Emily. But don't mistake me -- I believe his eyes are open now.


Lady. Not to the charms of every one who may wish to captivate h^^


Emily. Is there any such person?


Lady. I have heard so.


Emily. Before his marriage there might be, because the ladies all imagined he
would be a difficult conquest -- But after being so easily caught, I don't
think there is a woman in the world would be at the trouble of conquering him a
second time.


Lady. It would be a trouble, I believe.


Emily. Without any reward.


Lady. True -- for all the honor he can confer, he has bestowed on me.


Emily. And bestowed so much -- he has given up all his own.


Lady. Emily, I have too long borne with these unkind insinuations --
Reflections cast upon myself I can forgive, but when you make these attacks
upon sir John --


Emily. The truth is so glaring, you cannot bear it.


Lady. My dear sister, we will not remain here together, thus eternally to
dispute -- either you or I will fix upon some other abode.


Enter SIR JOHN. Emily. Oh! sir John, I am going away -- you are just come in
time to take your leave -- I am desired to quit your house instantly -- your
wife --


Sir John. Don't let me hear that name.


Emily. Why this delicacy -- when my anxiety to tell you --


Lady. If you have the affection of a husband --


Sir John. I will not hear that name. -- What is all this? -- What do you both
want to tell me? -- What nonsense? -- You have had a quarrel, I suppose?


Lady. Nonsense!


Emily. Nonsense -- I should not have thought of that!


Lady. You must know, my dear --


Sir John. I will not be called my dear.


Lady. Why then, sir John -- My sister has behaved --


Emily. No -- my sister has behaved --


Sir John. Oh! you have both behaved, I dare say.


Lady. Your indifference is unkind.


Emily. Every thing is indifferent to him, but what is written in a book.


Lady. I think so.


Sir John. Look there now -- they are going to quarrel with me. -- But come,
compose yourselves -- and tell me, Matilda, how this affair between your sister
and you began.


Lady. Ask her.


Emily. No -- tell it yourself.


Lady. [After considering.] I don't remember how it began.


Emily. [After considering.] Nor I either.


Sir John. The fact is, you have both been quarreling, and neither of you can
tell why. -- But pray do not let me interrupt you -- for nothing is so
entertaining to me as to hear ladies disagree.


Emily. Then you shall not be entertained at our expense, for we will instantly
forgive each other. -- Sister, I pardon you sincerely.


Lady. And I am sure I pardon you.


Sir John. And do shake hands, to be revenged on me.


Emily. With all my heart.


Lady. And with mine.

[They meet and shake hands.
Sir John. And to show how angry I am, I Will kiss you both.

[He salutes one; then the other.
MR. TRADEWELL CLASSICK enters during the time. Mr. Tradewell. Well employed,
upon my word, nephew.

Sir John starts -- and the ladies exeunt in confusion.
Sir John. [Aside.] My uncle -- Confusion!


Mr. Tradewell. I am sorry I should intrude upon your private studies.


Sir John. Sir --


Mr. Tradewell. A philosopher, I find, is but a human creature after all!


Sir John. Dear sir -- these ladies you saw here -- are --


Mr. Tradewell. What?


Sir John. [Aside.] I don't know what to say.


Mr. Tradewell. Finish your sentence -- Speak -- What are they?


Sir John. They are [hesitating] -- sisters.


Mr. Tradewell. Well --


Sir John. [Hesitating.] From the country -- and as they are going into the
country again -- I was taking my leave of them -- as you saw.


Mr. Tradewell. But what brought them here?


Sir John. A mere accident.


Mr. Tradewell. I don't like accidents, when women are in the ease -- They are
the cause of many unlucky accidents -- and I would have nothing impede the
business upon which I came to speak to you. -- I have procured you a wife -- I
know you have pretended an aversion to matrimony -- but that was merely to some
of its forms, and in this case something more substantial is to be attended to;
the lady I have chosen is young, handsome, and, above all, very rich; and some
family reasons will make it necessary the marriage should take place within a
few days.


Sir John. Destruction [Aside] -- But who is the lady, sir? -- Perhaps --


Mr. Tradewell. There is no perhaps -- for she is my daughter-in-law -- my
wife's only child -- and with a fortune -- You don't seem pleased -- Let me
tell you, the lady must not be despised.


Sir John. Despised, sir! -- No, no -- but --


Mr. Tradewell. No buts, sir -- You have written against matrimony to make your
book sell -- So far you did right -- I would write against it myself if I could
get any thing by it.


Sir John. But, sir --


Mr. Tradewell. My pockets are filled with parchments -- follow me into your
library, there we will look them over, and take care there is no cheating,
unless it should be on our side -- follow me, for I am growing old, and not so
expert at those things as I used to be.

[Exit.
Enter LUCY. Lucy. Sir, lord Lovemore called to tell you he will dine with you
to day.


Sir John. More good news; [Aside.] send to him, and let him know --


Lucy. We need not send to him, sir, he is here.


Sir John. Here! -- Where is he?

[Alarmed.
Lucy. With my mistress.


Sir John. More good news. -- [Aside.] Let him know my uncle is unexpectedly
arrived -- I cannot come to him just now -- but in about half an hour --


Lucy. Oh! you need make no apology, sir -- he will not think the time long.


Sir John. No?


Lucy. No -- as he is with my mistress, he will not mind waiting -- he will not be
impatient -- you need not hurry yourself.


Sir John. If that is the case, I shall hurry myself.


[Exit, in haste, on the opposite side to where he was going. END OF THE FIRST
ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I. Another apartment at SIR JOHN's -- LORD LOVERULE, SIR JOHN and LADY
discovered.
Lord. My dear sir John, I excuse you most willingly, for I know how much
depends upon your pleasing the old contractor, and how difficult it is to
please him.


Sir John. And in one thing he has just proposed, I fear it will prove
impossible.


Lord. What is that?


Sir John. He has chosen me a wife, and wants me to marry immediately.


Lady. How?

[Starting.
Lord. You marry -- you -- ha, ha, ha, ha -- does he know your resolution? --
does he know that you would not marry the finest woman in the world? -- [Sir
John shows evident signs of uneasiness.] -- to marry would make you the
laughing stock of the whole town -- You, that have laughed at every married man!


Sir John. [Uneasy.] They don't make me laugh so much as they did.


Lord. No --


Sir John. No -- but I think I pity them more than I did.


Lord. And does your old uncle imagine he can prevail upon you to quit a
bachelor's life? -- impossible -- and yet, would you believe it, there are some
people in this town credulous enough to report you are married -- but I take
care to vindicate your character,


Sir John. Thank you -- I am very much obliged to you.

[Confused.
Lord. No, sir John, I never will stand silently by, and hear your firmness of
temper called in question -- the lady [bowing to lady C.] I tell them, may have
charms to captivate the coldest heart, yet between her and sir John, I am
positive no other than a sincere friendship subsists; for he himself has told
me so a hundred times.


Sir John. I suppose I have -- to be sure -- you are quite right.

[ He makes signs to lady C. who appears anxious to speak, to be silent.]
Lord. And now, my dear sir John, as I know you to be not only her friend, but
mine, permit me to repeat, in your presence, what in private I have a thousand
times uttered.


Sir John. Indeed?


Lord. And as a friend to us both, exert your friendship for both our happiness
-- for if my esteem, my love, my adoration of you, beautiful Matilda --
[seizing her hand.


Lady. Sir John --


Lord. Nay, do not frown upon the man who doats upon you to distraction.

[Kneeling.
Sir John. [Aside.] I make a very respectable figure here.


Lord. But receive my vows -- receive my everlasting love:


Lady. Rise, my lord, or I instantly quit the place. -- [Aside to sir John.]
Can you see this unmoved?


Sir John. Be quiet.

[In great agitation.
Lord. [Rising.] Then let this, and this, seal my pardon.

[Kisses her hand with fervency.
Sir John. [Running to him.] 'Sdeath, how can you be so foolish -- you would
not marry, sure -- don't persist, for if you do you will lose my friendship --
Let go her hand, there is witchcraft in the touch.

[Endeavouring to part them.
Lord. Then why do you touch it?


Sir John. I can, with the coldness of a philosopher.


Lord. And would I could -- would I were in your situation.

[Sighing.
Sir John. And would I were in yours.

[Sighing.
Lord. What do you mean?


Sir John. I mean -- I mean, my lord, that I perceive your passion is a very
serious one; and yet it is my advice you do not give way to it -- do not, for
my sake -- you know my friendship for you, and how sorry I should be to see you
bound by those ties from which only death can release.


Lord. Oh! your old fashioned opinion of matrimony I begin to despise.


Sir John. But I have lately conceived a worse opinion of it than ever --
besides, while she persists in rejecting your passion, you ought to submit;
unless, in any of your former interviews, she has encouraged your hopes -- and
in that case --

[with suspicion.
Lady. I appeal to his lordship's own honor -- If I have, sir, explain.


Sir John. Ay, come, my lord, explain -- and I will be judge between you. --
What hopes has she ever given you? -- I don't mean merely in promise, but in
manners, looks, sighs, tears, sadness, joy, or sorrow? -- Come, be particular,
or you take from me the power of decision.


Lord. Why then, to be particular -- the first time I disclosed my passion to
her, she burst into a fit of laughter -- the second time, she insisted on my
leaving the room. -- But the third time she received me with every mark of
kindness.


Sir John. Very well!

[Uneasy.
Lord. My dear lord, said she --


Sir John. Very well!

[Angrily.
Lord. My dearest creature, cried I.


Sir John. Very well!

[More angry.
Lord. I have, said she, a sister, far more beautiful and amiable than myself,
to whom I request you will transfer your affection.


Sir John. Very well! [pleased] -- and why do you not?


Lord. What! transfer my affection! -- never -- no -- though she tried to make
me jealous.


Sir John. Did she -- of whom?

[Alarmed.
Lord. That I cannot tell -- but the ungrateful woman swore her heart was
engaged, and that nothing could eradicate the fixed and tender affection rooted
there for another.


Sir John. And can you persist after this, my lord? -- for my sake don't. --


Lord. A passion like mine, makes the heart rebellious -- it will love on -- it
will hope, in spite of the rules cold reason dictates.


Sir John. I know my uncle is impatient for my return, and therefore I cannot
remain any longer here -- but I am sorry to leave you -- very sorry to leave
you in this situation, indeed, my lord -- Now promise to get the better of your
pas^on -- it will make me much happier if you will.


Lord. I can promise nothing -- why don't you go to your uncle?


Sir John. I am going -- I must go, or he will never pardon it -- [aside.] --
Adieu, my lord, for the present, and think on my advice -- [Aside, going
reluctantly, and turning back to observe.] This is the first trial of
philosophy.

[Exit.
Lord. By heaven, I begin to suspect what report has told me; that he is the
favored lover -- but surely it cannot be -- I must be more worthy your
partiality than he is?


Lady. You have your taste, my lord, and I have mine.


Lord. But reflect upon my birth, my title, my fortune.


Lady. Oh! when a heart gives itself away, depend upon it, it never reflects
upon the cause.


Lord. And is it possible you can yield your charms to a cold philosopher?


Lady. If he is warm to me, his coldness upon all other occasions does me the
greater honor -- farewell, and believe, that to whom so ever I have given my
heart, it is gone past recall.

[Exit.
Enter EMILY. Emily. What, still sighing, my lord? -- still repeating vows of
everlasting love to one who will not listen, but while she holds your heart a
captive, inhumanly exposes you to the derision of a rival.


Lord. Tell me who that rival is, and my obligations to you will be unbounded.


Emily. If I do tell you, will you promise to fight him?


Lord. That is an engagement -- I don't like to enter into -- and why should
you request it?


Emily. Because both he and you have offended me, by prefering my sister, and I
should like to see you engaged in a duel, through pure revenge.


Lord. Now I suspect who my rival is -- it is Dorimant -- your jealousy
convinces me of it, for I know you love him, and I once thought the affection
mutual.


Emily. Be not too confident you have found out your rival -- you may be
mistaken.


Lord. But I am sure I am not -- and he is beneath my notice -- I shall yet win
her from him.


Emily. That is impossible -- because whoever Matilda loves -- he is her
husband.


Lord. What! [Starting.] Married!


Emily. Yes, married.


Lord. Distraction! -- my hopes for ever gone -- my pride, my vanity piqued.

[Aside.
Emily. Notwithstanding your endeavor to conceal it, I see vexation painted on
your countenance -- indeed, my lord, I pity you.


Lord. Pity me -- that is worse than the loss of the woman [Aside.] -- By
heaven, if you think I am chagrined, or even disappointed, you wrong me -- I
never loved seriously -- do you suppose I meant to marry? -- ha, ha, ha.


Emily. Come, be composed.


Lord. 'Sdeath, madam, I am composed -- [raising his voice.] It Is you, and you
only, that make me otherwise -- for here I vow, if I feel a momentary pang, the
least sense of sorrow, it is solely in compassion to the poor husband -- him I
pity, even while I despise and laugh at him. -- Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Emily. And these are your real sentiments.


Lord. My real sentiments.


Emily. I wish sir John knew them.


Lord. Why?


Emily. Because, from the friendship sir John has for you, and suspecting your
love for the lady, as soon as he is told of this marriage, he will dread the
effect it may have on you.


Lord. Then at once to put him out of doubt, I will go and tell him my
sentiments -- and we will both laugh at the husband -- ha, ha, ha.


Emily. Do -- that is right -- now that is just right --


[Eagerly. Lord. But have I your permission to tell the secret to sir John?


Emily. Yes, you have.


Lord. Thank you -- thank you. I am much obliged to you.


Emily. But you must not say you heard it from me -- nor hint you know who her
husband is -- as indeed you don't; for that is a secret I gave my word not to
reveal.


Lord. I understand you -- you did not absolutely say, but only hinted it was
Dorimant -- no matter who it is -- be it who it will, we will make sport of him.

[Going.
Emily. That Is right.


Lord. Where is sir John?


Emily. With his uncle at present -- come, take a few turns in the garden, and
when I find you are in a perfect humor to laugh with him. I Will conceive to
send him to you.


Lord. I am very much obliged to you -- you are very ^ind.


Emily. Ay, you cannot think how I love to do a good-natured action.

[Exeunt.
SCENE II. Another apartment at SIR JOHN's.
Enter SIR JOHN and MR. TRADEWELL, following a SERVANT. Sir John. My poor
father came so unexpectedly, and so many miles to see me? -- Conduct him
instantly hither.

[ Exit servant.
Mr. Tradewell. What -- my unfortunate brother?


Sir John. Dear uncle, do not behave unkindly to my father, and destroy the
pleasure he will take in seeing me.


Mr. Tradewell. And what (...) it to you if I do?


Sir John. What is it to (...) -- strange question! -- re^^ect what he is to
me, and wonder how you can ask it.


Enter MR. CLASSICK, and embraces his son. Mr. Classick. My dear son, what
pleasure do I feel in seeing and embracing you again -- You, the sole support
of my declining years -- the sole prop of my declining spirits.


Mr. Tradewell. [Going up to him.] And what brings you here?


Mr. Classick. Sure I may be permitted to visit my own son, without being
called to an account.


Mr. Tradewell. Your visit, notwithstanding, might be dispensed with -- [to sir
John] -- he does not come so many miles for the pleasure of seeing you -- he
has some new wants to be supplied, I warrant.


Sir John. Whatever be the motive, his coming gives me pleasure. [ Aside to
Tradewell] -- Your behavior pierces me to the heart.


Mr. Classick. To meet my son and my brother both together, is a happiness
unexpected -- and since it has thus happened, I will enjoy the pleasure the
meeting gives me, without suffering the seeming unkindness of any one to
diminish it. -- Heaven bless you both.


Mr. Tradewell. Ay, be liberal of your blessings, for you have nothing else to
bestow -- no other portion to give your son.


Sir John. And I value them much more than all your inheritance.


Mr. Tradewell. These are the precepts of philosophy. But by our ordinary
rules, a father takes care, and provide for his children. Between him and you
the order of nature has been reversed, for these ten years past.


Mr. Classick. And I glory more to live at his expense, than were he to live at
mine -- the benefits I receive from him come to me like blessings; and their
value is doubled by the pleasure I see him take in bestowing them. -- But these
are sensations which your heart is unacquainted with.


Mr. Tradewell. What has made you thus poor?


Mr. Classick. Honor and honesty. -- What has made you thus rich?


Mr. Tradewell. [Hesitating.] You know I have been for many years a contractor
-- had I depended on my honor and honesty, I might have been as poor as you --
and with all your contempt of the means of acquiring riches, you have no
objection to partake of them -- you have submitted to my becoming a father to
your son, from his infancy; and now, while you, with all your boasted
affection, cannot give him a shilling, I am going to marry him to a large
fortune, and to settle another upon himself. Does this wound your delicacy?


Mr. Classick. No -- it almost makes me weep in gratitude -- but to whom are
you going to marry him?


Mr. Tradewell. She Is the daughter of my wife.


Mr. Classick. I rejoice at such an alliance. -- Come, brother, let these
approaching nuptials unite us all in love and friendship; forget our frivolous
differences, for in my heart I am grateful and affectionate.


Sir John. Some obstacles may prevent the marriage.


Mr. Classick. Oh no -- it has no doubt been planned with too much care.


Mr. Tradewell. Brother, it is one of the best contracts I ever made.


Sir John. But allow me time, sir, to gain the lady's heart.


Mr. Tradewell. A lady's heart may be gained in a day -- sometimes in an hour.


Sir John. Not such a heart as I would possess.


Mr. Tradewell. Well -- I Will give you eight days --


Sir John. That is too short a time.


Mr. Tradewell. Not too short to win eight hundred women -- I wish I had a
contract for as many as I myself could win in that time -- and by sending them
to the ladies I have no doubt but I might increase my fortune half a million.


Sir John. How much soever I may dread your resentment, sir, I must declare I
cannot marry at present.


Mr. Classick. Reflect, my son.


Sir John. I do reflect, but it is too late.


Mr. Tradewell. If ye belong to me -- but no -- it is to him you belong -- and
him you are like -- had you been mine, then you might have been like me,
complying, obedient, amiable, and gentle -- but till you prove yourself so, I
have done with you -- nor will I give sixpence to a man, who does not look up
to me as a pattern and model for all his action^*

[Exit.
Mr. Classick. Follow (...)* my son, and promise to obey with cheerfulness --
he has virtues you should respect -- you have obligations which are binding --
and this proposed marriage beyond any other.


Sir John. Oh heavens!


Mr. Classick. What is the matter? -- Where is your usual joy on seeing me? --
perhaps my coming has displeased you -- if so, seek no excuses but let me go
away, and come another time, when y^u ^^pect me.


Sir John. Expect you -- Must I ex^^ct your coming, to form my features in a
smile to meet you? -- No -- your presence always gives me joy, no preparation
could put on.


Mr. Classick. I believe you. -- But why thus melancholy? -- This intented
marriage is perhaps the cause of your uneasiness. -- Come, acknowledge your
affections are placed upon some other.


Sir John. They are.


Mr. Classick. Perhaps they are bound by some engagement?


Sir John. I am.


Mr. Classick. I am sorry for it -- but go on -- I commend you -- Who is the
object of your love?


Sir John. My wife. --


Mr. Classick. Your wife! -- Are you then married?


Sir John. Yes -- I consulted affection, and not ambition, and have therefore
concealed my marriage; lest the world, as well as you, should blame me for it.


Mr. Classick. Is your wife prudent? -- Is she such as you wished to find her?


Sir John. She is.


Mr. Classick. Then you have made an excellent match.


Sir John. This kindness consoles, and makes me less unhappy.


Mr. Classick. Where is she?


Sir John. Here in this house, accompanied by her sister, and another lady, who
passes for her relation, and the mistress of the house.


Mr. Classick. We m^^^ think of some expedient to divert your uncle's attention
for the present, and during the delay we may contrive some means to declare
your marriage with safety.


Sir John. But the idea of the event being divulged, after having thus long
concealed it, makes me all confusion -- sooner or later I shall get the better
of this strange humor -- but at present I cannot suppress the shame I feel,
lest the world should know I am married.


Mr. Classick. Do not be ashamed of a good woman -- you philosophers are ever
searching after novelty, and what could you show the world more worthy their
attention than a good wife? -- In all your researches, my son, nothing could so
well establish yours, and your children's fame. What are plants and minerals?
-- Improve human nature, that is the first great work of a philosopher.


[Exeunt. END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I. An apartment at SIR JOHN's.
Enter SIR JOHN. Sir John. Where shall I hide me, from my uncle's
solicitations? -- Where hide me from my own reflections? -- Oh! that I could
but shake off this idle fear of the world, and own I am married.


Enter LORD LOVEMORE. Lord. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, [laughing] ha, ha, ha, ha, ha
-- Oh! I shall die -- I shall never recover it.


Sir John. [Alarmed.] What Is the matter? -- What are you laughing at?


Lord. At the sight of you. -- Ha, ha, ha.


Sir John. [More alarmed still.] At the sight of me? --


Lord. I have such a secret to tell you --


Sir John. [Earnestly.] What is it?


Lord. It concerns Matilda.


Sir John. [Starting.] Indeed?


Lord. Yes.


Sir John. And does it concern any body else?


Lord. It does -- But you will keep it a secret?


Sir John. Depend upon me -- What is it?


Lord. [Whispering.] Matilda is married.


Sir John. [Starting.] You don't say so?


Lord. She is, I assure you.


Sir John. You don't say so?


Lord. I do. -- She is married.


Sir John. But do you know to whom?


Lord. No -- But I guess.


Sir John. Indeed!

[Alarmed.
Lord. I guess it is to Dorimant.


Sir John. [Aside] Thank heaven!


Lord. [Overhearing him.] Why do you thank heaven? -- Are you glad she is
married?


Sir John. No, my lord, very sorry, I assure you! -- I would give a good deal
she was not -- And you, I suppose, are deeply concerned too.


Lord. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha -- Do you imagine I meant to marry her?


Sir John. [Angrily.] You said so before me, sir.


Lord. But that was after she had declared her heart engaged, and I knew she
would not accept my offer. -- I marry! -- I marry! -- I become a husband! -- I
be made the fool of a woman! -- No, no, no. --

[Proudly.
Sir John. God's Death! -- [In great agitation] -- And yet wiser men than you have
married.


Lord. But none so wise as you; and it is my ambition to be in every thing as
wise as you.


Sir John. Who has informed you of this secret?


Lord. That I must not say -- nor shall I let Matilda know I am acquainted with
it; but redouble my assiduities, still urging her to what I know she cannot
accept: and thus, in time, soften that heart which, in time, will harden to all
the insipid attentions of a husband.


Sir John. But have you no respect for him?


Lord. Ha, ha, ha -- Respect for a husband! -- Had you ever any? -- Whoever he
is, don't you despise him? -- But why don't you laugh? -- You will not laugh? --
You used to laugh on these occasions. -- What a solemn countenance! -- God's Death
-- I beg pardon, sir John -- Indeed I do. -- But a thought this moment strikes
me.


Sir John. What is it?


Lord. Nay, perhaps I wrong you -- and yet the person who told me this secret
had some doubts who the husband was -- and upon my soul (forgive me if I am
mistaken) by your strange, awkward manner, and melancholy countenance,
something tells me -- perhaps you are he?


Sir John. I am he, sir.

[With violence.
Lord. "No, you don't say so!" -- "You don't say "so?" --


Sir John. Confusion!

[Walks about in great distress.
Lord. Yes -- I see it is true -- that is the very gait of a married man -- How
strange, I could not perceive it before. -- But, my dear sir John, pray forgive
my having laughed -- Upon my honor, had I known, had I conceived you had been
the husband, I would not have laughed before your face.

[Stifling a laugh.
Sir John. Refrain from it now then.


Lord. I will -- And as I know no better method, than by quitting your presence
-- I take my leave. -- [Going -- returns.] -- But before I go, can I mediate
between you and your uncle, or you and your father?


Sir John. No.


Lord. To the world, however, you may depend upon it, I will paint the
circumstance in the most favorable light -- I will say, your falling in love
was but a weakness attendant on human nature -- your shame of owning it; but --


Sir John. My lord, my lord, you will make me forget myself. --


Lord. Sir John, sir John, you have forgot yourself.


Sir John. Leave this room, my lord.


Lord. I will -- [goes, and returns.] -- and I Will send your wife to you.

[Exit.
Sir John. How painful is my situation! -- Shall then the object that was to
have bestowed happiness on me, be the sole cause of all my misery? --


Enter DORIMANT. My resolution is fixed; nor do you, Dorimant, attempt to shake
it. -- I leave London this day, never to see that, or lady Classick more.


Dorimant. Sure you have lost your senses! -- What will the world say of you
then?


Sir John. When I am away, that will be indifferent.


Dorimant. But your wife, Matilda --


Sir John. She has been the cause of all -- And having had the pleasure of
telling the secret she has a husband, she may now have the pleasure of telling
the secret she has none.


Dorimant. You cannot be in earnest? -- She will not submit to a separation.


Sir John. She must. -- Who Is there?

[Calling at the door.
Enter SERVANT. Desire her -- her ladyship, to come hither.


Servant. [Surprised.] Who, sir?


Sir John. Lady Classick -- my wife.


Servant. Pray, sir, which of the ladies is that?


Sir John. Do you not know?


Servant. Yes, sir -- But I thought I was not to know.


Sir John. Even this fellow is laughing at me.


Servant. No, upon my word, sir -- Ha, ha, ha! -- No, indeed, sir -- Ha, ha, ha!

[Exit, stifling a laugh.
Sir John. See what I am come to!


Dorimant. Would I were married to Emily, as you are to Matilda! -- And I have
hopes my wish will be very soon accomplished: for I have just received
intelligence I may assume my real name, and put an end to every objection she
has conceived to me.


Sir John. Oh! here comes my wife -- I am agitated -- I dread to tell her what
I know she will be concerned to hear.


Dorimant. Why then have you determined so rashly?


Sir John. Can I stay, and expose myself to the reproaches of my uncle? -- To
the jests of the town? -- But will you, Dorimant, endeavor to find my father,
and tell him my determinations -- and tell him also --


Dorimant. To persuade you to alter them -- That I shall certainly tell him.

[Exit.
Enter LADY CLASSICK, EMILY, and LUCY. Sir John. I am glad you have brought
company with you.


Lady. My dear sir John, is it your uncle who is the cause of this seeming
uneasiness? -- Tell me if it is -- and put an end to my anxiety.


Sir John. Your ladyship's anxiety may now entirely cease -- The wish of your
heart is fulfilled -- Our marriage is publicly known -- I am congratulated
every moment by one friend or other -- and it is to you, ladies, I am under the
obligation.


Lady. I had been insincere, could I have denied the pride it gave me to be
supposed your wife -- but if ever that pride tempted me to drop a hint --
except to the marquis --


Emily. And I call heaven to witness, I never breathed a syllable of it, except
to half a dozen of my most intimate friends, and people whom I knew would be as
particular not to mention it, as I myself would be.


Lucy. And I wish I may not stay another hour in my lady's service, if I ever
told it to a single soul except mrs. Fringe, the milliner, and mr. Puff, the
hairdresser; and I am sure they never mentioned it again, for they promised me
they would not.


Sir John. No more of this -- I have done with my accusations -- I have done
with you all, too. -- I leave London this night, and it will be some time
before you hear from me.


Lady. Oh heaven! I cannot survive this.


Sir John. Are you not known to be my wife? -- What more would you require?


Lady. Require, my husband? -- not to be thus abandoned -- left unprotected.


Sir John. I shall leave you in the care of my father; and he will protect you
from the insults of my uncle.


Lady. But who is to protect me from the insults of the world? -- Protect me
from that fixed affection rooted in my heart for you? -- And from the
remembrance of your unkindness?


Sir John. Could you live with me in the retreat that I shall fly to? -- Could
you quit the pleasures of the world?


Lady. To me, the pleasures of the world can only be where you are*


Emily. I am out of all patience -- Oh! that you were but my husband?


Enter DORIMANT. Dorimant. As I went out, sir John, I met your uncle and your
father, both returning -- and your uncle communicated to me a project he means
immediately to put into execution. -- He has been informed of your marriage,
that it took place abroad, and without all the due forms to render it legal --
He therefore means to annul it.


Lady. Oh heavens!


Sir John. Annul my marriage? -- Let him -- then openly, and in the face of
day, I Will marry her again. -- [Going, and taking her hand.] -- Annul my
marriage? -- Make void the happiest action of my life? -- An act which gave to
my gloomy mind a friend, a soothing partner to reform it.


Lady. Is this my husband? --


Sir John. Yes -- but, in the fear of losing you, a lover still.


Emily. Now, would you were my husband in good earnest!


Sir John. What ceremonies were wanting.

[To Dorimant.
Lucy. Indeed, sir, I don't think the parson or you forgot one.


Sir John. And pray what said my father to my uncle's proposal?


Dorimant. At first he pleaded for your union to be acknowledged; but upon your
uncle declaring, that on those terms he would disinherit you, he appeared to
submit.


Sir John. I will go to them immediately, and my uncle shall find --


Lady. Wait till his resentment may, in some measure, be abated! -- Oh! for me
to be the cause of your ruin! --

[Weeping.
Sir John. Retire, my love, and do not appear till I send for you -- But remain
in full confidence, that if I give way to my passion, it is for your sake -- or
if I suppress it, it is still for you.

[Exeunt with her, Lucy following.
Emily. This situation, in spite of myself, makes me compassionate them both --
and in spite of myself, it makes me long to be married.


Dorimant. I should hope I caused that desire more than any thing else.


Emily. You?


Dorimant. Yes -- and when you are my wife --


Emily. I your wife? -- I should be glad to see it!


Dorimant. I know you would -- and so should I.


Emily. I marry a man without family or fortune!


Dorimant. Sir John is my witness -- I have both -- enquire of him, and be
convinced.


Enter LORD MORELOVE. Lord. Dear lady, I this moment parted from mr. Tradewell
Classick, and he assures me he is going to set aside your sister's marriage.


Emily. Very true, my lord -- and this is the time for you -- a woman
disconsolate and forsaken.


Lord. But she shall not be forsaken; in spite of all I may have said, I have a
great mind to go and offer myself to her again.


Emily. And if you do, my lord, I Will answer for the event.


Lord. You advise me, then.


Emily. I do -- for it will give me great pleasure.


Lord. [Bowing.] You are very good -- you are, upon all occasions, my good
friend -- You first discovered to me the marriage, though you could not tell me
with whom -- and then, unfortunately, you sent me to laugh at the very man
himself.


Dorimant. How then can you offer yourself on the present occasion? for he, no
doubt, has told her what you said.


Emily. No matter, his lordship can unsay it -- he can go and protest to sir
John, what he said was the mere effect of resentment; for that while he
laughed, he was ready to cry.


Lord. If I thought such an acknowledgment would have any effect --


Emily. Depend upon it, it will have great effect.


Lord. Where is sir John?


Emily. I believe, at present, with my sister -- go, go, make atonement.


Lord. You will answer for my reception?


Emily. That I will.


Lord. Thank you -- thank you -- and I think I can answer for it myself.

[Exit.
Emily. Ha, ha, ha! Sir John deserves this recompense.


Dorimant. But I doubt it is less in recompense to sir John, than in spleen to
his lordship.


Enter MR. CLASSICK and MR. T. CLASSICK. Mr. Tradewell. Oh the great scholar,
that could not learn to live single a few years -- the great philosopher, who
scorns to understand the value of money: nor from me shall he ever know the
comforts of it; for I disinherit him, but upon one condition -- unless he
consents to declare his marriage invalid.


Emily. [Coming forward.] Abandon a wife whom he has sworn to love and protect!
-- and who is to forgive you for making such a proposal?


Mr. Tradewell. Oh! your humble servant, madam -- What, you are the pretended
wife, I suppose? -- you are the lady who has ensnared him?


Emily. Ensnare -- ensnare a man with his head fortified with Latin and Greek,
and his heart made hard with philosophy. -- You might as well suppose a poor
honest tradesman could ensnare a rich, hardened contractor.


Mr. Tradewell. Here Is a vixen -- reflecting on the means by which I have
acquired my riches -- But let me tell you, madam, my nephew's marriage is an
illegal one, and I will take care to make you both ashamed of it.


Emily. In that case, we cannot retaliate, for I suppose there is not any thing
you would be ashamed of.


Mr. Tradewell. Is this the gentle spirit you described to me?

[To mr. Classick.
Mr. Classick. Such was the character I received -- but give me leave to say,
madam, you have departed from it.


Mr. Tradewell. Oh what a bargain the great man has made.


Emily. Not so good a bargain as some of yours have been.


Mr. Tradewell. But while he acknowledges this woman, his crime shall be his
punishment -- I will no longer be his banker. Let him apply to his studies -- a
philosopher can extract gold from base metal.


Emily. And a contractor can extract it, from every thing that comes in his way.


Mr. Classick. Let us be gone, brother.

[Going.
Dorimant. Be patient, gentlemen, for I assure you this lady is not the wife of
sir John.


Mr. Tradewell. I know she is not -- and I Will have it proved.


Emily. [To Dorimant.] And do you pretend to say sir John is not lawfully
married?


Dorimant. No -- I did not say that.


Mr. Tradewell. How, sir, do you contradict yourself? Pray were you the witness
to a legal marriage?


Dorimant. I was.


Mr. Tradewell. ^^ere, you see she has brought him over [To Classick.] -- this
man I have often seen at sir John's, is, I dare say, some poor relation, or
some attorney. -- I Will put him to the proof -- [To Dorimant, aside.] -- Hark
you, sir, do you mean to be a witness on the trial, and swear she is the lawful
wife of my nephew? -- Here, take this purse -- [gives it to him.] -- and tell
me now, what will you swear?


Dorimant. What do you wish me.


Mr. Tradewell. That, that lady is not my nephew's lawful wife.


Dorimant. I will swear it.


Mr. Tradewell. And keep your countenance?


Dorimant. And keep my countenance.


Mr. Tradewell. You are cleverer than I thought you -- a perfect man of
business.


Dorimant. But I Will swear it without your purse.

[Returning it.]
Mr. Tradewell. He is no attorney after all.


Enter LORD LOVEMORE, and goes to EMILY. Lord. Do you know I have made myself
ridiculous!


Emily. Is that possible?


Lord. They both laughed at me.


Emily. And why did you not laugh again?


Lord. I did -- but that did not prevent their laughing on.


Enter SIR JOHN. Mr. Tradewell. [Going to him.] I can tell you what, sir --
notwithstanding the trick you have played me, I am going to do you a kind turn
for it. -- I am going to take your wife from you; and you should be obliged to
me, for taking away such a termagant -- She has treated me --


Mr. Classick. It is true -- She has treated your uncle in a manner unworthy
the woman you should love.


Sir John. My wife? -- It cannot be! --


Enter LADY CLASSICK, SIR JOHN meets her, and takes her hand. Sir John. Here is
my father and my uncle, who both accuse you of treating them with disrespect --
Is it possible my Matilda can deserve such a charge?


Lady. In aspiring to be yours, I own my offense -- but in no one circumstance
else, has even my heart, much less my lips, presumed to offend -- nor had I
ever, till this moment, the confusion to appear before either of them.


Emily. But I, knowing the cruel design of these gentlemen, took the liberty to
represent my sister, and behaved on the occasion as she ought to do.


Lady. [To mr. Classick.] In what do I merit the severity I am threatened with?
-- In having complied with the desires of a beloved son, can I be the object of
his father's resentment?


Mr. Classick. In you, madam, I approve my son's choice, nor would have it
changed, had he the power to make you happy. But without the concurrence of his
uncle, you must live in poverty, and his determination is fixed.


Lady. [To mr. Tradewell.] To you, sir, I have nothing to offer in my behalf,
except my tears, my heart-wounding sorrows.


Mr. Tradewell. I refuse those offers.


Lady. Accept, then, my submission. To have gained your approbation I would
have knelt and supplicated; but as that must not be -- suffer me to kneel and
plead for a nephew, to whom you have ever been indulgent -- Let me not be the
cause of his misfortunes -- Pardon him -- take him to your heart again -- and,
hard as the task is, I consent never to see him more.


Mr. Classick. What Is the matter, brother? -- You hesitate. --


Sir John. Dear uncle, if you feel the least ray of pity --


Mr. Tradewell. For the first time in my life, I do.


Sir John. Then cherish it.


Mr. Tradewell. [After a pause, as struggling with his inclination.] I will --
and give my consent that you shall cherish your wife. -- [Gives her to him.] --
And yet I cannot but be sorry she was not like her [pointing to Emily] that
when she knelt, I might have thrown her from me -- But as it is -- as it is --
[struggling] -- I cannot help forgiving her.


Sir John. Oh! my Matilda! who can doubt your power?


Emily. Since she has proved it there -- [pointing to Tradewell.] -- What Is the
matter, my lord? -- You look concerned? -- Cannot you, as usual, laugh at your
disappointment?


Lord. Ha, ha, ha -- [affecting to laugh -- he stops short.] -- No -- I cannot
laugh so well as I did -- And I believe it would be much easier for me to shed
a few tears.


Dorimant. Nay, my lord, for once, if possible, forget your disappointment, and
partake the joy of your friends. -- My happiness is superlative, for Emily has
just consented to be mine.


Sir John. I have been an impostor -- for while I could equivocate with my
friend, and blush at being the husband of such a wife as this, I usurped, like
many others, the title of philosopher, without having a claim to it.


Mr. Classick. And believe me, my son, while you fill the station as you ought
to do, no title is more honorable than that of A MARRIED MAN.


THE END.

