THE ARCHERS, OR MOUNTAINEERS OF SWITZERLAND; TO WHICH IS SUBJOINED A BRIEF
HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF SWITZERLAND.

[COPY RIGHT SECURED.]

THE ARCHERS, OR MOUNTAINEERS OF SWITZERLAND; AN OPERA, IN THREE ACTS, AS
PERFORMED BY THE OLD AMERICAN COMPANY, IN NEW YORK; TO WHICH IS SUBJOINED A
BRIEF HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF SWITZERLAND, FROM THE DISSOLUTION OF THE ROMAN
EMPIRE, TO THE FINAL ESTABLISHMENT OF THE HELVETIC CONFEDERACY, BY THE BATTLE
OF SEMPACH.

NEW YORK: Printed by T. and J. SWORDS, No. 99 Pearl-Street. -- 1796. --

PREFACE.
IN the summer of the year 1794, a dramatic performance, published in London,
was left with me, called HELVETIC LIBERTY. I was requested to adapt it to our
stage. After several perusals, I gave it up, as incorrigible; but, pleased with
the subject, I recurred to the history of Switzerland, and composed the Piece
now presented to the public.

Any person, who has the curiosity to compare the two pieces, will observe that
I have adopted three of the imaginary characters, from HELVETIC LIBERTY, -- the
Burgomaster, Lieutenant, and Rhodolpha: I believe they are, however, strictly
my own. The other similarities are the necessary consequences of being both
founded on the same historic fact.

Should the reader meet with thoughts, expressions, or even a line, which is
not new, I hope he will acquit me of any intention to impose on him; and
consider it rather as the effect of a treacherous memory. For instance, that
line of Portia's --

"So many widows weep their husbands slain" --
since the printing of the first sheet, I understand to be the property of Lady
Randolph, with only the trifling alteration of "How" into "So."

The principal liberty taken with history, is, that I have concentrated some of
the actions of these heroic mountaineers; making time submit to the laws of the
Drama. But the reader will not have that sublime pleasure invaded, which is
ever felt in the contemplation of virtuous characters: Tell, Furst, Melchthal,
Staffach, and Winkelreid, are not the children of poetic fiction.

In the historical account of Switzerland, subjoined, actions are referred to
their proper dates; and the best information given, of this early period of
Helvetic history, that I could collect.

W. DUNLAP.
New York, April 10 th, 1796.
PROLOGUE.
WE tell a tale of Liberty tonight;
How patriots freely bleed, and freemen fight;
How men, though few, united in one cause,
May, 'spite of millions, for themselves form laws;
And though an union'd world their rights oppose,
May still support the government they chose.
But why that start when Liberty is named?
I fear, bright goddess, she has been defamed;
A fiend accursed has often assumed her form,
In whirlwinds nursed, and bred amid the storm;
Of face detestable, of words obscene,
Hell in her eye, and fury in her mien;
Yet versed in vile Hypocrisy's dark way,
She, harlot like, allures the steps astray,
While from her lewd embraces, fruitful, spring,
The factious partizan, the lawless king,
Vile anarchy, misrule, and blood, and death,
The smoking hamlet, and the barren heath; --
By these, her offspring, shall the fiend be known,
For tyranny and ruin are her own:
And never from Liberty such evils came,
For Liberty and Justice are the same.
Can Liberty with base injustice dwell?
As well seek virtue in the depths of hell --
Where equal rights are found -- no marking grade,
From property, or colour's varying shade,
There seek the nymph -- No Spartan dame is she,
Enslaving ten, that one may live more free.
Firm is her step, yet modest is her mien,
And conscious Virtue in her face is seen;
Valor, and manly Science in her train,
Upholding Peace, who blesses all the plain:
Her locks luxuriant, circling tendrils bind;
Her virgin manners, show a virgin mind;
The lover's warmth she softens to the friend's,
And rugged wildness to obedience bends.
Reserved, yet open, though severe, yet mild;
Wise as the man, yet guileless as the child.
Such is the Liberty tonight we show,
Best friend to right, to every wrong a foe.
CHARACTERS.
William Tell, Burgher of Altdorf, Canton of Uri, Mr. Hodgkinson. Walter Furst,
of Uri, Mr. Johnson. Werner Staffach, of Schweitz, Mr. Hallam, jun. Arnold
Melchthal, of Underwalden, Mr. Tyler. Gesler, Austrian Governor of Uri, Mr.
Cleveland. Lieutenant to Gesler, Mr. Jefferson. Burgomaster of Altdorf, Mr.
Prigmore. Conrad, a seller of wooden ware, in Altdorf, Mr. Hallam. Leopold,
Duke of Austria, Mr. King. Bowmen, Messrs. Lee, Durang, etc. Pikemen, Messrs.
Munto, Tomkins, etc. Burghers, Messrs. Des Moulins, Woolls, etc. Portia, Tell's
wife, Mrs. Melmoth. Rhodolpha, Walter Furst's daughter, Miss Broadhurst.
Cecily, a basket woman, Mrs. Hodgkinson. Boy, Tell's son, Miss Harding. Maidens
of Uri, Madame Gardie, Madame Val, Miss Brett, etc.
Scene lies in the City of Altdorf and its Environs. Time, part of two Days.

THE ARCHERS; OR, MOUNTAINEERS OF SWITZERLAND.
ACT FIRST.
SCENE FIRST.
A Street in Altdorf. Enter CECILY crying Baskets for Sale. CECILY. I BELIEVE
I Am out rather too early with my ware; there is scarce any body stirring;
however, I Will sing on, and endeavor charitably to break people's rest, and put
them in mind of their wants.


SONG.
Come who will buy my baskets?
I Have small and I Have great,
They are fit for all uses,
And suiting each state.
Come who will buy my baskets?
Buck-baskets, bread-baskets,
Of broom and of chip;
Work-baskets for ladies
Who never have the hyp.
Come who will buy my baskets?
Here Is love-letter baskets
Of willow so trim,
For the swain who sore sighs
At his mistress's whim.
Come who will buy my baskets?
Enter CONRAD with a Jack-ass loaded with Wooden Bowls, Dishes, Ladles, etc.
enters crying "Bowls and Ladles, Bowls and Ladles." SONG.
CONRAD. Here are bowls by the dozen, and spoons by the gross,
And a ladle or two in the bargain I Will toss.
Come buy.
Here are ladles for soup, and ladles for pap,
To feed little Cob as he lies in your lap.
By, by, by, by.
Come buy -- ladles and bowls, ladles and bowls -- Come buy.

CONRAD. Yaw -- yaw -- A murrain on the fleas for driving me from my cock-loft
so early -- It Is in vain to spend my breath and waste good music; for there is
nothing to be moved by it but brick-walls and pavers; and they don't seem to be
in a dancing mood. O ho! here is Cecily abroad with her baskets -- if it was not
an ungentlemanly suspicion one might think the fleas had found their way to her
bolster.

"Ladles and bowls, ladles and bowls -- Come buy."
Good morrow Cecily. Gently, Dapple, gently.

CECILY. Well Conrad, what is the news with you?


CONRAD. News? why, the mountaineers are cutting down all the trees to make
cross-bows and arrows, and I shall find none to make bowls. There Is likely to
be a war.


CECILY. I Am glad on it.


CONRAD. You're glad on it? Well, that shows a christian-like disposition in
you. Pray now your reason? I should like to know the depth of a basket-woman's
politics.


CECILY. I Will tell you -- they will press all you jack-ass fellows for
soldiers, and then we shall have better business.


CONRAD. Sound reason and good logical conclusions, by the mass! I shall ever
hold thy wit in higher estimation for thy politics: for trust me, Cecily, from
the governor to the basket-girl we all build on the same broad bottom,
interest, girl: but the mischief of it is, this war is too near home. One can
hear with such a glorious cool courage of some ten or fifteen thousand tall
fellows chopped into crows' meat, at a convenient distance; but when one don't
know but his own carcass may be served up for one of the dishes, it is apt to
damp the appetite.


CECILY. You learned such a flourishing way of talking, while you lived with
the lawyer, that one can hardly tell what you mean.


CONRAD. Why, then, the bowmen, they say, are all preparing long-bow,
cross-bow, and quivers; the old soldiers, who formerly served at Zuric, are
scouring up their battered helmets and cuirasses, new grinding their swords,
and sharpening their pikes, to oppose our governor here, Gesler; who, on his
part, is raising recruits to join his Austrians, to keep our peasantry under:
so, between one party or the other, a man must fight whether his stomach
inclines to it or not.


CECILY. And which side are you?


CONRAD. What a question to a patriot -- whether he will fight for or against
his country!


CECILY. Why, you know, Conrad, you told me that most people's interest had a
broad bottom; and knowing, that as a seller of bowls, you have a pretty wide
consicence, I did not know but the bottom of your interest might be as broad as
the best of them.


CONRAD. No, Cecily, since I must fight, I Will take leave of poor Dapple and go
join the bowmen.


CECILY. I shall like you the better for it as long as I live -- if you're not
killed.


CONRAD. Why, you should like me still better for dying for my country.


CECILY. Should I? Well, may be I should; but some how or another I shall never
like a dead man as well as a live one.


CONRAD. Well, I don't know but your taste is as well founded as your politics.
Will you go with me Cecily?


CECILY. For what?


CONRAD. To carry my knapsack.


CECILY. Why, Dapple might do that.


CONRAD. Aye, but a soldier is never allowed to carry any other beast of
burden with him but his wife. Of wives he generally takes care to have enough.


CECILY. You are an impudent good-natured rogue, and I don't care if I do. But
you don't think I Will go without you marry me?


CONRAD. No, certainly not! You don't suppose I would think of leading the
beast without the halter?


DUET. CONRAD. If a man would a faithful follower have,
O! there is nothing in truth like a wife;
She Will follow, good lack!
With a pack,
On her back,
And never quit him till he quits his life.

CECILY. When we are married we'll sing full many a stave,
As we trudge over hill or through wood;
As we to the fair
Shall repair,
With our ware,
Crying, baskets and bowls, sound and good.
BOTH. In peace or in war,
In joy or in care,
As we trudge through the rough roads of Life,
All labors we'll share,
And each shall declare
Nought's so fit for a man as a wife.

Enter LIEUTENANT and GUARD, DRUMS, etc. -- Some 'pressed Men bound -- Citizens
following -- CONRAD attempts to steal off. LIEUTENANT. Where is that fellow
sneaking? -- Seize him! -- Gentlemen, I am beating up for volunteers to serve
our emperor Albert, and our noble governor Gesler. We wish none but those who
freely enter into the service. -- Hand-cuff that rascal till you get him safe
to the castle. -- We are above kidnapping men into the service.


CONRAD. Yes, I think you are -- this is wolf-napping I suppose. If ever I get
clear, you will not catch me napping again.


LIEUTENANT. We have the greatest tenderness for the rights of the subject. If
the rascal attempts to speak gag him.


CONRAD. Ergo! the subject has no right to speak -- mum.


LIEUTENANT. What can be so honorable as the profession of arms? If a mere
citizen looks sour at a gentleman soldier, damme, we run him through the body
on the spot. These are privileges, gentlemen, to which we invite you -- these
are privileges the emperor offers. Pray, gentlemen, are you burghers or merely
inhabitants?


1st BURGHER. Burghers.


LIEUTENANT. You see, gentlemen, we only invite you to happiness.


CONRAD. I never knew what happiness was before.


LIEUTENANT. These arms alone would inspire courage into the breast of a
poltroon: look at this helmet gentlemen.


1st BURGHER. Slave! Exeunt Burghers.


LIEUTENANT. Slave! When our corpse is complete, and a few more Austrians
arrive, we shall see who are the slaves, and who the masters. Lead the
gentlemen volunteers to the castle, and put them in training directly. Use them
as becomes gentlemen who have freely chosen the honorable profession of
blood-letting; and if any one of them is obstinate or sulky, let him run the
gauntlet through the regiment, by way of commencing acquaintance.


CONRAD. But what is to become of Dapple?


LIEUTENANT. We'll take care of him.


CONRAD. And my bowls?


LIEUTENANT. We'll take care of every thing belonging to you.


CONRAD. O! you're too kind. Cecily, will you go with me?


CECILY. Through the world, Conrad.


LIEUTENANT. O! you belong to him too -- I Will take care of you.


CECILY. I can take care of myself, thank ye.


CONRAD. Don't affront him, Cecily, or mayhap you will have to run the gauntlet
too, by way of commencing acquaintance with the regiment.


TRIO. LIEUTENANT, CONRAD, and CECILY. CONRAD. These soldiers are devilish kind.


CECILY. Such kindness does not suit for me.


LIEUTENANT. Though hand-cuff'd, my lad, you will soon find
It Is only to make you more free.
Come, come pretty maid, frank and free,
You Will be pleased with a soldier's life;
My laundress and mistress you will be,
And to Conrad still prove a good wife.

CECILY. Is this then the way soldiers woo?
If so from my lad I Will never part:
I Will follow him all the world through,
For he is honest and sound at the heart.

LIEUTENANT. Strike up drums. (Lieutenant marches off one way, and guard with
prisoners another.)


SCENE SECOND.
WILLIAM TELL is discovered adjusting his Arms -- a Helmet, Cuirass, Cross-bow
and Pike lying around -- his little Son trying to draw the Sword. BOY. It will not
come out.


TELL. Thou have not strength to draw it;
But when thy arm is like thy father's, boy,
'Twill from its scabbard fly as soon as touched,
If sense of injury impel the hand.
When thou have strength, how will thou use it, boy?

BOY. I will defend my father and my mother;
And none shall harm our neighbors if I Am by.
These Austrian soldiers too, who look so proud --

TELL. O! you are thy father's, soul and body, lad!


(Catches him in his arms.) Enter PORTIA. PORTIA. How my heart sinks to see
these preparations!


TELL. And mine, with virtuous ardour, bounds upright;
Swelling, impatient, to remove the cause.

PORTIA. But then the many who must sink in death,
Whenever the dread appeal is made to arms!
So many widows weep their husbands slain!
So many matrons shrieking as they lie,
Their unbound tresses mingled with the dust!

TELL. No doubt, no doubt, war is the curse of man;
Himself contrived, himself inflicts, the woe.
Is it not strange that men, for thirst of power,
Of gold, dominion, or an empty name,
Can coolly plan the massacre of millions,
That other millions may be wrought their slaves?
It Is thus that Albert, with infuriate grasp,
Would wrest from us whatever is dear in life,
To gratify his idol, cursed Ambition.
Already are our charters violated;
Already Gesler, in despite of laws,
However sacred, grinds our peasantry;
And adds to injury, unmanly insult.
O Switzerland, my country, we must rouse!

PORTIA. But yet, my William, since we feel them not,
Why should we risk our all to right oppressions?
Proud Gesler has not dared to violate
The charter'd rights of Altdorf's citizens.

TELL. Hold, Portia, hold! while yet I love thee hold!
What! shall I sit content, my neighbor wronged?
Because my property untouched remains,
Shall I, by not opposing, aid the robber?
Such are the maxims of those half-soul'd fools
Who sit unmoved and see oppression round them,
Nor heed their neighbors groan, -- the poor man's cry.
They say -- "We are secure," -- and yet -- and yet; --
But that security becomes their bane;
And when the chains are riveted, they find
That they are but pre-eminent in sorrow.
Gesler as yet respects our burghers' rights;
Their rights of property; but our bold yeomen
Are beyond sufferance burdened. We come next.
Nay, though secure myself, I would not see
Our brave and hardy mountaineers oppressed.
They now are rouzing; mine shall be the task
To stir the lazy citizens of Altdorf,
And hurl proud Gesler from his seat usurped.
The Schweitzers, and the men of Underwalden,
Join the cause of Uri -- O! by yon heaven
'Twill be a glorious struggle, and must prosper!

PORTIA. Think not thy Portia lacks the sense or spirit,
To see, to feel, thy strong emotions just.
My better reason does applaud them all:
But when the woman steals upon my soul,
I nothing see but danger to thy life.
Then in my dreams I view thy mangled corse --
Or start affrighted at the shouts of war,
And see thee flying, all oppressed with numbers.

TELL. By heaven I scarce can pardon such a dream --
The waking thought I would not. (Pleasantly.)

PORTIA. Then our child --

TELL. Ah! think of him; -- think of the son of Tell,
The vassal of some lord -- perhaps his page --
Dream that thou see him with his master's son,
Some little pampered lordling -- think that thou see
Young Sir Nobility, in pettish mood,
Strike little Tell, or spurn him with his foot.
Oh, God of mercy! in the earth's cold center
First cover Switzerland from shame like this!

PORTIA. First may I weep upon his grassy tomb.


TELL, Ha! do thou feel it then?


PORTIA. I do, I do --
Go forth, my Tell -- the God of battles shield thee!
And, should thou fall, each hour I Will tell the boy
How, and for what, his father gave his life.
I will a rustic altar form of swerd,
And every morn there place his little hands,
And make him swear eternal enmity
To all who tyrannize over human-kind.

TELL. There spoke the wife of Tell. O imitate,
In times like these, the dames of Greece and Rome;
We will outstrip their men in manly daring.
Go with thy mother, boy, and if she weeps,
Ask her to tell thee tales of bad men's falls,
Of good men's triumphs, or their glorious deaths: --
For all must die, my boy, or good or bad.
The difference is, the bad expire in curses;
While he who for his country bravely dies,
Is chaunted daily in his country's songs;
With blessings lives in every good man's heart;
And still remembered, still excites to virtue!
Exeunt Portia and boy.
SONG.
TELL. Forever lives the patriot's fame,
Forever useful is his name,
Inspiring virtuous deeds:
How glorious it is in spite of time,
In spite of death, to live sublime;
While age to age succeeds. Exit.

SCENE THIRD.
BOWMEN are discovered preparing their Arms by the Side of a Piece of Water; on
the other Side of which is seen the sublime Hills, hanging Rocks, and various
appropriate Beauties of the Lake of Uri. CHORUS OF BOWMEN. Genius of our
pine-clad hills,
Give, of gifts, the first and best,
The animating thought which fills,
Swelling high the hero's breast.

SINGLE BOWMAN. Remembrance of our former bliss,
Contrasted with our present woe,
Shall fire the blood of every Swiss,
And rouse to vengeance on the foe.
Without restraint we roam'd our hills,
We pruned our vines, and knew no care,
Oppression, with its train of ills,
Were strangers to a Switzer's ear.
From youth inured to bend the bow,
To climb the rock's terrific steep,
To tend our goats upon the brow,
Whence roars the cataract to the deep,
Hardy and strong, our limbs never fail
The dauntless mind that dwells within;
Alert to oppose, when foes assail;
Fearless of War's tremendous din.
Sublime the scenes which meet the view;
Sublime the thoughts which they inspire;
Undaunted valor, friendship true,
And Freedom's all-expanding fire.

CHORUS OF BOWMEN. Genius of our pine-clad hills,
Give, of gifts, the first and best,
The animating thought which fills,
Swelling high the hero's breast.

1st BOWMAN. Behold here comes the father of our land,
The virtuous Walter; Uri's proudest boast.
What youthful bowman leads he by the hand?

2d BOWMAN. It Is Underwalden's chief, brave Arnold Melchthal:
I know him well; first of his countrymen.

Enter WALTER and ARNOLD. WALTER. Fellows in labor as in arms, I bring,
To aid our counsels, and to nerve our strength,
This gallant warrior: know him for my friend.
The pride of Underwalden leads he on;
The same their cause, the same their sense of wrong.
Thus leagued, we may defy the Austrian tyrant, --
Insatiate Albert -- and his host of slaves;
Who now, with wide and sweeping desolation,
Threaten our rugged hills.

ARNOLD. Why, let him come!
He shall be met by men. What say ye, countrymen!
Is it not better some brave Swiss should die,
Yielding their lives in pious opposition,
Than that we all be slaves?

1st BOWMAN. Better all die!


WALTER. There is no need of it: we'll live to triumph!
Our very soil does fight against tyranny;
And will assist our efforts to be free.
When up our mountains' craggy sides they climb,
We'll rend the o'er-hanging rocks and hurl them down;
Whelming our foes in one prodigious ruin.
Nor will we fear to face them in the field,
Though few our numbers. O, who knows the force,
Who knows the firmness of the virtuous man,
Who fights to save his country from oppression?

ARNOLD. Gesler, proud Albert's well-chosen delegate,
Does grow each day in tyranny more bold.

WALTER. I like it well; 'twill even rouse the dull.
There Is not a privilege but he does wrest,
Or warp it from its purpose to annoy us:
And, not content, adds insult to injustice.
I Am told that he has raised a pole in Altdorf;
Whereon, in mockery vile, his hat is fixed;
And every citizen, that passes by,
Must bend the neck to it.

ARNOLD. By heaven! I hope
To see the wretch's head even there uplift;
That Haman like, fell Tyranny may die
On the foul gibbet meant for Liberty.
But how bears Tell these insults?

WALTER. O! he chafes;
As does the mountain boar, who whets his tusks,
Preparing for the combat. Even now
He would, with us, meet here; but policy
Restrains. He may more service do at home.
The citizens of Altdorf look to him
For counsel and direction. When the storm
Is raised, it does require a hand like his
To guide it to its object. But behold --
See ye where you firs, with beach besprinkled,
Shade the western hill? even there, where jutting forth,
The barren promontory threats to crush
The pigmy-looking trees, over which it hangs;
There, in an opening 'twixt two pointed pines,
Observe the constant glittering of arms.
Some warriors pass this way -- and as the sun
Peeps over the opposite hill top, he sees and shows
Their burnished 'coutrements. Bowmen prepare.
(The BOWMEN of Uri (...) themselves (...) side of the stage, opposite to the
hill from which the warriors are descending.) Be every man prepared to meet a
foe.
(Horns sound at a distance.) That is the horn of Schweitz; they are our
friends*
Behold, now issuing from the trees
They leave the hill and this way come amain.
See at their head brave Werner Staffach moves:
He comes to meet us here, the Chief of Schweitz.
Let us in chorus raise the song of Uri;
Greeting our warlike friends with melody.

BOWMEN OF URI. Uri's sons, with open arms,
Still receive the friendly guest;
Shield him from impending harms:
Hospitality is blessed.
Pluck the fruit from yonder vine,
For the stranger choose the best;
Bring the bread, and milk the kine:
Hospitality is blessed.

Enter WERNER STAFFACH of Schweitz, at the Head of Warriors, armed with Pikes,
Swords and Shields; they march down the Stage, and range opposite the Bowmen of
Uri. PIKEMEN OF SCHWEITZ. To the war-horn's loud and solemn blast,
Floating on the affrighted air,
Obedient Schweitzers hither haste,
The fight with Uri's sons to share.
United have our fathers been;
Ever brave and ever free;
But we, their sons, with grief have seen
A tyrant strike at liberty.

ARNOLD MELCHTHAL. When roused by wrongs the freeman takes the field,
To crush oppressors and uphold the laws;
Though hosts oppose him, virtue is his shield,
And heaven assents in thunders of applause.
CHORUS OF THE WHOLE. To the war-horn's loud and solemn blast,
Floating on the affrighted air,
With souls on fire we eager haste,
The dangers of the fight to dare.

WALTER. Welcome brave warriors! Werner Staffach, welcome!
Walter of Uri greets the men of Schweitz.
Aught have ye heard of Albert and his host?

WERNER. Brave Walter Furst, I bring thee tidings good
Of Albert's vanguard. 'Twas but yester-morn
We charged, dispersed, and drove them from the field;
An almost bloodless victory.

WALTER. The manner?


WERNER. It was the men of Underwalden did it.
They broke the foe, and we did naught but slaughter.
In heavy mail the Austrian soldiers stood;
Our charge awaiting. We, in form of wedge,
Triangular, long strove to break their rank,
In vain. Rock-firm, their bristly pikes presenting,
Unmoved they faced us. Then Arnold Winkelreid
Sprang forward, self-devoted, to the charge.
He grasped, with either hand, the Austrian pikes,
Breaking the foremost rank with desperate force;
His breast presenting to the pikes behind,
He fell, gored through with wounds. But, by his death,
He opened the way to glorious victory!
Our pointed column, once within their ranks,
Terror possessed, confusion blind misled, them:
Our task was naught but slaughter and pursuit.

WALTER. So ever fall the foes of Switzerland.
So still, to death devoted for their country,
March our bold yeomen dauntless to the field.
Come forth my sword. (Draws) Draw thou, its fellow, Werner. (Werner draws.)
Form we the cross. (They cross their swords) This is the sacred sign
By which we live, by which, undaunted, die;
And by this sign do I myself devote
To Underwalden, Uri, and to Schweitz.
Do thou accept the sign?

WERNER. And join in it!


ARNOLD. And I, for Underwalden and myself.

(Arnold draws, and after Werner has lifted his sword from Walter's he lays his
own across.)
WALTER. Now long exist this blessed Helvetic league!
In federal bonds united we are safe,
And may defy our foes and laugh at tyrants;
For other bonds Helvetia never shall know.
Nations shall join the league; nations unborn
Shall venerate the place where now we stand,
And hail the village Gruti, (else unknown,)
The cradle of Helvetic liberty!

WERNER. Who, like Diana, bursts from yonder grove?


WALTER. My only child, remains of all my flock,
Her mother's image, darling of her sire.

Enter RHODOLPHA, equipped as a Huntress. She kneels to WALTER. RHODOLPHA. A
boon, a boon, Rhodolpha begs a boon!


WALTER. Arise, my child.


RHODOLPHA. First, father, give assent.


WALTER. In naught becoming did I ever deny thee.


RHODOLPHA. Aught unbecoming did I ever ask?


WALTER. O no! O no! therefore I grant the boon.
Arise, and tell thy father what thy wish.

RHODOLPHA. Thank thee, my father! This is my request: --
Now, while around War's preparations glare,
And every yeoman grasps his bow or pike,
Rhodolpha droops to think that sex alone,
Should rob her of her share of dangerous glory.
The boon I Have begged, and thou have granted, Sir,
Frees me from tyrant Custom's vile restraint;
And gives those rights which I will die ere yield.
Now, in the field, and by my father's side,
I Will charge the foe, or from afar annoy him.
Thy shield protecting shall secure my bosom;
While every arrow, to an Austrian's heart,
Bears death.

WALTER. Thou have cheated me to this assent.


RHODOLPHA. And is it unbecoming in thy daughter
To glow with ardour against her country's foes?
Show me the goatherd who more sure of foot,
Bounds over the craggy rock or sky-capp'd hill: --
Or who more swift skims over the level plain.
What bowman bends a tougher yew, or aims
More sure the winged death, than I? I lead
Full fifty like myself; dauntless alike,
In Virtue's ways, alike detesting wrong.
And when my father sees the Austrian ranks
Mown down, or scattered, flying over the plain,
Our arrows still pursuing; then thy heart
Shall leap within thy breast; and thou shall feel
Some consolation, though thou lack'st a son.

WALTER. Bless thee, my child! I Will not revoke my boon.
And may heaven shield thee in the day of death.

RHODOLPHA. Now pardon chiefs that I have played the braggart.
When peace again shall bless Helvetia's hills,
I will put off this boldness, and become
Meek with the meekest, with the blythest, blythe.

(They bow to her; Walter and Werner walk up the Stage to the Bowmen.) SONG.
ARNOLD MELCHTHAL. Why huntress, why, will thou thy life expose,
So valued by thy friends?
If thou should fall, the deaths of all our foes
Can never make amends.
O think what pangs thy father still must feel,
What pangs must Melchthal know,
When thou, exposed to the biting steel,
Shall rush amidst the foe.

RHODOLPHA. Brave Arnold Melchthal hear my fixed resolve;
Nay, by a vow, unto my troop I Am bound, --
My troop of virgins, -- not to hear of love,
'Till Switzerland is freed from Austria's yoke.
Wherever the battle rages will I hie;
There, if thou love, by deeds assert thy claim.

SONG.
RHODOLPHA. At the trumpet's clang, or the war-horn's sound,
As the tight-rein'd charger paws the ground,
Impatient to the field where armies lower
Fly we the winged death to pour.
By freeing Switzerland your passion prove,
For liberty not mine, I Will never know love.

ARNOLD AND RHODOLPHA. By freeing Switzerland our worth we'll prove,
For liberty not ours, we'll never know love.

(Rhodolpha retires to the upper end of the Stage, and waves with her hand,
upon which her troop of Maidens enter, armed with bows and quivers, and range
in front of the audience, -- upper end.) CHORUS OF THE WHOLE. Let every act,
let every thought,
Be centered in our country's good:
Just laws are not too dearly bought,
Though purchased with our dearest blood.
Never yet could foreign foes prevail
Over men united to be free;
Myriads in arms in vain assail
The firm-soul'd friends of liberty.
Let every act, let every thought,
Be centered in our country's good:
Just laws are not too dearly bought,
Though purchased with our dearest blood.
END OF ACT FIRST.
ACT SECOND.
SCENE FIRST.
In front of the Castle of Altdorf a Pole is seen with a Hat on it. Enter
LIEUTENANT with Guards, among whom is CONRAD, armed as a Cuirassier, his Armor
much too large for him, and apparently very heavy. LIEUTENANT leads him to a
Spot near the Castle. LIEUTENANT (To Conrad.) THIS, Sir, is your post; and pay
attention to my orders; for if you deviate in the least, you shall be shot
through with arrows, 'till you look like a porcupine. In the first place, you
are not to stir beyond this line, (marking with his sword) without further
orders. Secondly, every person who comes this way you are to challenge thus --
"Who comes there?"


CONRAD. Who comes there?


LIEUTENANT. And then, looking in a soldier-like manner at the governor's hat,
cry -- "Bow."


CONRAD. Bow.


DUET. LIEUTENANT AND CONRAD. LIEUTENANT. How happy is a soldier's life,
So pleasant, so gay, and so free;
He Is at ease in the midst of all strife,
And as happy --

CONRAD (Sorrowfully.) Aye, as happy as me.


LIEUTENANT. How jovially the glass goes round,
A bottle is due to each man;
To supply us the peasant is bound,
And we get it --

CONRAD. As well as we can.


LIEUTENANT. How happy do we soldiers live,
It Is pleasure --

CONRAD. Which nobody knows.


LIEUTENANT. Our governor a payment does give,
Which we always may take out --

CONRAD. In blows.


Exeunt Lieutenant and guard. CONRAD. O dear! O dear! O dear! I Am afraid this
pleasant life will be the death of me. This cuirass was made for Goliath of
Gath's great grandfather. A dozen arrows might pass through and through me
without ever touching my body. I think I must look like a great tin-cannister,
with a stake run through the middle of it. I don't wonder your Austrian
soldiers stand firm, for 'twill take the strength of two men to put one in
motion. Who comes there?


Enter GESLER and LIEUTENANT. LIEUTENANT. Hold your tongue, rascal.


CONRAD. Bow.


LIEUTENANT. Scoundrel.


CONRAD. Mum.


LIEUTENANT. There is no enticeing or persuading the citizens to take up arms.
I always thought I had a knack at wheedling; but I can pick up nothing but the
very refuse of creation; fellows that the crows have had the choice of before
me, and have turned up their noses at and left; and even those I am obliged to
press.


GESLER. We owe it all unto you saucy Tell:
He talks to them of rights; calls us oppressors;
And stirs the full-fed rogues to mutiny.
We must be cautious now; but soon I hope
To hunger-pinch the pampered slaves to reason.
My spies inform me, that the mountaineers,
Grown bold through lenity, meet even by day;
And threat, in swelling words, fierce opposition.
The men of Schweitz, and those of Underwalden,
Have joined in league, the yeomanry of Uri.

LIEUTENANT. But where lags the emperor, Sir? Methinks he is rather slow in his
movements. If he don't come soon, these damned dogs will come down from their
hills and dish us up for sauce to the carrion-carcasses of our soldiers.


CONRAD. Like capers to mutton. (Lieutenant looks at him) Mum.


GESLER. His armament is great and slowly moves;
But now is near at hand. When he arrives,
We'll see these goatherds skipping over their crags,
Skulking in caves, or on the glacier tops
At liberty to roam, with right to starve. --
But, might I counsel, we will hunt them down,
And extirpate, or bend them to the yoke.
By heaven! on every hill, by every lake,
I Would plant the country round with groves of gibbets.

CONRAD. A very pleasant kind of plantation; -- and new.


GESLER. I hear that in the public hall this day
The burghers mean to meet. Be on the watch.
This we must call sedition. Seize thou Tell;
And if, with full success, Albert arrives,
Then hang him up. Meanwhile, 'twill overawe
The citizens of Altdorf. Fare thee well. Exit Gesler.

CONRAD. The governor is a very pleasant, good-looking, kind sort of a
gentleman. I should like to see him at his country house, walking about among
those groves he talked of.


LIEUTENANT. Peace, scoundrel! If you are heard to speak any other words, while
on your post, but those I put into your mouth, you shall have a lash for every
monosyllable.

Exit Lieutenant.
Enter RHODOLPHA. CONRAD. Who comes there?


RHODOLPHA. Ha, ha, ha, ha! Why, what a thing art thou?
If I had found thee in a field of corn,
I could have sworn, the owner of the ground,
Some peasant soldier, had his battered arms
Hung on a pole, to fright the crows afar.

CONRAD. Bow.


RHODOLPHA. What, thou can bark too, can thou? See thou this?
(Aims at him.) If through the center of thy kettle-coat
My arrow flies, perhaps 'twill pierce the pole
Whereon it hangs.

CONRAD. O don't shoot Mistress Rhodolpha! Why don't you know me? Don't you
know poor Conrad the bowl-man.


RHODOLPHA. What do thou there?


CONRAD. I Am set here to cry bow at every body that comes along.


RHODOLPHA. A kind of watch-dog, ha! art not ashamed?


CONRAD. No, not ashamed, Mistress; but as much mortified as you or any other
good friend to the welfare of my spirit could wish my flesh to be. The
governor's lieutenant has taken me by force, and made a volunteer of me. And,
what is worst of all, they have taken poor Dapple, my ass, and enlisted him
among the cavalry.


RHODOLPHA. Thou tell a tale of laugh-provoking sorrow.
Quit these vile Austrian slaves and run away.

CONRAD. So I would if I could get out.


RHODOLPHA. Get out! Why art not out? What art thou in?


CONRAD. Why, don't you see I Am in the inside of my coat? If you will send three
or four of your father's bowmen to run away with me, I shall thank you all my
life; but as to running away with myself, it is totally impossible. You need
never expect any Austrian deserters.


RHODOLPHA. Nor need we fear that they will climb our hills,
If they their armor bear as well as thou.
But hark thee, Conrad, leave thy shell behind,
Come to the hills, and I will give thee welcome.

CONRAD. Thank you, I Will try. -- But here comes the fat burg^master: -- don't
seem as if you knew me.


RHODOLPHA. No, I will not disgrace thee with thy friends;
Thou have already learned the trick of state.

CONRAD. Mum. Who comes there?


Enter BURGOMASTER. BURGOMASTER. Friend.


CONRAD. Bow. (Burgomaster bows to the hat.)


BURGOMASTER. Ha, ha, ha! In the name of hunger and thirst what art thou?


CONRAD. Who comes there?


BURGOMASTER. Why do not answer, fellow? Know thou not my authority? Who
art thou?


CONRAD. Why, it is hard to say, Sir; for a man that is under orders not to
speak; but if I might think, I should suppose that I was your worship's
armor-bearer.


BURGOMASTER. Ha, ha, ha! I should not have thought that humor would have made
a dwelling place of thy carcass. Ha! my lass of the hills, art thou there? My
pretty Rhodolpha -- Why that look of scorn? Come, unbend thy brow. -- How does
my old friend Walter, thy father?


RHODOLPHA. He claims no title to a traitor's friendship.


BURGOMASTER. Ha, ha! -- ye know me not -- I, a traitor! -- no, no, I am one of
Switzerland's best friends.


RHODOLPHA. A friend to naught, but to thyself, art thou.


BURGOMASTER. And am not I a part of Switzerland?


CONRAD. Aye, and no small part neither. -- You Will take care of one mountain at
least. -- When I have seen your worship walk of a warm day, I have thought you
were very like Mount Blanc.


BURGOMASTER. How so? thou perpendicular line, without breadth or solidity!


CONRAD. First, your huge overhanging sides, threatening to crush any thing
that came near your foot: then, the snow upon the summit there; and as you
walked it seemed to melt, and several streams came meandering over your cheek
till they were lost among the snow-hills on your worship's chin -- then came
another stream, rushing in a cataract off the promontory of your nose, and
falling into the gulf below. I have sometimes thought that I could see the
wild goats skipping about among the craggs --


BURGOMASTER. Why, thou thing of naught --


CONRAD. I beg your worship's pardon, I Will 'bate the goats.


BURGOMASTER. If thou utterest any more words, save what thy duty requires,
I Will have thee box'd up for a skeleton; -- thou will not need dissection. Now,
my pretty lass of the hills, leave thy flouting looks, and tell thy father,
from me, that he had better quit his practices against the emperor. The emperor
is a good emperor, and pays his servants well; and there is much good eating
and drinking in Switzerland, for men of Walter's note.


RHODOLPHA. Eating!


BURGOMASTER. Ay, trust me, damsel, there is much virtue in eating and drinking.


RHODOLPHA. Thou blown-up thing! thou mockery of man!
Think thou the generous Walter Furst, like thee,
Would leave the gallant men, who look to him
For sage direction in the approaching storms,
In hopes of Albert's smiles, or fear of frowns?
My father, with his countrymen, will share
Or good or evil. Thee, he does despise. --
Of all things despicable, he is most,
Who, for the sake of interest base and vile,
Or personal safety, aids his country's foes.

BURGOMASTER. Tut, tut, -- this is all words, and words are wind, and wind is
emptiness! A man must take care of his own interest, and his own person, or no
one else will do it. -- And let me tell ye, damsel, a man of my size has a
great deal to take care of.


RHODOLPHA. That thou have wit, I do the more despise thee;
For thou do sacrifice thy better sense
To sensuality and beastliness.

BURGOMASTER. Think not, young woman, we will bear all this. Respect for the
emperor, forbids that we, his officer, should put up with any indignity. Thou
art in our power; therefore, as a mark of submission, bow thy knee to the
governor's hat, the representative of Albert.


RHODOLPHA. Why, truly, kings have much to boast, in this,
If sticks, and hats, and feathers, represent them.
Often has my father said it was the case
That owls, and mules, and asses, bore the office.

CONRAD. Perhaps, then, they will promote Dapple to be an ambassador.


BURGOMASTER. Thou shall be punished, fellow, for thy tongue. Meantime, damsel,
obey, or we will force thee.


(Advances toward her.) RHODOLPHA. Keep thy due distance, as thou love
thyself.
Thou art a mark 'twere difficult to miss. (Aims.)

BURGOMASTER. What, would thou murder me? Soldier, defend the emperor's
officer.


CONRAD. Who comes there?


RHODOLPHA. Ha, ha, ha, ha! who now does hold the power?
Down on thy knees and bow -- aye, bow to me,
The representative of Liberty. --
Quickly comply! or, by my father's head,
I Will offer up thy life a sacrifice
Unto thy suffering country. Quickly down. (He kneels.)
Ha, ha, ha, ha! Why, what a thing art thou!
Think, how has gluttony unnerv'd thy frame,
And sunk thee 'neath the level of a man.

SONG.
RHODOLPHA. While thus with mind infirm, and limbs unnerv'd,
The townly glutton sinks, through vice, to shame;
The peasant, who from virtue never swerved,
Looks firmly up, and claims an honest name.
With health's true brace,
As he bounds to the chase,
His limbs are unconscious of pain:
At the Chamois' cry,
Over the rocks see him fly,
And the glacier opposes in vain. Exit.

CONRAD. By the mass! she is the finest girl in Switzerland! -- Cecily excepted.


BURGOMASTER. Soldier!


CONRAD. Who comes there?


BURGOMASTER. Who sticks here! thou mean -- What a young tygress! Come
hither, rascal, and help me up.


CONRAD. A soldier should never leave his post: -- But, if you will come here I
will help you.


BURGOMASTER. What, do thou make a jest of me?


CONRAD. Heaven forbid that I should help your worship -- to do that.


BURGOMASTER. I would not have any body see me thus. Surely that is the
governor -- I must off -- O! you vile dog -- O! you cursed --


(Crawls off in haste.) CONRAD. A perfect greyhound by the mass! ha, ha, ha!


SCENE SECOND.
The Town Hall of Al^dorf. -- Burghers meeting. 1st BURGHER. Sad times,
neighbor.


2d BURGHER. Aye, we shall soon have Albert and his Austrians quartered upon us.


1st BURGHER. No doubt, no doubt! and then farewell happiness in Uri. Would it
not be better to resist by arms?


2d BURGHER. Why, truly, neighbor, I fear that would only make things worse.
He would then hang us for rebels, and seize all our property into the bargain.


1st BURGHER. Hush! here comes Tell.


Enter WILLIAM TELL. TELL. Now, fellow citizens, well met. Will you,
A little while, attention lend to me?

ALL BURGHERS. Hear Tell! hear William!


TELL. Not for myself I feel, or think, or speak;
I love you, fellow citizens.

ALL BURGHERS. We know it!


TELL. The circumstances of the times so press,
That on this day's resolve depends our fate:
Submission, or determined opposition.
What follows on submission? Coward safety --
The privilege to drag our limbs about;
And, on a holiday, throw up our caps,
And shout "long live our noble emperor!"
Stern Opposition calls up glorious Danger:
But look behind this danger! there behold
Our rights secured, our peace, our happiness!
I am no artful orator, my friends!
You know me well; -- a plain, well-meaning, man,
That speaks direct unto the point at once.
I have good information, that this day
Will be the last that we may here assemble.
The Austrian Albert is advancing fast.
It Is easier far, my friends, to avoid the yoke,
Than, when it is on, to break it. Let us resolve. --
Be law and rightful government, the word;
All difference of opinion be abjured;
Own we no purpose but our country's good.

3d BURGHER. No other object's worth a good man's thought!


TELL. The men of Uri ever have been free;
And freemen's counsels still are moderate; --
For useful Science dwells with Liberty: --
While those accustomed to the tyrant's chain,
When roused, by sense of wrongs, to burst their bonds,
Are left alone to Passion's erring guidance.
Such are not we: we know our rights; have laws,
For which our fathers fought: -- by them be guided:
Form, by them, our fixed resolutions;
And, to our friends without the city, publish.
Thus shall we force mankind this truth to own,
"Enlightened freemen know to rule themselves."

Enter LIEUTENANT. LIEUTENANT. I do command you hence, unto your homes!
The governor, henceforth, will not allow
Of these unlawful and seditious meetings.

TELL. "Unlawful and seditious!" Slave in soul,
As in thine actions, dare thou utter falsehood?
Meet we not here, as erst our fathers met,
In open council, free to every one?
We are no party club, shut from the world;
Brooding over dark and secret machinations,
To lead away from Truth the minds of men.
Our doors are open; every man admitted;
And all opinions treated with respect.
Our numbers, as our sentiments, all known.
And thus we hurl defiance to thy master!
Resolved to die ere live the slaves of Austria!

LIEUTENANT. You may repent this boldness ere it is long. Exit Lieut.


TELL. Now, countrymen, the die is cast. You stand
Pledged, through my words, to meet the event with courage:
Unless you choose -- and I give free permission --
Still to hold back, and bow unto the yoke;
I standing as your offering of peace,
To gratify the tyrant, I have dared*

BURGHERS (Indignantly.) No, William, no!


3d BURGHER. We'll live, or die, with thee!


TELL. Ye are my countrymen! Ye are my friends!
Now, then, away! prepare your arms with haste.
Oh! it does glad my heart to see men rise,
Indignant, spurning far their vile oppressors! --
When those entrusted, for the public weal,
By the people's voice, with delegated power,
Guide all their actions by the line of duty;
Making the people's good, in all, their study;
In all, attentive to the law supreme; --
Rights constitutional, or charter'd grants; --
How would that wretch deserve his country's curse,
Who, by ambition base, or interest, prompted;
Or, listening to the voice of giddy Faction,
Would interrupt them in their pious labors; --
Striving against authority so sacred!
But when Oppression shows his hideous front;
Whether in league with foreign foes he comes,
Or starts the weedy growth of soil our own;
Let us, with firm and dauntless opposition,
Resist until the monster is no more.
These are the sentiments I dare avow;
These are the principles for which I Will die. --
Is there one here who does not know his rights?
Let him go hence! Gesler will teach them to him!
Is there one here, who, knowing, dares not urge them?
If one, he is a self-form'd, dastard slave:
Associate fit for Albert. Speak your resolves.

ALL BURGHERS. Equal rights, equal laws, equal liberty!


TELL. Now all depart* be resolute, be free. Exeunt Burghers.
The castle guards are weak. Ere Albert comes
That hold must be secured. Ay -- it must be so --

LIEUTENANT enters behind with GUARDS. LIEUTENANT. Seize him! (Guards surprise
and disarm Tell.) Bind him!


TELL. What, has it come to this, O Switzerland?
A citizen of Altdorf, seized and bound!
But that my wonder at the daring deed,
Does rise superior to my indignation,
I would not question such a thing as thou.
What has emboldened Gesler to this act?

LIEUTENANT. Why, to tell you the truth, Master Tell, we are reinforced by a
part of the emperor's vanguard; who just now arrived, after gaining a victory
over the men of Underwalden.


TELL. A victory!


LIEUTENANT. Why, to be sure, it was not so much a victory as an advantage;
that is, our troops suffered the rascals to cut to pieces a few hundred men;
while the rest, making a glorious change of position, threw themselves, by a
forced march, into the castle here. -- So we are strong, my blustering cock.
Follow with the prisoner.


TELL. O, heaven be praised! the glorious game's begun! Exeunt.


SCENE THIRD.
The Castle, Pole, etc. CONRAD stands on his Post sleeping and nodding. CONRAD.
Who comes there? A murrain on this drowsiness! -- Yaw -- I was up so early --
ay, and a pretty morning's work I Have made of it! None of the burghers pass this
way: so the governor's hat has nobody's bows but mine -- and, to say the truth,
they are rather on the nod order -- familiar. -- I don't see that they intend
to relieve me; so I Will even sit myself down, draw my head into my shell, and
nap it a while.


After CONRAD sleeps, enter BURGOMASTER on one side, TELL, LIEUTENANT and
GUARDS on the other. TELL. O! have I met thee, Sir? See thou these chains?
If I mistake thee not, thou art the man,
Whom we, the much dup'd citizens of Altdorf,
Elected as our magistrate supreme.
Thou art the man, who, in our public hall,
Did swear with vigilance to guard our rights;
And execute the laws with equal justice.
See, now, before thy face, in bonds most vile,
A citizen of Altdorf. Is there power
In Switzerland, save in the magistrate?
If any other, it is lawless power:
And I do call on thee for thy protection,
As thou will answer it some future day.
Rouse up our burghers to a timely rescue;
And save thyself, and Switzerland, from shame.

BURGOMASTER. Why, William, thou art warm. Thou let'st thy passion overruled
thy judgment: which is not well in men of note like thee; to whom the rabble
look for an example. Thou have vilified the good order and discipline of our
Austrian friends.


TELL. Away! no more! With Friendship's specious mask,
Did Austria send her armies to protect us.
That she preserved she for herself has seized;
And over-runs us with her hosts of slaves.
Thou, too, a vile apostate, willing slave --

BURGOMASTER. William, thou know me not. The good of Switzerland is ever in
my thought. Indeed, I fear much thinking yet will be the death of me; or waste
me down to nothing. From all my cogitations, I conclude, that we should yield
these trifling forms and tokens of obedience to the emperor, in return for his
protection. -- It is but reasonable, too, that the emperor should tax our
peasantry, to pay his soldiers. -- It Is but right. -- Such men as thee, ^ow,
William, Albert loves, and would appoint to office, if thou would a good
example to the vulgar set, and yield him due respect. -- Yet bow to yonder
pole, and all shall be well with thee.


TELL. My indignation did prevent my speech,
Or long ere this I had cut short thy falsehoods.
I bow my head unto no cap-crown'd pole;
Not even that, of Liberty the symbol.
The man of reason scorns idolatry;
And fears to trust enthusiastic zeal.
He walks upright; his face erect to heaven;
Nor bows his head to aught but to his God.
(Crosses the Stage, first looking firmly upwards, then bowing, as in mental
adoration.) Come, lead away! -- With such a wretch as this,
One who has sold his soul for foreign gold,
To gratify his pampered body's cravings;
To parley, or to reason, is disgrace.
I see my doom. Yet, oh! my bleeding country,
If, by my death, thy sons are roused to vengeance,
And happiness and peace restored to thee,
With smiles I Will welcome the decisive blow!

Exeunt Tell, Lieutenant and Guards. BURGOMASTER. Ha, ha! to hear men talk of
smiling at the gallows -- as if hanging were a laughing matter. -- It Is pride,
rank pride -- Heaven keep me from such distinction! The very thought of
suffocation choaks me. Yet we must all die. All flesh is mortal. If so, I have
a double portion of mortality. This Tell never knew the joys of good living, or
he would not be so ready to die. He eats when he is hungry, and drinks when he is
dry. -- Now, I eat that I may be hungry; provoking Appetite to the field, that
I may have the pleasure of slaying him. While I am enabled to do this, I wish
no change -- No, no, it is far better to hold my office from the emperor, than
to depend upon the voices of a parcel of razor-fac'd rogues, who envy me my
ruddy cheeks, and eye my portly walk, with as keen a glance, as if I was a
well-fed ox for the governor's table. Struts off.


Enter CECILY. CECILY. O dear! O dear! I Am quite out of breath with running. --
I wonder I had'n't broke every bone in my skin, in jumping out of that nasty,
narrow window. And now I am out, I don't know where to look for Conrad. What,
in the name of shellfish, is this? O lud! O lud! O lud! Sure as the world it is
my poor Conrad. They Have murdered him for his patriotism, box'd him up in an
iron barrel, and throw'd him over the castle wall.


CONRAD. Who comes there?


CECILY. No, he is'n't dead. Now I have it! they have set him here for a sentry,
and the stupid fellow has gone to sleep. -- It Is well nobody else found him. --
Ha, ha, ha! what a figure! -- I Will tickle his nose with a straw, 'till I wake
him.


SONG.
(As she sings the last line of each verse, she tickles his nose.) CECILY.
Come, Conrad, awake from your trance!
If some others had caught you, I trow,
They Would have made you on nothing to dance;
And in vain would you then have cried --

CONRAD. Bow.


CECILY. What a dolt-head, to fall thus asleep!
'Twas this morning you said I was fair;
Yet awake even love could not keep,
The bowl-man who cries --

CONRAD (Starting up.) Who comes there?

O, Cecily! is it you? I dreamt that the governor's lieutenant was blowing
snuff up my nose. Where have been Cecily?


CECILY. Why, I Have been locked up, all the morning, in the lieutenant's closet.


CONRAD. Ha! -- locked up all the morning, with the lieutenant, in a closet! --
Why -- hey -- he is a recruiting officer to be sure --


CECILY. I did'n't say any such thing. -- I tell you he was'n't with me. He
very civilly asked me to walk in, as he had something to say about you. So, says
he, "I must go out a little while: stay here 'till I come back." Out he went;
locked the door; and I saw no more of him.


CONRAD. Aye, he wanted to make a volunteer of you.


CECILY. So, I jumpt out of the window, and come to look for you.


CONRAD. That Is a dear good girl! O, Cecily! I Have had a hard time of it, since
I saw you. Such drilling, thumping, and fisting; and what is worst of all, I
have not had a morsel of breakfast.


CECILY. How shall I help you, Conrad?


CONRAD. If I could once get away and join the bowmen, then I could marry you;
and mistress Rhodolpha would promote you to be one of her virgins.


CECILY. That would be pure.


CONRAD. Now, Cecily, if you will put on my cuirass and helmet, and stand
sentry in my place, I may get off before they find out I Am gone.


CECILY. What, that thing?


CONRAD. Yes, its a kind of a closet.


CECILY. Well, I wont object to going into a closet to serve you, Conrad.


CONRAD. I don't know how I shall get out, unless I lie down and creep out of
it, like a shrimp out of a lobster-shell. Here I come. (He gets out of the
cuirass and dresses up Cecily.) I don't see but you make as good a soldier as I
did. You will follow as soon as you get rid of the lieutenant and his guards?


CECILY. Aye, never fear me.


CONRAD. I don't: for if they can keep a woman away from the pretty fellow she
loves, they must have found out a new system of politics. Good bye, Cecily. I
hope they will pursue me with cuirassiers only. Exit Conrad.


CECILY. I hope he will get clear. Poor fellow! he has had a tedious time of it
here. I Will sing a bit of a song, to pass away time, while I Am in my cage.

SONG.
Come all ye pretty maidens,
And listen unto me;
I Will tell ye of a lovyier,
That left his faithful she --
No, hang that! it is too dismal; I will not sing that. Let me see -- aye -- now
for a merry stave.

There lived in Altdorf city fair,
A maiden blythe and free;
In crow-black ringlets fell her hair,
And beautiful was she.
She was loved by a young man,
Who was a mountaineer;
Who came to an untimely end,
As I shall make Appear.
O dear! this is worse than the other. It puts me in mind of poor Conrad, who, I
verily believe, will be hanged. --


Enter LIEUTENANT and GUARDS. They march up to Cecily. LIEUTENANT. Halt! Well,
rascal, why don't you challenge? Who have we here?


CECILY. Do'n't be angry, Sir, it is only I; -- got out of your closet into
Conrad's.


LIEUTENANT. O ho! so the rascal has deserted. Order a party of horse to scour
the suburbs, and bring in all the fast-day-looking fellows they find. I have
got you though, my pretty lass. Come along -- I Will take care of you.


CECILY. Why, you don't press women, do you? Exeunt.


SCENE FOURTH.
The Governor's Palace. Enter GESLER, giving Orders to some of his followers.
GESLER. See instant execution done upon him.
We'll teach the rogues to mutiny and growl.
There, where he did refuse to bow his head,
There be he hung. We'll see the execution.

PORTIA (without.) I will have way! who shall oppose my sorrows?


Enter PORTIA. GESLER. Whence this intrusion?


PORTIA. It Is Grief's privilege.

Where is the place that Grief and Pain intrude not?
I am the most unhappy wife of Tell;
Never unhappy in that name 'till now.
Thou have, with power usurped, doomed him to death.
Beware of what thou do. Thou may, one day,
Have need of such a man as William Tell;
To moderate the fury of thy foes; --
When Switzers, in remembrance of his death,
Will tear thee limb from limb, nor heed thy cries. --
O pardon what I Have said! -- heed not my words --
I am distract with woe. O pity! pity! --
This morning saw me most supremely blessed --
The best of husbands, and my little boy --
Who now shall guide, shall guard, his helpless youth! --

Enter LIEUTENANT. LIEUTENANT. Albert is slain! The emperor is slain!


GESLER. What say thou man? Art mad?


PORTIA. Now praised be heaven!


LIEUTENANT. An Austrian trooper even now arrived;
His horse's sides all bathed in foam and gore, --
With desperate spurring; and he bade me say
The emperor has fallen by vile assassins.

GESLER. Where is the army?


LIEUTENANT. They have stopped, amazed;
What their resolves he knows not.

GESLER. Who commands?


LIEUTENANT. Leopold of Austria.


GESLER. Stop the execution -- Exit Lieut.
Lady, we'll show thee that we can have mercy. --
Curses light on them! -- We are merciful. --
Yet Tell has much provoked us, gentle dame. --
But we will pass it by. -- We bear no malice.

PORTIA. I will esteem, and will report it so;
And take no note of changing circumstance.

GESLER. 'Twere better for thee not! -- thou dare not think
That we do fear to lead him to his death!

PORTIA. I will not think so.


GESLER. Ha! by heaven, the slaves
Will so interpret. -- Curse them! -- Hark thee, woman,
Hye thee to thy husband. Tell him to know us
For a kind master; merciful and just. --

PORTIA. Master! -- nay, pardon me, I will be thankful.


GESLER. But he must somewhat do to pleasure us. --
If we too easily do set him free
It will be said we feared: -- it might be thought so.
Now, forasmuch as we have often heard
Of William's archery, he must comply,
And set himself to make some sport for us:
And this shall be the manner. Near the pole,
Where William did refuse to bow his head,
We will erect a stake; there bind the boy,
Thy son; and on his head an apple place;
Which William, with his arrow, shall remove; --
The boy unhurt; -- and Liberty reward him.

PORTIA. O! hear you this ye heavens? Is this your mercy?
Monster accursed! with nature thus to sport;
Hoping to make the father wound the son. --
O! as thou had a mother, pity me! --
O! as thou art a father, pity Tell! --
Revoke thy sentence! -- Draw not on thy name,
The never-dying curses of mankind! --
Mock not with Mercy's name! --

GESLER. Hence with these clamours!
We will hear no more! -- By heaven it shall be so!
Provoke me not, or Tell shall surely die: --
Aye, and the youngster too. Away! be wise,
And lead thy husband to comply in time. Exit.

PORTIA. O hold my brain! Sure this is woe's extreme!
The pinnacle of mortal wretchedness!
My husband, and my child! -- Methinks I see
The fatal arrow launched! -- It strikes my boy! --
It Is buried in his brain! -- Hold William! --
Ha! let me fly this fever of the mind;
Nor add unto my wretched husband's woes! --
Power omnipotent! who hat'st injustice,
Wing, wing thy lightnings to this tyrant's brow;
And vindicate the majesty of Nature! Exit.

SCENE FIFTH.
The Mountains, a Water-Fall, and a distant View of a Part of the Lake. Enter
WALTER, meeting ARNOLD MELCHTHAL and BOWMEN. WALTER. Joy, joy to Switzerland!
The tyrant's dead!
Even in the sight of all his numerous host,
A single dagger laid proud Albert low!

ARNOLD. Who did the glorious deed?


WALTER. One who deserves
No praises for the act; for private injury
Prompted to the blow: young John of Hapsburgh,
Nephew to the tyrant. Albert did keep
Possession of his signories; and John,
In dark revenge, has planned this timely death.

ARNOLD. The praise is due to wonder-working heaven.


SONG.
ARNOLD. While man, with high-wrought impious pride,
Defies the will of heaven, and Nature's right;
The avenging bolt is launched, though undescried,
Which hurls the wretch to everlasting night.

Enter on one side WERNER with PIKEMEN, and RHODOLPHA with MAIDENS on the
other. RHODOLPHA. Gesler has seized on Tell, and threatens death.


WERNER. The death of Albert will be William's safety.
Proud Gesler dares not practi^e on his life,
Unless he has an Austrian army 'round him.

RHODOLPHA. They say that Leopold leads the army on.


WERNER. It Is well, for he does lead them to defeat.
We'll teach these Austrian slaves that full as dear
To Switzers is the barren pine-clad rock,
The cataract's roar, the whirlwind's thundering gust,
The humble cot and honest poverty,
As are to other men, in milder climes,
The endless-varied gifts of Art and Nature.

TRIO. RHODOLPHA, ARNOLD, and 1st BOWMAN. [Altered from Goldsmith.] Dear is the
homely cot, and dear the shed,
To which the soul conforms;
And dear to us the hill, whose snow-crown'd head
Uplifts us to the storms.
The child, if frighted with the din of war,
Or other sounds molest, --
The louder breaks the thunder on his ear,
Clings closer to the breast.
So to the Swiss, the mountain-torrent's roar,
The sweepy whirlwind's ills,
The thunder, echoing from the lake's crag'd shore,
But bind him to his hills. CHORUS OF THE WHOLE.
Dear is the homely cot, and dear the shed,
To which the soul conforms;
And dear to us the hill, whose snow-crown'd head
Upbears us to the storms.
END OF ACT SECOND.
ACT THIRD.
SCENE FIRST.
The Castle, Pole, etc. A Stake for binding the Boy. An elevated Seat for
GESLER. Guards, Burghers, etc. WALTER FURST and WERNER STAFFACH, (disguised)
among the Burghers. WALTER. BE cautious, Werner, and elude suspicion.


WERNER. Will Tell accept the tyrant's cursed conditions?


WALTER. I know not, whether, trusting to his skill,
Or what deep purpose in his mind is hidden;
But William has accepted Gesler's terms;
And, even now, the trial does come on.

WERNER. Inhuman villain! versed in cruelty,
He knows how much the tortures of the mind
Exceed all bodily pains; and thus contrives
To place Humanity's most tender feelings
Upon a rack of exquisite invention.
There will he sit on high, in fiend-like state,
To watch brave William's face, in hopes to see
Nature's fine workings in the father's soul;
Perhaps, in hopes to make the wretched sire,
The executioner of his harmless boy.

WALTER. O how my heart bleeds for thee, valiant Tell!
But I do know thy firmness. Thou have friends;
And if thy life this day is taken, O Tell!
More than one patriot's soul will wing its way;
Nor shall they unattended leave the world.

WERNER. Gesler is coming; let us wait the event. They retire.


Enter GESLER and Attendants; he seats himself. LIEUTENANT with the Guards.
GESLER. Bring forth the boy, and bind him to the stake.
I much do fear that we do err in this: --
Thus lightly passing over seditious crimes:
But Switzerland in this shall mark our mercy.
(During this the boy is bound.) Bring forth your prisoner.

Enter TELL in chains, guarded: PORTIA following. PORTIA. Oh, do not William!
rather suffer death
Than point thy arrow against thy guiltless boy!
O, God of heaven! what piteous sight is this!
To see yon innocent, helpless victim bound
To the murderous stake! -- Nay, William, never, never --

GESLER. Hence with that clamorous woman! she disturbs us.


PORTIA. I will not hence! I can defy thy force!
I reign supreme the queen of human sorrows!
Do I disturb thee, monster, by my presence?
O, it is well! I will be ever with thee;
By day, by night, I Will haunt thee with my curses!
Ay! I will strew thy couch all over with curses!
And over thy pillow they shall hang like fogs,
Shedding upon thy head foul blasts and mildews!

TELL. Retire, my Portia! -- let thy husband beg it!
Put confidence in me, and calm thy soul.
If thou do stay, my hand may lose its firmness;
And thou shall be the murderer of thy son.
Put faith in me.

BOY. My father will not hurt me.


PORTIA. I will obey my husband. (Turns and looks at the boy.) Oh, my child!
Exit.


GESLER. It Is well thou do comply in this, proud Tell;
And thy compliance is the price of life.
(Tell's chains are removed.) The apple clean removed, and boy unhurt,
Thou have thy liberty. So far our mercy.
But if thou do, for safety of thy life,
Draw innocent blood from yonder helpless child;
That were a crime so great, we could not pardon.
The boy, but injured, thou shall surely die.

TELL. What mockery is this? -- But hold thee Tell --
This is nor time, nor place, for wordy war.
Give to my hand my never-failing bow,
And let me from my quiver choose the shaft,
That bears the fate of thousands on its point.
(Tell selects two arrows, fixing one in his belt. The Lieutenant places the
apple.) Now heaven in mercy speed the shaft aright! (Shoots.)
How fares the boy?

GESLER. Curse on his steady aim!
(A general shout.) Unbind the child and give him to his father.

TELL (embraces the boy.) Now, God be praised, it is so far over and well!
But mark me, Gesler, I Will be plain with thee;
Showing, how insecure injustice is.
If I had missed my aim, or hurt my boy,
This arrow should have cleft thy heart in twain.

Enter PORTIA. PORTIA (speaks entering.) Where is my child? -- O give him to my
arms!
It is -- it is -- too much! -- Too much for speech --
(Embraces him.) The pent-up tears, which almost burst my brain,
Rush forth, and choke the accents of my joy!

(Walter and Werner pass by Tell, speaking aside, during the last lines, and
exeunt.) TELL. Portia, lead hence the boy.


PORTIA. My child! my child!


Exit with the boy. TELL. I claim my liberty.


Enter an OFFICER. OFFICER. Leopold's at hand!
We can descry his signals from the hills.

TELL. I do demand fulfillment of conditions.


GESLER. Leopold at hand! why, ay, my friends, that is well!
Bind Tell again. (They seize him.)

TELL. Tyrant!


GESLER. It Is vain to talk;
The Duke of Austria now decides thy fate.
Lieutenant, order straight a bark prepared. --
I Will cross the lake and join the Austrian army;
Thy task shall be to awe the citizens.
Yet of their loyalty I make no doubt,
When Tell shall be removed. He goes with me.
I Will lodge him safe at Kussnacht. Quick, dispatch!
Exit Lieutenant. Thou art a marksman, Tell, but I shall show
That I can better hit my mark than thou can. Exit.

TELL. Such ever are the promises of tyrants;
Such is their faith, such their respect for truth.
O Switzerland! I more lament for thee,
More feel thy woes, than ought can hap to Tell.
Yet, well I know thou will not basely bow
To Austria's yoke. No, thou will bravely struggle!
In my last moments, I shall most regret,
That I must not partake the glorious strife. Exit guarded.

SCENE SECOND.
The Mountains -- Violent Storm, Wind, Rain and Thunder. After the Storm has
abated enter ARNOLD MELCHTHAL. SONG.
ARNOLD. Hark! from the mountain's awful head,
To strangers' hearts inspiring dread,
The genius of our hills in thunder speaks!
"Switzers, to arms! to arms! arise!"
"To arms!" each hollow cave replies.
"To arms! to arms!" from every echo breaks.

ARNOLD. How terrible the blast swept over the lake!
Though long conversant with the ways of Nature,
In this, her sporting-place, yet never saw I
So sudden or so forcible convulsion.
With what a sweepy torrent rushed the wind
Down yonder mountain's side! Trees from the earth
Dragged, or whirled like straws, to gambol in the air,
Sunder'd their sinewy roots, or only serving
To tear away the rocks whereon they grew,
And magnify the ruin. Sure, methinks,
The genius of our hills, in thunders, thus
Proclaims impatience of these foreign arms,
And calls upon his sons to do him vengeance.
Enter RHODOLPHA.
SONG.
RHODOLPHA. Haste, my Maidens, haste with me!
The genius of the storm is past; --
Exhausted by the whirlwind blast,
He murmuring rolls afar, to sport upon the sea.
Haste, my Maidens, haste away!
Let us to the mountain's brow,
Brushing rain-drops from each bough:
Pleasant is the sunshine upon a rainy day.

Enter MAIDENS with Bows, etc. RHODOLPHA. Arnold, well met. Where lies the
Austrian force?


ARNOLD. Maiden, we may, on yonder distant hills,
Observe their signals. On the rocks around,
Our men impatient wait the war's direction.
Here comes your honored father from the town.

Enter WALTER FURST. WALTER. Well met, my children, I do bring you news.
William, with wondrous archery, did cleave
The apple from the stripling's head. And now
His purpose is immediately to arm.
Has Werner yet returned?

ARNOLD. He has not, Sir.


RHODOLPHA. I see him now come bounding over yon rocks*
From the margin of the lake. Behold his haste.

WALTER. I parted with him, at the city gate,
To avoid the notice of the Austrian guard.

Enter WERNER STAFFACH. WERNER. Oh glorious, oh immortal, matchless, deed!
He comes this way -- The tyrant Gesler's slain!

WALTER. Who comes this way?


RHODOLPHA. By whom did Gesler fall?


WERNER. Pardon me, friends, I cannot speak in method --
'Twas Tell that slew him -- here upon the lake --

WALTER. Tell! why, we left him --

WERNER. True -- I say no more
Than that I saw -- and scarcely that for joy. --
The sudden storm did stay me on you cliff
Which overhangs the lake. Thence, as I mused,
Viewing with wondering eye the windy war,
And marked how rude the angry wave beneath
Dashed his white head upon the scornful rock,
I saw a boat approach, driven by the wind,
And tossed among the waves, nor helmsman had she.
Proudly the waters bore her on, and soon the craggs
Had pierced her sides, and dashed her to the deep. --
But then I saw the men within the boat
In earnest treaty with a prisoner.
They doff'd his chains; he sprang unto the helm;
The bark obeyed him, and he braved the seas. --
'Twas Tell -- I knew him by his gallant mien!

WALTER. O, curse on Gesler! then he did deceive him.


WERNER. I now knew Gesler: pale the tyrant sat,
With eye aghast, viewing the warring elements;
And quaking round him sat his Austrian guard.
Soon came the bark to land; when, with a spring,
(Seizing an Austrian's cross-bow in the leap)
Tell touched the shore. The action launched the boat:
And instant from the bow an arrow flew;
Deep buried in the astonished tyrant's heart.
Oh! 'twas a wondrous deed, none else had done it!

RHODOLPHA. Behold! he comes; the glorious patriot comes!
Meet him, ye Maidens, with a song of triumph!

SONG.
RHODOLPHA. He comes! he comes! the victor comes,
Who conquers in his country's cause;
Guiltless he comes, with glory crowned,
And foes shall greet him with applause.

CHORUS. He comes! etc.

ARNOLD. Not so the bloodstain'd hero, he
Who murders but to gain a name:
Destruction's paths are th^se he seeks,
And curses waft him to his fame.

CHORUS. He comes! etc.

Enter TELL. Bowmen and Pikemen enter from several parts. TELL. Now cease your
sounds of soothing melody;
For we must tune our souls to death and discord.
Let us forswear all notes but those that flow
From clanging arms, stout strokes, and twanging bows,
'Till victory is ours, and Switzers free.
Albert is dead; the tyrant Gesler slain: --
Now is the smiling moment of our fortunes:
Now let us seize, or it is forever flown.
The Austrian troops already are astonished,
And want but good excuse to turn their backs. --
What though their numbers three times treble ours?
'Twill but ensure more glory to each man --
When he shall bare his arm and show his son,
"Here fell an Austrian's sabre -- but I slew him!"
Say, countrymen, when shall we rout these slaves?

WALTER. Even now.


ALL. Now, now!


TELL. And who shall lead the war?


WALTER. Who but thyself?


ALL. Tell! Tell! brave William Tell!


TELL. It Is fit the chiefs of Schweitz and Underwalden,
And thou the venerable chief of Uri,
Should hold an equal share of all command,
All counsel. But for this day's exigence,
I do your confidence accept with thanks. --
Come! let us rather lead on Time than follow!
Some one among us must surprise the town;
The Austrian arms in sight, they feel secure; --
This will give 'vantage to the ready burghers,
Who straight must issue forth and join our force.

WALTER. It Is ordered well.


RHODOLPHA. O leave to me the task,
With these, my merry Maids, to take the town.

TELL. Now, by the virtues of my wife, I swear,
I like thy spirit, damsel, and thou shall!
But we must send some troops, in case of ill,
To yield assistance, or to bring thee off.

ARNOLD. That post be mine. The duty done, I Will lead
The armed burghers out to join the battle.

TELL. So be it, gallant Melchthal. And I pray,
Find out my drooping wife, and cheer her spirit. --
Tell her that I am well -- that Gesler's dead --
That Switzerland is free! Now let us on.
O, my brave countrymen! it joys my heart
To have the leading on of men like you.
Bend your tough bows, ye archers, draw the cords,
'Till the barb'd steel does touch the stubborn yew.
It Is for our rights we fight, our country, and our laws!

Exeunt. (Rhodolpha and Arnold remain. Maidens, Bowmen, etc.) DUET. RHODOLPHA.
In storied page where shall we find
A man so great as Tell?
Where shall we look the world around,
For one whose deeds excel?

ARNOLD. Shall we in cities look and courts?
'Midst noblemen and kings?
Nature's true worth can never be found
In artificial things.
BOTH. O no, true worth is only found
Where Liberty does dwell*
Where none are lords, and none are slaves,
There look to find a Tell.

Exeunt. SCENE THIRD.
The Castle, Pole, Stake, etc. -- A Chair placed in the Center of the Stage,
upper end. Enter LIEUTENANT and BURGOMASTER, CONRAD with Guards. LIEUTENANT. If
you please, Sir, although the rascal was a volunteer, you shall set in judgment
on him, because, he is a native; and we must keep terms with the burghers a
while longer. You condemn him, and I Will see him shot.


CONRAD. Yes, they will do my business between them. Indeed, gentlemen, you give
yourselves too much trouble on any account.


BURGOMASTER. Well, since you will have it so, I will sit in the judgment seat.
But I fear my tender mercy will prevent me from doing justice. (Sits.) Come
hither, rascal! I see halter in your face.


CONRAD. It Is very much at your honor's service.


BURGOMASTER. You have a gallows countenance. You are the sentinel that
suffered me to be insulted this morning.


CONRAD. I thought your worship was big enough to take care of yourself.


BURGOMASTER. What! does the scoundrel speak?


CONRAD. Why, I Am not put here to cry "Bow;" am I?


BURGOMASTER. The villain is too light to be hung; his weight would never draw
a noose tight enough for suffocation. And, as for burning, 'twould be too
merciful -- 'twould be over in an instant -- he would blaze up, and go out like a
whiff of straw. Therefore I sentence him to be shot through with arrows. Choose
your best archers; for a common marksman would never hit him.


CONRAD. What Is all this for? Nobody has accused me yet. I think my trial
begins at the end -- condemnation.


LIEUTENANT. If it please your worship, we are a little out of form. Let me
begin by declaring his crime. May it please your worship, this rascal --


CONRAD. My name is Conrad Steinhart.


LIEUTENANT. This rascal is a deserter -- He cannot deny it -- He was taken in
the fact. Therefore, in the emperor's name, I demand judgment.


BURGOMASTER. You cannot deny it, rascal; for you was taken in the fact.


CONRAD. I do deny it. You want to shoot me, because, I would not help you out
of the mud, this morning. And you want me shot, that you may have Cecily all to
yourself. Why don't you examine my witnesses? Send for Cecily.


LIEUTENANT. What have we to do with Cecily?


CONRAD. That Is more than I know. I have to do with her though: so, send for
her.


LIEUTENANT. Where is she?


CONRAD. In your closet, I suppose.


LIEUTENANT (aside.) I have taken better care of her this time, my good fellow.
(Sees her.) The Devil!

Enter CECILY. CECILY. O, Conrad! have I found you again? (Seeing Lieutenant.)
So, my fine gentleman, you're here, are you? You thought I was safe enough,
because you locked me up in a two-pair-of-stairs-bed-room. --


CONRAD. Bed-room! Cecily?


CECILY. Aye, that he did. He thought the windows were too high; but, I
fackins, let me alone for that -- ha, ha, ha! Pray, did you ever hear of such a
thing as tying the sheets together, and letting oneself down? -- Ha, ha, ha! --
But, what are you doing here, Conrad?


CONRAD. I Am not likely to do much, Cecily; but I Am afraid I Am about to suffer.


CECILY. Oh, the goodness! the marcies! Why, they are not going to kill you?
What will become of me? What will become of me? O, O, O!


BURGOMASTER. Fellow! you have been condemned, found guilty, and tried. What
have you to say against being immediately shot?


CONRAD. I hope your worship don't think of such a thing -- I have a great deal
to say, and a great deal to do -- I cannot possibly think of dying today --


LIEUTENANT. Then you shall die without thinking, you dog. Bind him to the
stake. Archers, prepare.


(They bind Conrad, he talking to them.) CONRAD. Gentlemen -- good gentlemen!
-- gentlemen soldiers! -- comrades! -- Why need you tie me? -- You see I cannot
get away. You are all around me. -- Since I must be shot, let me have a place
to move in. -- It Is more honorable to hit a bird on the wing, than a poor
devil tied to a stake --


CECILY. O, O, O! Have all my prospects come to this? Am I never to be married?
Never to be one of the virgins? O, O, O!


BURGOMASTER. Take away that noisy woman.


CECILY. You sha'n't take me away -- I wo'n't go. Poor Conrad! since you must
be shot, I Will stay and see the ceremony -- It Is the last kind office I can do
you.


CONRAD. Don't kill me, Cecily! Your sorrow is too moving! I feel as if a
little thing would make me cry.


LIEUTENANT. No more of this blubbering. Archers, take aim.


CONRAD. A little farther off, gentlemen, if you please -- A little farther off
-- You call yourselves marksmen -- Consider your own reputations, if you will
not consider my feelings -- Where Is the honor in hitting a poor fellow when
the ends of your crossbows almost touch his teeth? --


LIEUTENANT. Take aim!


(As the guard prepare to shoot, a loud huzza is heard; they turn affrighted; a
flight of arrows pass over the Stage, some falling on it. Enter RHODOLPHA and
MAIDENS; the Austrians fly. Enter BOWMEN; they seize the Lieutenant and
Burgomaster.) CONRAD. Whiz! whirr! how the arrows fly about my ears! I think
I Am as likely to be shot by one side as the other. Do, Mrs. Rhodolpha, have me
untied.


RHODOLPHA. What, my friend Conrad, faithful to your post?


CONRAD. They Have only changed it to a stake, Ma'am. (They unbind him.) Thank
you. -- I Have had a narrow squeak of it. -- It was all your fault, Ma'am, you
persuaded me to run away; but you came in the nick. -- Suppose we were to tie
these two good-natured gentlemen to the stake. I don't know but I might hit the
biggest myself.


RHODOLPHA. That they deserve it well, I do believe;
But we, at present, have no time to try them.

CONRAD. O, it is soon done. They have just been teaching me the way to dispatch
business. "You Have a damned hanging look -- You cannot deny it -- Tie him to the
stake -- Take aim." -- And it is all over.


Enter ARNOLD MELCHTHAL. ARNOLD. The castle is our own, the burghers armed,
And all goes well. Success was never more full!

RHODOLPHA. Lead off the prisoners. See them well secured;
But treat them with humanity.
(Lieutenant and Burgomaster are led off guarded.) Now let us on, and lead the
burghers forth
To second valiant Tell. We have yet to do
A world of business, ere the nightshade falls.

CONRAD. Give me but good sword, buckler, and helmet -- I Will excuse the cuirass
-- and if I don't show you that my life is worth saving, may I never see Dapple
an ambassador! Never see Cecily one of the virgins! or myself a bowl-man again.


SONG.
CECILY. Good mistress, kind lady, my thanks receive,
I Am still your debtor, as long as I live,
For a gift, the best that mortal can give,
A husband that is honest and true.
We merrily follow, lead you the way; --
And grateful poor Cecily still shall pray,
And offer her wishes by night and by day,
For one who is worthy of you.
Right comely in person, and pure in mind,
A friend to his country, and all mankind;
Such, such is the helpmate Rhodolpha should find;
Each aiding the other through life;
Instructing and blessing the poor around,
Till want on our mountains no more is found;
Each Switzer, with true equality crowned,
Shall bless and be blessed with a wife.

ARNOLD. Soon shall the affrighting trumpet cease its blast;
And Peace sit smiling on our hills sublime.
Then shall the tender maid, instead of arms,
Bear rosy wreaths, to entwine the wrestler's brow,
Or rustic victor in the sportive race:
Then, joining hand in hand, the blade scarce bending
To your tripping steps, around him featly dance,
Like elves, by moonlight, on the dewy lawn.
GLEE. RHODOLPHA, ARNOLD, AND CECILY. Come, my Maidens, haste away!
Finish, as begun, the day.
Then shall Peace lead Joy along,
"Follow, follow," be the song.
Dance around, linked hand in hand;
Switzers! this is Freedom's land.
Then aside our bows be laid;
Blythe the youth shall meet the maid;
Health's bright glow, in every face,
Virtue's brow, and Freedom's grace.
Come, my merry maids, away!
Finish well this glorious day.
Come, my Maidens, haste away!
Finish, as begun, the day.
Then shall Peace lead Joy along,
"Follow, follow," be the song.
Dance around, linked hand in hand;
Switzers! this is Freedom's land.
Exeunt.
SCENE FOURTH.
The Field of Battle, surrounded by Mountains -- Alarms -- Trumpets. Enter
LEOPOLD, Duke of Austria, attended. LEOPOLD. Curse on their archery! There Is
not a shaft
Falls guiltless of a gallant Austrian's death.
Order the horsemen make another charge;
And rather stake their steeds upon the crags,
Than thus stand harmless butts for cross-bow shot. --
Already, are the horses mainly wounded. --
They madly paw the ground, or, all impatient,
Heedless of the rein, they whirl their helpless
Riders round the field, or hurl them from their seats. --
One effort more. Sound trumpets to the charge!
Strike up, ye drums! for Austrians have forgot
The valiant spirit of their ancestry.
Remember whom you have to deal withal;
Undisciplined, unwarlike mountaineers.
O! never be it said, we fled before them. --
For me, I swear, before you all this day,
I will not quit the field, until I Am borne
Upon the victor's car, or on the bier.
Beat drums! sound trumpets! Death or victory!

Exeunt. SCENE FIFTH.
Another Part of the Field -- Alarm -- Horns and Trumpets. Enter WALTER of Uri,
defending himself against numbers -- They press hard -- Horn sounds, and enter
RHODOLPHA and Maidens -- Austrians fly. RHODOLPHA. Art thou unhurt, my father?


WALTER. Yes, my child --
And, praised be heaven, I owe my life to thee!
Hot in pursuit, I left my men behind;
And found my error when it was too late.

RHODOLPHA. Altdorf is ours -- the burghers join the fight. --


WERNER. O, it is a glorious day! Brave William Tell
Scatters destruction wheresoe'er he moves! --
But for the valor of the Austrian duke,
Who, all on foot, bears terror on his sword,
And cheers in every part his fainting troops,
The fortunes of the day ere this were ours.
But still the scales hang doubtful.

RHODOLPHA. Let us on!
A weight, though small, will turn a trembling beam!

Exeunt. Alarm. Enter LEOPOLD and WERNER fighting -- WERNER retires fighting.
Re-enter LEOPOLD. LEOPOLD. 'Twas bravely fought, young man! Curse on my slaves!
In vain, I strive, in vain, add death to death,
And carry carnage through the affrighted field --
I am unseconded. Some man, or demon
In an human shape, spreads consternation
Wild, wherever he comes -- enacting wonders. --
My bravest veterans turn their backs, and fly,
A timorous flock, before him. Grant, kind heaven!
That, by his death, I may retrieve the field,
Or die beneath his sword! Alarm. Exit.

Enter CONRAD. CONRAD. Let me breathe. -- How the Burgomaster would sweat if he
had a little of this work. -- I think I Have scor'd a few of them. -- For any
thing I see to the contrary, I make as good a soldier as the best of them --
unless it be Tell: -- to be sure he does lay about him like a devil. -- There Is
the duke, too, pays away among our bowmen, whenever he can come at them. --
I Will take another touch -- It Is nothing to be shot at when one has room to move
about; but to be tied to a stake -- O! my blood curdles at the thought. -- Now
for a little more honor. -- By the mass, there is the duke. -- Too much honor
is dangerous to honesty -- 'ware honesty. Exit running.


A Party of Swiss retire across the Stage, pursued by LEOPOLD. He stops.
LEOPOLD. I but exhaust my strength in unavailing
Slaughter. In vain I seek this peasant Mars:
He moves a rapid whirlwind over the field.
The tumult this way comes -- By heaven he comes!
The lion this way comes, his prey pursuing.
(Enter Austrians, as pursued by Tell. Leopold attempts to rally them in vain.)
Turn, cowards! -- Dastard hinds! -- Flight has no safety. --
(Kills one.) The coward finds a foe wherever he turns.

Enter TELL. TELL. I thank thee; for, in truth, my arm is weary.


LEOPOLD. Thou will have need of all thy manly vigor
To reap the glory yet reserved for thee;
Or guard the harvest thou have gathered in,
So gallantly, today. Now for the prize: --
It Is Leopold, Duke of Austria, meets thy arm.

TELL. Thou do mistake me much, proud lord, to think
That love of glory brought me to the field.
O, no! the fame that springs from human woe,
Is, to republicans, but infamy.
This day I Have bathed my hands in Austrian blood;
But 'twas in self-defence alone I did it;
To save my country, and myself, from wrong.
Heaven is my witness, I had rather much
That every Austrian, who has fallen today,
Were safe at home, and crowned with happiness!

LEOPOLD. Ha! have thou such a mind? Sure thou art noble?


TELL. In Nature's scale, I Am noble as the noblest:
She made me man, and vice has never debased me.
Republicans no other nobles know!
Without a hope thy army is defeated.
My name is Tell. Surrender up thy sword,
And I will give thee honorable treatment;
Nay, send thee home, the friend of Switzerland.

LEOPOLD. I thank thee, Tell: But, were thou once removed,
The day for Austria might be yet retrieved. --
If not, the gallant men who died today,
Shall not seek other worlds without a leader.

TELL. Why, then, no further parley. We shall see
Who bears the stouter arm, or heavier sword,
The noble, or the man.

(They fight fiercely; Leopold appears to be wounded several times, and retires
still fighting off. Enter CONRAD as looking at them.) CONRAD. The lion and the
tiger are at it -- Well said lion -- well said tiger -- Well hit -- well put --
The tiger bleeds, the tiger bleeds -- Huzza -- Well --

(Whilst Conrad is engaged in viewing the combat, a heavy-armed Austrian
Cuirassier enters, and strikes him on the helmet, from behind. Conrad
recovers.) -- Thanks be to my headpiece! O you cowardly piece of clock-work!
-- strike a man behind! -- I Will crack your lobster-shell, and pull you out by
the heels. -- Strike a man -- (Fight; the Austrian retires.) Aye! you may as
well stand still -- I know the weight of your coat -- You might as well run
with a house on your back -- I Will unkennel you -- Strike a man, and never
challenge him! Exeunt, fighting.


Enter on one side TELL, with the Duke of Austria's feathers in his helm, his
sword drawn. On the other, WALTER, ARNOLD, RHODOLPHA, CONRAD, Maidens, Bowmen
and Pikemen. TELL. We will be proud; for Switzerland is free!
See ye, my friends, how gay my helmet looks?
We Have plucked a plume from Austria's crested cap;
And given, this day, a lesson unto tyrants?

ARNOLD. We hail thee, William, savior of thy country!


TELL. Not so, not so; there is not a man who fought,
And risk'd his life, this day, to save his country,
But does deserve as much as William Tell.
He did exert his all; did risk his all;
And I have done no more. Thank thee, Rhodolpha,
For thy gallant aid. Thank thee, brave Walter --
O! how the fire of youth shone in thy deeds,
Mocking the frosty honors of thy head!
And, valiant Arnold, I did view thy acts,
Which well became the lover of Rhodolpha.
To you I owe the safety of my wife;
The safety of my boy. But where is Werner?

WALTER. I found him sorely wounded on the field,
By Austria's Duke, and faint with loss of blood;
But since I learn not dangerous.

TELL. O, it is well!
It is an almost bloodless victory,
Upon our part. And those that died are blessed!
Enter PORTIA and BOY. If ought of good I Have done, here is my reward.
(Embraces them.) For this the patriot fights, for this he bleeds;
Security and peace with those he loves.

PORTIA. O! art thou safe? Unhurt? Have all the shafts
Of malice and of war, fallen bloodless round thee?
When I look back on this eventful day,
My mind is 'wilder'd 'midst the woes we have past.

(They retire up.) ARNOLD. If I have ought deserved, here let me look
For my reward.

RHODOLPHA. I do fulfill my promise. (Gives her hand.)


Enter CECILY. CONRAD. And here comes my reward. To be sure she is not of the
most delicate; -- yet, let me tell you, she is been in great demand today. And,
if a man is to judge of his merits by his misfortunes, I think I have gone
through as many perils as the best of you.


CECILY. O! Conrad, I Am glad I have found you -- I Have had a par'lous time
looking for you. There was no keeping clear of the Austrian soldiers.


CONRAD. Why, where are they?


CECILY. Why, don't you see them all about the field there? -- nasty, dead,
grum looking fellows -- I never could bear a dead man.


CONRAD. I Am very glad I was not killed for your sake, Cecily.


CECILY. Ah! a'n't you, Conrad?


TELL (advancing.) Thus, countrymen, by virtue, and by courage,
All foreign foes are driven from Switzerland.
Now let us guard against domestic faction.
Draw we our federal bands close and more close;
Our interest, happiness, and strength but one.
Let every man remember, private virtue
Is the true basis of all public good. --
Summon the fathers of our land to meet,
And delegate to them, in trust, our power.
Their's be the task to guard our happiness,
By wholesome laws: be it ours to reverence them.
Thus acting, we are safe from every foe,
And shall deserve eternal LIBERTY!

SONG.
TELL. When heaven pours blessings all around,
O! may mankind be grateful found,
And not reject the good!
In grateful thanks their thoughts arise;
Their laws, their rights, over all things prize,
And guard them with their blood.

ARNOLD MELCHTHAL. Ye youths, to Melchthal look and learn; --
It Is blessed reward see Virtue earn; --
In Folly's paths never rove:
Folly and Vice but lead to woe;
From Virtue purest pleasures flow,
Health, Liberty and Love.

RHODOLPHA. If foreign foes our land invade,
Like me, may each undaunted maid,
A patriot heart display:
Thus each address the youths who love --
"By deeds alone your virtue prove;
The price of worth I pay."

CECILY. Now war is over, and Conrad mine,
I Will make my baskets neat and fine,
Through Altdorf's streets to cry:
When Dapple's found, 'twill all be well,
We'll baskets, bowls and ladles sell --
Who Will buy our wares! -- who will buy!

CHORUS OF THE WHOLE. When heaven pours blessings all around,
O! may mankind be grateful found,
And not reject the good!
In grateful thanks their thoughts arise;
Their laws, their rights, over all things prize,
And guard them with their blood.



A BRIEF HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF SWITZERLAND; FROM THE DISSOLUTION OF THE ROMAN
EMPIRE, TO THE FINAL ESTABLISHMENT OF THE HELVETIC CONFEDERACY, BY THE BATTLE
OF SEMPACH.

A BRIEF HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF SWITZERLAND.
WHEN a man has made any particular transaction, or individual, the subject of
his pencil, or his pen, he becomes highly interested in every circumstance
connected with the favorite object. But, independent of feelings of this
class, which may, perhaps, be traced to vanity, every mind, fitted to conceive
an idea of man's true happiness, must dwell, with an admiration bordering upon
enthusiasm, on the scenery and history of Switzerland. The justly celebrated
traveller, Mr. Coxe, thus begins his first letter, after entering the Canton of
Shaffhausen: "I feel great delight in breathing the air of liberty: every
person here has apparently the mein of content and satisfaction. The
cleanliness of the houses, and of the people, is peculiarly striking; and I can
trace in all their manners, behavior and dress, some strong outlines which
distinguish this happy people from the neighboring nations."

"Of all the countries of Europe," says Voltaire in his Essai sur les moeurs et
l'Esprit des Nations, "that which has preserved the simplicity of the first
ages in the greatest degree, is Switzerland. If she had not thrown off the yoke
of Austria, she would have had no place in the history of the world; she would
have been confounded with the multitude of more fertile and opulent provinces,
which follow the fate of those kingdoms in which they are swallowed up. A
people attract no attention until they are independent. A lowering sky, a rocky
and ungrateful soil, mountains and precipices, are all that nature has given to
three fourths of this country. Notwithstanding which, they dispute the
sovereignty of these rocks, with the same fury, with which other men contend
for the possession of Naples or Asia Minor."

"Never did any people combat for their liberty so long, or so bravely, as the
Swiss. They triumphed over the Austrians in more than sixty battles; and,
probably, will long preserve their well-bought freedom. A country whose extent
is not too great, whose people are not too rich, and whose laws are dictated by
justice, ought to be free. Liberty changed even the face of nature in
Switzerland. The sterile soil became fruitful; the vine was planted upon the
rocks; the barren heaths cleared, and cultivated, by the hands of freemen,
became fertile."

"Equality, the natural heritage of man, still subsists in Switzerland."
"Simplicity, frugality, modesty, those preservatives of liberty, have, always,
been their portion. They support no army to defend their frontiers, or to
invade the rights of their neighbors; no fortresses to serve either against
enemies or citizens; no imposts burden the people. They support neither the
pride, nor the armies of a master. Their mountains are their ramparts, and
every citizen is a soldier to defend them."

There are reasons which render the history of that revolution, in which the
Swiss Cantons threw off the yoke of Austria, peculiarly interesting to
Americans. "The establishment of the Republics of Switzerland and Holland,"
says a learned and amiable author of our own country, "bears such a striking
analogy to that of the United States, in the causes which produced them, and in
the manner in which they were conducted, that without considering them merely
as illustrious precedents, they are deserving of attention in our enquiries
into the foundation of our own independence." He then proceeds to mention the
privileges and the charter rights, which they enjoyed under the empire; their
mild remonstrance to the Emperor Albert; their confederation, etc. "It is
worthy of remark, that the instrument of union among the Swiss (1315) begins in
the name of the people, like the constitution of the United States. The deed
runs thus: 'A cette cause nous le Paysans d'Ury, de Schewitz, et d'Underwalden
faisons ascavoir.' Leibnitz Codex dipl. 69, quoted by Ward in his Law of
Nations, vol. ii. p. 275." Dissertations, etc. by James Kent, professor of law
in Columbia College, New York.


Julius Caesar is the first author who takes notice of the Helvetic people, as
a nation. In the beginning of his commentaries, he mentions his war with them.
After being subdued by the Romans, they remained under their dominion, until
the empire was destroyed, and new kingdoms established on its ruins. When the
kingdom of Burgundy, of which Switzerland made a part, was divided, about the
end of the twelfth century, into several petty sovereignties, the Swiss found
themselves no longer united under one head. Some of the cities were imperial;
others were given, by Frederick Barbarossa, to the Count of Hapsburgh, from
whom the house of Austria is descended. But the priesthood seem to have seized
upon the greatest portion, which we find Histoire de la Confederation
Helvetique, etc. par Alexander Louis de Watteville, Haut commandant du
Munsterthal, etc. etc

Etat et Delices de la Suisse. Par Fouche.


was parcelled out among bishops, abbes, canons, abbesses, convents and
monasteries.

At the time when the greatest part of Helvetia was subject to the empire, the
inhabitants of Uri, Schweitz, and Underwalden, had long enjoyed the most
considerable privileges; particularly the right of being governed by their own
magistrates. The clergy, and many of the nobles, indeed, had fiefs and subjects
in those respective territories; and Uri received its governors from the
empire; Busching.
but the bulk of the people formed several communities, almost totally
independent. -- The chronicles of the nation carry the date of their liberty
very high. They say, that, in 829, the inhabitants of these Cantons went to the
succor of Italy, and fought under the banners of the Marquis Guidon Pusterla,
against the Saracens. They add, that Pope Gregory IV. after conferring on them
the title of Defenders of the Faith, obtained for them, from the Emperor Louis
le Debonnaire, the privilege of governing themselves, by their own laws. Such
was their situation at the death of Frederick II. in 1250. In 1251 the Cantons
of Zurich, Uri, and Schweitz, entered into a strict confederacy, to protect
themselves from the encroachments of the nobles and bishops, who, during the
interregnum of eighteen years, when Germany was without an emperor, endeavored
to extend their power and enslave the people. But even this confederacy was not
sufficient to defend them against these rapacious robbers; and Schweitz, Uri,
and Underwalden, were obliged to put themselves under the protection of
Rhodolph of Hapsburgh; who, in 1273, being chosen emperor, terminated the
interregnum.

The nobles, now, formally accused these three Cantons of rebellion, and of
demolishing their castles; but Rhodolph, who had himself to struggle with these
smaller tyrants, gave judgment in favor of the people. He received a small
revenue from these Cantons, and appointed a governor, who took cognizance of
all criminal causes. The rights, however, and privileges of the people, were
expressly reserved.

Rhodolph, some time after his accession to the Imperial throne, listened to
the ambitious schemes of his son Albert, who was desirous to form Helvetia into
a duchy. For this purpose, the emperor purchased the domains of several
abbeys, and other considerable fiefs in Switzerland, as well in the Canton of
Schweitz, as in the neighboring territories. The three Cantons, induced by the
great increase of power the emperor gained by these acquisitions, prudently
renewed their alliance, and obtained a confirmation of their privileges; which,
upon the death of Rhodolph, were again confirmed by his successor, Adolphus of
Nassau. But when Albert was afterward elected emperor, he refused to ratify
their rights, and endeavored to seize the absolute dominion of Switzerland.
With this design, he appointed one Gesler, or Grisler, to the government of
Uri; and one Landerberg, to that of Underwalden. They were ordered to reduce
the three Cantons, by corruption or force; and were fitted, by the baseness of
their minds, for the task.

These governors, not succeeding by the engines of corruption, among men who
knew that happiness consisted in virtue, and that without liberty, there could
be neither, employed every mode of cruelty and violence to subdue them; until
the irritated people leagued to throw off, by a generous effort, this
intolerable oppression.

It was under these circumstances that Werner Staffach, of Schweitz, Walter
Furst, of Uri, and Arnold Melchthal, of Underwalden, (men, says Voltaire, the
difficulty of pronouncing whose names has alone prevented their celebrity)
planned the famous revolution, which restored liberty to the three Cantons, and
laid the foundation of the Helvetic confederacy. Each of them entrusted three
friends with the scheme; and, as a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump, from
these twelve the whole of Uri, Schweitz, and Underwalden, were soon in a
ferment. While the conspiracy was yet forming, Gesler, the governor of Uri,
carrying his tyranny to a ridiculous extreme, caused one of his hats to be set
up on a pole, in the market square of Altdorf, and ordered all persons, under
pain of death, to salute it as a mark of obedience to the emperor. William Tell
openly refusing to yield this proof of slavish obedience, the governor
determined to make him feel the weight of his indignation. He condemned him to
be hung; and pardoned him, only on condition of his cleaving, with an arrow, at
a certain distance, 120 paces. Fouche, Etat et Delices, etc.
an apple placed on the head of his son. The trembling father drew, and was so
fortunate as to strike the apple, and leave the boy unhurt. Gesler, perceiving
a second arrow sticking in a part of Tell's garment, asked him what it was for?
"For thee," said the Swiss, "if the first had harmed my boy."

From the description which Mr. Keysler gives of the statue of Tell, in the
Arsenal at Berne, we may gather, at least, the notions of the Switzers
concerning the person of their favorite hero, and the dress which, either
through tradition, or other information, they assign to that early period. "At
the end of the hall is an excellent wooden image of the famous William Tell: he
is aiming at the apple on the head of his little son, who stands opposite to
him: the hands and eyes are admirably expressed. He appears to have been a tall
raw-boned man, with a very honest countenance; and, according to the fashion of
the times, one half of his coat is red, and the other black and yellow stripes,
alternately: his breeches and stockings are of one single piece; and an arrow
sticks in his coat, behind his head: the boy is laughing, as apprehending no
danger."

As the story of the apple is the only part of the history of this revolution
which has ever been questioned, I shall here insert that passage of Mr. Cox^,
in which he mentions this tale, and the reasons for and against believing it.

"Having re-embarked at Brunnen, we soon entered the third branch, or the lake
of Uri; the scenery of which is so grand and sublime, that its impression will
never be erased from my mind. Imagine to yourself a deep and narrow lake, about
nine miles in length, bordered on both sides with rocks uncommonly wild and
romantic, and, for the most part, perpendicular; with forests of beech and pine
growing down their sides, to the very edge of the water: indeed, the rocks are
so entirely steep and overhanging, that we scarcely observed more than four or
five places where we could have landed. Upon the highest point of the
Seelisburgh, we observed a small chapel that seemed inaccessible; and below it
the little village of Gruti, near which the three heroes of Switzerland (Furst,
Staffach, and Melchthal) are said to have taken reciprocal oaths of fidelity,
when they planned the famous revolution. On the opposite side appears the
chapel of William Tell; erected in honor of that hero, upon the very spot
where (it is said) he leaped from the boat, in which he was conveying, as a
prisoner, to Kussnacht, and shot the tyrant Gesler. It is built upon a rock
that projects into the lake under a hanging wood; a situation, amid scenes so
strikingly awful, as must strongly affect even the most dull and torpid
imagination! On the inside of this chapel, the several actions of William Tell
are coarsely painted. While we were viewing them, we observed the countenances
of our watermen glistening with exultation; and they related to us, with much
spirit and sensibility, the cruelties and tyranny of Gesler, governor of Uri,
and the intrepid behavior of their glorious deliverer. Indeed, I have
frequently remarked with pleasure, the national enthusiasm which so generally
prevails in this country; and have greatly admired the fire and animation with
which the people discourse of those famous men among their ancestors, to whom
they are indebted for that happy state of independence which they now enjoy.
This laudable spirit is continually supported and encouraged by the number of
statues, and other memorials, of the ancient Swiss heroes, which are so common
in every town and village throughout Switzerland. Among these, Tell is the most
distinguished, and he seems to be the peculiar favorite of the common people:
the reason is obvious, for his story partakes greatly of the mavelous.

A few years ago a treatise, entitled Fable Danoise, was published at Berne; in
which the author calls in question the history of William Tell. Though his
arguments in general are by no means conclusive, yet he mentions two
circumstances, which, if true, are convincing proofs, that much fiction is
interwoven with the whole account: for the author asserts that the incident of
Tell's shooting the apple from the head of his son, is not recorded by any of
the cotemporary historians, although they give the minutest accounts of the
governor's tyranny; and that the first writer who takes notice of it, is
Petermann Etterlin, of Lucerne, who lived in the latter end of the fifteenth
century, near two hundred years after the fact is supposed to have happened.
Besides, a story of the same kind is related in the Danish annals by Saxo
Grammaticus, with scarcely any difference but that of names: Herod, king of
Denmark, supplies the place of the governor of Uri; and Tocco that of William
Tell; and this event, which is said to have happened in 965, is attended also
with nearly the same incidents as those recorded in the Swiss account.
Nevertheless, it is far from being a necessary consequence, that, because the
authenticity of the story concerning the apple is liable to some doubts;
therefore, the whole tradition relating to Tell is fabulous. Neither is it a
proof against the reality of a fact, that it is not mentioned by any
cotemporary historians. The general history of William Tell is repeatedly
celebrated in several old German songs, so remarkable for their ancient dialect
and simplicity, as almost to raise the deeds they celebrate, above all
reasonable suspicion: add to this, the constant tradition of the country,
together with two chapels erected some centuries ago, in memory of his exploits.

The three Cantons were so much offended with the author for throwing any doubt
upon the exploits of their ancient hero, that they presented a remonstrance to
the sovereign council of Berne: and the pamphlet was publicly burnt at Uri. In
this instance, their national prejudices (if they really deserve that name)
become, in some measure, meritorious and respectable."

Be the story of the apple false or true, there appears to be no doubt that
Tell having been seized by Gesler, he intended lodging him in the castle of
Kussnacht; and did himself accompany the prisoner across the lake of Uri. This,
if the tale of the apple be true, must have been after having granted his life
on condition of the trial of his archery; when, as the Swiss historians say,
Gesler, being irritated by Tell's reply concerning the second arrow, determined
to make him finish his days in a dungeon. During their voyage, a sudden gust
arose, which agitated the waters of the lake, and rendered the boat totally
ungovernable in the hands of the Austrians. No one was calm but Tell. The boat
was driving upon the overhanging rocks which border the lake, and inevitable
death seemed to await all in her; when Gesler turned his attention to Tell, and
saw in him the only object of hope. With the baseness, which is a part of the
tyrant's character, he now begged his life of the injured man. Tell looked upon
his chains. They were instantly unlocked, and he, with that skill which the
unvitiated man will ever acquire while active to help himself and aid others,
equally secure upon the mountain's snowy brow, the valley of ice, or the bosom
of the lake, seizing the helm, and commanding his armed masters, guides the
boat to a part of the shore more accessible than the rest, and sheltered from
the blast. As they approached the place of landing, Tell secured the cross-bow
and arrow of one of the guard, and, watching his opportunity, leaped upon the
rocks, and, instantly turning, shot the governor dead; Some write that the
governor was slain after he had landed, and was proceeding to the castle; Tell,
having waited for him in a crooked road, and shot him as he passed. "In memory
of these two actions," says Fauche, "there are two chapels to be seen at this
day, one on the rocks upon which Tell leaped, and the other on the spot where
the governor fell."
then joining the conspirators, he animated them to an immediate execution of
their designs.

About the beginning of January, 1308, the people arose, seized the castles
without bloodshed, and by a moderation almost incredible in an irritated
people, a mark of virtue perhaps unexampled, the governors were peaceably
conducted to the frontiers and released; having no condition exacted from them
but simply an oath never to return to Switzerland. Thus four private men,
without wealth, or the advantages which at that time were annexed to birth, but
animated by a love of their country, and a just hatred against tyrants, were
the immortal founders of Helvetic liberty!

Albert immediately made preparations to attack the Cantons, and marched with
an army against them; but before entering their country he was assassinated by
his nephew, John of Hapsburgh, Duke of Suabia. The occasion of this
assassination, and the circumstances attending it, were as follow: -- Albert,
as guardian to his nephew, John of Hapsburgh, had taken possession of his
hereditary dominions in Switzerland, and refused, under various pretenses, to
deliver them up to him. At length, wearied with repeated and fruitless
solicitations, John entered into a conspiracy against the emperor, with
Rhodolph de Warth, Ulric de Palm, Walter de Eschenback, and Conrad de
Tagerfeld.

The emperor dined at Baden, in his way to Rheinfelden, a town in the circle of
Suabia, where the empress, his consort, had collected a considerable body of
troops, with which he purposed invading the three Cantons of Uri, Schweitz, and
Underwalden, to bend them to his yoke. Cotemporary historians, who have
recorded the minutest circumstances, in this whole transaction, relate, that
Albert was in high spirits during the repast; and, that his nephew again
entreating to be put in possession of his hereditary dominions, the emperor,
with an air of banter, placed a garland of flowers upon his head, adding, at
the same time, "This will be more suitable to you, for the present, than the
cares of a troublesome government." This taunt had such an effect upon the
young prince, that he burst into tears, flung away the flowers, and could not
be prevailed upon to sit down to the table.

After dinner, Albert continued his journey on horseback, accompanied by his
son Leopold, the conspirators, and his usual attendants; and came near the town
of Windish, in the Canton of Berne, to the Reuss, over which river passengers
were usually ferried upon a raft. The conspirators passed over first, and were
followed by Albert. As he was riding gently on, expecting his son Leopold, and
the remainder of his suite, he was suddenly beset by the assassins. One of them
seizing his horse's bridle, John of Hapsburgh reproached him for his injustice,
in detaining his dominions, and struck him on the neck with his sword; Rhodolph
de Warth wounded him in the side; and Ulric de Palm clove his head with a
sabre. In this condition they left him expiring upon the ground.

This assassination was committed the first of May, 1308, in the open day, and
in the sight of his son Leopold, and the rest of his court, who had not as yet
passed the river; and who, though witnesses to the murder, yet could not assist
the emperor. The field lies between the Aar and the Reuss, not far from the
junction of those two rivers; and the very spot, where he was massacred, is
marked by a convent, erected by his wife Elizabeth, and his daughter Agnes. The
place was called Koningsfelden, or Kingsfield; a name it retains to this day.
The remains of the emperor were buried in the convent of Witterling, from
whence they were afterward transported to Spire, and there interred. Coxe.


The assassins fled to the Cantons of Uri, Schweitz, and Underwalden, expecting
to find a sure asylum in a nation, which Albert was preparing to invade. But
the generous natives, detesting a crime of so atrocious a nature, although
committed upon the person of their greatest and most formidable enemy, refused
to protect the murderers: jealous, indeed, of their liberties, but too wise to
think that guilt would support them. Watteville.


In 1315, Leopold, Duke of Austria, marched against the confederate Cantons, at
the head of twenty thousand troops; and, endeavoring to force his way into
Schweitz, at the Straits of Morgaten, received a total defeat, from thirteen
hundred Swiss, who were posted upon the mountains. These brave republicans,
after having thrown the Austrians into disorder, by rolling down rocks from the
hills, descended, and pursued them with dreadful slaughter. A cotemporary
author says, that he saw Leopold return, after the combat, to Winterther, as
pale as death; and that the action was rather a massacre than a battle. If we
may believe cotemporary historians, the Swiss lost but fourteen men in this
memorable engagement, which insured their independence.

From the circumstance of this decisive engagement being fought in the Canton
of Schweitz, the other two Cantons, it is supposed, adopted the name of
Schweitz for the confederacy, which spread over the whole country that now
bears it, as the other Cantons joined the league. Thus the name of the union
serves to commemorate the victory by which their happiness was secured.

Some years after the battle of Morgaten, Lucerne joined the confederacy; and
this accession enabled it, in 1386, to resist all the efforts of a great and
implacable enemy. In that year, Leopold, Duke of Austria, invaded Switzerland
with a numerous army; when the combined troops gained a bloody victory at
Sempach, in which Leopold lost his life. The confederated Swiss were but one
thousand three hundred men, badly armed, and on foot. Their offensive weapons
were only their large swords and their halberts: for shields, they had only
pieces of wood tied to the arm, to ward off their enemies blows. In the
accounts of this battle, an instance of private valor is recorded, which would
have done honor even to a Grecian or a Roman name; and only requires the pen
of a Thucydides, or a Livy, to equal in fame the exploits of the most admired
heroes of antiquity. The Austrian army, far superior in number, was drawn up in
firm battalion, accoutred in heavy armor, and furnished with long pikes, which
they presented before them. The Swiss troops were led to the attack in the form
of a wedge, in order to open their way into the ranks of the enemy, and to
break the solidity of the battalion; one soldier being in front, two behind
him, then four more, and so on: such was the order in which this handful of men
courageously advanced upon the enemy. The Austrians continuing for some time
impenetrable, Arnold de Winkelreid, a native of Underwalden, devoted his life
to the service of his country. Rushing, alone, upon the enemy, he seized as
many pikes as he could grasp, presenting his breast to inevitable death: thus
opening the way for his countrymen to come within the Austrian pikes, and
inflaming their courage anew, they followed, and penetrated the battalion. Once
enabled to use their arms with effect, nothing could resist the Swiss, and the
overthrow of the Austrians was complete. They lost two thousand men, among whom
they numbered six hundred and seventy six gentlemen of the first families in
Germany.

Leopold himself might have escaped, when his troops first began to give way;
but, with a magnanimity worthy of a better cause, he determined, after having
been a witness to the total rout of his army, not to survive so ignominious a
day: accordingly, he rushed into the thickest of the enemy, and was slain. In
the arsenal of Lucerne is still preserved his armor, together with a large
quantity of cords; with which, according to tradition, he intended to have
bound the citizens.

Switzerland was the rock on which the house of Austria split, during more than
a century. Blinded with resentment against their former subjects, and anxious
to recover their lost domains in these parts, the several dukes led in person
considerable armies to subdue a nation, whose spirit was unconquerable; and to
obtain possession of a country, which, from its situation, was easily defended,
by a handful of men, against the most numerous troops. Within the period
abovementioned, they neglected several opportunities of aggrandizing
themselves in other parts; and, slighting what was more feasible, bent their
whole efforts to acquire what in its very nature was unattainable. The
consequence of this mistaken policy was, a continued succession of defeats,
attended with a prodigious expense, and the loss of their bravest troops: until
at length, convinced of their error, they totally relinquished an attempt, in
which they had expended so much fruitless blood and treasure. But although
several emperors of that house occasionally made alliances with the Swiss
Cantons, yet it was not till the treaty of Westphalia that their independence
was fully and finally acknowledged, by Ferdinand III. and the whole empire.

The government of Uri and Schweitz is entirely democratical, and nearly the
same. The supreme power resides in the people at large, who are divided into
several com^^^^ities, from which are chosen the councils of regency. In the
Lands-gemeind, or general assembly, the landamman, and the principal
magistrates, are elected; and every burgher, at the age of fourteen in the
Cantons of Uri and Underwalden, and of fifteen in Schweitz, has a right to
vote. The councils of regency in Uri and Schweitz consist each of six members,
and reside at the capital burghs. In this council the executive power is
vested, and from this body the principal magistrates are chosen.

These two Cantons contain, including their subjects, about fifty thousand
souls; and, in case of necessity, could furnish about twelve thousand militia.
"Such," says Mr. Coxe, "is the purity of manners and morals among these people,
as cannot easily be imagined by the inhabitants of great and opulent cities:
and I cannot reflect on that affectionate patriotism which so strongly attaches
them to their country, without calling to mind that beautiful description of
the Swiss peasant in Goldsmith's Traveller. --

"Dear is the shed to which his soul conforms,
"And dear that hill which lifts him to the storms:
"And as a child, when scaring sounds molest,
"Clings close and closer to the mother's breast;
"So the loud torrent and the whirlwind's roar,
"But bind him to his native mountains more."
While my mind turns away with disgust from the contemplation of those scenes
of vice and misery which great and opulent cities afford, it dwells with so
fond a delight among the cottages and hills of Switzerland, that it is with
reluctance I close this account of the events which established happiness, as
an inmate among them. To those whose feelings are like my own, I recommend
"Coxe's Switzerland;" (from which valuable work I have extracted the most
pleasing materials of the preceding essay) where will be found an animating and
accurate account of the soil, climate and appearance of this country, with the
manners, laws, and virtues of its inhabitants, dictated by philanthrophy, and
executed with taste.

FINIS.
ERRATA IN THE OPERA.
Page 10, line 7th, dele "enters" before "crying." Line 18th, for "pavers" read
"pavements"

Page 11, line 23d, for "or the other" read "and the other."

Page 64, scene third, after "stage" dele "upper end."

Page 65, line 3d, for "does" read "dares."

Page 71, scene fifth, before "O, it is a glorious day," for "Werner" read
"Walter."


