REFLECTIONS on DEATH by William Dodd L.L.D. late Chaplain to the Lord Bishop
of St. David's.

The sixth Edition corrected and enlarged with occasional Notes and
Illustrations

By G. Wright Esquire. Author of Solitary (...). Dust thou art and unto dust thou
must return.


PHILADELPHIA Printed by JACOB JOHNSON and Co. No. 117 Market Street. 1796

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE EARL OF BUTE, FIRST LORD OF HIS MAJESTY'S TREASURY,
KNIGHT OF THE MOST NOBLE ORDER OF THE GARTER, etc. etc.
MY LORD,
WHATEVER may be the execution of the little performance which I have the
honor to present to your lordship, it will derive some merit, I am persuaded,
in your lordship's sight, from the good meaning wherewith it was written, from
its suitableness to my profession, and from the importance of its subject.
Perhaps too, its author's undissembled respect for your lordship may give it
some additional value; for true respect, we are assured, can give value to the
smallest offerings from the hands of the poorest.

But, indeed, I did not know to whom I could, with greater propriety, inscribe
a work of this nature, than to a nobleman, whose regular life, and punctual
discharge of all the social duties must render Reflections on Death not
unpleasing; whose regard to works of literature has always been eminent and
consistent; and who, though continually employed in affairs of the highest
moment, has testified that regard by the most favorable attention to men of
science and learning.

From hence, my lord, we are encouraged to promise the fairest days to good
letters and good manners: -- They cannot but flourish under your discerning
eye, and the fostering patronage of our beloved MONARCH; in whose unsullied
virtues, while his people felicitate themselves, no grateful man can be
insensible of the honor, which redounds to the illustrious person, who had so
considerable a share in forming the royal mind to virtue; and inspiring it with
those great, just, and patriot sentiments, which have obtained to our
sovereign, from his subjects, that most honorable of all appellations, -- the
Good.

Happy in your PRINCE'S favor, my lord, and happy in the consciousness of your
own integrity, you will go on to deserve and to obtain the esteem and affection
of all men of science, of virtue, and religion. So will your name be placed
high in that temple of true glory, where the whispers of malevolence, and the
clamours of faction, shall never be heard: where envy, the unfailing shadow of
merit, shall never be permitted to enter: and where -- when that melancholy
hour is come, which no might nor greatness in mortality can delay -- that hour
in which you, my lord, shall be lost to your friends, to your country, to your
king, your monument shall proclaim the glorious truth, that You were a
principal instrument in putting an end to a war, uncommonly wide and extensive;
and of restoring peace to an exhausted and depopulated world.

I am, my lord, with the most respectful acknowledgments for this indulgence,
Your LORDSHIP'S Most obliged and devoted humble Servant, WILLIAM DODD.
Westham, Jan. 1, 1763.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THESE Reflections were first written with a design to be published in a small
volume proper to be given away by well-disposed persons at funerals, or on any
other solemn occasion. But the editors of the Christian's Magazine, supposing
they might be of some service to that useful and well-esteemed work, requested
the author first to print them there, and afterward to pursue his original
design. Accordingly, they were printed in separate chapters, and he has reason
to be satisfied with the reception they met with. His best prayers accompany
them in their present form, that they may be found useful to mankind.

REFLECTIONS ON DEATH.
CHAP. I.
-- To die -- to sleep --
No more: and by a sleep, to say, we end
The heart-ach, and the thousand natural shocks
That flesh is heir to: it is a consummation
Devoutly to be wished -- to die, to sleep --
To sleep! -- perchance to dream: aye, there is the rul^,
For in that sleep of death what dreams may come,
When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
Must give us pause: there is the respect
That makes calamity of so long life:
For who would bear the whips and scorns of times,
The oppressor's wrongs. the proud man's contumely,
The pangs of despised love. the law's delay,
The insolence of office, and the spurns
That patient merit of the unworthy takes --
But that the dread of something after death
(That undiscovered country, from whose bourne,
No traveller returns) puzzles the will,
And makes us rather bear the ills we have,
Than fly to others that we know not of.
SHAKESPEARE.
A FEW evenings ago, I was called to perform the last sad office to the sacred
remains of a departed friend and neighbor. Ministers who are often called to
attend the dying beds and funerals of the young and old* the rich and poor,
professors and profane, are best calculated, or at least best furnished with
materials, to enforce on all, the necessity of reflecting on death, and
preparing for it.


It is too commonly found, that a familiarity with death, and a frequent
recurrence of funerals, graves, and churchyards, serve to harden rather than
humanize the mind; and to deaden rather than excite those becoming reflections,
which such objects seem excellently calculated to produce. Hence the physician
enters, without the least emotion, the gloomy chambers of expiring life: the
undertaker handles without concern the clay-cold limbs: and the sexton whistles
unappalled, while his spade casts forth from the earth the mingled bones and
dust of his fellow creatures. See yonder maker of the dead man's bed,
The Sexton................
......... Poor wretch! he minds not
That soon some trusty brother of the trade,
Shall do for him what he has done for thousands.
BLAIR'S GRAVE.
And, alas! how often have I felt with indignant reluctance my wandering heart
engaged in other speculations, when called to minister at the grave, and to
consign to the tomb the ashes of my fellow creatures!

Yet nothing teaches like death: Wait the great teacher death.

Dr. YOUNG.
and though perhaps the business of life would grow torpid, and the strings of
activity be loosed, were men continually hanging over the meditation -- yet,
assuredly, no man should fail to keep the great object in view; and seasonably
to reflect that the important moment is coming, when he too must mingle with
his kindred clay; when he too must appear before God's awful judgment-feat;
when he too must be adjudged by a fixed, irrevocable, and eternal decree. It is
appointed unto men once to die, but after this the judgment. HEB. ix. 27.

This is one of the most awful texts in the sacred writings, and cannot be too
much insisted on and enforced, both from the pulpit and the press.




As I entered the churchyard, Where heaves the ^urf in many a mouldering heap:
where -- Each in his narrow cell forgotten laid, so many of my friends, my
neighbors, and my fellow creatures, lie mouldering in dust: -- struck with the
slow and solemn sound of the deep-toned bell, and particularly impressed with
the afflicting circumstances of his death, whose obsequies I was going to
perform, I found the involuntary tear rush from mine eyes, and the unbidden
sigh heave in my laboring bosom. The reader cannot but observe th^se
reflections are written in a similar style to Hervey's celebrated Meditations;
a style Dr. Dodd was peculiarly (...) of, and adopted particularly in the
pu^pit, as the most pleasing, affecting, and energetic.


And, "Oh Death, mighty conqueror, I could not forbear saying, in the silence
of unaffected meditation -- Oh Death, how terrible, how wonderful thou art!
Here I stand, full of life; health smiling on my cheek, and sparkling in my
eye; my active feet ready to bear me briskly along, and my hands prompt to
execute their appointed office: scenes of pleasing felicity are before me; the
comforts of domestic^ serenity dwell seemingly secure around me; and my busy
soul is planning future improvements of happiness and peace. -- But the moment
is coming, perhaps is near, when life's feeble pulse shall play no longer;
these eyes no more sparkle, nor this cheek glow with health; that, pale as the
shroud that invest me, and those closed to unclose and awaken no more on earth;
the feet shall decline their function, and the useless hands fall heavily down
by my side. Dr. Watts happily meditates on the dissolution of the body, in the
following lines: And must this body die,
This mortal frame decay?
And must these active limbs of mine,
Lie mouldering in the cl^y?
Corruption* earth, and worms
Shall but refine this flesh,
'Till my triumphant spirit comes
To put it on afresh.



Farewell then all the engaging and endearing scenes around me; farewell the
comforts of domestic peace: my much loved friend shall weep tenderly over me;
and my thinking, restless, busy soul at length find sweet repose, and be
anxious no more.

It is fixed: and all the powers of earth can neither arrest nor divert the
sure, unerring dart! but with consummate wisdom the great Lord of the world,
has wrapped up the important moment in impenetrable darkness from human view;
that from the cradle we might have the solemn object before us, and act as men,
because as men we must die!

Let me then not labor to divert the improving speculation, but advance still
nearer, and see, if I can learn, what it is to die!

To die! Oh you, my friends, amidst whose graves I now am wandering -- you, who
not long since, like me, trod this region of mortality, and drank the golden
day See Dr. Young's Night Thoughts, Night IV. line 144.
-- with you the bitterness of death is past; you have tasted what that is,
which so much perplexes the human thought, of which we all know so little, and
yet of which we all must know so much! Oh! could you inform me what it is to
di^, could you tell me what it is to breathe the last gasp; -- what are the
sensations of the last convulsion, of the last pang of dissolving nature! Oh
could you tell me how the soul issues from the lifeless dwelling which it has
so long inhabited! what unknown worlds are discovered to its view; how it is
affected with the amazing prospect; how it is affected with the remembrance and
regard of things left here below -- Oh could ye tell me -- but alas! how vain
the wish! But ah! no notices they give,
Nor tell us how or where they live;
As if bound up by solemn fate,
To keep this secret of their state;
To tell their joys nor pains to none,
That man might live by faith alone.
SOLITARY WALKS.
-- clouds and darkness rest upon it; and nothing but experience must be
allowed to satisfy these anxious researches of dying rationals.

Yet let us not forbear these researches: or at least not relinquish the
interesting meditation. For what can be of equal importance to a man, destined
inevitably to tread the path of death -- what of equal importance to examine,
as whither that path leads, and how it may be trod successfully?..... The
thought of death indulge,
Give it its wholesome empire, let it reign,
That kind Chastiser of the soul in joy.
NIGHT THOUGHTS.
-- what of equal importance for a pilgrim of a day to contemplate, as that
great event which must open to him a state unalterable and without end?

All men must tread that gloomy path -- It is appointed for all men once to
die. -- Adam's curse is upon all his posterity. ROMANS v. xii.
Dust they are, and to dust they must return. -- But whither leads that gloomy
path! -- Alas, in the heathen world, with a bewildered mind they sought the
resolution of that question -- Death was dreadful indeed in such circumstances:
for if we want the glad hope of immortality to cheer our departing souls, what
affliction can even be conceived more affecting than death and dissolution, a
separation from all we hold dear upon earth, and a perfect annihilation of all
future expectations? Annihilation is an after thought,
A monstrous wish, unborn till virtue dies.
Dr. YOUNG.


Life and immortallity are brought to light by the Gospel: and the question is
answered clearly from that book whence alone we can gain information on this
point -- Once to die, and after that be judged. ACTS, xxvii. 31.
-- We must all stand before the judgment seat of Christ. Oh my soul, how awful
a reflection! can any thing more be wanting to inspire thee with the most
serious purposes, and most devout resolves, than the certainty of death, the
assurance of judgment, the knowledge of mortallity!

And after death be judged! Well might Felix tremble, when St. Paul reasoned of
righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come.

ACTS, xxiv. 25.
Tell me no more of the pangs of death, and the torment of corporeal
sufferings; -- What, what is this, and all the evils of life's contracted span
to the things that follow after?..... If there is an hereafter?
And that there is, Conscience uninfluenc'd,
And suffered to speak out, tells every man;
Then must it be an awful thing to die.
BLAIR'S GRAVE.
This it is which makes death truly formidable, which should awaken every
solemn reflection, and stimulate every rational endeavor!

To be judged! to be sentenced by an irreversible decree, to an allotment
eternal and unchangable; an allotment of consummate felicity, or consummate
distress. The wicked shall go away into everlasting punishment, but the
righteous into life eternal.

Matt. xxv. 16.


Oh immortality, how much does the thought of thee debase in their value every
earthly enjoyment, every earthly pursuit and possession His hand the good man
fastens to the skies,
And bids earth roll, nor feel her idle whirl.
NIGHT THOUGHTS.
-- and show man to himself in a point of view, which amply discovers his true
business on earth, which amply discovers the true dignity of his nature, and
forcibly reproves his wretched attachment to all sublunary things.

And methinks, as if a voice were speaking from yonder grave -- I hear a solemn
whisper to my soul!

"Every grave proclaims thy own mortality! child of the dust, be humble and
grow wise! a few days since, like thee I flourished in the fair field of the
earthly world! a few days since, I was cut down down like a flower, and my body
lies withering in this comfortless bed; regardless of God, and inattentive to
duty, I passed gaily along, and thought no storm would ever overcloud my head
-- In a moment the unexpected tempest arose. I sunk and was lost. Go thy way,
and forget not thyself: remember that today thou have life in thy power;
tomorrow, perhaps, thou may lie a breathless corpse. To morrow, I will
better live,
Is not for man to say;
The morrow can no sureties give,
The wise make sure today.

Estimate from thence the value, poor and small as it is, of all things beneath
the sun, -- and forget not that death* and eternity are by an indissoluble band
united.

If thou dare to die without repentance, and unprepared to meet thy God and
Judge, who can enough deplore thy misery, most wretched, of all human beings!
everlasting anguish, remorse, and punishment assuredly await thee. -- But if
bearing futurity in mind, thou art so blessed as to be enabled to live in
conformity to the Gospel of thy God and Savior, he will, according to his
gracious promise, open the golden doors of perennial bliss for thee, whilst
eternal delight, from the full river of God's inexhausted love, remains to
crown thy faithful services.

Immortal! be wise, remember judgment, and prepare to die." --

Lost in the deep reflection, I was awakened from it by the intelligence of the
approach of the funeral of my departed friend.

CHAP. II.
Boast not thyself of tomorrow, for thou know not what a day may bring
forth, Pr. xxvii. 1. Defer not until death to be justified!

Eccl. xxviii. 22. O death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that
lives at rest in his possessions: unto the man that has nothing to vex him;
and that has prosperity in all things: yea, unto him that is yet able to
receive meat.

ECCLES. xli. 1.
THE horses nodding their sable plumes, advanced with solemn pace; Solemn and
slow it moves unto the tomb,
While weighty sorrows nod on every plume.
Dr. WATTS.
whilst the slow-moving wheels of the melancholy hearse, seemed to keep time
with the deep-toned bell, expressive of the silent sorrow, (now and then
interrupted with a groan of distress) which reigned in the mournful coaches
that followed.

They stop: -- and ah, my friend, what all this labor, and all this difficulty
to drag thy body in its last narrow dwelling from the confinement of the
hearse, and to bear it along the churchyard to its gloomy mansion in the
church! Ah, where is thy former activity -- thy wonted sprightliness and
vigor! Thou who did tread over the threshold with such lively strength, and
brushed away the dew of the morning with stout and nimble vivacity; have thy
feet too forgotten to do their office? And must thy fellow-mortals toil beneath
the load of thy clayed corpse, to bear thee from the sight and sense of the
survivors?

O death, thou sovereign cure of human pride! Well might a Latin poet say,
..... Mors sola fatetur
Quantula sunt hominum corpuscula.
JUV.
to what a state, impartial in thine attack, do thou reduce as well the
noblest and the fairest, the greatest and the best, as the meanest and most
worthless of mankind! Though our friends be dear to us as a right eye; lovely
as the bloom of the morning; powerful as the sceptered monarch of the East;
thou not only degradest them from the elevated height, but renderest obnoxious
to the view; and inaccessible to the tender embrace of the last lingering,
faithful, unshaken adherent; let corruption cease to be vain; let rottenness,
and dust, no longer swell in brief and borrowed arrogance. The following
well-known lines may serve as a suitable comment and illustration of the above
observations: I dreamt that, buried with my fellow clay,
Close by a common beggar's side I lay,
And as so mean an object shocked my pride;
Thus like a corpse of consequence I cried,
Scoundrel be gone* and henceforth touch me not;
More manners learn, and at a distance rot.
Scoundrel then, with an ^^aughtier tone, cried he,
Proud lumb of earth, I scorn thy words and thee;
Here all are equal, now thy case is mine,
This is my rotting-place, and that is thine.





But see the afflicting sight! Five tender children, each in an almost infant
state, are led by weeping friends, in mournful procession, after the body of
their departed father.

In a coach behind, waiting to complete the melancholy view, is an infant,
three days old, brought into the world by its half-distracted mother, before
its appointed time! Big sorrow, and insupportable grief, has hastened the
throws and dire anguish of childbirth; and behold the little orphan,
insensible of its misery, is offered to the baptismal font, while its father is
consigned to the dreary tomb. This pathetic or affecting picture, taken from a
real scene which the Author was called upon to attend in his ministerial
character, could not but excite the pity, and provoke the tears of every
spectator capable of feeling for the distressed situation of the mourning widow
and her helpless orphans.


Crowds of spectators from every part are attentive to the moving scene: on
every face sits sympathetic sorrow; in every eye swells the generous tear of
compassion and concern.

But a few days are past since a trembling messenger with breathless speed,
urged my attendance at the sick bed of NEGOTIO, on whose life, it was to be
feared, the remorseless fever had made fatal inroads. I hastened without delay;
and I found -- but who can describe the afflicting misery? Confusion, anguish,
and distress; weeping, lamentation, and woe; dismay and unutterable agony took
up their residence in the dwelling of NEGOTIO! Surprised in the midst of youth,
and in the ardour of earthly pursuits by the awful and irresistible summons of
death, the husband, the father, the man, lay racked with such thoughts as his
condition might well be supposed to awaken. For a worldly-minded man, in the
midst of youth, riches, and pleasure, to be laid on a sick bed, and in the
apprehension of his friends, as well as his own, to be near the borders of
dissolution, is surely a very awful condition, and much to be dreaded by every
thoughtless candidate for sensu^ality and dissipation.


Unable to bear the shock, his wife, who long sleepless had watched by his
couch, was thrown on the ground in an adjacent chamber, and her little infants
were weeping around her, the more to be pitied, as unconscious of their misery,
and wondering, with artless plaints, why their beloved mamma was thus sad and
in tears! Near relations were tender in their best offices, while every heart
was anticipating the wretched widow's distress.

When I sat down by his bed, and gently undrew the curtain, he looked -- and
shall I ever forget the earnest, anxious, speaking look? A tear dropped from his
eye, he caught my hand, he strove to speak, but his full heart forbad; and the
organs of speech, deeply affected by his malady, were unfaithful to the trust
of words which he gave them: we sat silent for some time, and with difficulty
at length I perceived that he said; or wished to say, "I fear it is too late.
-- Pray for me; for Christ's sake, pray."

I endeavored, as well as the affliction of my mind would permit me, to
suggest every ground of hope, every motive of consolation: he squeezed my hand,
and sighed. Alas! what comfort or consolation can be administered to a wicked
man in the views of death and eternity? Having lived a life of gaiety and
pleasure, he can have no good scriptur^^ ground to hope of meeting his latter
end without fear and terror; deathbed repentance is at best precarious and
uncertain; one was saved at the last hour, that none might despair; and but
one, that none might presume.

LUKE xxiii. 43.


"Little is to be done, he strove to say, amidst all the distractions of a sick
bed like mine: oh consider my wife, consider my poor little babes!" We said all
which could be said; had scarce finished the usual prayers, and were preparing
to mention the sacrament, when the visit was interrupted by the necessary
attendance of the physician, whose departure the lawyer awaited, to settle his
temporal affairs. Two more blisters were ordered to six he already had upon
him; a drowsy sleepiness, dire prognostic of death, siezed him; which hourly
increasing, at length terminated in strong convulsions, and the busy, active,
sprightly NEGOTIO died in his thirty-third year. Few years but yield us proofs
of death's ambition
To call his victims from the fairest fold,
And sheath his shafts in all the pride of life.
Dr. YOUNG.


Died! utterly unprepared and unprovided to leave this world; far less provided
to enter into the next. His worldly concerns totally unsettled; his eternal
concerns scarce ever thought of!

How much to be deplored is the fate of NEGOTIO! and yet, alas, how much is it
to be feared that many thousands are hourly splitting on the same rock with him.

He lived only for this world. Full of hope, and buoyant with life; death was
not in all his thoughts; and a future state, when suggested to him, was
considered as unworthy his present concern, because it was judged so distant.
He thought not of the present span of existence, as of a short state of trial,
an hour of weary pilgrimage; nor considered himself as an immortal being,
speedily to give an account to the dread judge of mankind. Did we esteem
ourselves only as pilgrims and strangers here below, and as accountable beings
who must ere long be judged according to our deeds, we should not be so much
attached to things temporal, but think more seriously and frequently about
those things which are eternal, according to the Apostle Paul's exhortation.

COLOSSIANS, iii. 2.
But deluded by the specious pretense of making necessary provision for his
family, a duty he well knew incumbent upon him, a duty he universally approved
and applauded; he had no other view than to amass wealth, and provide a large
fortune for his children; the comforts of which he promised himself to partake,
and had formed many chimerical schemes of chariots and country retirements, of
brilliant gaiety and envied splendor. Man appoints, but God often sees fit to
disappoint.


Amidst these designs and pursuits, it might with too much truth be said of
NEGOTIO, that God was not in all his thoughts. Indeed he regularly attended his
church in the morning of the Sabbath Day, and as regularly gave the afternoon
to indulgence and dissipation. But while at the church, how listless was he to
the prayers, now and then yawning out an unmeaning Amen! for his heart was
there where his treasure was placed. MATTHEW, vi. 21.
The sermons had seldom much weight with him; he sometimes observed they were
good; and when they touched on the subjects most pertaining to himself, he
failed not to remark that the preacher was rather too severe. "A faithful
minister cannot be too severe either in describing of sin, or dehorting from
it."
Thus he went on; and in the eagerness of temporal pursuits, and the
over-earnest desire to grow rich, had too far engaged his fortune, and not been
successful according to his hopes; the reflection on which harrassed his mind;
while his industrious desires to obtain his ends and bless his family, as much
harrassed his body, and brought on that fever, the sad issue of which we have
just been describing.

Many and excellent were the qualifications of NEGOTIO; his mind was tender and
humane; tender affection dwelt on his heart toward the partner of his bed; and
few parents knew a more sensible concern A man may be, in the general tenor of
his conduct, what the world calls a good husband and parent, and at the same
time an utter stranger to piety and real religion.
for the fruit of their loins. No man would have been more ready or more active
in the kind offices of friendship, if the multiplicity of his own avocation,
had not rendered him incapable of being servicable to others. He had no
objection to the great truths of revelation; There is such a thing as believing
and assenting to the truths of divine revelation, without a saving knowledge
of, or a heartfelt concern about them: Reader examine thyself.
and once in a sickness, from whence he was wonderfully raised, determined
strictly to comply with them; but the world recovered its dominion as health
again mantled on his cheek, and he returned to the pursuit which engaged his
heart, with vigor redoubled, and activity augmented, in proportion to the time
and opportunities he had lost.

How often, in the freedom of friendship, have I remonstrated, but remonstrated
in vain; till he saw me with shyness, and heard me with reluctance. Striving to
justify himself, he usually concluded, when every argument failed, that he was
young, and not likely soon to die; Prepare for death, young man, make no delay;
The old must go, it is true, but younger may.
RURAL CHRISTIAN.
and would some time hence in retirement perform all those duties, and prepare
for that futurity which he could not but acknowledge it was wise to foresee,
and necessary to prepare for. Dr. Young beautifully observes
Procrastination is the thief of time,
Year after year it steals, till all are fled,
And to the mercies of a moment, leaves
The vast concerns of an eternal scene.
NIGHT THOUGHTS.


Alas, my friend, how are thy vain hopes frustrated! Cut off in the full
blossom of all thy expectations, in the flower of life, thy earthly designs all
abortive; thy beloved wife and dear children left to struggle with loneliness,
sorrow, and difficulties; and thy soul, thy deathless soul, gone to meet the
great God and Savior! that God whom it never desired to serve or love; that
Savior whose mercies it never implored, except, perhaps, at the last sad
moment; and whose wonderful loving kindness had no charms to engage it to
obedience, duty, and esteem.

And is the fate of NEGOTIO peculiar? Is he the only dreamer among the many
thousands who walk the road of mortality? Would to Heaven he were; or would to
Heaven his hapless example might be hung out as a beacon to warn others, Felix
quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.
and prove effectual to awaken the children of this world from their sleep of
death, thundering in their ears this solemn admonition:

"What art thou seeking, child of eternity, what art thou seeking with such
restless assiduity! Look up and behold the heavens, where dwells the judge of
the world! Formed by his hand, thou art placed awhile, short-lived probationer
on this earth, and when he shall give the tremendous summons, thou must drop
thy earthly body, and appear an immortal soul before his judgment seat!
Eternity then awaits thee; as thou have done good or evil, an eternity of
blessedness or misery! Will thou then, in the folly of thy heart, neglect thy
God; set up thy standard on earth; and think to fix thy dwelling here? when
perhaps the breath of death may, the next moment, puff down all the phantastic
castles raised by thy airy hopes! Will thou forfeit eternal joys for the
transient things of earth? Will thou not be a man? act wisely; choose soberly;
keep immortality in view; and live every day as one who knows that the next
day, perchance, he may be obliged to lay aside his pilgrim's weeds; Make every
day a critic on the past,
And live each hour as if it was your last.
RURAL CHRISTIAN.
^leave the inn of this uncertain life; and enter on a state that can never be
changed, and which shall never never have an end?"

Whatsoever effect these Reflections may have on others, may they, oh my God!
at least, be imprinted on my own heart; never may I so live here, as to forget
that I am to live for ever hereafter.

CHAP. III.
I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Write, From henceforth blessed
are the dead who die in the Lord -- Even so says the Spirit: for they rest
from their labors, and their works do follow them.

Rev. xiv. 13.
SUCH was NEGOTIO; whose sad funeral obsequies performed, and whose little
infant baptized, I was soon left alone to my solitary walk in the churchyard;
and being not much disposed to leave the solemn scene, I determined to continue
a while longer; and indulge the pleasing sobriety of melancholy meditation.

How various, how innumerable are the shafts of Death! They fly unerring from
the quiver around us; and on so thin a thread hangs human life, to so many
accidents and disasters is human life subject, that one would rather marvel
that we continue to live, than that we should forget one moment that we are to
die! Dr. Watts, reflecting on the innumerable channels through which the blood
is conveyed over the whole animal system, breaks out in wonder and
astonishment, saying, Strange that an harp of thousand strings,
Should keep in time so long.



Nothing can be more beautiful, nervous, and expressive, than the following
Prayer used in our Burial Service:

"Man that is born of a woman has but a short time to live, and is full of
misery! He comes up, and is cut down like a flower; he flees as it were a
shadow; and never continues in one stay.

In the midst of life we are in death; of whom may we seek for succor, but of
thee, O Lord, who for our sins art justly displeased?

Yet, O Lord God most holy, O Lord most mighty, O holy and most merciful
Savior, deliver us not into the bitter pains of eternal death.

Thou know, Lord, the secrets of our hearts: shut not thy merciful ears to
our prayers: but spare us, Lord most holy, O God most mighty, O holy and
merciful Savior, thou most worthy Judge eternal, suffer us not at our last
hour, for any pains of death to fall from thee."

Were we truly influenced by the doctrine and piety of this incomparable
prayer, there is no doubt but we should make a better estimate of Life and
Death than is usually done; we should set a less value on the one, and meet the
other with more courage and resignation.

For what is man, and what is his life -- Man that is born of a woman has but
a short time to live, -- short, indeed, suppose it to extend to the utmost
length of human existence, even to fourscore years. But alas! too commonly,
extent of life is but extent of sorrow; the time, though short, is yet full of
misery. Jo^, xiv. 1, 2.
The natural and acquired evils, the evils unavoidable, and the evils brought
on ourselves by our own folly, vice, and imprudence are many, and great.

Our best happiness on earth is short, precarious, and uncertain; he comes up,
and is cut down like a flower; today we flourish in all the external
accommodations of life, tomorrow the taste can no more relish its delicacies,
nor the ear be delighted with the melody of the viol; no more the tongue can
chaunt with pleasing harmony; the eyes open no more on sublunary scenes, while
the useless lids are (it may be) closed by the trembling hand of our weeping
friends.

As the shadow that departs, that flees away, and its place is known no
more, so we vanish from the earth, and our memory is soon buried in total
oblivion. To us little regard is paid any longer: still our associates, with
their usual gaiety and ardour, pursue their several designs; still, as before,
the business of life goes briskly on; the sun shines as brightly; the earth
blooms as gaily; The author here seems to have in view the sentiments of Mr.
Pope, in a letter to Mr. Steel, where he thus expresses himself: The morning
after my exit the sun will rise as bright as ever; the flowers smell as sweet,
the plants spring as green, and the world will proceed in its old course.


the forests echo as sweetly with the music of the winged choristers; and all
things wear their accustomed form: while our neglected clay is mouldering in
dust, and trodden over by many a thoughtless, perhaps many a friendly foot. --
What is this world?
What but a spacious burial-field unwall'd,
The very turf on which we tread once lived.
BLAIR'S GRAVE.


Many a friendly foot! -- yes, even now while I wander in the silence of the
night, amidst these lonely receptacles of the dead, how many graves are around
me, which contain the precious relicts of neighbors and fellow creatures, by
myself consigned to their last earthly home!..... The grave, that home of man,
Where dwells the multitude.
NIGHT THOUGHTS.
-- wretched, wretched home! were not the soul secure of immortality; were not
the body lodged in the grave, as a faithful deposit, hereafter to be raised to
life and glory, Certum est in cineres corpus mortale reverti,
Sed tamen ^^ternus non erit ille sopor:
MANT.
by the Almighty Redeemer's trump. 1 CORINTHIANS, xv. 52.
That reflection sooths all the sorrow, and extracts all the poison from the
dart of death! -- What is that I read on yonder tomb -- on which the passing
moon reflects her full light, as she walks majestic through the skies, and
makes her silver way through the dark and mantling clouds -- "Oh Death, where
is thy sting? Oh grave, where is thy victory? The sting of Death is sin, and
the strength of sin is the Law -- But, thanks be to God, who gives us the
victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ. 1 CORINTHIANS, xv. 55-6-7.
" -- These were the words, which last hung on the lips, and at his desire are
engraven on the tomb of OSIANDER, who died full of faith; a man whose death
might well inspire the wish -- Let me die the death of the righteous, and let
my latter end be like his! NUMBERS, xxiii. 10.


O NEGOTIO! how unlike to thee was OSIANDER: how unlike in life, how unlike in
death -- though the same temporal concern, the same worldly occupations were
common to either.

Happy in parents, who well knew the influence and importance of religious
principles, OSIANDER was early initiated and perfectly instructed in the school
of piety: abundantly did he verify the truth of the wise man's observation; for
conducted, when young, into the happy path of truth, he never departed from it.
Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart
from it.

Prove. xxii. 6.
His youth was amiably distinguished by the most conscientious and tender
regard to his parents; a presage of his future felicity; and his whole demeanor
was tempered with the most winning modesty and engaging respect.

Rare felicity in OSIANDER; he obtained a partner, formed with every
qualification suitable to his own: it might well be said of them, so similar
were their tempers, their desires, their pursuits, so much, Like objects
pleased them, and like objects pained, that 'Twas but one soul that in two
bodies reigned. No wonder then OSIANDER was a pattern, as of filial, so of
conjugal affection. Peace and serenity ever welcomed him to his house, and true
satisfaction departed not from his happy dwelling. Hence he found no cause to
search abroad for the felicity which multitudes cannot find at home; nor
dreamed of the tavern and the club, the places of merriment and diversion, to
drown the cares he never knew, or to give the bliss he continually enjoyed. An
engaging picture of matrimonial happiness. Would to God there were more
pleasing copies of it to be met with in the present day; but, alas! how few is
the number, and how seldom are they found!


Happy in so choice a companion, he was diligent to discharge, in the exactest
degree, the parental duty toward the dear pledges of his love, wherewith their
faithful embraces were blessed. And hence, from their earliest youth, he took
care to inspire them with every sentiment of true religion, and to bring them
up in the faith and fear of that Almighty Father, a regard to whom, deeply
rooted in the minds of children, is the most undoubted security of their regard
to earthly parents. Children who fear not God, seldom regard man; this is a
melancholy truth, and too often verified.


As the connections of OSIANDER necessarily rendered his family large, he was
conscientiously exact in the discharge of his duty to his domestics and
servants. "Every man, he was wont to say, should esteem himself as a priest in
his own family; and be therefore careful to instruct his dependants, as those
of whom he must one day give a solemn account." And, "One reason, he would
often say, why men are generally so negligent of this important duty, is the
sad example they set themselves, -- an example which renders all precept
ineffectual." Be not a man of words, but deeds,
Examples (precepts) far exceeds.

Hence he was diligent to maintain that prime pillar of domestic authority: he
spoke by his life as well as his words; and never proposed a duty to his family
which they did not see him practice himself. Setting a good example is the best
way to recommend and enforce good precepts.


Family prayer was never omitted in his house. The Sabbath Day was never
misspent in trifling, visiting, and folly; much less in drunkenness and
debauchery. Attended by as many of his family as was convenient, he himself led
the way to his church, both morning and afternoon; while the evening of that
blessed day was ever spent in catechizing and instructing the younger, and in
reading some useful discourse to the more advanced part of his household. The
method of spending the sabbath day, cannot be too much inculcated or enforced
on every master and mistress of a family; the neglect of it has been the ruin
(it is greatly to be feared) of thousands of children, apprentices, and
servants.
-- Never abstaining from the hallowed table of the Lord, he was earnest always
in pressing that important duty: and few who lived with him were long strangers
to that heavenly banquet.

Thus exemplary at home, he was no less esteemed abroad: his punctuality,
honesty, and worth, were universally commended; and though some of freer
principles would sometimes be apt to sneer at his preciseness (as they termed
it) yet no man maintained a more universal credit, pursued his temporal
business with more becoming alacrity, or, by the blessing of God, flourished
more in all desirable success. Well might the Psalmest say, the blessing of the
Lord is in the house of the righteous, blessed is every one that fears the
Lord, that walks in his ways, happy shall thou be and it shall be well with
thee.

PSALM, cxxviii. 1, 2.


It pleased the Sovereign Disposer of all things to give him a long foresight
of his approaching dissolution, by means of a lingering and consumptive illness.

Shall I ever forget with what delight I heard him declare his high hopes,
when, coming in by accident, I found him, with his beloved wife by his side;*
pale and emaciated, he sat in the chair of sickness, his hand tenderly clasping
hers, and his eyes tenderly fixed upon her: -- while she, with soft affection,
strove to conceal her heartfelt distress, and the tear, unpermitted to come
forth, stood trembling in her eye. "I was endeavoring, dear sir, said he, to
reconcile my life's loved companion to the stroke which shortly must separate
us -- separate for a while -- separate, blessed be the Lord of life, only to
meet that we may never more part. -- But, alas! so frail is human nature, so
weak is human faith, so attached are we to this poor crazy prison, that we
cannot, we cannot be triumphant, we sink and grovel upon the earth even to the
last." Dr. Watts very justly sings
Our dearest joys and nearest Friends,
The partners of our blood,
How they divide our wavering minds,
And leave but half for God.
Oh! may we scorn these clothes of flesh,
These fetters and this load*
And long for evening to undress,
That we may rest with God.
HYMN lxi. B. 2.


Affection like yours, said I, so long tried, and so tender, cannot be supposed
to part without pangs; nor should we think ourselves the worse Christians,
because we feel the most sensibly as Men.

"Oh no, said he, I have never thought the finest feelings of humanity
inconsistent with the most elevated degree of Christian virtue -- but,
methinks, when a pair have lived, (as thanks be to God) my dearest wife and
myself have constantly endeavored to do -- with a perpetual prospect to a
future scene, and an earnest, though very imperfect labor, to walk worthy our
high calling and hope -- it should be matter of the noblest joy when the
consummation of all our labors is at hand, when we are about to drop the veil
of flesh, and to enter on the fruition of everlasting peace: surely this should
dry up all our tears, and cause us to rejoice on behalf of the friend who is
about -- not to die but to live; not to lose life but to enjoy it. We can never
think too much upon this solemn and interesting truth When this our short and
fleeting life is over,
We die to live; and live -- to die no more.



-- For myself, I have no more doubt of immortality, nor (let me speak with due
humiliation) of my own felicity with God, through Jesus Christ, than I have of
my present existence. All nature, and the universal voice of the wise in every
age proclaim the animating doctrine: but the Christian Religion has displayed
it in such full light, so dispelled every cloud, so removed every scruple, that
it would be the greatest indignity to the blessed Author of it, either to doubt
a future or eternal existence, or to doubt an eternal and happy one through
faith in Jesus Christ. It is the absolute declaration of God himself. He that
believes shall be saved, and Christ has promised, as he lives, they (who
truly believe in him) shall live also.
Infidelity appears to me of all sins the most monstrous, after those various
declarations which God has made to support and confirm our faith." Unbelief
robs the Christian too often of his spiritual comfort; but let him who
professes to believe in Christ, take heed respecting the nature, ground, and
fruits of his faith, that they are of the right kind, according to the rule of
God's unerring word.


We were charmed at the divine warmth with which he uttered these words: his
wife burst into a flood of tears; tears of mingled joy and sadness, who could
refrain? We sat silent: -- He at length went on.

"Yet let me not be thought presumptuous: I know the utter abhorrence of God to
the least spark of self-dependance; I know the absolute contrariety of pride to
the true interest of a fallen creature: I am nothing; I have nothing; I can do
nothing: to the glory of his free grace be all I have ever done, be all I ever
hope for! This will ever be the language of a true Chistian, though not the
sentiments of every nominal one*
But there is such an exhaustless fund of unexampled mercy and love in the
great Savior of mankind, so wonderful are his doings, so passing all
comprehension his tender regards for the children of men, that I dare not
dispute his rich offers; that I dare not hesitate in the embracing his full
promises.

Oh, Sir, I can say, with the utmost sincerity, that the reflection on his past
mercies is my sole and unspeakable comfort; and in his love I already taste
something of the bliss I expect. Influenced by that love, and by a sincere
(though almost weak) faith in him, I have labored diligently to act in
conformity to his will: and though conscious of a thousand and ten thousand
infirmities, though in my best services utterly unprofitable, though in all,
less than the least of his mercies, yet I have an unshaken confidence in his
all-sufficient merits, and fully relying upon them, I commit my soul to him,
with all the satisfaction and serenity of calm and well-grounded hope. Oh! the
comforts and consolations of an expiring believer in Jesus Christ, how solid,
unspeakable, and encouraging! well might the psalmist David say, the end of
that man is peace.

PSLAMS, xxxvii. 37.
-- He is a rock that can never fail us: the cross of Christ promises the
sinner every thing which repentance can presume to ask." Touched by the cross
we live, or more than die;
That touch, with charm celestial, heals the soul
Diseased, drives pain from guilt, lights life in death,
Turns earth to heaven, to heavenly thrones transforms
The ghastly ruins of the mouldering tomb.
NIGHT THOU^HTS.


Much more passed between us, some things far too tender to be committed to
paper; and it will not be any wonder to the serious reader to be told, that a
sickness of some weeks was borne by a man of such faith, with all the cheerful
resignation and consummate patience which are peculiar to the true Christian.
It may well be said, religion has pleasures which none but the real Christian
can enjoy; consolations which none but the real Christian can partake of, and a
crown of glory promised to its followers after death, which none but the real
Christian can have a title to, or wear.

2 TIMOTHY, iv. 8.
Nothing would be more instructive, perhaps, than many of the discourses which
he held with his friends, during the scene of trial. A few hours before he
died, he took a solemn leave of his wife and children, to whom he had delivered
at large his dying advice -- and perfectly sensible of his approaching
dissolution; some minutes before he expired he was heard to say, "O Death,
where is thy sting! O grave, where is thy victory! the sting of Death is sin,
and the strength of sin is the Law, -- but thanks be to God who gives us the
victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ." And having said this, he fell asleep,
with a composure perfectly lovely, with a peace infinitely desirable.

CHAP. IV.
Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them shall not fail to
the ground without your Father. But the very hairs of your head are all
numbered. Fear ye not, therefore, ye are of more value than many sparrows.

Matthew, x. 29, etc. Leave thy fatherless children, I will preserve them
alive, and let tby widows trust in Me.

Jeremiah, xlix. 11.
FEW passions are more strongly implanted in the human mind, tha^ the love of
our offspring; to be devoid of which, degrades the human far beneath the
irrational creature; through every species of which, the wonderful influence of
parental affection is discernible. The wisdom of the great Creator is
immediately obvious in this gracious provision for the helpless young; and it
is certain that this powerful regard in the human species, may be rendered
productive of the most excellent effects.

Too commonly, indeed, it is grossly abused; and the honorable claim of
parental regard is made the pretense for an unworthy and mean attachment to the
pursuits of the world, and the love of this life. Many men cheat themselves
under this specious delusion; and while they conceive that the spring of their
actions, and the cause of their singular attention to earthly desires, is the
laudable purpose of providing for their families; A prudent desire and
endeavor to make a suitable provision for our families, are laudable and
praiseworthy; but an over-anxious pursuit after temporal things is hurtful and
unbecoming, particularly respecting those who profess to be Christians.
they are, the mean while, but following the bent of their inclinations, and
treading in a track which they would continue to tread, were they not
influenced at all by the motive which they fancy engages them in it. Frequent
experience has manifested this; but it was never seen more evidently, perhaps,
than in the case of AVARO; who lived only for his children, as he constantly
avowed, and on that account denied himself every reasonable gratification;
when, as if it were to falsify those pretenses, as well as to awaken him, if
possible, to a more rational conduct, the Sovereign of heaven deprived him of
his children in a short compass of time; and lo, he remains the same grovelling
earthworm, though he has none to share that inheritance, which he purchases at
the price of his soul!

If any truth be fully revealed in the sacred oracles, if any has the sanction
of the soundest reason, it is the belief of a wise, good, and superintending
Providence, of an universal Father, who tenderly watches over, and graciously
cares for the concerns of those beings whom himself has created, and placed
in their several stations upon earth; MATT. vi. 26.
a truth of an aspect the most benign, and of an influence the most important
to all the affairs of men: to forget and disregard which, leads to all the
folly of self-seeking, all the madness of self-dependance, all the bitter
anxiety of self-corroding care: to remember, and live under the constant
persuasion of which, induces all the sweetness of a serene conscience, all the
fortitude of a resigned soul, all the comfort of an unshaken hope. Well might
our Savior upbraid his disciples with unbelief of his providential care, by
saying, if God so clothe the grass of the field, which to day is, and to morrow
is cast into the oven, shall he not much more clothe you, O ye of little faith!

Matthew, vi. 30.


And to this, were we to judge by the rules of right reason, or religion, that
parental affection which is so universal and amiable, must naturally bend every
parent: whom, if no other consideration were sufficient to persuade to the
practice of religion, and to a dependence upon the Deity, the reflection of its
infinite moment to their offspring, and of the unspeakable value of the divine
favor, should powerfully incline thereto. For there is no patrimony like the
divine protection, and no friendship so stable as the friendship of heaven. The
former can never be exhausted, the latter will never fail or forsake us: no
change of circumstances will change its fidelity: nay, much unlike the
friendship of the world, Dr. Young expresses a similar opinion of the world's
friendship, in the following lines: Tired nature's sweet restorer, balmy sleep!
He, like the world, his ready visit pays
Where fortune smiles; the wretched he forsakes.
NIGHT THOUGHTS.


in the black day of adversity it will smile with the most sweetness and
affection.

Our earthly scenes in behalf of our children, may prove unsuccessful, and be
quickly blasted by the finger of disappointment; our labors may end in
vexation, and all our attempts be insufficient to secure the fortune we may
wish: or should we secure it, the patrimony we have gained, at the expense of
so much care and anxiety (nay, perhaps at the high price even of felicity
eternal) may be embezzled by the faithless guardian; devoured by the litigious
lawyer; or foolishly squandered away by the spendthrift heir; whom our industry
has capaciated to sink into the foul sewers of idleness, vice, and sloth;
Idleness* vice, and sloth* have been the ruin of thousands; therefore carefully
to be avoided; particularly by young persons of both sexes: for an idle man is
the devil's play-fellow; slothfulness brings a man to rags, while Vice its
own punishment will ever prove,
But virtue leads to blissful realms above.
RURAL CHRISTIAN.


and deprived at once of the comforts of this life, and the hopes of a better,
by supplying him with the means and opportunity to be iniquitous; when perhaps
without them he had been led to careful industry, to sobriety, and all the
blessed fruits of a rational and prudent demeanor.

Let it not be concluded from hence that we would condemn that proper care, for
the subsistence of a family, which all nations have judged necessary and
becoming. We mean only to decry that absurd, but too common practice, of living
merely to lay up wealth for those who shall survive us; without taking care to
secure the favor of Providence, without looking at all to the great
superintendant of human affairs, who laughs, with just contempt, at the
spider-webs which men of this character so industriously weave. Without God in
their lives, without hope in their death, they are unable calmly to lay their
dying heads on their pillows, The wicked, in the views of dissolution, may hope
for mercy at the hands of their offended Maker, but not on scriptural grounds,
for the word of God assures us, without repentance there is no salvation.

LUKE, xiii. 3.
or to commend, with humble, but confident faith, their weeping widows and
orphans to the heavenly Husband, and the everlasting Father.

Of these, poor NEGOTIO never thought, and therefore could derive no comfort to
himself, could administer no comfort to his wife or his children, from the
solid expectation of the fatherly care of Omnipotence. The offspring of wicked
parents, if they continue in the roads of impiety and vice, may justly expect
according to the express declaration of Jehovah, that the curse due to their
parents will descend on them, for he has said he will visit the iniquities of
the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation of them
that have him and keep not his commandments.

Exodus, xx. 5.
This rendered his death dreadful: as the contrary view soothed every sorrow,
and cheared every gloom before the face of the departing OSIANDER. He beheld
his wife and his children with an eye of gladness, as the peculiar care of the
Father of the fatherless, and the Husband of the widow: and to that care he
consigned them with a cheerful hope and a peaceful acquiescence. The real
Christian, trusting in God as his heavenly father, friend, and portion, may
safely leave all he has in his hands, knowing he will safely keep that which is
committed to him against that day, when he comes to judge the world by his Son
Christ Jesus.

2 TIMOTHY. i. 12.
NEGOTIO saw his family with an eye of distraction, as the prey of poverty, and
the sport of an injurious world.

Unaccustomed to estimate worth by any other standard than that of earthly
acquisitions, he considered them as unavoidably miserable: and leaving them
unprovided with what the world calls good, he left them, as it seemed to him,
destitute; and doomed to all the contempt of penury, and all the painful pity
of distress. -- Such was the issue of his anxious solicitude for temporal
things. Oh, happy had it been for thee, NEGOTIO, happy for thy family, if some
portion of thy anxiety had been allotted to eternal concerns! then had thou
died in the pleasing reflection, that, not void of attention to thy great
business on earth, thou wast going thyself to the kingdom of a Father, who
watches with peculiar attention over the orphan and the widow, especially when
consigned by the faithful parent to his secure protection: and who is equally
able to save by many as by few; to bless where there is little, as where there
is much: to bless with the most substantial blessings -- competency, content,
and a good conscience: which bestow those consolations, solid, secure, and
immovable, that are denied frequently, or sought for in vain, by the
distinguished favorites of exorbitant wealth or exalted power.

Conscious hereof, OSIANDER, during his last sickness, was never deficient in
pouring this healing balm into the bleeding heart of his life's loved
companion, and softer friend.

"Widowhood, See the fine speech of St. Chrisostom's mother, in the Christian's
Magazine, Vol. I. p. 54. Published for Newberry, in St. Paul's Churchyard.
he was often wont to say to her, is doubtless a state of the deepest distress:
left to weather out all the storms and tempests of a calamitous world, a poor
dejected woman then most wants the tender support of the husband, whose loss
those very wants more feelingly teach her. Not only every source of usual
satisfaction is dried up; not only every allowable and life-chearing comfort is
cut off; but the floodgates are open to a tide of new troubles, unknown,
unthought of before: which the memory of past felicities mournfully enhanceth;
the retrospect of happiness once enjoyed, but now lost, adding double weight to
the woe which springs up unwelcome in its place.

Even when the affection has not been of the most tender sort, the loss of a
husband is severely felt; but where it has been just and sincere, where
long-tried fidelity has much approved one to the other, there, as the parting
becomes more afflictive, so the loss is more sensibly felt. Widowhood is then
an iron furnace indeed. -- But to catch the allusion, as the Son of God was
seen in the furnace with the three faithful Israelites, preserving them unhurt
from the rage of the flames; DANIEL, iii. 25.
so will he be present, with peculiar protection, and shield with his fatherly
providence, the widow and her orphans. -- "Leave thy fatherless children, says
this kind God, I will preserve them alive, and let thy widows trust in me."
JEREMIAH, xlix. 11.


This passage, I will freely confess to you, has at all times given the
greatest comfort to my mind, and at the same time encouraged me to a cheerful
discharge of my duty, and to perfect dependence on God; conscious, that if I
could by any means secure the fatherly care of Omnipotence for you, and my dear
children, I need not be anxious for aught besides: I have endeavored to keep
this point in view; and I can now commend you to that care, with the most
joyful and heartfelt delight. For the Lord will never leave you nor forsake
you: -- he is emphatically styled, "the Father of the fatherless, and the
Husband of the widow." PSALMS, lxviii. 5.
A reflection which surely must make every tender parent, every affectionate
husband solicitously careful to obtain God's blessing, if they really love
their children; if they have a real regard for their wives and offspring; for
the Lord God has shown, all through his blessed word, how near and dear to him
are the interests of the widow and the orphan: he has given peculiar laws,
with much tenderness, respecting them: he has made it one of the
characteristic parts of true and undefiled religion, to visit the fatherless
and widows in their affliction; JAMES, i. 27.
and as an emblem of his ever full and flowing mercy toward them, he sent his
Prophet to one of them in the day of her distress, and enriched her with a
continual supply, while want and famine were reigning around: giving at once a
proof and a significant token of his fatherly providence, and increasing
mercies to the widow who trusts in him. 2 KINGS, iv. 6.


For, my dear love, permit me to say, though I have scarce any need to say it
to you, that these rich promises to widows are not given indiscriminately and
under no conditions: it may be very possible to languish in all the
wretchedness of a widowed state, and yet to enjoy none of the distinguished
care of heaven. St. Paul speaks of those who are widows indeed; which plainly
implies that some in a state of widowhood may be far from the Divine notice. A
widow indeed, according to him, "is one who trusts in God, and continues in
supplications and prayer night and day;" one who is truly sensible of the
afflictive hand of Providence upon her; who endeavors to receive with
meekness, and to improve in resignation by the chastising stroke; who fixes
her soul's dependence upon the high and gracious providence of her god, and
labors, with all the sincerity of faith, and fervor of prayer, to cast
herself and all her concerns upon him, as knowing he cares for her.

And as thus trusting in God and continuing in prayer, the widow should be
particularly grave, serious, and sober in all her behavior, dress, and
deportment: she should not forget that God has been pleased to cut off, if I
may so say, the ornament of her head, and the pride of her life; and therefore
requires a decent solemnity in all her carriage. If the loss happens to a
woman in earlier life, she has need of more peculiar watchfulness against all
the attacks of carnal enemies; and should be very cautious not to give the
least room for that reproach, either of wantonness or calumny, which some are
so apt to impute to widowhood in general. Would to God there were no widows in
our day, but such who answered the above description.


And should she, my dear, be left in your case, with a family around her, oh
how much anxiety attends that necessary, that important charge; that most
tender duty which she owes to them -- I cannot, indeed, I cannot speak of this
heavy burden: my heart is too full; and I have perfect satisfaction in your
motherly love to my dear children. -- But do not sink under the burden, for God
is with you: he will bless your endeavors; he will support you in every
difficulty. -- "Leave thy fatherless children to me, I will preserve them
alive," JEREMIAH, xlix. 11.
said he: alive, -- that is, through Grace, alive to the only valuable, the
divine life; alive to himself! Oh! sweet and comfortable promise, let it always
be your support, and rest perfectly confident, that while you exert your best,
though feeble efforts, for your dear children, the father of the fatherless
will more than second you: trust in him: continue in prayer to him for them and
for yourself: and you will have a husband infinitely preferable to this poor
perishing mortal who is about to leave you -- and they, my beloved pretty
orphans -- have a father. PSALMS, xxvii. 10.
--

"Oh! thou gracious father, preserve, protect, defend, both her and them -- and
when my weeping eyes shall be closed in death; when my supplicating tongue
shall be silent in dust; when my solicitous heart shall cease to throb for
them! Oh! be thou their never-failing, their heavenly husband, father, friend!
-- their God and portion in this life and in that which is to come -- Oh may we
meet to part no more -- meet to praise and adore thy exceeding loving kindness,
through endless ages in glory." Thrice happy Christians! who, when time is over,
Shall meet in realms of bliss, to part no more.
G. W.


Thus spoke OSIANDER: and happy that husband who thus, like him, can in the
views of death, pour the balm of divine consolation into the heart of his
afflicted and lamenting partner.

CHAP. V.
Still frowns grim Death; Guilt points the tyrant's spear.
And whence all human guilt? -- From Death forgot!
YOUNG. WERE it possible to avoid the stroke* or to escape the victorious arms
of death, they would have something to plead for their conduct, who shun with
all their power, and solemn reflection; who make it the whole business of their
lives to dissipate the important thought of that, which they must sooner or
later meet with, and to which they are inevitably doomed! For it is appointed
unto all men once to die.

HEBREWS, ix. ^7.
But as no human power can arrest even for one moment, the fatal dart; When
death receives the dire command,
None can elude or stay his hand;
For when his dread commission's sealed,
The youngest, healthiest, all must yield.
RURAT CHRISTIAN.
as every individual must pass through this black and lamentable flood; surely
wisdom dictates a serious and frequent attention to so interesting a concern,
and reason advises the most diligent survey of this dreadful evil; that we may
learn to encounter it with holy courage, or at least to submit to it without
reluctance. Death, viewed with an hasty and trembling eye, appears in
formidable terror, as the cruel blaster of all human hopes and joys; but death
viewed with the eye of faith, and contemplated with the coolness of rational
deliberation, loses much of its terror, and is approached with no small degree
of complacency and peace. Death and his image rising in the brain,
Bear faint resemblance, never are alike;
Fear shakes the pencil, fancy sours excess,
Dark ignorance is lavish of her shades,
And these, the formidable picture draw.
NIGHT THOUGHTS.


You tremble at the fear of death; come draw near, and let us see what that is,
which thus alarms your quickest apprehensions. See in the most fearful garb,
Death is only the ransomer of frail mortals from the prison of a sinful,
painful, and corrupted frame; their deliverer from a transitory, and vexatious
world; -- Death ends our woe
And puts a period to the ills of life.
Dr. YOUNG.
their introducer to an eternal and -- oh that we could always add -- a blessed
state! -- but there, there alas, is the dread. It Is this which clothes Death in
his terrors, and gives all its sharpness to his sting. Could we be assured, had
we a sciptural and well grounded presumption, that the departing soul should
enter into a state of felicity, and be received into the bosom of its Savior
and its God; we should then universally lay down the load of mortality, not
only without regret, but even with triumph. To meet death without cause to fear
it, is the privilege only of a true b^liever in Jesus; well therefore, does an
eminent writer say*

Believe, and look with triumph in the tomb.

Dr. YOUNG.


When then comes it to pass? -- let us no longer lay the blame on Death, for it
is fairly exculpated -- whence comes it to pass? that we dare to live, without
treasuring up "this rational and well grounded presumption," which the
Christian religion so copiously supplies and which we are called upon to
treasure up by every motive of interest, of common sense, and of duty? if we
neglect this, let us not pretend to quarrel with our fate, and to repine at the
fearfulness of death; we ourselves give all his fearfulness to him, and from
ourselves alone proceeds the cause of our bitterest disquietude. For God has
plainly declared to us the irreversible condition of our nature. Our death is
no less certain than our existence. Fixed is the term to all the race on earth,
And such the hard condition of our birth*
No force can death resist no flight can save,
All fall alike, the fearful and the brave.
POPE.
He has graciously provided a sovereign and infallible antidote against the
fear of death, in the victorious resurrection of his dear Son. 1 CORINTHIANS,
xv. 20.
He has informed us, that our bodies must return to dust; that all our
possessions must be left behind; and that a state everlasting and unalterable
awaits us -- a state of endless bliss with him, or of misery with condemned
spirits. MATTHEW, xxv. 46.


If then, my soul, deaf to his informations, and regardless of his mercies,
thou shall forget the condition of thy nature; pride thyself in the beauties of
thy present body; boast thyself in the possessions of thy present state;
neglect to secure an interest in the Savior, by faith unfeigned, and obedience
unreserved -- thine, and thine eternally will be the just condemnation: nor
can thou wonder that the stroke of death, in this view, is horrible to thy
apprehension; for it will separate thee from all thou hold dear, and convey
thee to a region, dolorous and unwelcome, where thou have not treasure, and
can not have either hope or love. But remember, in this case, death deserves
no blame; for it is not death which is terrible in itself; it is man, foolish
man, who renders it so, by his inexcusable neglect. Death will be to the real
Christian, the end of all his earthly troubles, and the beginning of his
heavenly joys, while to the wicked and impenitent. it will prove the end of all
their hopes, and the beginning of their eternal desperation.


It is from hence arises the fear of death; from estimating too highly the
things of this life, and from forgetting the mutable condition annexed to every
mortal blessing. Hence sprung all the mistakes, and all the miseries of the
young, the lovely MISELLA; and all the piercing pangs, which tore her wretched
parents' hearts.

MISELLA was blessed, by the great giver of all good gifts, with a frame
peculiarly elegant and pleasing. Softness and sweetness dwelt in her
countenance; the down of the swan was rivalled by her skin; her shape was
faultless, her limbs were finished with the most beautiful symmetry, and her
voice was musical as the harmony of the lute. She was taught from the cradle to
value this fine person; and her fond and overweening parents fed the soothing
vanity with every food which their dotage could supply. The very means and the
best method they could have taken, or the devil himself could have devised, to
make their child a curse to them, and bring down their gray hairs with sorrow
to the grave.


Her education was perfectly polite, adapted to set off the graces of her
frame, little calculated to expand or improve the more valuable beauties of her
mind. Her taste for dress was remarkably elegant, her manner of dancing
particularly genteel: she excelled much at cards, and few were happier in
devising schemes, and engaging parties of pleasure. As her voice was charming
in itself, so was it improved by art, and aided by the soft touches of the
guittar, which she handled with inimitable grace; preferring it to all other
instruments, as the attitude of playing upon it, is most advantageous for the
display of a fair lady's gentility.

She very early gave her parents convincing proof of the mistake they had made
in her education, and of their unhappiness in neglecting to inculcate the
principles of religious duty and conscientious virtue. For in her seventeeth
year, she married a young officer, of inferior rank, and no fortune, with the
entire disapprobation of her parents; nay, and in direct contradiction to their
commands. The gaiety of his dress, and the charms of his person, captivated her
heart; and unaccustomed to reason and think, she broke through every obligation
to gratify her romantic passion. Young women can never be too cautious
respecting the men they make choice of, as partners for life, for their future
happiness depends on it. What a melancholy reflection it is, that numbers in
the present day, marry in haste, and repent at leisure, when it is too late.


The blind and excessive fondness of her parents soon induced them to pass over
this breach of duty, and to welcome their darling daughter and her husband to
their affectionate arms. Accustomed from her cradle to a life of dissipation
and pleasure, now that she was free from all parental restraint, she indulged
the mad propensity with still greater ardour. The education of children is
truly an important task, and cannot be too carefully attended to by parents in
general; for it is an observation confirmed by experience: Children like tender
offers take the bow,
And as they first are fashioned always grow.



From one public place to another, during the summer, she led her passive
husband; during the winter they lived in all the fatiguing gaiety of town
diversions.

A child was the issue of their marriage; but as the daughter had been before,
so now the mother was swallowed up in the woman of pleasure: she sent the
little infant to her parents, regardless of its welfare, if she could but
pursue her beloved gratifications. -- The case was the same with a second
produce of their conjugal endearments. She looked upon childbearing as a
severe tax paid by the fair sex, and as an obstacle in their way to the
possession of those delights, which alone have worth and relish in the esteem
of a woman of fashion. Alas! how many Misellas, such thoughtless and imprudent
married women, do we see daily: may the Lord of his infinite mercy lessen the
number, by teaching them wisdom from above.


My reader will not be amazed if a life of this kind produced no small
difficulties in their circumstances. Her parents, though not very affluent,
readily contributed all they could: and ah! too fond -- fed scantily and dressed
meanly, that their daughter might be clad in scarlet, and seast in delicacy. If
ever parents were blinded by affection, to the true interests of their
children, surely these were among the number.
It happened that her husband in the third year of their marriage, was called
abroad to attend his regiment. Pleasure was her passion; she felt therefore
little regret at parting with him. Nor did she live, during his absence, like
the widowed wife, and separated friend. She followed her diversions with
redoubled assiduity; was the life of the ball, the delight of the men, the
queen of joy.

But her constitution, tender and delicate, was unequal to the toil; her
nocturnal reveries extinguished the rose in her cheek; her laborious life of
pleasure brought on a consumption. Besides this, with declining health, her
character became equivocal; (though it is agreed by all, she was never really
criminal, in the sense that word is commonly used:) but the want of appearances
is often as fatal to reputation, as even the want of virtue itself. It is a
well known proverb, give a dog an ill name, and hang him; and so it is, if you
are not a thief, don't look thief-like: the meaning of which is, the loss of
reputation, however it may be founded only on suspicion, is truly as hurtful
and disadvantageous as though there was (...) sufficient gr^^nd for (...) and
if we are not candidates for vice and votaries of dissipation, we should not
associate with those who are: for a man is generally known by his company.
To exhilirate her spirits, she had frequent recourse to improper means; to
renovate her beauty, she had constant recourse to destructive arts.

Her parents, who seldom saw her, -- saw her only for a few passing moments,
which she could sometimes, though very rarely, steal from her engagements, to
dedicate to the children of her bowels, and to the parents, whose only joy, she
knew, was in her company. -- Her parents hearing of her declining state
entreated, earnestly and with tears entreated her to come to them, and to use
all proper means for the recovery of her health. She sent them no reply; but
using what appeared to her the necessary methods, yet prosecuting at the same
time, her usual course of pleasure, she appeared a dead body, almost in the
bright scenes of revelry and joy, -- and at length was siezed with an acute
disorder, which in two days carried her off, in a strange place; at a distance
from her friends! and without a relation to close her eyes! Hapless Misella!
may surviving fair ones,
By thy example learn to shun thy fate;
How wretched is the woman wise too late.
O. BARNWELL.


A messenger was instantly dispatched to her parents; a tender parent only can
guess their anguish. The afflicted father flew down to the place of her death
with all possible speed; and when he entered the house, where lay the dead body
of his child, his only child, the child of his soul, -- "Oh give me my
daughter, he cried out, let me but see her dear face, though she is dead; lead
me, lead me to my child, show a poor old man the sad remains of all his hopes
and wishes." -- Dumb grief prevailed: -- the mistress of the house conducted
him to the door of the room, where lay the pale and lifeless corpse.

He threw himself with unutterable distress, on the bed beside his daughter,
and bedewing her clay-cold face with tears, lay for some time in all the agony
of silent sorrow! "Are we thus to meet? -- at length he burst out thus: -- Oh
my KITTY, my child, my daughter, are those dear lips ever sealed in silence? --
Ah, all pale and wan! -- and will those eyes, which used to look upon me with
such joy, never, never open more? -- One word, my child, oh if it were but one
word! -- Ah, cruel and unkind -- that I might not be allowed to watch thee in
thy sickness! had thou permitted me to attend, thy dear life had been saved.

Alas, why do I rave? she hears me not -- pale, indeed; but lovely as ever: Ah,
soft and precious hand, marble in coldness. -- I will never let thee go. -- Oh
my KITTY, my child, my only beloved! -- I am undone, for thou art no more; oh
that I had died with thee; Extravigant or excessive grief, is finely depicted
in the lamentations of David, the man after God's own heart, over the corpse of
his son Absalom, as recorded in the 18th chapter of the 2d book of Samuel.
would to God I might die this moment! -- My KITTY, my child, my daughter, my
all!" -- Here again he burst into an agony of tears, and betrayed all the signs
of the most excruciating grief.

But it is unnecessary to dwell longer on this part of our tale; it will be
more proper to make some remarks upon it: these, however, together with the
very different character of PULCHERIA, must engage the next chapter.

CHAP. VI.
Take compassion on the rising age;
In them redeem your errors manifold;
And by due discipline and nurture sage,
In Virtue's love betimes your docile sons engage.
WEST'S ^oem on Education. HOW great a blessing is early instruction! --
MISELLA never heard the sweetly persuasive lectures of wisdom; she was never
called to attend to the winning voice of religion and truth; and therefore,
left to the blind conduct of impetuous passions, she was driven along, "to
every wave a scorn;" she foundered and was lost! -- We do not pretend to say,
that early instruction and virtue are so inseparably connected as never to be
divided: we do not say, that all who enjoy this advantage must go right; that
all who enjoy it not, must infallibly go wrong. This would be to contradict
palpable experience. But we are bold to advance, that there is the chance of
ten thousand to one, in favor of the former; so is there the same chance, it
is feared, against the latter. The wisest man declares, if you train up a child
in the way he should go, when he is old, he will not depart from it.

PROVERBS, xxii. 6.
How alarming a reflection to parents!

Had MISELLA, from her early infancy been trained up in the knowledge of
herself, her God, and her duty; had she been carefully led to a true estimate
of her corruptible frame; not deceived into a wrong opinion of it, from
poisonous flattery, and delusive adulation: had she been taught, that every
good gift comes from God, and consequently can be no proper subject of human
vanity; had she been taught, that God expects a proper return, and reasonable
service for the bounty he shows; that our present state is a state of trial,
that we are pilgrims and probationers of a day; and must necessarily in a short
time remove our tent from this world, and live -- live everlastingly in
another, happy or wretched, as we have performed our duty in this: MATTHEW,
xxv. 46.
-- Had these lessons of useful import been early and steadfastly imprinted on
her mind; most probably the miserable parent had not wept in such anguish, over
his more miserable daughter: most probably her hands might have closed* with
filial piety and tenderness, his aged eyes.

But -- ah me! -- how constantly do we behold these important lessons
neglected! while fond and over-weaning parents, like those of MISELLA, cheat
their little ones, even from infancy, into false opinions of themselves! The
mistakes so frequent and so fatal, in the education of children, would almost
lead one to approve the Lacedemonian policy, which allowed not to parents the
liberty of educating their own children, but committed this most necessary
business to the care of the state. And, from an accurate observation of the
conduct of parents, how few have yet fallen within the observation of the
writer of these lines, who were tolerably capaciated for the task! -- who had
prudence and fortitude enough to conquer parental prejudices; and to stand
superior to the soft foibles of melting affection.

With respect to the gentler sex, it is an evil too notorious to be denied,
that 'ere the pretty innocents can lisp their pleasing tales, they are
initiated into the school of pride and show; taught to reverence dress even to
superstition, as the glare of alluring finery! -- The mind thus early vitiated,
strongly retains the taste; Hence let parents and tutors be careful
In virtue's paths to lead the infant mind;
For as the bough is bent, the tree's inclined.

vanity and modish folly engross the whole attention, and ruin half, or render
trifling and insipid, unwary thousands in the female world. For it is a fact, I
apprehend, scarcely to be controverted, that in the lower orders of life, more
women are seduced into prostitution, through their love of dress, than through
their love of vice: and in the higher, we know, to what lengths an attachment
to this deep-rooted foible is carried.

With such principles, strongly impressed, how can we expect to find in the
fair one, the endearing and sensible companion, replete, as Milton phrases it,
-- with all good, wherein consists Woman's domestic honor, and chief praise.
How can we expect it -- while, as he goes on they are -- Bred only and
completed to the taste
Of lustful appetite, to dance and sing,
To dress, and troll the tongue, and roll the eye! PARADISE LOST, xi. 616.

Let it not be said, that the writer is severe: he would only wish to hold out
a friendly warning, against an evil destructive to the tender and affectionate
parent: upon whom it principally lies to give to female elegance its greatest
merit: while he entreats the inconsiderate and the fond, attentively to
contemplate the half-distracted father weeping over the clay-cold corpse of his
darling MISELLA.

And would thou, oh reader, wish thy beloved offspring a better fate; would
thou wish never to share in the horrors of so sad a distress? -- then let it be
thy chief study early and diligently to inform with true wisdom, the young, the
waxen mind; attentive to the poet's remark: Children like tender offers take
the bow,
And as they first are fashioned, always grow.


Sensible of this capital truth, the parents of the amiable PULCHERIA omitted
no opportunity to cultivate her mind, and early to lead her into the pure and
peaceful paths of sacred wisdom. She was not inferior in person to MISELLA; but
in conduct how superior! -- in death how different! Live to the Lord, that thou
may die so too:
To live and die, is all we have to do.

As I have not had the happiness to converse with many, from whom I have reaped
greater improvement, or received more delight; as I have never Attended a
deathbed, with more profit and edefication, than that of the ever-valued
PULCHERIA; it has frequently made me curious to learn from her parents the
method they pursued in her education -- And one day sitting with her excellent
father, I took the liberty to hint my desire.

"I know, sir, (said I) you are above the vulgar prejudices; and have so just a
sense of the divine wisdom and goodness, in removing your daughter from this
state of probation to a realm of glory, that the subject is rather pleasing
than painful to you. You know my high opinion of her virtues; tell me what
particular steps you took, in her early days, to lay the foundation of that
noble structure, which she reared?" "You judge rightly, sir, said the good old
man; it is pleasing to me to think as well as to talk of my valuable daughter,
whom I reflect upon with the most heartfelt complacence, as having soon ran
her complete circle of virtues here; The speaker perhaps had the following
celebrated lines of Waller in his view.

Circles are prais^d, not that abound
In largeness, but the exactly round:
So life we praise, that does excel
Not in much time, but acting well.

as having speedily finished her course, and entered so early on her
everlasting reward.

"Praised be God for giving me such a child; praised be God, for placing before
me such an example. -- Forgive the involuntary tear -- I cannot on this
occasion withhold it; the remembrance of my dear angel so affects and ravishes
me: oh when will the hour come, that I shall once more see her -- once more
meet her, for ever to enjoy her lovely converse -- meet her -- Dear sir, excuse
me, the pleasing hope overpowers me; excuse the parent; excuse the man." -- We
sat silent a few minutes; some natural tears we mutually dropped -- but wiped
them soon; when my worthy friend proceeded. "I will satisfy your desire: I did
indeed lay down some few rules, respecting the education of my child, and they
were invariably regarded: I will tell you the most material of them. Attribute
it to the weakness of an old man's memory, if I am not altogether so perfect in
them as I wish.

"In care, reproof, correction, and encouragement, my wife and myself (as all
parents should) resolved to act, and ever acted, in perfect concert. Mothers
are often said to spoil children by indulgence, but both parents should
mutually unite, and determine not to spare the rod and spoil the child.
-- We early taught our child implicit submission to ourselves; assured, that
otherwise we should be able to teach her nothing. It was our care to remove all
bad examples, as far as possible from her sight; and in consequence to be
cautious in our choice of domestics. Children are often spoiled by being left
to converse and be too familiar with servants.
-- We endeavored always, to understand ourselves, what we wished our child to
understand; to be ourselves, what we would have her be; to do ourselves, what
we would have her practice; as knowing that parents are the original models,
upon which children form their tempers and behavior. Children may generally be
said to follow example, rather than precept.


"We labored gradually and pleasingly, to infuse into her mind the clearest
and most affecting notions of God; his universal presence; almighty power; his
goodness, truth, and overruling providence; his regard to pious men, and
attention to their prayers. As the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom,
parents therefore should be careful, to inculcate that fear in their children
betimes.
These things we imprinted upon her tender spirit, and fixed them by those
striking examples, Such particularly as those of Noah, Abraham, Joseph, etc.
the passage of the Israelites through the Red Sea; the miracles in the
wilderness; the deliverance of Daniel and of the three Israelites from the
furnace. -- The miracles of Christ; the Apostles, etc.
wherewith the sacred writings abound. -- We took care, that she should
frequently hear conversations upon serious and spiritual subjects, to which she
used to attend as matters of curiosity; and from which she caught much of a
religious and proper spirit. Few people are sensible of the advantage derived
to children from suitable and serious conversation. Alas! how trifling and
improper, is the conversation of too many parents before their children, and
how little calculated to inform their judgments, or regulate their conduct.


"It was our most earnest study, early to show her the vanity of the world: the
frailty of the body; the corruption of our fallen nature, the dignity and
infinite worth of the immortal soul; MATTHEW, xvi. 26.
and to make her acquainted, as she was capable, with what God has done for
that soul; and to set before her all the riches and mercy of redemption. -- We
constantly inculcated upon her, this important truth, that she was not created
merely to live here below, but in the glorious and eternal world above; and
that she was placed here only to have her virtue tried and exercised, The
present life is justly styled a state of trial and probation; for the
scriptures of divine truth frequently represent it as a warfare, and the
troubles and afflictions we meet with, as so many trials of our faith,
patience, and resignation.

2 TIMOTHY, 2, 3, 4. 1 PETER, i. 7.
that she might be made fit to live for ever in heaven. -- "And therefore, my
dear; you see, (I used to observe) that there can be no room for pride in your
person, or vanity in any external endowments, for your body is the workmanship
of the great God; you cannot make one hair of your head white or black: and
your body is but the prison, if I may so say, of your nobler part, which is
immortal, and must share in the rewards or punishments of futurity, while your
body will moulder in corruption, and become so odious, that your nearest and
dearest friends cannot approach it. If a beautiful, proud, and gay woman, would
but seriously reflect on what a loathsome carcass she must ere long become, in
the silent grave, amidst worms, rottenness, and corruption, it would tend to
mortify her pride, lessen her vanity, and teach her to be humble.


"Remember, you have received all you are and all you have from God; therefore
never presume to assign any merit to yourself; nor estimate any thing here
below, at too high a rate: for this life you perceive is only a state of trial,
and of consequence unworthy our too fond attachment. Heaven is your home; God
is your father; and eternity is your life." But pardon me, dear Sir, I digress
from my rules, and like an old man indeed, fall into downright prating --
Satisfied that all Religion stands or falls with the breach of the Sabbath, we
habituated our dear child from her infancy, to sanctify that sacred day: to
esteem highly the word of God; to reverence his ordinances, and to respect his
ministers. And we were especially careful, that with all religious instruction
(you know my own sentiments) she should imbibe a spirit of universal candor,
goodness, and charity; as far from the wildness of enthusiasm, as from the
narrowness of superstition and bigotry.

"We always addressed her understanding, and treated her as a rational We
suppose, that by this remark the gentleman means to express his disapprobation
of the simple method, in which many ignorant nurses, (we would not say
parents,) treat children; as if they imagined them mere little animals,
unconcerned with rationality.
creature: we encouraged her enquiries, and used her betimes to think and to
reason. We represented vice in its true colors, Well might Pope say,
Vice to be hated, need but to be seen.

which are the most odious, and virtue in her proper form of beauty and
loveliness. -- We were especially diligent to give her a deep sense of truth
and integrity; and an abhorrence of all manner of falsehood, fraud, craft,
subterfuge, and dissimulation, as base, dishonorable, and highly displeasing
to the Almighty. Assured that we could not cherish veracity too much, we never
were severe for any fault she ingeniously acknowledged; but always while we
strove to convince her of the wrong she had done, we honored and commended her
for the truth she had spoken. It is an old proverb, and a just one,
Truth may be blamed, but cannot be shamed.



"Convinced of the countless evils which attend the female sex from their
passion for dress and show, we endeavored all in our power to give her a low,
that is, a true opinion of these things; and though she always wore such
apparel in her younger days as became her rank and station, yet we never
deceived her into a wrong opinion of herself by gaudy, external ornaments -- If
we had, how could we have excused ourselves? Parents are much to blame to
encourage, or countenance their children in following the fashions of the times
too scrupulously, it naturally tends to promote pride and vanity in the young
and tender breast. --
-- Whenever we observed any thing tending to a bold, pert, or forward
behavior, (though blessed be God, there was even from her infancy little
appearance of this) it was checked immediately: for we knew it might grow up
into a flippant pertness, or a dissolute insolence.

"From many examples before us, we saw the misfortune of suffering children to
be men and women too soon; for children are by no means, fit to govern
themselves, or to direct others: -- we avoided this dangerous rock. Soon as she
was able to apply to the business of instruction, we inured her to diligence
and close application, yet not so close as to deprive her of such amusements
and exercises as were proper to preserve cheerfulness, vivacity, and health.
This is a good rule for parents to act by in general, toward their children,
respecting their employments and diversions.
And you, who knew her, (good Sir) and her many accomplishments, will do me the
justice to believe, that we permitted her not to want any advantages of
increasing in wisdom and knowledge, and that she did not abuse those advantages.

"I had forgot to observe, that we taught her most assiduously the duty of
humanity; for we taught her to reverence the feelings of nature even in the
lowest orders of creatures; we suffered her not to treat any with contempt, but
to show all possible acts of tenderness and charity, cherishing with all our
might a spirit of modesty and gentleness, of benevolence and compassion, even
to insects and animals, always discountenancing that wanton cruelty which some
children show as an early proof of a barbarous, wicked, and inhuman
disposition. See advice to a daughter.


"And the fruits were equal to our labors -- the lovely plant well repaid all
our care and tendance."

To show that this was not merely the remark of parental partiality, let us
proceed to take a view, in our next chapter of the amiable PULCHERIA in her
life and death.

CHAP. VII.
Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain; but a woman that fears the Lord,
she shall be praised.

Proverbs, xxxi. 30.
OUR obligations are truly great to those parents who carefully train up their
children in the paths of wisdom, piety, and virtue; that they may be enabled to
discharge every social duty with propriety. Children can never be sufficiently
sensible of the obligations they lie under to their parents for their care,
protection, and education, till they become parents themselves.
And as so much of the comfort and peace of human life depend upon the fair
sex, we are doubly indebted to those who early inform their tender minds, and
deliver into the hands of the husband, not only the lovely mistress, but the
endearing companion, and heart-approved friend. This was the constant and
successful endeavor of the parents of PULCHERIA; some of whose rules in the
education of their child, were delivered in the foregoing chapter.

An education so wise and rational, could scarce be supposed to have failed of
the desired effect. The modesty, understanding, and elegance of PULCHERIA were
generally observed, and the charms of her person, though of the first rate,
were always eclipsed by the superior beauties of her mind. She was sensible,
but not assuming; humble, but not mean; familiar, but not loquacious;
religious, but not gloomy. This reminds me of the character of Marcia, in the
tragedy of Cato: Though she is fair, oh how divinely fair!
But then the lovely maid improves her charm*
With inward greatness, unaffected wisdom,
And sanctity of manners.
^DDISON.


The tenderness and delicacy of her sentiments peculiarly recommended her, and
that sweet temper which never suffered her to indulge the malevolence of
censure, rendered her the object of universal esteem. I speak not of her
accidental acquirements, her skill in music, her taste for painting, etc. nor
of her domestic knowledge: suffice it to say, she was well accomplished in
these, and in every improvement which her parents could supply, or she herself
could make.

The happy BENVOLIO, with the perfect approbation of her parents, received this
rich treasure to his embraces, and called the lovely PULCHERIA his, in her
twenty-first year. He was the object of her choice, and his acknowledged worth
well justified her heart's attachment to him. The fruits of her parents' care
were now abundantly manifested; BENVOLIO* thought -- and justly thought -- his
lot peculiarly blessed, in a wise of so refined and happy a disposition. The
felicity was consummate, as the strongest and most undissembled affection can
produce. Their pleasures were mutual; and of separate satisfactions, -- happy
pair! -- they had not the least idea! Happy they! the happiest of their kind,
Whom gentler stars unite, and in one sat
Their hearts, their fortunes, and their beings blend.
It Is not the coarser tie of human laws,
Unnatural often and foreign to the mind,
That binds their peace; but harmony itself
Attuning all their passions into love.
THOMPSON'S SEASONS.


Her servants could never be lavish enough in her praises; for she treated them
always with the most amiable humanity: "she considered them, she used to say,
as fellow creatures, placed indeed in an inferior station; but not on that
account the less acceptable in the sight of God. Nay, if we remembered, (she
would observe) who it was that for our sakes took upon him the form of a
servant, we should certainly treat our domestics with becoming gentleness.
Besides, she would go on, it appears to me an office of common humanity, to
render a state of servitude and dependence as light and pleasing as possible:
for while we by the bounty of Heaven, enjoy such superior blessings, shall we
not, in gratitude, do all in our power to bless others who are less favored by
Providence? However different our stations in life may be, we are all of the
same blood and therefore have no reason to be proud of ourselves, or to lord it
over those who are below us; but to be humble, thankful and benevolent.
-- I esteem my servants as a kind of meaner, humbler friends; and though I
would on no account make myself too familiar with them, or listen either to
their flattery or their tales; yet I never would be deficient in alleviating
their inconveniences, and promoting their real happiness." Good masters often
make good servants: would to God, every master and mistress properly considered
this, and adopted the sentiments and conduct of Benvolio and Pulcheria for
their own.


Acting upon these principles, she was the darling of her domestics; they
beheld her with a degree of veneration. She was so happy as seldom to find
cause to change; and she never entertained her friends with tedious tales of
the ill behavior and errors of her servants. A practice too common with many
in the present day, but highly censurable and imprudent.
I should observe, that she was careful to see them well instructed in their
duty, and for that purpose she not only supplied them with proper books, but
saw that they read them, while her beloved partner omitted no opportunity to
assist in this necessary service.

Conscious of the high obligation upon all to observe the Sabbath, she strictly
devoted that day to religion. She took care that such of her family as could
possibly be spared, should always attend with her at the morning and evening
service of the parish church. This she esteemed an indispensable duty; How
great the pity! that so many persons in the superior walks of life, content
themselves with only going to church on Sundays, without suitably attending to,
and constantly practicing what they hear preached; hearing the gospel should
always be accompanied with a life regulated by its prospects.
and never allowed herself to ramble from church to church, as was the case
with some ladies of her acquaintance, in the neighborhood, whose practice she
constantly disapproved. "I owe this duty, she used to say, to my family, to my
neighbors, to my minister: and I cannot tell what evil may arise from a
different example."

The evening of the Sabbath was always spent in religious exercises; and she
never would think of seeing company on that day. Routs on Sundays were monsters
in her apprehension. "I can excuse, she would often observe, those in the lower
stations of life, who have no other day of leisure but the Sabbath, and who
perhaps are pent up in narrow shops all the rest of the week, if they dedicate
some part of the day to recreation: This sentiment is not agreeable to the
fourth command, remember the sabbath day to keep it holy, and therefore should
not be adopted by a follower of Christ, be his station in the world what it may.
but for us, who have the enjoyment of all the week, surely it is inexcusable
to devote this sacred day to our pleasures. Shall not the great giver of all,
receive a tribute of some small portion of our time?"

But were I to dwell upon all the excellences of her life and conduct, the
limits prescribed me in this paper would soon be exceeded. I shall omit,
therefore, any account of the benevolent charity which she exercised so
largely, (insomuch that never a child of distress went with a heavy heart and
unrelieved from her presence) -- while I hasten to give some account of her
death. Her constitution was delicate; after the birth of the second beloved
infant which she brought her BENVOLIO, (her first died early, and gave an
opportunity for the display of the most exemplary resignation,) she caught a
cold, which was accompanied with unhappy circumstances; and though she
recovered in some measure, yet the consequence was an hasty decay.

It is not easy to conceive the anguish of her parents and her husband upon so
melancholy an occasion; upon a discovery that all the efforts of art, and all
the powers of medicine were in vain; while her patience and resignation obliged
them to refrain from every word of repining, We cannot but feel for and
sympathize with those whom we love, when they are in pain and sorrow; but it is
inconsistent for us as Christians to murmur or repine, being assured what God
does either respecting us or ours, is right and best.
though it tended to increase their sorrow, by enhancing their esteem for her.
Happy as I was in her friendship, it was my custom often to visit her during
her long and trying illness; but I shall not easily forget an interview at the
close of it, which I must confess, wholly unmanned me, while it taught me the
deepest humility.

I found her seated in the chair of sickness, in her bedchamber, with her
little infant lying in her lap, over which she hung with such a look of
maternal fondness and anxiety, as I yet never saw, and which no painting could
express! Soon as I advanced, she lifted up her eyes, in which stood the big and
affectionate drops; while death seemed to sit upon her countenance, wan, yet
not void of that placid sweetness, which ever dwelt upon it.

"I was indulging, sir, said she, and I hope not improperly, some natural
affection, and taking, perhaps, -- my last leave of my poor little babe, who
holds my heart too fast -- (false and weak heart as it is) rather too fast
bound to this transitory scene! Pretty innocent! see how it smiles on its
weeping mother; unconscious yet of the bitterness of grief, and the sadness of
tears. -- Sweet babe! I must leave thee; the Father of heaven thinks fit, and
his will be done. But oh, the parent, dear sir, the parent will feel: -- surely
this will not be deemed a deficiency in humble resignation." Christians are not
stoics, they cannot but feel, though they should not fall under their troubles
and afflictions.
I observed that Christianity by no means opposes humanity; and that grace does
not destroy, it only regulates and refines our affections.

"My soul, she went on, thankfully acquiesces in all the divine disposals, and
I am satisfied, that whatever a God of love and wisdom ordains, must be best
for his creatures. But when I look upon this dear innocent; when I consider the
various evils of the world, and the prevalence of our corrupt passions: when I
consider the peculiar inconveniences of our sex, if deprived of maternal care
and instruction my heart throbs with sensible anxiety -- and I wish -- O father
of love, pity and pardon me! Must I, ah, must I leave this sweet harmless
creature to all the trials and difficulties of life? -- Oh my pretty babe, I
must leave thee; but I shall entrust thee (and in that let me take comfort)
entrust thee to a tender father, and to the protection of a Savior and a God,
who cares for his little ones. Blessed Savior" -- She was here overpowered by
the strength of her affection: and falling into a fainting fit, from which we
almost apprehended she would never recover, her husband and her parents were
instantly called up; every effort was used to restore her; though grief
suffered* no one present to utter a syllable. The scene was the most profoundly
awful I ever beheld.

At length she came to herself; and the first object she saw was her trembling
mother bathed in tears, and holding her clay-cold hand; on the other side stood
her father; at her feet knelt her anxious and distressed husband -- around her
several of us were placed, whose tears sufficiently witnessed our concern. She
raised her languid eyes; gazed earnestly at us -- then fixed them upon her
mother, "Best and most beloved of parents, said she, farewell, farewell; God of
his mercy reward your tender care of me, and give us a meeting in the future
world. -- Oh my father, and are you too there? -- do not let me see your tears:
support my poor mother, and remember you have a daughter gone before you, to
that place, where all sorrow ceases: -- But my husband" -- She said no more;
then threw her arms round his neck, and both mingled their tears together for
some time. She sighed forth, "Best and most dear of men, let me thank you,
sincerely thank you, for all the marks of your tender esteem. Be kind to my
pretty babe; oh! why should I say be kind? I know your goodness; but my sweet
innocent; let her -- " -- She stopped short -- but soon went on, "I little
expected all this pain at parting; this is dying; this is truly the bitterness
of death. This pathetic picture (drawn, as we may naturally suppose) from life,
somewhat resembles the affecting description of an eminent Christian in his
dying moments, in Mr. Hervey's Meditations among the Tombs, page 25.


"My dear friends, she continued, addressing herself to all of us around her,
"accept my best acknowledgments for all your kind offices to me; if you ever
remember me when I am gone, remember, that my soul perfectly rejoiced in God's
dealing with me; and that however the weaker passions of nature may prevail;
yet I am wholly resigned to his will, thankful to him for all; nay desirous to
quit this world, that, I may see my dear Savior, the Lord of life and love,
who gave his life for me, and in whose merits alone I joyfully trust for
salvation.

"I am on the brink of eternity, and now see clearly the importance of it --
Remember, oh remember, that every thing in time is insignificant to the awful
concern of -- " Eternity, Well does the poet say,
All, all on earth is shadow, all beyond
Is substance --
How solid all, where change shall be no more!
Dr. YOUNG.
-- she would have said, but her breath failed: -- she fainted a second time;
and when all our labors to recover her seemed just effectual, and she appeared
returning to life, a deep sob alarmed us -- and the lovely body was left
untena^ted by its immortal inhabitant.

Now she is numbered among the children of God; and her lot is among the
Saints. Well may it be said, "Blessed are the dead, who die in the Lord, for
they rest from their labors and their works do follow them."

CHAP. VIII.
Should such a wretch to numerous years arrive,
It can be little worth his while to live:
No honors, no regards his age attend,
Companions fly; he never could have a friend:
His flatterers leave him, and with wild affright,
He looks within, and shudders at the sight:
When threatening death uplifts his pointed dart,
With what impatience he applies to art,
Life to prolong amidst disease and pains!
-- Why this, if after it no sense remains?
Why should he choose those miseries to endure,
If death could grant an everlasting cure!
It Is plain there is something whispers in his ear,
(Though fain he would hide it) he has much to fear.
JENNYNS' translation of BROWN'S Poem on Immortality, etc.
AMONGST the various arguments of consolation on the loss of our friends, that
which is drawn from the pleasing hope of a future meeting, and perfect
felicity, doubtless is the most persuasive. Grief subsides, and sorrow softens
into a tenderly pleasing remembrance; when the soul is comforted with the happy
expectation of one day seeing again -- seeing never more to separate, those
whom death has torn from our affectionate embraces, and removed a little
before us, to our father's house.

The transporting thought suffers us no longer to lament our loss; the flame of
our friendship is still kept alive, and the anxious fear of disappointment on
our part, becomes an active principle of obedience and duty. -- See in this
view what we owe to our friends, and how careful we should be religiously to
pass the short time of our pilgrimage here, that when we depart they may have
scriptural grounds to believe, that our souls are with God; and that at his
right hand they shall meet us, in the fullness of bliss.

What a comfort was this to the parents and friends of the amiable PULCHERIA:
who, sensible of her constant attention to spiritual concerns, were well
convinced, that her change was from mortality to glory, and therefore resigned
her with cheerful thanksgiving to God; weeping over her, it is true, but
weeping only the tears of gentle affection; and living always with a
comfortable respect to that happy hour when again they should meet, after a
melancholy absence, to part no more for ever.

And shall it be? -- Oh thou God of infinite grace! ever studious of thy
creature's felicity, various in thy bounties, and infinite in loving kindness:
-- it must be so. For whatever conduces most to our bliss, we have abundant
evidence to conclude, will be always thy decree. -- It must be so! -- oh
pleasing, balmy hope! It must be so, --
Or whence those pleasing hopes, those fond desires,
Those longings after immortality?
It Is heaven itself that points out an hereafter,
And intimates eternity to man.
ADDISON'S CATO.
And once again, ye best-loved parents, ye tender solicitous guardians of my
youth, once again shall I behold you -- but ah! not as once; not as wasted with
sickness, and wearied with pain! I shall see you made like unto God; and saved
from sorrow, from sin, and from death. Thou too, my LANCASTER, loved friend of
my youth, with whom so often I have roved along the banks of favored Came, and
enjoyed all the sweets of virtuous, unpolluted friendship; thou too shall
rejoice my longing sight! for never have thou been wiped from the tablets of my
memory; still have I borne thee, as a seal upon my heart; my first, my dearest,
my disinterested friend!

Happy, thrice happy thou! far removed from this bad world, ignorant of its
ensnaring arts and fatal deceits. Happy, thrice happy thou! offered, in
virtuous innocence, and unhackneyed in the ways of evil men, an unpolluted
flower, an early and sweet sacrifice to heaven. Early, bright, transient,
chaste as morning dew,
She sparkled, was exhaled, and went to heaven.
NIGHT THOUGHTS.
-- And shall we meet? Alas, too well I know where rests the only doubt. But
the blessed hope shall animate my soul: still, still will I maintain the painful
conflict. Aid me, oh mighty Redeemer, in the fight; and through thy merits give
me victory, St, Paul declares we are more than conquerors through him that has
loved us.

ROMANS viii. 37.
give a happy, speedy union with thyself, and with my deceased friends.

But have we not living friends? And shall we in our regard for the dead forget
our duty to the living? -- Forbid it, heaven! Nor let it be feared, where
virtuous friendship reigns in the generous heart, that the love which awakens
every tender sentiment for the departed, will make us less anxious to
communicate felicity to the surviving; less anxious so to live, that we may
leave behind us the sweet odor of our memory, and the anxious desire to enjoy
us again. Without this reciprocation of mutual endearments, what is life, and
what is man? Was he formed for himself, or can he be blessed in unsocial
existence? Can he be contented (nay then let him relinquish his claim to
immortality) can he be contented to live without the love, to die without the
tribute of friendly remembrance! -- Can he be contented to live the despiser of
his God, and to die the affliction of his friends, who can never think without
horror of his future existence! How then can they dry up their tears? Oh
wretched parents of the more wretched MISELLA! my heart bleeds for you: I
wonder not that ye refuse to be comforted.

Have we then any value for our friends, are they really dear to us, do we wish
to remove every cause of anguish from their souls, and to wipe off every tear
of distress from their eyes? -- Let this be a motive to influence our conduct,
and to render us active in the discharge of every duty to God and to them; that
so when we are summoned to that future and important world, they may close our
eyes with peace, and say with heartfelt satisfaction, "Farewell, oh farewell,
thou dearest, best-loved friend! Thy life, thy love, thy faith, leave us no
room to doubt of thy felicity. Thou art happy -- we mourn only for ourselves.
Yet soon, very soon, we hope to meet thee again. -- Then farewell only for a
little while: we will ever bear thee in most faithful remembrance; and treading
in the paths of thy virtues, will hope speedily to receive thy reward."

How desirable to leave this world, thus lamented and beloved! How much better
than to drag out a contemptible existence through threescore and ten worthless
years, and at length to drop into the grave, and there to rot, without one
longing wish from one lamenting friend? They who live unbeloved, may naturally
expect to die unlamented.


The contrast, perhaps, may strike us; let us view it in BUBULA; whose funeral
obsequies I saw lately performed, with all the pomp and vain parade of
ostentatious pride; yet though carried to the silent tomb, with all this farce
of show, no eye dropped a tear, and no heart heaved a sigh when BUBULO ceased to
breathe.

Full threescore years and ten had BUBULO encumbered with his heavy load, this
sublunary world; and it would be difficult to point out any works of
benevolence or religion, any works of real worth or humanity, which
distinguished these seventy years. Fond of vile pelf, the earthworm continually
toiled to add to his heap; and though rich, and daily increasing in wealth,
could never prevail upon himself to communicate of his riches to others, or to
serve his nearest relations. Yet smooth were his words, and fair were his
promises; and who that knew him not, would have thought him any other than an
universal friend to mankind?

The hours which were not devoted to gain, were consecrated to the service of
his nice and enormous appetite, to devouring of flesh, and drinking of wine. He
was, in this respect, a perfect animal: and who that saw him at a city feast
ever thought him of a superior order? His faculties were almost entirely
absorbed by this life of indulgence and gluttony: yet stupid as he appeared to
be, he could pretend to scoff at Religion, to deny even the being, and to
despise the revelation of God. -- What a dreadful character! from such slaves
of the devil and heirs of hell good Lord deliver us.

He found a female willing to submit to the slavery of his dominion: she
brought him three children, and happily was soon freed from her captivity. The
eldest son continued a kind of superior servant to him, till his death, which
he had long impatiently wished for, and at length heard of with joy. The
younger, of a more sprightly disposition, unbiassed by principles, rushed
headlong into the practice of all fashionable vices, and being unassisted by
his father, committed some actions which obliged him to secure himself, by a
voluntary banishment to the West Indies. His daughter, though frequently asked
in marriage, could never prevail upon him to forward her happy settlement in
life: -- he could not spare a fortune for her; she continued with him,
therefore, in a state of discontent, and added but little to his felicity by
her filial duty, as he was so averse to make any addition to here is by his
parental regard. He saw his widowed sister, with many little orphans,
surrounded with a variety of difficulties; and persuaded at length to undertake
her affairs, embroiled them more and more; and in conclusion gave them up,
because his own business and concerns would not allow him sufficient time to
attend to them.

A long and wasting illness warned him of eternity: -- he would not receive the
warning. He dreaded death, yet would not prepare to die. The jovial associates
at the tavern and the club, forsook and forgot him: -- his servants attended
on, but cursed him: -- his children thought every day of his existence too
long: -- the few dependants, which his money occasioned, ceased to regard him,
and paid their respects chiefly to his son. BUBULO observed it, and it grieved
him to his very soul. He sent for more and more physicians; they wrote, shook
their heads, and took their fees: all hope was gone. The minister of the parish
was sent for. -- He found the almost lifeless wretch weeping, and lying along
the ground; for he would be removed from his bed; but not having strength to
support himself, he fell down, and in a few moments died. -- Nobody wept, for
nobody had cause to weep: the pride of the family gave him a pompous funeral,
-- and now he is forgotten!

Think not, oh reader, the character of BUBULO exaggerated. He lived! -- and
alas, too much it is to be feared, there are many such BUBULO'S living, whose
example should inspire us with detestation of a life, which must certainly end
in a death not less dreadful.

N. B. A friend of the writer of these reflections is pleased to observe, "The
Reflections on Death please me much. But don't you carry things rather too far,
when you say, (in your 7th chapter) "'it is an indespensible duty to go to our
parish church." -- Was I to live in London, I should rarely or never go to my
parish church, if I had a stupid humdrum minister. I long to live in London,
that I might hear clever men, etc. -- I disapprove as much as you can do,
running after Methodist preachers and enthusiasts; but should I not prefer a
Sherlock at the Temple, if I lived in Fleet Street, to, etc.

It is a misfortune, that when gentlemen quote, they will not refer to the
work, and observe the words -- It is not said positively, in the place referred
to, that "it is an indispensible duty, etc." -- The writer of the Reflections
does not deliver his own sentiments in that place; he only says, (see p. 89.)
that the lady, whose character is given, PULCHERIA, esteemed it (for her part)
an indispensible duty. It did not follow from thence, that the writer of these
Reflections thought it so: though being thus called upon by a man of sense and
learning, (as his friend confessedly is,) he is now ready to declare, that he
sincerely thinks there can be but very few exceptions. As to that of a
Sherlock, it is too peculiar to be drawn into example. -- But what would this
gentleman say of those, who, loose to all connections with their parish
minister, etc. would leave a Sherlock, nay, and esteem him a legal preacher
without ^^^ction, etc. etc. to hear a butcher, or a weaver, a man without
learning, nay, it may be, a stranger to his own mother tongue?


CHAP. IX.
-- Cut off even in the Blossoms of my Sin;
No reckoning made, but sent to my Account,
With all my imperfections on my head!
O horrible -- O horrible; most horrible!
SHAKESPEARE.
IN the Liturgy of the church of England, we pray to God to deliver us from
sudden death; that is, as her best divines have always explained it, and as
reason. clearly understands it from a death sudden and unlooked for, from a
death instantaneous and unexpected; Beware Lorenzo, a slow sudden death.

NIGHT THOUGHTS.
for which no provision has been made which finds the soul* utterly unprepared,
and sends the unhappy creature into eternity, with all his imperfections on his
head. A death like this is doubtless to be deprecated, more than the
wide-wasting pestilence, or the devouring sword. The thought of death alone the
fear destroys;
A disaffection to that precious thought,
Is more than midnight darkness on the soul,
Which sleeps beneath it, on a precipice,
Pufft off by the first bla^t, and lost for ever.
Dr. YOUNG.


On the other side, to the good man, to the soul conscious of its frail
dependence here, and properly careful to secure its eternal interests in the
world beyond the grave, a sudden death is so far from an evil, that it appears
rather a blessing, and in this view has been earnestly wished for, even by men
of exemplary piety. St. Paul had a desire to depart, Philipians, i.23. St. John
wishes for the coming of Jesus Christ quickly, in the 22d of his Revelations,
and 20th verse.


Indeed, strictly speaking, there is no such thing as sudden death to us, who
as soon as we are born, begin to draw to our end; who breathe this sublunary
air as temporary strangers, existing only a while upon the bounty of
Providence; and assured that the moment will come shortly, may come instantly,
when the Lord of life shall summon us into his tremendous presence. The young,
the old, the rich, the poor,
Can neither, life an hour ensure.
SOTITARY WALKS.
And as such is the condition of our being, we cannot properly call that stroke
sudden; to live in constant expectation of which, is our highest wisdom and
duty. Submission to the will of him who is as good as he is wise, is doubtless
the best service which such imperfect creatures can pay in every particular;
and therefore we act most wisely, when we submit the determination of this
point to the father of mercies, and wait with resignation either from the
momentary stroke, or the long and lingering trial, which dismisseth us from the
stage of life. -- This care only should be ours; well to act our parts, that
the dismission may be with a plaudit, with the approbation of our judge. Let
rich and poor lay this to heart,
Not he who acts the greatest part,
But they who act the best, will be
The happiest men eternally.
RURAL CHRISTIAN.


"Yet, yet, oh father of unutterable love, thou source of everlasting goodness,
yet if the meanest of thy creatures might be allowed to make his request -- if
thou would deign to give him liberty of choice -- suffer him not, oh do not
suffer him long to languish on the bed of feeble disease, or excruciating pain;
nor yet snatch him hence, by an instantaneous stroke, before he has looked his
last farewell, and given the final affectionate adieu to all his heart
approved, his dearest, tenderest, and most valued friends! Neither a sudden or
lingering death is in general to be wished for, but God's own time and way, for
removing out of this present evil world, should be the matter of our prayer,
and full submission to, as the best and fittest; while to be habitually ready
for awful summons, should be our daily study and concern.
He will not call their kind attendance round his bed, "the afflicting parade
of death: he will rejoice in their sympathetic tenderness; he will struggle to
pour forth the voice of consolation and love; he will point to the hope which
upholds his soul, the shining pole star by which he steers, and by which he
trusts his dearest friends shall steer into the joyful harbor of eternal rest!
The hope, the star, the sun, Christ Jesus, the conqueror of death, and
destruction of the grave. HOSEA, xiii. 14.


Such was the petition of the beloved URANIUS; heaven heard and granted his
prayer. This day he sickened; the next summoned and took leave of his friends;
perfect in his senses, he saw death approaching, and saw him unappalled! for he
had led his life in continual preparation for the awful event. -- On the
evening of the third day, he closed his eyes, and commended his spirit to God,
who gave it; and almost without a groan, exchanged this mortal for an immortal
state! -- Happy URANIUS -- so let me die! or rather, let me say, "so let me
live," and death cannot fail to be blessed. Where to live is Christ, to die
must be gain, eternal gain; for thus says the Spirit, blessed are the dead who
die in the Lord.


How different was the death, and ah! how different was the life of my
neighbor AGRICOLA; who often, though in vain, I have endeavored to wean from
the world, and to show the deceit and delusion of all earthly attachments. But
alas, he would not believe? AGRICOLA was a wealthy and laborious farmer; it
might, strictly speaking, be said of him, that "he rose up early, and late took
rest, and eat the bread of carefulness." PSALMS, cxxvii. 2.
He prevented the morning's dawn, and called the hinds to the field, ere the
rosy sun peeped over the misty mountains. The flail, early heard resounding in
his barn, awakened the rest of the village, and was industry's summons to
arise. His shepherds first drove their flocks a-field; and as the bleating
multitude poured from their eotes, AGRICOLA stood by, and beheld with rapture
the whiteness of their fleeces, and the strength of his sportive lambs. The
neighboring markets saw him always first to enter, and last to leave the scene
of commerce and advantage; his samples were always ready, and were always best.

Thus he pursued temporal things with unwearied application, and unremitted
diligence; but for eternal things, AGRICOLA never once heeded, never once
thought of them! What then? Did not AGRICOLA believe in God, in providence, in
eternity? Oh yes, he believed all this; True faith on a firm belief in th^se
great and glorious doctrines of divine revelation, will never leave manknd to
live, (as the common phrase is) as they list, or to act without thought and
consideration, but will more or less influence the life, and regulate the
conduct.
but he had no time to think of such things! "Hereafter," was his word; it will
be soon enough "hereafter." What then? -- Did AGRICOLA forsake the weekly
service of the church, and wholly relinquish the worship of God? -- Oh, by no
means. AGRICOLA never or very rarely was absent from the divine service: he
generally invited the curate of his little village -- (a poor laborious man,
like himself, who rode with all haste from parish to parish, and served three
distant churches!) He generally invited him to a regale at his house on the
sabbath; when the time would allow, the good man embraced it with thankfulness;
they drank together in friendly sort; and behold, their conversation was of
"the oxen in the field." AGRICOLA had sagacity enough to discern this
impropriety in the conduct of the man of God. His Rector's rare appearance in
this village, and ready acceptance of his tithes, gave him also no very
favorable idea of religion. From such worldly minded rectors and curates, Good
Lord deliver us.
He He judged these men servants of the Lord for the wages of the world; and
apprehended all religion to be merely lucrative and earthly. Alas! how many
endeavor only to make a gain of godliness, and follow Jesus, merely for the
loaves and fishes.
He was desirous to believe it such; hence in the alehouse, at the markets,
and in the little club of his village-neighbours, he frequently delivered his
sentiments with freedom, when God and his priests were sure to be treated with
little or no respect.

AGRICOLA continued his course of life for some years; only as his money
increased, so increased his heart's attachment to it; It is frequently
observed, and too often verefied, the more we have, the more we want.
and (as the world was fond to say) his regard to probity diminished as his
possessions were multiplied. The widows and the poor complained of his rapacity
and extortion; the fields spoke his covetousness; for he encroached upon his
neighbors lands, and the ancient boundaries were rendered disputable. The
markets were said to be forestalled, and his abundance became the source of
oppression to the poorer farmer: he wished to stand alone; and beheld with a
malevolent eye, the flocks, the herds, and the crops of others -- He grew
surly, proud, and insolent: vainly imagining that his wealth gave him an
importance, and a right to tyrannize over his inferior neighbors. Wealth may
naturally claim some degree of homage and respect from the sons and daughters
of poverty and indigence, but never should (though it too often does) create in
the possessors of it, pride, or self-importance.
My connections with him afforded me an opportunity often to remonstrate: he
sometimes heard and promised fair, but he heard more frequently with
impatience, and would have spoken his dislike, if worldly motives had not
compelled him to silence.

Happy had it been for him if he had heard, regarded, and been wise. Happy for
him if he had trusted less to that "hereafter," which never came! For as last
summer he attended his reapers in the field, suddenly the heavens grew black
with clouds; the sun withdrew his light; the air seemed to stagnate with
intolerable fervor; the lightning flashed with unremitting fury; vast peals of
thunder burst fearfully around; there was no place to fly unto; they were
exposed to all the terrors of the storm. AGRICOLA stood aghast -- when behold,
the thunderbolt of Omnipotence, (a sheet of living flame disclosing itself
over his head,) in a moment struck him a blackened corpse to the ground!

Oh horrible! most horrible! thus to be sent to our final account! -- And shall
not the death of AGRICOLA instruct us? Will thou, O Man, after such an
admonition, persevere in forgetfulness of duty and attachment to the world! --
can thou secure thyself from so deplorable an end? -- No! thou can not;
thou can not promise to thyself one future moment! -- Death lies concealed in
every path we tread, and his stroke will ever be sudden and dreadful, in
proportion to the degree of our forgetfulness of that stroke, and our
attachment to the vain delights, or possessions of the world.

CHAP. X.
He who lives in Pleasure, is dead while he lives.

1 Timothy v. 6.
IT gives the Author of these Reflections singular pleasure to have the
approbation of a lady, so justly admired for her taste as Lady --. He esteems
it a particular favor that she condescends to make a request to him, which he
most readily grants, as assured, that the letter which she desires him to
admit, will not only be pleasing, but highly instructive to his serious
readers. The death of Mr. NASH drew her thoughts to it, and therefore she is
pleased to inform me, she copied it out for the benefit of the public: it was
sent by a person of known worth and piety, some years since, to that son of
pleasure. -- What effect it had, his future life, alas! did but too plainly
show!

To RICHARD NASH, Esquire at Bath.
SIR,
THIS comes from your sincere friend, and one that has your best interest
deeply at heart. It comes on a design altogether important, and of no less
consequence than your everlasting happiness: so that it may justly challenge
your careful regard. It is not to upbraid or reproach, much less to triumph and
insult over your misconduct: -- no, it is pure benevolence, it is disinterested
good will prompts me to write; so that I hope I shall not raise your
resentment. However, be the issue what it will, I cannot bear to see you walk
in the paths which lead to death, without warning you of your danger, without
sounding in your ears the awful admonition, "Return and live: -- For why will
you die?" I beg of you to consider whether you do or not, in some measure,
resemble those unhappy children of ELI, whom, though they were famous in their
generation, and men of renown, yet vengeance suffered not to live. For my part,
I may safely use the expostulation of the old priest: -- "Why do you such
things?" for I hear of your evil doings by all this people. Nay, my brother,
for it is no good report I hear; you make the Lord's people to transgress." I
have long observed and pitied you; and a most melancholy spectacle I lately
beheld, made me resolve to caution you, lest you also come into the same
condemnation.

I was not long since called to visit a poor gentleman, ere while of the most
robust body, and of the gayest temper I ever knew. But when I visited him, oh
how was the glory departed from him! I found him no more that sprightly, and
vivacious son of joy, which he used to be; but languishing, pining away, and
withering under the chastising hand of God. His limbs feeble and trembling; his
countenance forlorn and ghastly; PSALMS, cxxvii. 2.
and the little breath he had left, sobbed out in sorrowful sighs! His body
hastening apace to the dust, to lodge in the silent grave, -- the land of
darkness and desolation. His soul just going to God who gave it; ECCLESIASTES,
xii. 7.
to enter upon an unchangeable and eternal state.

When I was come into his chamber, and had seated himself on his bed, he first
cast a most wishful look upon me, and then began as well as he was able to
speak -- "Oh that I had been wise, that I had known this, that I had considered
my latter end! Ah! Mr. --, Death is knocking at my door: in a few hours more I
shall draw my last gasp; and then comes judgment, the tremendous judgment!
ECCLESIASTES, xii. 14.
-- How shall I appear, unprepared as I am, before the all-knowing and
omnipotent God! How shall I endure the day of his coming."

When I mentioned, among many other things, that holy Religion which he had
formerly so slightly esteemed, he replied (with a hasty eagerness) "Oh that
Religion is the only thing I now long for. -- It Is this alone,
Amidst life's pains, abasements, emptiness,
The soul can cherish, elevate and fill.

I have not words to tell you how highly I value it; I would gladly part with
all my estate, large as it is, or a world, to have lived in the practice of it.
Now my benighted eyes are enlightened, I. clearly discern the things that are
excellent.

What is there in the place whither I am going, but God? or what is there to be
desired on earth, but Religion? -- But if this God should restore you to
health, said I, think you that you should alter your former course? -- "I call
heaven and earth to witness, said he, I would labor for holiness as I shall
soon labor for life. As for ^ches and pleasures, and the applauses of men, I
account them as dross and dung, no more to my happiness than the feathers that
lie on the floor.

"Oh if the righteous judge would try me once more; if he would but reprieve
and spare me a little longer -- in what a spirit would I spend the remainder of
my days? I would know no other business, aim at no other end, than perfecting
myself in holiness. Whatever contributed to that, every means of grace; every
opportunity of spiritual improvement, should be dearer to me than thousands of
gold and silver -- But alas, why do I amuse myself with fond imaginations? The
best resolutions are now insignificant, because they are too late. The day in
which I should have worked is over and gone, and I see a sad, horrible night
approaching, bringing with it the blackness of darkness for ever. Heretofore,
(woe is me!) when God called, I refused; when he invited, I was one of them
that made excuse. -- Now, therefore, I receive the reward of my deeds;
fearfulness and trembling are come upon me: I smart, I am in sore anguish
already; and yet this is but the beginning of sorrows! -- It does not yet
appear what I shall be -- but sure I shall be ruined, undone, and destroyed
with an everlasting destruction!"

This sad scene I saw with my eyes; these words, and many more equally
affecting, I heard with my ears; and soon after attended the unhappy gentleman
to his tomb. The almost breathless skeleton spoke in such an accent, and with
so much earnestness, that I could not easily forget him or his words. And as I
was musing upon this sorrowful subject, I remembered Mr. N -- SH; I remembered,
you, Sir -- For I discerned too near an agreement and correspondence between
yourself and the deceased. "They are alike, said I, in their ways, and what
shall hinder them from being alike in their end? The course of their actions
was equally full of sin and folly, and why should not the period of them be
equally full of horror and distress? I am grievously afraid for the survivor,
lest as he lives the life, so he should die the death of this wretched man, and
his latter end should be like his.

For this cause, therefore, I take my pen to advise -- to admonish -- nay, to
request of you to repent while you have an opportunity, if happily you may find
grace and forgiveness. Yet a moment, and you may die; yet a little while, and
you must die: -- And will you go down with infamy and despair to the grave,
rather than depart in peace, and with hopes full of immortality?

But I must tell you, Sir, with the utmost freedom, that your present behavior
is not the way to reconcile yourself to God. You are so far from making
atonement to offended justice, that you are aggravating the future account, and
heaping up an increase of wrath against the day of wrath. For what say the
scriptures? those books, which at the consummation of all things, the ancient
of days shall open, and by which you shall be judged -- What say those sacred
volumes? They testify and declare to every soul of man, -- "That whosoever lives
in pleasure, is dead while he lives." 1 TIMOTHY, v. 6.
So that while you roll on in a continued circle of sensual delights and vain
entertainments, you are dead to all the purposes of piety and virtue.

Think, Sir, I conjure you, think upon this before it is too late, if you have
any inclination to escape the fire that will never be quenched. Would you be
rescued from the just vengeance of Almighty God? Would you be delivered from
weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth? Sure you would! But you may be certain
that will never be done by amusements, which, at the best, are trifling and
impertinent; and therefore if for no other reason, foolish and sinful. It Is by
seriousness; it is by retirement and self-examination, you must accomplish this
great and desirable deliverance. It Is good for every rational creature upon
earth, frequently and seriously to ask himself, what am I? what was I created
for? and whither am I going?
You must not appear at the head of every silly diversion, but enter into your
closet, and shut the door: and commune with your own heart, and search out your
own spirit. The pride of life, and all superfluity of naughtiness must be put
away. You must make haste, and delay not the time to keep (and with all your
might too) all God's holy commandments. Always remembering that mighty sinners
must be mightily penitent; or else be mightily tormented.

Your example, and your projects have been extremely prejudicial, I wish I
could not say fatal and destructive to many: for this, there is no amends but
an alteration in your conduct, as signal and remarkable as your person and name.

If you do not by this method remedy in some degree the evils which you have
sent abroad, and prevent the mischievous consequences which may ensue, --
wretched will you be, yea wretched to all eternity. The blood of souls will be
laid to your charge; God's jealousy, like a consuming flame, will smoke against
you; as you yourself will see in that day, when the mountains shall quake, and
the hills melt, and the earth be burnt up at his tremendous presence.

Once more then, I exhort you as a friend; I beseech you as a brother; I charge
you as a messenger sent from the great God, in his most solemn words: -- "Cast
away from you your transgressions; make you a new heart and a new spirit; so
iniquity shall not be your ruin." EZEKIEL, xvii. 30, 31.


Perhaps you may be disposed to contemn this, and its serious purport; or to
recommend it to your companions as a fit subject for raillery. -- But let me
tell you beforehand, that for this, as well as for many other things, God will
bring you into judgment. ECCLESIASTES, xi. 9.
He sees me now I write: he will observe you while you read. He notes down my
words in his book; he will also note down your consequent procedure. So that,
not upon me, but upon your own self, will the neglecting or despising my
friendly admonition turn. "If thou be wise, thou shall be wise for thyself; if
thou scornest, thou alone shall bear it."

With hearty good wishes for your welfare, I remain, Sir, your unknown friend,
The writer of these Reflections thought himself obliged to retain this letter,
(which, however, he has taken the liberty to correct in a few places) not only
out of respect to the Lady who communicated it, but because it was published in
the Christian's Magazine, in the regular course of the Reflections. He finds it
too in a life of Mr. NASH, lately published, and was therefore the rather
inclined to retain it, as that biographer seems to think it too severe, and is
inclined to palliate a life of utter dissipation* which certainly merited the
severest strictures.

No man living can have a higher regard for benevolence and humanity than the
writer of these lines: but he thinks benevolence to the soul of a much higher
nature than that of the body; and would be far from leading those who are
treading the insidious paths of pleasure with too eager delight, into delusive
and dangerous opinions, as if tenderness of heart, and acts of charity, could
atone for every other deficiency. Dissipated and fond of pleasure as we are,
little need is there to encourage men in so false a pursuit. It is hoped,
therefore, that the writer of NASH'S life, (who he is, I know not,) in a future
edition, would strike out that offensive and hurtful passage, which every
sincere Christian must disapprove, wherein he asserts, -- "That there was
nothing criminal in his (NASH'S) conduct: -- that he was a harmless creature,
whose greatest vice was vanity, -- and that scarce a single action of his life,
except one, deserves the asperity of reproach." And this is said of a man, who,
with a heart of exquisite humanity, and which might have been molded into the
noblest form, -- was yet, through life, a gamester professed, and an encourager
of illegal gambling! -- a follower of pleasure all his days, and a perpetual
dissipater! -- and whose conversation was made up of trifling, of falsehood, and
of immorality!

In matters which concern the souls of men, let us be especially careful; for
fatal, indeed, may it be to betray them into wrong opinions. In other respects
we will unite to applaud Mr. NASH, and will readily join his Panegyrists; -- we
will be thankful to him for the improvements he has made at Bath, by his means
the most elegant and pleasing of all public places; and we will be thankful to
the editor of his life, for the amusement and satisfaction we have received
from so well-wrote and entertaining a performance.


etc.


CHAP. XI.
So may thou live, till like ripe fruit thou drop
Into thy mother's lap, or be with ease
Gathered, not harshly plucked, for Death mature.
This is old age; but then thou must outlive
Thy youth, thy strength, thy beauty, which will change
To withered, weak, and gray; thy senses then
Obtuse, all taste of pleasure must forego,
To what thou have: and for the air of youth
Hopeful and cheerful, in thy blood will reign
A melancholy damp of cold and dry,
To weigh thy spirits down; and last, consume
The balm of health.
MILTON.
IN our two foregoing chapters, we have two very different and alarming
characters before us; each sufficient to show us the vanity of this life, and
to awaken in our souls an earnest attention to future concerns. The one, cut
off by a sudden blast from heaven in the full bloom of days, and the vigor of
health; the other, dragging through a length of wearisome years a feeble
existence, Mr. NASH died at Bath in February, 1761, aged 88, "The man was sunk
long before, as one expresses it, in the weakness and infirmities of exhausted
nature."
to the last scene of all.

Which ends our strange, eventful history,
To second childishness and mere oblivion,
Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans every thing. SHAKESPEARE.

Old age is honorable, and has its advantages. -- But might I presume, Oh!
thou Almighty and All-wise! short-sighted as I am, and incapable at the best to
distinguish my real good from evil, might I presume to judge, or to ask any
thing of thee respecting my future state in this poor and perishing world, I
would humbly say, "Suffer me not to bear the load of life when every faculty is
benumbed, when every power of enjoyment is past; when oblivion darkens the
memory, and all the senses seem wearied and sealed up; when the power of being
useful to mankind is totally removed; nay, when the power of pleasing is no
more, and we become a burden even to our nearest friends."

See the trembling, palsied HASSAN! unable to move; scarce able to utter
intelligible sounds; weak in his sight, imperfect in hearing; oppressed with
pains; forgotten by the world; forsaken by all; and attended only by a distant
relation, whom interest alone keeps with him, impatient for his departure, and
anxious to possess his wealth. Yet though thus miserable, despised, forsaken,
and forgotten; HASSAN loves the world; clings faster to it, the more it shrinks
from his embraces; detests the thoughts of death; and thinks and talks of
nothing with satisfaction, but the delusive mammon of unrighteousness. LUKE,
xvi. 9.11.
Oh, what an old age is this! How wretched an issue of a long and useless life!
-- Fourscore years have been passed to no end, but the procuring of wealth.
Fourscore years are over; the wealth is procured; the man is about to die, and
he has neither child nor friend to inherit it! He has no power to enjoy it
himself; he is dead while he lives: yet his affections are placed -- not on
things above, -- but ah, sad reverse! -- on things below. Can the world produce
any object more pitiable or more contemptible than HASSAN?

Vigorous old age, the winter of an useful, virtuous life, is as much to be
desired, as the contrary is to be deprecated. Crowned with victory over the
inferior passions, girt round with useful and experimental knowledge, leaning
on the staff of prudence, courage, Bishop HALL gives us an instance of courage
in an old plain man in the country: some thieves broke into his solitary
dwelling, taking advantage of the absence of his family, and finding him
sitting alone by his fireside, they fell violently upon him; when one of them
fixing his dagger to the old man's heart, swore that he would presently kill
him, if he did not instantly deliver to them that money which they knew he had
lately received. The old man, looking boldly into the face of the villain,
replied with an undaunted courage; "Nay, if I were killed by thee, I have lived
long enough; but I tell thee, son, unless thou mend thy manners, thou will
never live to see half my days."
and resolution, the old man becomes a blessing to society; we rise up to him
with reverence, and rejoice to do him honor.

Such is the hoary SOPHRON; we behold him with a degree of awe and veneration;
we consult him with confidence; and to follow his advice is to act wisely and
consistently. SOPHRON filled a very busy sphere of life, and maintained a high
reputation for integrity, prudence, and piety. He retreated in proper season
from the stage, and now dedicates his time to the great business of
self-recollection. Yet is he no absolute hermit nor recluse; nor does he so
live to himself as to forget the concerns of others; mild and affable, he
delights in the conversation of his friends, and pleasingly instructs, while
scarce seeming to instruct; benevolent and humane, he listens to the voice of
affliction, and is always the ready friend of the poor and the oppressed. Happy
SOPHRON! he has not lived in vain; his youth was active; his old age is
healthful, placid, and serene. Resigned to the Sovereign Disposer's will, he
waits contentedly for his approaching change; and looks with joy to his
journey's end; looks with joy to that welcome harbor, wherein his
weather-beaten vessel must shortly cast anchor! With joy the sailor, long by
tempest's tossed,
Spreads all his canvass for the wished for coast;
With joy the hind, his daily labor done,
Sees the broad shadows and the setting sun;
With joy the slave, worn out with tedious woes,
Beholds the land which liberty bestows;
So death with joy my feeble voice shall greet,
My hand shall beckon and my wish shall meet.
ANON.
when his youth shall be renewed like unto the eagle's, and he shall live with
God in perfect felicity for ever. Old ADAM, the faithful servant, in
Shakespeare,


If men will not look forward, nor prepare for eternity, we cannot expect they
should prepare for old age; but surely, if we wish or desire to live long, --
and it is to be feared this is too much the wish of human hearts, -- we should
endeavor to provide for the winter of life, by laying up such a store of true
wisdom and experience, as may render the close of it comfortable; or at least
soften the many unavoidable difficulties of age.

Intemperance will in the general prevent our long continuance here below; 1
THESSALONIANS, iv.17.
as it certainly is the source of many pains and evils. Old ADAM, the faithful
servant, in Shakespeare, speaks thus: Though I look old, yet I am strong and
lusty,
For in my youth I never did apply
Hot and rebellious liquors in my blood;
Nor did I with unbashful forehead woo
The means of weakness and debility:
Therefore my age is as a lusty winter,
Frosty, but kindly. --



Vice and immorality will render our old age despicable to others and
afflicting to ourselves; As virtue is its own reward, so vice is generally its
own punishment.
and make us the more uneasy to quit the stage of life, as we draw nearer the
solemn change. So that the grand rule to attain a happy old age, as well as a
happy death, is to "live well:" -- to live, as becomes those who bear the name
of Christians, and profess to be the disciples and followers of Christ. Well
might a good man say not long since, respecting true christians, "The children
of God are best known by their family likeness."


Uncertain as is the tenure of human life, this rule, one would conceive,
should be universally regarded. For how few, how very few of the myriads of
mortals, who tread this earth, arrive at old age, or see the present boundary
of human life, the "seventieth year!" Psalms, xc.10.
What numbers before that, are consigned to a state eternal and unalterable!
alarming thought! -- And can thou, oh reader, promise thyself this length of
days! Know thou how long thy line shall run: know thou when the
tremendous Judge shall call, and thou must appear before his impartial
tribunal? Alas, human fate is mantled in thick darkness! But eternity -- who
like AGRICOLA, would be utterly unprepared for it, since the call may come
instantly? and then how terrible will be the consequences?

But AGRICOLA'S fate was peculiar. -- So thought his neighbor HAUSTULUS. He
saw the singed corpse of AGRICOLA borne from the field; shook his head,
declared the stroke a judgment from heaven, and enlarged greatly on the
demerits of the deceased: De mortuis nil nisi bonum, is the language of
humanity and benevolence, founded on that well known proverb, humanum est
errare.
-- yet he forgot himself. HAUSTULUS was the pride of the village where he
lived: young, healthful, robust: the maidens beheld him with pleasure; the
young men heard of his perfections with envy. A lively goodnature recommended
him universally; and relying on the strength of his constitution, he was the
first and last at every merriment, at every wake, at every scene of rural
pleasantry and joy.

Drinking too much at one of these meetings, and staying too late from home, he
caught a cold; a violent fever ensued; he became delirious, all hopes in a few
days were lost; and he, who had never employed one serious hour about his soul;
thus plunged, -- ah hapless improvident -- into an everlasting state! -- Was
his fate peculiar? was his death sudden? -- It Is a death -- it is a fate every
day exemplified -- And would you choose to share such a fate; to die such a
death? Surely no: then be careful not to lead such a life. For there are
innumerable outlets from this present scene: lightnings and fevers are not the
only instruments in the hand of God: the meanest and most inconsiderable agent
is all-sufficient with him to stop the throbbing heart, Know, thoughtless man,
when it is thy Maker's will,
A fly, a grape-stone, or a hair may ki^^.
RURAL CHRISTIAN.
and to draw the veil of death over the closing eyes.

CHAP. XII.
Woe then apart, (if woe apart can be
From mortal man) and fortune at our nod;
The gay, rich, great, triumphant, and august,
What are they? the most happy (strange to say!)
Convince me most of human misery.
YOUNG.
THOUGH death levels all distinctions, and pays no more deference to the crown,
than to the unnoticed head of the meanest peasant; yet the great seem willing
to preserve, even in death, that distinction which they have shared in life;
and therefore refuse to mix their mortal dust with common and inferior clay!
There may be a propriety in this; subordination is absolutely necessary, and it
may be decent, that they who have been elevated in life, should at the close of
it, still keep up their due dignity and distinction. But this will not prevent
us from meditating in the vault of the Nobles, where surely we shall find ample
matter for contemplation.

By the side of the church, where first I was led into these reflections such a
vault is found. Let me descend into the solemn and sacred recess! -- How awful!
-- As I tread slowly down the stone steps, which lead into it, a melancholy
murmur seems to echo through the silent mansion; the moon just throws in a
faint light, sufficient for me to discern the contents, (though indeed no
stranger to them) and all my soul thrills with an anxious dread and horror. See
HERVEY'S Meditations among the tombs.
-- Whence this strange, this uncommon fear upon us, when conversing with the
deceased? Helpless dust and ashes as they are, we know they cannot harm or
injure us. Nay, and were it possible for any of them to appear to us, surely it
would be most delightful as well as most acceptable to hear from them some of
the wonders of that unknown world, which is at once so interesting and so
important.

But ah! -- no notices they give,
Nor tell us where, or how they live:
Though conscious while with us below,
How much themselves desired to know!
As if bound up by solemn fate
To keep this secret of their state;
To tell their joys or pains to none,
That man might live by faith alone.
Oh, come hither ye sons of ambition, ye children of pride; descend a while
from the lofty summit whereon you stand, and look disdain on all beneath you;
oh come, and pass a few silent minutes with me in this lonely vault which
boasts the most noble inhabitants; and pride will no more dwell in your eyes,
or vanity rise in your hearts. Ye proud, ambitious, wealthy, young and gay,
Who drink the spirit of the golden day,
And triumph in existence, come with me,
And in the mouldering corpse your picture see,
What you and all must soon or later be.
SOLITARY WALKS.


Here are the great and the gay; the young and the brilliant; the honorable
and the lovely, placed in no mean order or elegance together. Their coffins are
decorated with velvet and with silver; but ah, their contents are only like
vulgar dust -- There lies the noble ALTAMOUNT; no wonder the remembrance of him
first strikes every soul which descends into this vault, and was no stranger to
his character. An able writer Dr. YOUNG, in his Centaur not Fabulous.
has given us a striking account of his last moments: let us first recollect
this, and then make our reflections upon it.

"I am about to represent unto you, says he, the last hours of a person of high
birth; and high spirit; of great parts, and strong passions, every way
accomplished, not least in iniquity. His unkind treatment was the death of a
most amiable wife, and his great extravagance, in effect, disinherited his only
child.

"The sad evening before the death of that noble youth, I was with him. No one
was there, but his physician and an intimate friend whom he loved, and whom he
had ruined. At my coming in, he said:

"You, and the physician, are come too late. -- I have neither life, nor hope.
It is declared in the oracles of divine truth, that the wicked is driven away
in his wickedness, but the righteous has hope in his death, Prove. xiv. 32;
hence learn the happiness of the one, and the misery of the other.
You both aim at miracles. You would raise the dead."

Heaven, I said, was merciful.

"Or I could not have been thus guilty. What has it not done to bless and to
save me? -- I have been too strong for Omnipotence! -- I have plucked down
ruin."

I said, the blessed Redeemer.

"Hold! hold! you wound me! -- That is the rock on which I split. -- I denied
his name." They who deny Christ on earth, he will deny in heaven.

Matt. x. 53.


Refusing to hear any thing from me, or to take any thing from the physician,
he lay silent, as far as sudden darts of pain would permit, till the clock
struck. Then with vehemence he exclaimed --

Oh time! -- time! -- It is fit thou should thus strike thy murderer to the
heart. -- How art thou fled for ever! -- A month! -- Oh for a single week! I
ask not for years. Dr. Young may well say,
Buy no moment but in purchase of its worth,
And what its worth ask deathbeds, they can tell;
A moment we may wish when worlds
Want wealth to buy --
NIGHT THOUGHTS.
Though an age were too little for the much I have to do."

On my saying, we could not do too much: that heaven was a blessed place --

"So much the worse. -- It Is lost! It Is lost! Heaven is to me the severest part
of hell!"

Soon after I proposed prayer.

"Pray you that can; I never prayed, I cannot pray. -- Nor need I. Is not
Heaven on my side already? It closes with my conscience. Its severest strokes
but second my own."

His friend being much touched, even to tears, at this (who could forbear? I
could not) with a most affectionate look, he said:

"Keep those tears for thyself. I have undone thee -- Do weep for me? That Is
cruel. What can pain me more? --

Here his friend, too much affected, would have left him.

"No, stay, Thou still may hope; therefore hear me: how madly have I talked?
how madly have thou listened and believed? But look on my present state, as a
full answer to thee, and to myself. This body is all weakness and pain; but my
soul, as if strung up by torment to greater strength and spirit, is full
powerful to reason; full mighty to suffer. And that, which thus triumphs within
the jaws of mortality, is doubtless immortal. This is no small proof or
argument in favor of the soul's immortality.
And as for a Deity, nothing less than an Almighty could inflict what I feel."

I was about to congratulate this passive, involuntary confessor, on his
asserting the two prime articles of his creed, extorted by the rack of nature;
when he thus very passionately exclaimed --

"No, no! let me speak on. I have not long to speak -- My much-injured friend!
my soul as my body lies in ruins; in scattered fragments of broken thought.
Remorse for the past throws my thoughts on the future. Worse dread of the
future strikes it back on the past; I turn and turn, and find no ray. Did
thou feel half the mountain that is upon me, thou would struggle with the
martyr for his stake, and bless heaven for the flame; this is not an
everlasting flame, nor that an unquenchable fire."

How were we struck? -- yet soon after, still more. With what an eye of
distraction, with what a face of despair, he cried out --

"My principles have poisoned my friend; my extravagance has beggared my boy;
my unkindness has murdered my wife! And is there another hell? -- Oh! thou
blasphemed, yet most indulgent Lord God! Hell itself is a refuge, if it hides
me from thy frown."

Soon after, his understanding failed. His terrified imagination uttered
horrors not to be repeated, or even forgot. And ere the sun (which I hope has
seen few like him) arose, the gay, young, noble, ingenious, accomplished and
most wretched ALTAMONT expired. Let the young, wealthy, gay, and inconsiderate
votaries of pleasure and dissipation, learn from the latter moments of the
wretched Altamont, (who is supposed by some to intend the late Lord
Bolingbroke) the folly of living unmindful of approaching death, and be
convince of the truth of that common proverb, they who swim in sin, shall sink
in sorrow.


CHAP. XIII.
Adorned with all that heaven or earth could give
To make her amiable --
MILTON.
HOW doubly dreadful is Death, when it hurries away an affrighted and
unprepared soul from all the splendor and pomp of earthly greatness; from
noble mansions; elegant gardens; beautiful and extensive parks; numerous
attendants; large possessions; and all the bright circle of sublunary grandeur!

"And must I leave these? Curse upon my fate; must I leave all these? said the
noble PUBLIO, as, stretched upon the bed of disease, he lay struggling with
unconquerable pain, like a wild bull in the net; impatient and restless under
the hand of Omnipotence; as the untamed lion, in the toils of the Lybian hunter.

Yes, PUBLIO, thou must leave all these; and, proud and vain as thou have been
of thy titles and honors; as much elevated as thou have thought thyself above
thy fellow mortals, thou must now at length experience that death ^ovels all
distinctions, and strikes at thee with as cruel unconcern as he strikes at the
meanest peasant who toils in the neighboring fields. Mors aequo pulsat pede
pauperum tabernas.
Regumque turres.
HOR.
Why will men forget this obvious truth? Surely if the rich and noble would
bear it in mind, it would be a powerful check against every motion of pride,
and would instantly crush the least appearance of elation.

If we look to this world only, how superior are the advantages which the great
and wealthy enjoy, how infinitely superior to those which the poor and mean
possess? But if we look beyond the present scene, nay, if we look only on the
parting moment, how great advantages have the serious poor over the thoughtless
rich? Poverty denies to men the enjoyment of almost every thing which the
wealthy call convenient and comfortable; much more of what they call elegant
and pleasurable. But poverty disengages the affections from this transitory
scene, and depriving men of the enjoyment, renders them more indifferent to
their continuance in the world. He who has nothing to leave behind him, must be
supposed to quit the stage with infinite less regret, than he who is surrounded
with every thing that can elevate the desires, or delight the heart of man.
Hence the rich may learn not to despise the poor, while the poor are taught not
to envy or covet the riches of the affluent, the honors of the nobles, or
possessions of the great.
Now if we were steady to our Christian principles, and fixed in our pursuits
of the blessings of eternity, doubtless, in this view, poverty would be very
far from being esteemed an evil.

But let us not conceal the truth; there is often more of envy and chagrin in
our strictures on wealth and greatness, than a real contempt of these idols, or
a true Christian renunciation of them. And it is to be feared, that our remarks
respecting their possessors, are frequently stretched beyond the line of truth.
It is a point, of which long experience and close observation have left me no
room to doubt, that the great are not the happy: I mean, that true felicity,
and an exalted state, have no natural and necessary connection. Remember, man,
the universal Cause
Acts not by partial* but by general laws;
And makes what happiness we justly call,
Subsist not in the good of one, but all.
POPE.
Yet am I equally satisfied that the poor are not happy. If the disturbing,
anxious, and higher passions, molest the repose of the former, the chagrining
and vexatious passions sufficiently ruffle the quiet of the latter. In great
goodness and condescension to his creatures, the all-wise disposer of all
things has made happiness peculiar to no state, and attainable in all; it is a
plant which will thrive in every soil, though some may be more kindly to it
than others. I have seen it blooming in all the verdure of the most flourishing
palm tree, in the splendid palace of the noble: I have seen it fresh,
beautiful, and fragrant, in the lowly dwelling of the peaceful and contented
cottager. For the true Christian is the happy man; and he who is indeed a
Christian, will find peace and joy, whether in a cottage or a palace.

What could have deprived the gay, the young, the noble, the ingenious, and
most accomplished ALTAMONT, of happiness superlatively pleasing? Had he but
known and practiced the precepts of that divine religion, whose excellence is
sufficiently marked by the name of him who revealed it, -- Jesus Christ, the
eternal Son of God. Every earthly bliss crowded around the noble young man,
sedulous to present themselves, and anxious to offer their sweets to his
acceptance. Elegant mansions, highly furnished with all that art could bestow,
were ready provided for him; parks, beautified with the finest lawns and most
extensive prospects, s^^etched themselves around him; ample estates were in his
possession, sufficient to supply every necessity, and sufficient for calls of
magnificence, liberality, and charity; and heaven had blessed him with a mind
capacious of the largest enjoyments, and with sense equal to the most elegant
refinements. Happy peculiarity -- heaven had blessed him also with an amiable
consort, whose virtuous endearments were themselves sufficient to have
constituted solid bliss; and in whose love, scarce a man exists, who would not
have thought himself crowned with his heart's full content.

Ah! wretched ALTAMONT, -- the want of that Christian virtue which alone will
felicitate, robbed thee of the enjoyment of all these blessings, and brought
thee in early youth to an untimely death; thy soul undone, thy fortune ruined,
thy wife brokenhearted, and thy orphans beggared! -- ah vain and worthless
nobility! what availed to thy miserable remains, the nodding plumes and the
escutchioned hearse, with all the pomp of funeral solemnity! Here thou lie
mouldering in the velvet-clad coffin; and I, so much beneath thee in station,
can weep thy sad fate, and commiserate thee, thou fallen son of greatness!

Oh ye nobles of the earth, consider and be wise. Nobility, without virtue, is
but a polished shaft, more quick and keen to destroy; adorned with Christian
faith, it is a coronet of gold, graceful and honorable to the brow; Greatness
alone in virtue's understood;
None's truly great, but he who is truly good.

it will dignify you in time, and add honor to your greatest honors in
eternity.

So thought the incomparable Lady, whose sad relicts I view with joy; and am
transported to find in this doleful vault an inscription like the following,
over her honored remains. Let us peruse it, and leave it to our reader's
reflections.

"Here rests the body of MARY, Countess of --, etc. -- who departed this life,
etc. whom it were unpardonable to lay down in silence, and of whom it is
difficult to speak with justice. For her just character will look like
flattery, and the least abatement of it is an injury to her memory." Praises on
tombs are titles vainly spent,
A man's good name is his best monument.



In every condition of life she was a pattern to her sex; appeared mistress of
those peculiar qualities, which were requisite to conduct her through it with
honor, and never failed to exert them in their proper seasons, to the utmost
advantage.

She was modest without affectation, easy without levity, and reserved without
pride. She knew how to stop without sinking, and to gain people's affections
without lessening their regard.

She was careful without anxiety, frugal without parsimony; not at all fond of
the superfluous trappings of greatness, yet abridged herself of nothing which
her quality required.

Her piety was exemplary, her charity universal.

She found herself a widow in the beginning of her life, when the temptations
of honor, beauty, youth, and pleasure, were in their full strength; yet she
made them all give way to the interest of her family, and betook herself
entirely to the matron's part. Few widows in the present day, God knows,
deserve this character, or strive to imitate so praiseworthy an example.


The education of her children engrossed all her care; no charge was spared in
the cultivation of their minds, nor any pains in the improvement of their
fortunes.

In a word, she was truly wise, -- truly honorable, -- and truly good.

More can scarce be said; and yet he who said this, knew her well, and is well
assured, that he has said nothing which either veracity or modesty should
oblige him to suppress." The reader may be assured of the truth of what is here
delivered, as the character was penned by that excellent prelate, Dr. Hough,
formerly Bishop of Worcester.


CHAP. XIV.
Why all this toil for triumphs of an hour?
What though we wade in wealth, or soar in fame,
Earth's highest station ends in "Here he lies;"
And "Dust to dust," concludes her noblest song.
YOUNG.
FROM the vault, where rests the precious remains of the great and noble, I
ascended into the Church, and was immediately led to that part of the sacred
edifice, which is dedicated to the memory of these illustrious personages. What
superb monuments! what elaborate decorations! what pompous inscriptions! what
high sounding epitaphs! one would imagine from a perusal of these, that all the
sons and daughters of this noble house, like those mentioned in another sacred
place, were valiant and virtuous! but alas, even tombs are taught to flatter
and to lie.

How strong is the desire of pre eminence in the human breast? we wish to
preserve it even in death. In some respects it may be well so to do: -- but
what vanity can be so truly contemptible, as that which assigns a large sum of
money to the erecting a splendid monument, serving to perpetuate only the
erector's folly and pride! let the truly virtuous and truly good, the friends
to society, and the ornaments of religion, be distinguished in death: for the
rest, whatever titles they bear, or honors they boast, they are but empty
names -- let them be consigned to oblivion and to dust! If we current speak
well of our deceased fellow creatures, we had better (...) silen^ concerning
them; "de mortai^ ^ll ^isi bon^^*" is a very ^^irable motto thy re^^^^^^ on
deceased friends, relatives, or acquaintance.


What a foppery and false taste discovers itself in some of these fantastic
monuments before me, the emblems of which it is more difficult to decypher,
than the darkest shades of an allegoric poem! what absurdity and profane^ess
glare in others! Methinks I am transported, by some invisible power, while I
gaze from a Christian church, into one of the heathen temples; for their
deities crowd around me, sculptured with all the pride of art, while I can
discern a medallion only of him to whose memory the monument is consecrated! --
It looks as if the noble dead had renounced their dependence upon Christ and
his Gospel; and returned to the worship of those heathen divinities, into whose
hands they seem to commend their fame.

But while I turn away with disgust from these fine, but misapplied efforts of
art; that elegantly-simple monument strikes and delights me. It is the statue
of the late Duke of --: it is finished in the highest taste; it affords the
most exact resemblance of his person; the posture is the most natural and easy;
proper for the place, serious and contemplative: -- it is raised on a plain but
beautiful pedestal; there are no fantastic decorations; the inscription
contains nothing more than the name of this worthy nobleman, the date of his
birth and death, and the detail of his illustrious issue. There needs no more,
his virtues live in the faithful memory of his friends and of his country* and
time itself cannot obliterate the impression, which his beneficence has made
on the hearts of the distressed. But could time efface these, should they be
universally forgotten; yet will they be had in everlasting remembrance before
God, the eternal rewarder of those who live to do good; who make the blessings
vouchsafed to them by a kind Providence, the exalted means of felicity to
others. Would to God, such righteous persons were oftener to be found, among
the noble and the great ones of the earth.
Such actions in life will smooth the rough brow of death, and render the
departure from honors and opulence not only easy, but joyful!

Methinks, as I stand contemplating this animated statue, I can fancy its noble
original before me, as I often seen him, and imagine I hear him thus addressing
me: -- "See the end of all human grandeur, and learn to think nothing great in
mortality; nothing can be truly great which is uncertain; nothing can be truly
good which must shortly have an end. Ere while I flourished in all the verdure
which human existence can boast. High in birth, high in honors; dignified with
the royal favor; abounding in wealth, and of consequence courted and flattered
by the obsequious crowd.

In this elevated state I forgot not myself: I remembered that I was a man;
that I was to give an account to a superior tribunal, and that my punishment or
reward would be pronounced according to the improvement or abuse of the trust
reposed in me. When therefore the solemn summons came, when I heard the
alarming voice, "Thou must die," I was not confounded, though impressed with
awe: commending myself to the Father of mercies, I resigned his earthly favors
with complacency and thankfulness, in the joyful and animating hopes of a
future and better state. The apostle Paul had a desire to depart, and why?
because he was assured he should be with Christ, which he knew was far better,
than to continue in this present evil world, surrounded with enemies, exposed
to temptations, and at a distance from him whom his soul loved.

PHILIPPIANS, i. 23.


Had my conduct been the reverse of this, what should I have gained, or rather
what should I not have lost? for my pomp and power could not have arrested the
stroke of death, which would have pierced my heart with agony inexpressible, as
separating me from all things desirable here below, and removing me to a world
where I can neither have hope or desire. -- Mine was a better choice: the
remembrance of death taught me wisdom; Death! the great counselor who man
inspires
With every noble thought, and fairer deed;
Rich Death, that realises all my cares;
Toils, virtues, hopes, without it a chimera!
Death, of all pain the period, not of joy.
Death wounds to cure, we fall, we rise, we reign;
Spring from our fetters, faster in the skies;
This king of terrors is the prince of peace.
NIGHT THOUGHTS.
for they who remember death, will assuredly be wise." DEUTERONOMY, xxxii. 29.


This is an important truth: The abuse of life proceeds from the forgetfulness
of death;.... The man who consecrates his hours,
By vigorous effort and an honest aim,
At once he draws the sting of life and death.
Dr. YOUNG.
when men fix their standards upon earth, and vainly propose this transitory
scene as the end of their being, and the object of their love, what errors and
evils are the consequences; what fearful disappointments here, and what horrid
punishment awaits them hereafter!

This was the cause with the famous Cardinal of the noble house of Beaufort
who, much unlike that amiable nobleman, whose character we have been just
considering, remembered not that wealth and greatness were insignificant and
unavailing to stop the hand of death; and, that, gained by indirect methods
they prove, in the conclusion, a never-dying worm to the distracted conscience.
When therefore, as history informs us, he was arrested in his mad career, and
all the terrors of death were marshalled in horrid array before him, thus he
complained, and thus vented his afflicted soul to his weeping friends around:
See Harpsfield's History.
"And must I then die? will not all my riches save me? I could purchase the
kingdom if that would prolong my life. What! is there no bribing of death? when
my nephew the Duke of Bedford died, I thought my happiness and my authority
greatly increased; but the Duke of Gloucester's death raised me in imagination
to a level even with kings; and I thought of nothing but accumulating still
greater wealth to purchase at length the triple crown! Alas! how are my hopes
disappointed! -- Wherefore, O my friends, let me earnestly beseech you to pray
for me, and recommend my departing soul to God." Cardinal Beaufort was of royal
extraction, he was the son of John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, by his third
wife, Catharine Swinford. He was commonly called the rich Cardinal of
Winchester: he died in 1447. Shakespeare, who generally preserves historical
truth very exactly, in the second part of Henry the VI. has given us in lively
colors, a description of the Cardinal's death.

Scene, the Cardinal's bedchamber.
Enter King Henry, Salisbury, and Warwick, to the Cardinal in bed. K. H. How
fares my lord? speak, Beaufort, to thy sovereign.


Card. If thou be death, I Will give thee England's treasure,
Enough to purchase such another island,
So thou will let me live and feel no pain.

K. H. Ah! what a sign it is of evil life,
Where death's approach is seen so terrible!

War. Beaufort, it is thy sovereign speaks to thee.


Card. Bring me upon my trial when you will.
Died he Meaning the Duke of Gloucester, of whose murder he was suspected.
not in his bed? where should he die?
Can I make men live whether they will or no?
Oh torture me no more, I will confess --
Alive again? then show me where he is;
I Will give a thousand pounds to look upon him. --
He has no eyes, the dust has blinded them:
Comb down his hair: look, look! it stands upright
Like lime twigs set to catch my winged soul.
Give me some drink, and bid the apothecary
Bring the strong poison that I bought of him!

K. H. O thou eternal mover of the heavens,
Look with a gentle eye upon this wretch!
Oh beat away the busy meddling fiend
That lays strong siege upon this wretch's soul,
And from his bosom purge this black despair.

War. See how the pangs of death do make him grin.


Sal. Disturb him not, let him pass peaceably.


K. H. Peace to his soul, if God's good pleasure be!
Lord-cardinal, if thou think on heaven's bliss,
Lift up thy hand, make signal of thy hope.
He dies, and makes no signs. -- O God forgive him!

War. So bad a death argues a monstrous life.


K. H. Forbear to judge, for we are sinners all.
Close up his eyes, and draw the curtains round,
And let us all to meditation. --




Oh, what an end was this! what availed this unhappy great man, that
sacrificing to his ambition some of the most sacred duties of humanity, he died
possessed of a sum, superior to what, perhaps, any subject before him had
possessed? -- What availed it, that amidst the terrors of death he consigned
large sums to charitable offices! and least of all, what could avail the ten
thousand masses which he ordered to be said for his departed soul? Heaven is
not to be purchased with gold, nor the favor of God to be bought with money.
Our redemption was not perfected by such corruptible things, but by the
precious blood of Jesus Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot!
and he who after an evil life, thinks to conciliate the regard of the Most
High, by donations and masses, dies in a mistake as gross and fatal as that
wherein he lived.

Indeed, to the honor of the Protestant church, we must observe, that this
most destructive of all errors is seldom found within her pale; at least, in
comparison with its frequency in the Romish church; where the religious orders
are led to deceive even the souls of dying men, for the fake of accumulating
wealth for their own societies. Shocking and dreadful! -- now contrary to the
tenor of that Gospel, by which we are assured, that the truly humbled heart,
and penitent desire, a lively faith, and undissembled sorrow, can alone
recommend us to the Father of heaven, through the merits and intercession of
his only begotten Son!

Before I conclude this chapter, let me point out to my reader a noble penitent
of the Protestant communion, as a contrast to this Cardinal of the church of
Rome: the late earl of Rochester, I mean, whose life was defiled with every
vice, but whose death was distinguished by the most exemplary repentance -- a
repentance, not shown by external gifts, and the appointment of repeated masses
for his soul; but by inward contrition, and a real sorrow for his past sins, by
a desire to undo all the evil he had done, and to stop the current of all the
mischief which unhappily owed its source to him; -- by an unfeigned application
to the only Redeemer of lost sinners, and a fixed resolution to amend his life
(if that life should be spared,) and to be as exemplary in holiness, as he had
been infamous in the practice of every vice. -- This is true repentance: True
repentance is a blessed token of the forgiveness of sins; none ever truly
repented of sin without its being pardoned through the merits of Jesus's blood,
which cleanses from all sin.
and such a penitent, Christ will assuredly redeem, as well from the guilt, as
from the defilement of all his accumulated iniquities.

CHAP. XII.
-- Take physic, pomp:
Expose thyself to feel what wretches feel.
That thou may shake the superflux to them,
And show the heavens more just.
SHAKESPEARE.
HIGH in health, and recumbent on the downy breast of prosperity and
indulgence, SECURUS rejects our Reflections with disdain, and will not, cannot
bear to hear of death, the cruel spoiler, of all our earthly comforts. "Away
with the melancholy strain, he cries; I cannot endure the voice of this gloomy
contemplative. Let him not approach to disturb my repose, nor like the hoarse
and ill boding raven, croak his fatal admonitions in my ears." Ah, mistaken
mortal, what troubles art thou treasuring up for a future moment! -- pity him,
heaven, who has no pity for himself! -- We will leave him then, though with
sorrow and compassionate regret, and entreat thy attendance. Oh serious and
Christian reader, (who art not afraid to view these mournful but instructive
scenes) to the sick, the dying-bed of the poor man, Carry me, my feet, to the
temple of the Lord* to the beds of the sick, and the houses of the poor.

HERVEY'S MEDITATIONS.
now that we have visited together, the superb vault of the affluent and noble.
If thou art rich, perhaps thou have never been called to so sad a scene, and
the sight of it may teach thee gratitude and content: We are incited to the
relief of misery, by the consciousness that we have the same nature with the
sufferer; that we are in danger of the same distresses; and may sometimes be
obliged to implore the same assistance.

JOHNSON's IDLER.
if thou art poor, it will affect thy heart, and lead thee to a serious concern
for futurity; that both temporal and eternal evils may not be thy deplorable
lot!

Come then, and let me lead thee up these narrow and miserable stairs, to the
wretched apartment, whither I myself was ere while led, and where the poor man
lies languishing on the bed of emaciating disease! See thou this dismal
dwelling, foul, wretched, and offensive!

Hear, the wind whistles through the shattered casement, ill defended by vile
rags and darkened paper, sure mark of penury and distress. -- ^ore pierced by
wintry winds,
How many shrink into the sordid hut
Of chearless poverty.
THOMSON'S SEASONS.


See thou that wretched object, pale and meagre, with haggard, staring eyes,
and beard unshaven, stretched upon those flocks, with not a curtain round him,
and with scarce a cover to conceal his wasted body?

Turn round and view upon the floor another miserable heap of tatters. It is
the bed of two poor children of this afflicted sufferer! and this, this place
of woe, is the only habitation which receives and hides the heads of these poor
and helpless children, with their wretched mother and himself! That woman,
bathed in tears, and clothed in the ragged garments of poverty, is the wife,
the mother of these unfortunate children -- hapless wife, and still more
hapless mother!

But though narrow this apartment, though offensive and soul, it would well
suffice, and be but little complained of, did not want, cruel want, here too
fix her dreary abode; could the mother supply the importunate demands of her
hungry children, or alleviate the pains and sufferings of her oppressed
husband. But alas! the parish withholds relief from aliens to its rights, and
how shall the charity of the beneficent, find out in their obscure retreats,
the stranger and unknown!

Nay but even poverty itself, with all its dire necessities, might patiently be
borne, -- well, very well, if fiducial dependence upon God, was but found in
the sufferer's heart; if heavenly hope dwelt in the afflicted breast; if there
was any prospect of an happy issue, when all these mournful trials are
overpast, and the soul safely landed on a future blessed and eternal shore! but
for this we enquire in vain! from the want of it proceeds far the greater part
of these evils. When I came to talk with EGENO, (so call we this poor man)
concerning his soul, his faith, his hope, and future expectations; he fixed his
eyes upon me with the most unutterable anguish, and elevating his emaciated
hand, sighed out, "Alas! alas! Sir, sure I shall recover." "But if you should
not, said I, as God knows there appears but little probability -- what then?
what says your conscience?" "I cannot tell, he replied, I know I have not been
so good as I ought; but if I live, I will endeavor to be better." This is
often language of persons in sickness, who have lived thoughtless of God, their
immortal souls and a future state; but alas! how seldom (though life is spared)
do they perform their bed promises of amendment and reformation!


I turned to his wife, to ask somewhat of his past life; and to know whether
during his long illness (for he had been long declining) he had ever shown any
concern for his soul, or whether she had ever read to him for his instruction?
-- Weak and wretched as he was, he could reply, with abundant acrimony, "She
instruct me? -- No, she had better first instruct herself, she wants it most."
What greater shock could an humane heart feel, than to perceive a fierce
altercation likely to ensue, between two persons so mutually and so deeply
distressed? I interposed with some authority; and endeavored with all my
power, to set forth the dreadful terrors of futurity, before the eyes of this
unawakened sinner, just, just about to launch -- oh horrible -- into its awful
gulf! from whence there is no return.

He heard me with attention, and I perceived at length a tear stealing down his
pallid cheeks. "I have been miserable, said the poor unhappy object, all the
days of my life; and now I perceive that I must be miserable through all
eternity too." Upon hearing this, we could none of us refrain from tears. Oh
who could refrain? to see a fellow creature lying in exquisite distress, soul
and body equally estranged from comfort, health, and ease! -- Oh who could
refrain? to see a fellow creature thus about to perish, ignorant and hopeless,
in a land where the glad tidings of the gospel are so constantly and
universally preached!

Moved with compassion, I endeavored to offer some consolation -- the utmost
which I dared to offer. For alas! how can the ministers of Christ exceed their
commission; how can they speak peace to those, to whom there is no peace? There
is no peace, says my God, to the wicked.

ISA. xlviii. 22.
-- But my offers were unavailing; he told me, "he had led a wicked and a
careless life, and now he found that the end of it was sorrow and despair."
After every argument to rouse and to console, I joined in prayer with him and
his wretched household; and exhorting him to earnest prayer, and fervent
supplication for himself to the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, I left them,
designing on the morrow to renew my visit.

But from this melancholy office I was prevented by his wife, who came in the
morning to inform me that he expired in the night; expired regardless, as it
seemed, of every thing; utterly stupid, senseless, and unheeding.

And thus too often it happens, that the minister is sent for when the soul is
at the ^^st gasp, Too many appear in the views of death, to place too much
dependence on, too much confidence in, and encourage themselves too much, from
receiving the sacrament (at the hands of the clergyman) to hope that all will
be well with them after death; as if there was some merit in mere ordinances or
partaking of them: no, it is a dreadful mistake; nothing but repentance for
sin, accompanied with true faith in Jesus Christ, can afford solid ground for
hope of pardon, salvation, and eternal life.
when all hope is given up, and when all our endeavors, alas! are as
inefficacious, as pouring water into a sieve. During almost a twelve-month's
illness, EGENO thought not of God, of repentance, or of death. Just when the
lamp of life was going out, just when the trembling soul fluttered on the verge
of eternity, the alarm was given, and all was confusion, disorder, and dismay.
His whole life was a scene of care, of toil, of discontent, and sin.
Neglectful, wholly neglectful of religion, his sabbaths were passed in tr^^ling
and drunkenness; the scanty pittance he gained by his labor, was too commonly
condemned before it was earned; and his wife and children bewailed in hunger
and want, the frequent disappointment of his wages. Hence arose brawls and
contentions at home; which rendered the little wretched lodging still more
wretched. As no surplus was saved, his own, and the clothing of his family, was
seldom superior to rags; and he lived without a friend to serve, as he died
without a friend to succor him. Would to God, persons in the lower classes of
life, would take warning from Egeno, and seriously think in time, of that
eternity which awaits them beyond the grave.
Miserable end of a miserable existence! Fearful poverty and introduction to
sufferings, far more fearful! --

Good God! what is man! how terrible is it thus to pass a few years in this
vale of sorrow, comfortless, despicable, and abandoned -- To know none of the
refreshments and delights of this life, and yet wilfully to forfeit all
delights of the future! But let me forbear making any reflections, till I have
shown you the contrast of EGENO, in a man of the same occupation and the same
rank of life, whom also I lately attended upon his deathbed -- and would to
heaven my latter end may be like his!

CHAP. XVI.
The ports of death are sins; of life, good deeds;
Through which the Savior leads us to our needs:
How wilful blind is he then* who should stray,
And has it in his power to make his way?
This world death's region is, the other life's;
And here it should be one of our first strifes,
So to front death, as man should judge us past it:
For good men but see death, the wicked taste it.
ROW.
IT is common, to hear circumstances and station in life, urged as an excuse
for neglect of religion; to obviate which, we have examples proposed to us of
sincere and regular piety, in every station of life. It must be understood,
that I speak here, of the honest and allowable stations of life. There are some
professions* with which indeed religion is absolutely incompatible; and
therefore if a man would save his soul, he must either abjure these, or never
think of salvation.

The AUTHOR.
Thus we are shown, that religion is incompatible with no worldly
circumstances; and of consequence, no worldly circumstances can offer a
sufficient excuse for a disregard to it. It is a good proverb, Prayers and
provender hinder no man.
The wretched EGENO could urge his labor and poverty, -- but how
ineffectually? Look at his fellow laborer MENTOR, and learn how weak and
frivolous such an apology.

MENTOR was of the same occupation with EGENO; worked in the same shop, and
earned the same wages. MENTOR too was a married man, and had children. Thus far
there was a similitude; but in other respects, where can that similitude be
found? -- Diligent and punctual, MENTOR was never absent a day from his
business, unless detained by sickness or some necessary avocation; ever found
in his duty* while EGENO kept holliday, and wasted his important time in
drunkenness and riot.

Fearing God, and anxious to please him, MENTOR never refrained his feet from
the church, and was a regular attendant at the blessed supper of the Lord;
strictly observing the sabbath, and spending it as became a Christian, a
husband, and a father; while EGENO'S temple was the alehouse, and his devotion
only oaths and impiety Happy Mentor! may thy example be more generally
followed, while Egeno's is suitably reprobated and abhorred.


Go to the places of their abode, and mark the contrast there also; you have
viewed that of EGENO -- miserable scene of poverty! -- At MENTOR'S little
dwelling all was neat, clean, and wholesome. He has procured a small house,
with a good piece of ground, which he carefully cultivated with his own hands,
when he returned from his work in the evening; often rising an hour or two
before the time of labor in the morning, to do the business of his garden, and
to take care of his crop, which paid him well for his toil. His wife,
industrious and careful, contributed her part with gladness; Far from the
madding crowd's ignoble strife,
Their sober wishes never learned to stray;
Along the cool sequestered vale of life,
They kept the noiseless tenor of their way.
GRAY's ELECY.
her children were brought up with every notion suitable to their station; and
she omitted no opportunity to aid her husband's honest efforts by her frugality
and pains. An aged mother dwelt under the same roof with them, and owed a
comfortable subsistence to the pious affection of her laborious son.

It pleased God to extend the life of this useful and worthy, though mean and
unnoticed man, to a happy length; for he lived to close his aged mother's eyes,
and to pay the last duties of filial regard to her. Honor thy father and
mother, that thy days may be long upon the land, which the Lord thy God gives
thee. EXODUS xx. 12. This commandment accompanied with a promise plainly
implied, if not fully expressed, is no little encouragement to the practice of
filial piety and obedience.
He lived to see two of his sons capable of maintaining themselves in the world
with decency and comfort; and treading -- distinguished felicity of a parent!
-- in the steps of their father's sobriety and virtue: Happy proof! of the good
effects of a pious example and instructions on the minds of children.
sons, to whose care he could with confidence leave his wife, as their religion
had taught them, that a peculiar blessing ever attends those who delight to
honor their parents, EXODUS xx. 12.
and "to rock the cradle of declining age."

How pleasing, how instructive to attend the deathbed of such a Christian! --
Oh, ye great and vain, ye children of voluptuousness and pomp, how does the
deathbed of such a Christian reproach your follies, and condemn your visionary
views? -- on that bed I saw him! -- true, no consultation of physicians was
held on his account; no damask furniture decorated his apartments; no carpets
were spread over his floors; vessels of silver and gold were not found to
convey the little nourishment he took: -- but ah! what poor and wretched
comforters are these, when the languishing body declares the fatal moment of
eternal separation from this present world, near at hand! How much more
excellent the consolation arising from the testimony of an approving
conscience! The more a man leaves behind him, the more reluctantly he dies:
Covet not the riches, honors, or possessions of the great and noble; for the
less you have in this world, the less reason you will have to regret when you
come to die, leaving what you possess.
to die is an easy matter to the poor; and to a good man, what matter is it
whether he dies on a throne or a dunghill? The only misfortune at the hour of
death, is to find one's self destitute of the supports of true Religion. Thy
force alone, Religion! death disarms,
Breaks all his darts and every viper charms.
BLACKMORE'S CREATION.


MENTOR was not destitute of these: -- ("I am arrived, Sir, said he, at that
period for which I was born, and for which I have been long preparing; and
blessed be God, I do not find any terrors in the approach of death. Thanks be
to God, who gives us the Victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ. I am thankful
to the good providence of my heavenly Father for all things; -- but how shall I
express my thankfulness for his exceeding love in the precious gift of his dear
son! Oh what a support is he to sinful creatures, like us, in this hour
especially! Blessed, for ever blessed be God, for his inestimable gift or
redemption through the blood of the Lamb, offered up for the sins of a rebel
world."

Rejoiced to see him thus triumphant over death, I congratulated his felicity,
and remarked the vanity of worldly stations, when God distributes his spiritual
favors thus freely to the low as well as the rich. "True, Sir, said he, this
is a sweet reflection to the poorer and meaner sort of Christians: it has
often refreshed my soul, and stopped every tendency of murmuring and
complaints, which are too apt to arise in our haughty hearts, at the sight of
the rich, and their plentiful en^oyments. God frequently makes the poor in this
world, rich in faith, and heirs of his eternal kingdom, while he sends the rich
empty away; not many rich; not many mighty, not many noble are called.

1 CORINTHIANS, i. 26, 27.
And it was a pleasing thought often to me in the midst of my labor, that my
divine and glorious Savior stooped to a mean and toilsome employment, and
condescended to work with his own hands; setting us an example, and thus
alleviating, to the true Christian, all the weariness of fatigue and daily
pains.

The recollection of this, has frequently given me new life and spirits when I
have been almost worn out, and ready to sink down with labor. And when I have
considered all his loving kindness toward me, which he has shown in so many
instances, I have always with joy persevered in my duty, and thought myself
happy that I had a being to praise and adore him. And now my race is run, and I
am about to appear before the judge of all the earth!" "I doubt not, replied I,
you will appear with joy, and be for ever blessed in his kingdom." -- "Through
Christ, I trust I shall, said he: my only hope and reliance is on the precious
Redeemer; for oh, Sir, what am I, what have I, but from him? -- and alas! what
I have done is so imperfect and unworthy, that it cries for pardon only, not
for reward; can it be possible that any human being can talk of merit before
God! A sinner may plead for mercy at God's hands, but never can plead merit,
without it is that of Christ's.
Lord Jesus, pardon the sinfulness even of my best and most holy services, and
wash them in thy most precious blood, which cleanses from all sin."

"But, observed I, though you depend not upon any thing you have done, nor
apprehend the least merit or deserving in any of your own works, does it not
give your soul peace and comfort, when you look back, and remember that you
have done such works, or rather, that you have in any measure sincerely
endeavored to obey the laws of Christ?" Oh yes, replied he, great, very great
peace! without this I could have no peace at all: for without this what test
could I have of my sincerity in any respect? or how would I dare to expect any
mercy from the Redeemer? No, I bless him for enabling me, by his sovereign
grace, to do any thing: would to God I had been more diligent, and had done
more: without holiness no man shall see him: I have labored after it with all
my might, and to the best of my knowledge: It Is greatly to be feared many
deceive themselves in this particular; for where is even the best of
Christians, who can truly say in the views of death, they have acted to the
best of their abilities, or done all that was in their power, to approve
themselves the children of God? Alas! every one must acknowledge after having
done all they are able to do, we are but unprofitable servants.

LUKE, xvii. 10.
but am thoroughly sensible of the imperfections of my best endeavors. May the
gracious Savior pity my weakness, and perfect what is wanting in me!"

He added much more: but from this the reader may easily collect, how happy an
end a man of such just sentiments must make. He received the blessed Sacrament
from my hands, and never did I administer that sacred ordinance to a more
elevated Christian. I remember one passage in our conversation struck me. "Sir,
said he, though I had never no great learning, I have always been pleased witn
reading; and from some book, Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress.
early in my youth, I was taught to consider myself as a pilgrim, appointed to
travel through this world to the other, where I was to remain for ever. This
notion made (...) great impression upon me; and I ever afterward used to
consider myself as a traveller, and therefore entertained no great hopes or
fears respecting any thing below; but looked continually to the end of my
journey, the happiness of which, I was persuaded, depended on my right
management of myself during my stay here. A just conclusion, worthy to be
adopted and attended to, by every son and daughter of mortality.
And this thought was the occasion, not only of much content to my soul, and of
much peace and resignation under every affliction and cross accident: but of my
continued attention to duty, and of the exactest caution in my daily walking."

Such was MENTOR; whose life and death were equally amiable and exemplary. What
a contrast to the wretched EGENO! What man but could wish to die the death of
the former? -- then let him take heed not to lead the life of the latter. To
live the life of the righteous is a good ground to hope of dying the death of
the righteous.
Ye sons of men, in the humbler stations of life, read the important lesson
before you. Look at the examples, and revolve their ends: -- avoid the vices of
EGENO, and copy the virtues of MENTOR. -- So will you live in credit, and die
in peace. ISAIAH, lvii, 2.


CHAP. XVI.
Exhort servants to be obedient unto their own masters, and to please them well
in all things; not answering again -- Not purloining, but showing all good
fidelity; that they may adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all things.

TITUS, ii. 9, 10. Let thy soul love a good servant, -- and defraud him not of
his liberty.

ECCLES. vii. 21.
AFTER having attended the deathbeds of the busy and the gay, the noble and
the poor; after having surveyed the issue of life spent in those pursuits,
which are common to mankind in general, and contrasted every character, to make
each more striking; I intended to have stopped here, and considered death in a
general view, -- to have offered arguments and consolations against the fear of
it; and as a conclusion, to have contemplated the great things which follow
after, -- Judgment, Heaven, and Hell. Death, Judgment, Heaven, and Hell, think,
Christians, think;
You stand upon eternity's dread brink;
Faith and Repentance seek with earnest prayer;
Despise this world, the next ^e all your care.
TR^P^.


But a funeral, at which I was called lately to officiate, leads me to postpone
these reflections to a following chapter; that I may pay some tribute to the
memory of an humble man, whose virtues deserve to be had in honor, though his
low station denies him the loud applause of public celebrity. But why should
fame be the prerogative of greatness; of worldly greatness and external
splendour? -- To do well, and to deserve in every station, is to be great, and
ought to obtain praise -- and will obtain praise! -- Yes, ye sons of obscurity,
whom no titles dignify, -- whom no pedigrees ennoble, -- but whose virtuous
actions are more illustrious than either -- yes, ye shall inherit praise, as
much superior to that which men, the world, and time can give, -- as God, as
heaven, and eternity are superior to all these.

This bright and blessed honor is not conferred according to rank, birth, or
title; but to high and low, rich and poor, the glorious price is held forth
alike, and to him who does best, shall the best recompense be given. GENESIS
iv. 7. ROMANS, ii. 6, 7.
-- Yet one sure method to obtain this blessing in that kingdom, where all
distinctions eternally cease, is to act and live agreeably to those
distinctions and subordinations, which God has wisely appointed upon earth: I
mean the sure method to obtain God's favor, is to acquiesce thankfully in that
station of life, wherein he has placed us; and with entire submission, to
discharge faithfully and uniformly all the duties of it. REVELALIONS, ii. 10.


So thought the worthy man, whose decent funeral was lately solemnized. He had
been servant in a neighboring family above twenty years; and during that time
had abundantly approved himself by the strictest fidelity. A rare example, when
the depravity of this order amongst us, is the subject of universal complaint,
and the severest tax upon the domestic felicity of numbers! Though perhaps the
cause and the remedy of the evil are both to be drawn from other sources, than
those which are generally proposed: to be drawn rather from the heads of
families, than from those who act in menial capacities. The influence of
example in good masters is generally beneficial respecting servants: -- would
to God they had no other examples set before them.
A prudent and conscientious master, for the most part makes prudent and
regular servants; and it is from the increase of such examples, that we must
expect improvement in our attendants.

PETRUCIO, (so call we the subject of our present chapter) was happy in this
respect; happy in a master, whose own life was regular, and whose great care
was to discharge every duty, which he owed, particularly to his servants. He
was well recompensed by the love and fidelity of his servants in general, but
of PETRUCIO in particular. This faithful domestic had right notions of God,
himself, and his duty. He murmured not at the inferiority and servility of his
own condition: he knew it was the will of God; as such he received it with
thankfulness, and lived in it with cheerful content: considering himself as the
servant of Christ, he acted conscientiously, as desirous to please him, and not
man only.

Reflecting that the eye of God, if not of his master, was always upon him,
Omnia cum videat, nulli Deus ipse videtur.

MANT.
he feared to neglect his duty, Thou God sees me, is a reflection ever to be
remembered by all, add will prove a successful antidote to the wilful practice
of known sin.

GENESIS, xvi. 13.
and thought it a poor excuse for himself, if he could escape the notice of an
earthly observer, while all his actions were minutely scanned by him, who
searches the inmost secrets of the heart. Hence he served not "as a
man-pleaser, but as the servant of God, in singleness of heart as unto Christ;
not with eye-service, but as the servant of Christ, doing the will of God from
the heart;" all his service was done with a good will, not with a morose
restraint or sourness, -- as to the Lord and not to man only -- for he knew,
and ever bore in mind that comfortable truth, "That whatsoever good thing any
man does, the same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free."
EPHESIANS. vi. 5, etc.


In consequence of these right principles, PETRUCIO ever esteemed his master's
interest, as essentially connected with his own: and would as soon have
suffered the extremest punishment, as to have joined in any collusion to
defraud, much more to have himself defrauded his master. It was his constant
endeavor to preserve the strictest economy in every part of his trust, and he
would express the highest wonder and deepest abhorrence at many of those
infamous arts, which modern polite servants would frequently advise him to
practice, and to which tradesmen, for the basest ends, would often attempt to
allure him.

"Though I am in a state of servitude upon earth, he would often say, I hope to
be in a state of freedom with God hereafter: but how can I hope for this, if I
am deficient in those easy duties, which are required in my present station?
For surely, when all the necessaries of life are found me, it is easy to be
just and faithful, honest and industrious -- nay, gratitude itself alone should
lead to this, for his sake, who provides so well for me; and who requires
certainly that I should repay all his expense, with every worthy and cheerful
endeavor possible on my part. Would to God, servants in general. would take
pattern from Petruchio, and think and act as he did; happy indeed would the
master of such servants be, and happy would be servants in so doing.


We may well believe that a servant with such notions, must be uniform and
excellent in his whole conduct. And such indeed was PETRUCIO. He received every
order with silence and humility: he executed every order with diligence and
punctuality. He pretended not to be wiser than his directors; and he was a
stranger to the odious malapertness, which is one of the distinguishing
qualifications of contemptible modern valets. His long continuance in the
family, had wrought in his breast a tender affection, not only for his master
and mistress, but also for their children and relations: and at length their
interest was become so peculiarly his own, that he shared in all their joys,
and partook of all their sorrows.

The fruits of his fidelity were the confidence and esteem of his master and
mistress; the affection of the family; the reverence of his fellow servants;
and a comfortable saving, on which he proposed to live, if ever he should have
cause to quit the service; and which, dying in it, he had the pleasure to
bequeath to a widow-sister and, her children, whom it rescued from many
difficulties, and placed in a happy situation, above dependence and necessity.

During the time of his last sickness, he frequently declared that the
tenderness and regard of his master and mistress to him, more than overbalanced
the merit of all his former services, and were an abundant recompense to him.
For PETRUCIO had a generous mind, and was sensible of affectionate treatment.
Gratitude is commendable and praiseworthy in all; from the poor and needy to
the wealthy and benevolent, as well as from every rational creature under
heaven, to their great Creator, Benefactor, and Preserver, who gives to all
liberally and upbraideth not.
His master every day visited his sick room, and read and prayed by his
bedside: his mistress with her own hands administered his medicines, and took
care to supply him with the most proper nourishment. His humility alone could
equal his gratitude and thankfulness on such occasions; and when upon his
expressing his great obligations his mistress once said, that "this, and much
more than this, was due for his faithful services." "And that word, madam, said
the honest fellow, with tears in his eyes, that word is a reward sufficient for
more than twenty times such services as mine."

Thus died this useful worthy man: and to do all honor to him, his master
buried him at his own expense, with all the decency and propriety conceivable:
-- six neighboring farmers, tenants to his master, bore his pall; his master
and mistress walked as chief mourners; the rest of the family attended in
procession, and had mourning given them on the occasion; and so great was the
esteem in which this faithful servant was held, (who I should have observed was
the willing and joyful hand by which his master and mistress distributed their
liberal charities) -- that scarce a dry eye was seen at his funeral: and his
death and funeral, I persuade myself, have done more to reform the servants in
that part of the world, than twenty lectures to them could have achieved. "See
how PETRUCHIO, though a servant, is honored and respected!" -- was the general
cry: and the general reason given on all hands was, "Because he was faithful,
honest, and industrious."

And let servants, in conclusion, be told, that if they would obtain such
favor here, and such recompense as PETRUCIO doubtless has obtained, their
only method is to go and do likewise; is to imitate his example; is to make
their master's interest their own. The best motive upon which they can do this,
is to consider, that in so doing they serve the Lord Christ, and may be
assured, that, according to their fidelity, so shall they reap hereafter. For
God is no respecter of persons. ACTS, x. 34.


* I subjoin to this chapter the following excellent rules, which were sent by
an unknown hand, entirely agreeing with the gentleman who sent them, -- "That
if they were hung up in all kitchens and servant's halls, (printed on a large
sheet) they would be extremely useful."

To faithful, honest, and industrious Servants.
A Good character is valuable to every one, but especially to servants, for it
is their bread; and without it they cannot be admitted into a creditable
family: and happy it is, that the best of characters is in every one's power to
deserve.

II. Engage yourself cautiously, but stay long in your place; for long service
shows worth, as quitting a good place through passion is a folly, which is
always repented of too late. Every servant, whether male or female, who attend
to those rules, will be approved and respected, by all whom they are called to
served.


III. Never undertake any place you are not qualified for; for pretending to do
what you do not understand, exposes yourself, and what is still worse, deceives
those whom you serve.

IV. Preserve your fidelity; for a faithful servant is a jewel, for whom no
encouragement cant be too great.

V. Adhere to the truth, for falsehood is detestable; and he that tells one lie,
must tell twenty more to conceal it.

VI. Be strictly honest; for it is shameful to be thought unworthy of trust.

VII. Be modest in your behavior; it becomes your station, and is pleasing to
your superiors.

VIII. Avoid pert answers; for civil language is cheap, and impertinence
provoking.

IX. Be clean in your business; for slovens and sluts are disrespectful
servants.

X. Never tell the affairs of the family you belong to; for that is a sort of
treachery, and often makes mischief; but keep their secrets, and have none of
your own.

XI. Live friendly with your fellow servants; for the contrary destroys the
peace of the house.

XII. Above all things avoid drunkenness; for it is an inlet to vice, the ruin
of your character, and the destruction of your constitution.

XIII. Prefer a peacable life with moderate gains, to great advantages with
irregularity.

XIV. Save your money, for that will be a friend to you in old age; be not
expensive in dress, nor marry too soon.

XV. Be careful of your master's property: for wastefulness is sin.

XVI. Never swear, for that is a sin without excuse, as there is no pleasure in
it.

XVII. Be always ready to assist a fellow servants; for good nature gains the
love of every one.

XVIII. Never stay when sent on a message; for waiting long is painful to a
master, and quick return shows diligence.

XIX. Rise early, for it is difficult to recover lost time.

XX. The servant that often changes his place, works only to be poor: for the
rolling stone gathers no moss.

XXI. Be not fond of increasing your acquaintance; for visiting leads you out
of your business, robs your master of your time, and puts you to an expense you
cannot afford: and above all things take care with whom you are acquainted, for
persons are generally the better or the worse for the company they keep.

XXII. When out of place, be cautious where you lodge; for living in a
disreputable house, puts you upon a footing with those that keep it, however
innocent you are yourself.

XXIII. Never go out on your own business without the knowledge of the family,
lest in your absence you should be wanted; for leave is light, and returning
punctually at the time you promise, shows obedien^^ and is a proof of sobriety.

XXIV. If you are dissatisfied in your place, mention your objections modestly
to your master or mistress, and give a fair warning, and don't neglect your
business, nor behave ill, in order to provoke them to turn you away; for this
will be a blemish in your character which you must always have from the last
place you served.

CHAP. XVIII.
Faith builds a bridge across the gulf of death,
To break the shock* blind nature cannot shun!
And lands thought smoothly on the farther shore,
Death's terror is the mountain faith removes:
That mountain barrier between man and peace.
It Is faith disarms destruction, and absolves
From every clamorous charge the guiltless tomb.
YOUNG.
WHILE wrapped in the silence of the night, I take my solitary and contemplative
walk in the churchyard, with what a feeling concern do I reflect on the living
world around me! -- How striking the contrast! Here rest in peace the well-nigh
forgotten remains of those who once, it may be, filled up busy spheres on the
earth. Beneath those rugged elms, that yew-tree's shade,
Where heaves the turf in many a mouldering heap,
Each in his narrow cell forgotten laid,
The rude forefathers of the hamlet sleep.
GRAY'S Elegy in a Country churchyard.
All those distinctions which they so anxiously courted, are now forever done
away: all those animosities which they so warmly agitated, are now forever
hushed and forgotten; and all those complainings and sighs which they so
mournfully uttered, are silenced, are silenced for ever, and heard no more. --
Yet on the great theater of the world the same parts are still acting, the same
ardour for place and pre-eminence; the same propensity to malice and envy; the
same repinings and lamentations are found: -- as if generations preceding, read
no lessons of instruction; as if men utterly forgot that their hour appointed
was hastily advancing.

"Oh that they were wise, that they understood these things, that they would
consider their latter end!" Deuteronomy, xxxii. 29.
Benevolent wish! for nothing so powerfully, so strongly teaches, as a
consideration of that latter end See HERVEY'S Meditations among the Tombs. page
6.
-- which is of general concern, for every son of ADAM is equally interested
therein. Can we reflect upon the day of dissolution approaching, when every
sublunary hope shall cease, and every worldly project vanish as the shadow? Can
we survey the solemn mansions of the dead, where the mingling dust bespeaks the
folly of earthly pre-eminence and honor, -- and yet pursue, with unremitted
chase, the fleeting vanities of life? and yet indulge, with unrelenting hearts,
the burning passions, which torture human peace, and murder man's best
felicity? -- Nay, can it be possible that we should look beyond the grave, and
recollect that an existence everlasting awaits us, and not use every wise,
every scriptural method to secure to our souls the comforts of that existence,
when time has closed upon us, and we have bidden an eternal adieu to all
things here below. Since we can die but once, and after death
Our state no alteration knows;
But when we have resigned our breath,
The immortal spirit goes
To endless joys or everlasting woes;
Wise is the man who labors to secure,
That mighty and important stake,
And by all methods tries to make
His passage safe and his reception sure.
POMFRET.


Thrice awful meditation! May its powerful instructions deeply impress my soul!
Nothing teaches like death. It Is indeed the wages of sin, and a fearful evil,
we must needs allow it! But then it is a persuasive monitor, and superior to
all things, convinces us of, and leads us to combat and conquer sin.

The sting of death is sin. From thence we may plainly discover, what is the
grand remedy against its fear and its power to do harm. Destroy sin, and death
becomes no longer formidable; he cannot hurt or annoy, for his sting is taken
away. But how shall we atchieve this desirable enterprise, how destroy the
sting of death? It Is done, already done for us! Thanks be to God who gives us
the victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ. 1 CORINTHIANS, xv, 57.


Here then, thou trembling mortal, who art every day distressing thy feeble
soul with the fear of approaching death, -- here behold the first and greatest
consolation under it: "Faith in Jesus Christ," who through death destroyed him
who had the power of death; and will deliver thee from that fear of death,
which all thy life time has kept thee in bondage! Look to that triumphant
conqueror, who died on the cross, and lay in the grave, to sanctify it for us:
see in his precious redemption a full pardon for all thy offenses; and with the
eye of faith steadily fixed upon him, thou also shall triumph over an enemy,
already vanquished. Believe, and look with triumph in the tomb.

NIGHT THOUOHTS.


This is the grand remedy against, and chief consolation under the fear of
death, "the knowledge and love of Jesus Christ:" Whom to know aright is life
eternal.

JOHN xvii. 3.
which properly understood, comprehends every other consolation. But that we
may not be misunderstood, let us as a second consolation and remedy, recommend
to the soul, desirous of victory over this fearful foe, "an earnest care to
live a life of gospel obedience through that faith in Christ," True faith works
by love in the heart, to Christ, his ways, ordinances and people; and obedience
in the life, to all his laws, precepts and commands.
which indeed without such obedience, will be found too weak to support the
firm structure of a joyful hope. Live as you would wish to have lived when your
anxious head is laid upon the dying pillow: Repent, believe, and mourn your
errors past,
And live each day as though it were your last.
RURAL CHRISTIAN.
live as the Gospel of that Savior directs, through whom alone you expect
salvation; live as you are assured he will approve. The prospect of death will
then animate your soul with fortitude and delight: and you will have a desire
to be dissolved and to be with Christ, which is best of all. PHILIPPIANS, i. 23.


There again we enjoy another consolation, exquisite and unspeakable, under the
apprehensions of death! "We shall be with Christ!" We shall live with him, and
be like him! Like in purity and holiness, and like him in happiness too! --
Transporting thought! Can death be esteemed an evil -- nay rather, must we not
welcome that as our greatest good, which conveys us from a dying world, like
the present, to a kingdom, where joy, and rest, and peace, shall eternally
surround us? -- But of this we shall speak more hereafter.

Another reflection which ought to abate our fears, and reconcile us to death,
is "the absolute certainty, and unavoidable necessity of it. Could ou^ fears at
all avail to prevent the stroke, or even to respite it, they might well be
allowed, and we should have some plausible reason to urge in their support. But
alas, the stroke is inevitable. Dust thou art, and unto dust thou shall return.

GENESIS, iii. 19
Surely then it is our wisdom to familiarize ourselves to an event, which must
come shortly, and which, to render us still more watchful, may come instantly.
Claim ye then no more the character of rational, ye simple ones of the earth,
who start at the thoughts of death The thought of death alone the fear destroys.

Dr. YOUNG
and use every method which ingenious thought can devise, to dissipate and
drive it from you. -- Lo, the moment comes, and utterly unprepared, ye must
stand before your God. -- Conquer yourselves: and remembering that death will
come when it will come, review it in all its circumstances, and learn through
Christ, to gain a happy victory over this dreadful leveller of all human
distinctions.

Reflect of what will death deprive you: not of being -- which to us must
certainly be of all things most dear. No; the soul cannot cease to be; it only
changes i^ circumstances and state.

"But it separates those old and familiar friends, the body and the soul." --
And let us bless God for the separation. For can we regret a separation from
that flesh, which is the seat of sin and of diseases, and which from both, has
so frequently afflicted us with the most piercing distress? No; farewell then to
the body (we will say with joy) since thereby we bid an eternal farewell to
sickness, pain and sin. To be absent from the body and present with the Lord,
will be, more or less, the wish of every real believer in Christ.

2 CORINTHIANS. v. 8.


"But death separates us from this world!" True; and it introduces us to one,
utterly unlike the present, where sorrows and losses, disappointments and
trials, shall never more be known. -- "But it separates us from our friends!"
-- Afflicting separation! The tender heart must bleed, and the affectionate eye
cannot fail to drop a tear! Yet look forward, and behold -- see in the blissful
realms to which thy spirit is soaring -- friends, immortal and unalterable
friends, awaiting thy glad arrival! -- and perhaps many already, many near to
thy heart, have gone before thee, and will give thee a joyful and blessed
welcome. Nay, yet a little while, and thou shall receive to thy rejoicing
embraces, those whom thou have left weeping in this vale of sorrow. Though death
will come, yet give your sorrows over,
For all those pious friends, who are gone before.
You Will meet 'ere long in heaven, to part no more.
G. W.


Armed with these consolations, who shall fear the stroke of death? Who but
must rejoice to relinquish this scene of trial and trouble, and to commit their
souls into the arms of an ever-living Redeemer, Job, xix. 25.
who died to save his people from their sins: of a Father, whose unwearied care
is over all his works, and whose watchful providence extends to the minutest
concerns of all his creatures? In that reviving truth the soul must find
comfort, as under every trial and affliction, so especially when the moment of
death approaches; which a child submissive to the better will of such a father,
will receive with thankfulness and Christian resignation!

As therefore death must come, and after death, judgment, and a state of bliss
or misery unalterable, let us, like the wise virgins, keep our lamps always
ready trimmed and burning, that we may never be found unprepared. Matthew, xxv.
10.
And that we may still be excited to a stricter watchfulness -- let us
contemplate those great things that are to come hereafter; let us now suppose
ourselves, as summoned to appear before the judgment seat of God; Acts, xvii.
31. John, v. 28, 29.
and as about to receive the eternal reward of our deeds, 1 Peter. i. 17.
Romans ii. 11, 12.
And is there a last day? and must there come
A sure, a ^ix'd, inexorable doom?
............
The judge des^ending, thunders from afar,
And all (...) is summons'd to his bar.
The echoing voice now rends the yielding air,
For judgment, judgment, sons of men prepare.
Dr. YOUNG'S Last Day.
-- heaven or hell; -- affecting thought! Holy Father -- we tremble and adore!
Blessed Jesus, be our advocate and intercessor!

CHAP. XIX.
Shall man alone, whose fate, whose final fate
Hangs on that hour, exclude it from his thought?
I think of nothing else: I feel! I feel it!
All nature, like an earthquake trembling round;
All deities, like summer's swarms on wing!
All basking in the full meridian blaze!
I see the Judge dethroned! the flaming guard!
The volume opened! opened every heart;
A sunbeam pointing out each secret thought!
No patron! intercessor none! now past
The sweet, the clement, mediatorial hour!
For guilt no plea: to pain no pause, no bound!
Inexorable all! and all extreme.
NIGHT THOUGHTS, Night ix.
DID our existence end with this life, how little to be dreaded, yea, in many
cases, how much to be desired were death! But our existence does not end with
this life; eternity is before us; and it is eternity which makes death of so
much consequence. Beyond the grave two states alone remain,
Of endless pleasure, and eternal pain.
SOLITARY WA^^S.
How awful, how alarming is that representation which the sacred scriptures
give us of the solemn day approaching, which is to determine our fate for this
eternity! Let us contemplate the stupendous scene; for who can dwell upon such
interesting reflections, without serious thoughts, and heaven-directed
resolutions? The steady belief of a future judgment is sufficient to make all
men zealous in duty...... If there is an hereafter,
And that there is, conscience, uninfluenc'd
And suffered to speak out, tells every man,
Then must it be an awful thing to die.
BLAIR'S GRAVE.


The doctrine of a future judgment is peculiar to the Christian Revelation.
Human reason could never discover it; for human reason could not discover how
the God of the whole earth would be pleased to deal with his creatures, and
with that world which he has formed for them. -- But in much mercy, to animate
and awaken our best desires, the eternal Lord of all has declared, that an
endless and unalterable state is reserved for us, happy or miserable, as we
comply with, or refuse the terms of his covenant: and that upon a day
appointed, he will pass the righteous sentence upon all; when those who have
done good, shall go into eternal life, and those who have done evil, into
everlasting fire. Matthew, xxv. 46.


Alarming, important truth! -- What thinking creature can be indifferent to it!
Picture the awful scene to your view; imagine yourself now called to the bar of
inviolable justice! there enthroned in glory unutterable, sits the sovereign
Judge, the gracious Redeemer! Thousand thousands ministering unto him, and ten
thousand times ten thousand standing before him! See that earth, once the seat
of all your cares and fears, now wrapped in universal flame: hark, the heavens
are passing away with insufferable noise; the sun is extinguishing; the stars
are started from their spheres, and all this system of created things is
hastening into utter destruction! The trump, the awakening trump has sounded,
and all the dead, rising from their sepulchers, are summoned to appear before
the impartial Judge! Man starting from his couch, shall sleep no more;
The day is broke which never more shall close;
Great day of dread, decision and despair!
I see the Judge enthroned, the flaming guard;
The volume opened, opened every heart.
NIGHT THOUGHTS.


Oh, terrible distress! -- Where, where shall we fly, if conscience condemns
us, and we dare not approach that impartial Judge? In vain shall we call upon
the rocks to hide, or mountains to cover us; rocks and mountains are themselves
dissolving; they can give neither shelter for our heads nor support for our
feet. Where, where for shelter shall the guilty fly?
When consternation turns the good man pale?
Dr. YOUNG.
In vain shall we solicit our friends to intercede; -- our friends shall be
then too deeply concerned for themselves to regard the cause of others; and
what, ah -- what could patrons or friends avail, when "the clement, the
mediatorial hour" is now absolutely passed and gone; -- and we have not made
him our intercessor, who would have been as mighty to save and reward, as he
now is to punish and avenge? What too will dissembling profit us; or how can we
expect to deceive him whose eyes are as a flame of fire, who pierces into the
heart's inmost recess? Who will lay open before us the whole volume of our
lives, and place in the universal view of all, those thoughts, and words, and
deeds of darkness, which in vain we secreted from the eyes of our fellow
creatures upon earth -- For who can escape the eyes of Omniscience?

Can tongue express, can heart conceive the anguish which will rend our souls,
when the dire sentence of condemnation shall pass -- a sentence from his lips,
which breathe only mercy and love to the just; -- and which we despise, while
calling to us upon earth with the most pathetic invitations, -- "Come unto me,
and I will give you rest. Matthew, xi. 28.
Aggravating circumstance! We have abused his love! We might have been blessed,
eternally blessed. -- But now the fatal moment is arrived, "Depart from me ye
cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels," Matthew.
xxv. 41.
is the dreadful malediction.

No, my soul, through this Redeemer's never-changing love, we will hope,
confidently hope to avoid the horrors of this extreme distress. And oh, that
every soul of man would, with such composed and solemn thought meditate upon
it, that joyful songs of thankfulness only might on that day be heard: that
with humble trust we might approach the Judge's throne, and find in him, -- not
the Almighty avenger, -- but the Father, the Savior and eternal friend!

What can equal the goodness of our God? or what could we desire more gracious
at his hands, than that he should seat upon the tribunal of justice, that son,
that only begotten and beloved son, John, v. 22.
who once came to our earth, not to judge, but to be judged; who died for those
sinners, on whom he is now willing to confer an eternity of bliss. O may I
breathe no longer, than I breathe
My soul in praise to him, who gave my soul
And all her infinite of prospect fair.
Cut through the shades of hell, great love! by thee,
O most adorable! most unador'd.
NIGHT THOUGHTS.


Happy he, who, convinced of this sovereign grace, looks continually and
steadfastly, with the eye of Faith, to that great day when the Savior shall
come in the clouds! -- Then shall his fear be for ever removed, and all his
anxious doubts shall vanish as the smoke; then with an accent of melodious
sweetness, with a look diffusing love and joy ineffable, the great Redeemer
shall welcome him, together with all those who have been faithful unto death,
shall welcome them and say, "Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the kingdom
prepared for you from the beginning of the world!" -- Nay, he shall vouchsafe
to enumerate those general deeds of Christian benevolence, which such souls
have performed through their faith in him: and not only enumerate, but
acknowledge them, as if they had been conferred upon himself, -- "Inasmuch as
ye did it unto the least of these my brethren, ye did it unto me." Matthew,
xxv. 4^.


How forcible, how affectionate a motive to us, now in the day of our
pilgrimage, to be diligent, continually and unweariedly diligent in all such
acts and offices of love! Christ will accept them, our Redeemer, our Judge, our
hope and our all, will accept our tender charities to his members, and our
fellow creatures; will accept our works of faith and labors of love, 1
Thessalonians, i. 3.
as if we had been happy enough to have had an opportunity of performing them,
even to his own person. And publishing the grateful tidings to all around, he
will allow us to partake of his triumph, and to enter, amidst his returning
saints and angels, those regions of glory and peace, where we shall live with
him, and enjoy everlasting happiness.

But we will refer to our next chapter what we have to add respecting the
peculiar blessedness of that state, and the exquisite misery reserved for those
"who know not God, and who obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
will be punished with everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord,
and from the glory of his power, Prostrate, my contrite heart! r^ad:
My God, my Father, and my Friend!
Do not forsake me in my end!
Lord ROSCOMMON.
when he shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels, in flaming fire,
taking vengeance; and when he shall come to be glorified in his saints, and to
be admired in all them who believe in that day." 2 Timothy i. 7.
A passage of scripture which cannot fail greatly to influence those who give
it that attention which it^ importance deserves: for who can think of
everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and the glory of his
power, without an anxious desire to avoid that destruction, the very terror of
which chills the heart.

CHAP. XX.
And these shall go away into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into
life eternal.

MATT. x^v. 46.
ETERNAL punishment! Eternal life! What awful words! What solemn events! Who
can read them and be unconcerned? Who can think of them, and be indifferent to
the momentous truths they impart? -- Were our existence to terminate with the
present passing scene, indulgence might be laudable, and every
self-gratification right. If death was nothing, and naught after death!
If when men died, at once they ceased to be,
Returning to the barren womb of nothing
Whence first they sprung, then might the debauchee,
Untrembling mouth the heavens, and inly laugh,
At the poor bugbear death.
BLAIR'S Grave.
"Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die: let us crown ourselves with
rose-buds; let none of us go without his part of our voluptuousness;" would
then be the language of reason and truth. -- But eternity before us --
consummately blessed, or consummately wretched -- and death every moment
shaking his dart triumphantly over us, preparing to strike once and strike no
more; -- can it be possible that any rational being should remain unsolicitous,
and neglect to prepare for the important realities of eternity, while chasing,
with unremitted ardor, the fugitive vanities of time and sense?

Yet, alas! many beings, proud of their faculties, and boasting their superior
reason -- are found, are daily found, immersed in sin, and rivetted to the
world; -- heedless of God, of themselves, and immortality! uninfluenced by
every motive of gratitude, unmoved by every argument of interest to obey the
voice of Religion and Truth, and to secure the eternal salvation of their
souls! Oh, that they would indulge one serious reflection; that they would
condescend a while to meditate with us, on the miserable woe reserved for those
who forget their God: -- on the inexpressible comforts which they shall reap in
joy, who love and serve him.

Think then, my fellow creatures, oh! think of that awful day of which we spoke
before, In the last Chapter.
and imagine, if you can, the horror which must seize the souls of those who
hear the dreadful sentence. "Depart, ye cursed, into everlasting fire!" --
Driven from the presence of God, which is itself complete and perfect joy;
driven from the society of those best-beloved friends, whose kind remonstrances
they would not hear on earth, and now -- ah! fatal separation -- now must
never, never more hear or behold! And driven thence -- aggravating
circumstance! even by the condemnation of that Lord of love, who, desirous to
bless and to save, freely shed even his own most precious blood, and as freely
would have given them life, had they but humbly asked it. Matthew, xxiii. 37.


And were not this, only this expulsion from God, from Christ, from Heaven --
of itself a hell sufficient, yet what horrors remain behind? They shall be
driven into the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, whose actual and
insufferable tortures shall aggravate the mind's inward horror. -- Oh! "who can
dwell with everlasting burnings!" Isaiah, xxxiii. 14.
yet where, where shall one drop of water be found to cool the parched tongues?
who can dwell where devils and condemned souls shall mix their mutual and
insulting taunts and upbraidings? where there shall be no society, but a
society in common accusations, and where, every gentle passion expelled, the
tumultuous workings of despairing minds shall miserably confuse and distract
each other.

There too the passions, which were indulged and gratified on earth, shall
become severe tormentors, ever craving, yet never finding gratification; ever
consuming the anxious heart, themselves never consumed. -- There the worm of an
accusing conscience never dies; there the flame of self-condemnation and
burning guilt shall never, never be quenched. Isaiah, lxvi. 24. Mark, ix. 44.


Where shall the soul find comfort? shall it be in the companions of its
earthly crimes condemned to the same place of woe? Alas, those companions will
then be sound the sharpest thorns to goad the guilty mind. Fierce hate will
seize the place of former love, and they will curse each other in the
bitterness of their souls, as the mutual causes of each other's undoing. But,
little consolation being found in accusing others, their upbraidings will
speedily recoil upon themselves. Against the Highest fiercely they blaspheme.
But then again their own mad choice condemn:
Much they curse God, but curse themselves much more.
In concert the s^lphurious torrents roar.
TRAPP.
Then only will be heard -- (ah me! the very thought is anguish) for ever
heard, dire gnashings of teeth, weeping and wailing, execrations and sorrow. --
Yet neither is this all: for though peace and rest enter not there; though one
gleam of joy shall never pierce through the darkness of their distress; yet all
this, and more, might be borne well, very well -- did hope, fair comforter! who
comes to all, did she but ever come, and cheer the wretched sufferers with the
sweet alleviation, that, years on years passed by; that ages upon ages gone; a
period will be put to this consummate misery, and the prisoner of hell be set
free. But this hope is withdrawn. In MILTON'S Paradise Lost, we find the
following tremendous description: -- He (Satan) views
The dismal situation waste and wild:
A dungeon horrible on all sides round
As one great furnace flamed: yet from those flames
No light, but rather darkness visible
Served only to discover sights of woe,
Regions of sorrow, doleful shades; where peace
And rest can never dwell; hope never comes
That comes to all; but torture without end
Still urges, and a fiery deluge fed,
With ever-burning sulphur unconsum'd!
Book I. v.60, etc.


--

Oh eternity, eternity! -- how fearful is the thought! And will thou, oh man,
for the momentary delusions of sin, plunge into this gulf of punishment
unutterable, unending!

At least, my soul, let the prospect be profitable to thyself; and struck
abundantly with its horrors -- infinitely more alarming than thou can imagine
or paint -- turn thy view, and let us contemplate the more pleasing scene, the
life eternal, and endless pleasures which the dear Redeemer has in store for
those who, by patient continuance in well doing, seek for glory, honor, and
immortality. Romans, ii. 7.


But if an inspired Apostle, who was favored with the rapturous prospect,
declares, that it has not even entered into the heart of man, to conceive the
greatness and excellency of the good things reserved for the righteous; how
shall we attempt to spell them out, dark habitants in cottages of clay! May it
not suffice to know, that the happiness we expect, will be in every view
complete? happiness, without the least mixture or alloy of discontent or
dissatisfaction. Corinthians, xiii. 12.
-- Pleasing truth! yet not entirely sufficient to gratify our thirsty and
inquisitive souls.

In condescension to our weakness, -- or perhaps I might say -- our strength --
(for earnest desires after the knowledge of immortality, doubtless bespeak the
soul immortal) -- however in great goodness certainly, the Lord of life has
vouchsafed to us some glimpses of that future felicity, Every one shall enjoy
as much as they shall be able to contain, or shall be necessary to complete
their joys and perfect their happiness.

This bottomless source of glory and bliss, shall for ever and ever overflow
all the glorified in heaven, and satisfy their souls with unspeakable delights.

DRELIN^O^^^.
which may render us desirous to know more, and animate every endeavor toward
the possession of so exalted a good.

We feel evil so sensibly, that perhaps we can form a better idea of heaven
from its negative, than its positive blessings. Who among us is a stranger to
sickness, to sorrow and pain? Who among us is a stranger to the comfort which
would follow an entire exemption from these corporal evils? -- Now in heaven,
our bodies spiritualized, and our souls made perfect, we shall never know pain
of body, or pain of mind: sorrow and tears shall never have admission into
those realms of joy. Isaiah, xxxv. 10. li. 1^.


But happy as our state should be, freed from those cruel spoilers of our
peace, yet of death and dissolution we are certain, the eminence of our bliss
would only render the stroke more dreadful. In heaven to secure the perpetuity
of our delight, there shall be no more death: Revelations, xxi. 4.
this mortal shall put on immortality -- and eternally free from pain and
sorrow, we shall fear no end of the transporting scene.

Positive blessings, numberless and unutterable, shall attend these negative
ones. God will not only wipe away all tears from our eyes! -- will not only
invest us with eternal security in bliss; will not only remove every thing
defiling and noxious from those regions of joy; but he himself will dwell
amongst us, and be our God. Revelations, xxi. 3.
-- He the adorable Father, with the Lamb of Love, and the Spirit of Holiness,
shall be the object of our divine contemplation. -- He, the blessed and
all-glorious Deity, whose presence is joy, and bliss, and heaven, shall be the
life, the light, the praise of the new Jerusalem, and all its divine
inhabitants! Revelations, xxii. 5.
Love shall reign triumphant in every heart, every pure and celestial desire
shall be gratified in full: every holy and devout affection shall find its
adequate supply; and one uninterrupted scene of thankfulness, serenity, and
comfort, shall smile eternally, and eternally be found; where the harps of ten
thousand times ten thousand shall unceasingly be tuned to the praises of the
Father of mercies, and the Lamb who sits on the throne, for ever, and ever.
Revelations, v. 11, 12, 13.


Come then, Lord Jesus! come and put a speedy period to this miserable world of
confusion and sin! Hasten, blessed Lord, hasten thy kingdom; whence every evil
shall be wholly removed, and where all good shall be found which can perfect
the bliss of men and angels! Faint and dark, indeed, are our earth-bound
conceptions of this consummate glory, and of that which thou have purchased for
thy servants -- purchased at a price which may justify our most elevated hopes,
even at the price of thine own life, and ever precious blood! Yet through the
riches of thy wondrous grace, the humble Christian, who by faith now enters
into rest, has some sweet fore-taste, some pleasing anticipation of the joys
to come.

Love, grateful love, looking to thee, seels a transport which enraptures the
soul, fills it with sweet complacence toward all its fellow creatures; and
makes the afflictions of this transitory world light and easy to be borne --
nay, which makes death itself no longer formidable, but devoutly to be wished,
as the happy conveyance of an imprisoned spirit to its God and its hope: to its
freedom and perfection: to its dear departed friends, and all the joys of a
blissful immortality.

Give me, oh! give me divine love, the bountiful bestower of every good gift!
shall I experience the beginning of heaven in my heart, and die with full
persuasion that the fair bud will burst into a perfect blossom -- that my joys,
begun in grace, will be ere long consummated in glory everlasting. Grace will
complete what grace begins,
To save from sorrows and from sins
The work that wisdom undertakes,
Eternal mercy never forsakes.
Dr. WATTS.


For thee, too, my Reader, let me offer up this fervent prayer: "Oh! may
thou feel and be made perfect in the love of Christ!" so will thy life be
blessed below; so will thy death be comfortable; What wise man would not live
the life of the righteous, that his latter end may be like his? that in the
agonies of death and in the very jaws of the grave, no disturbing thoughts may
discompose him, no guilty fears distract him, but he may go out of the world
with all the joyful presages of eternal rest and peace.

SHERLOCK.
so will thou be made partaker of thy Savior's kingdom.

Serious and important have been the subjects which have employed our mutual
meditations: may they be impressed no less strongly on thy heart than on my
own: may they awaken thee, if careless, to a life of devout meditation; may
they confirm thee in that life, if happily thou art already devoted to it.
This, this you may be certain is the only road to peace; this, this you may
rest assured of is the only true wisdom of human nature.

Earnestly wishing thee much success in thy Christian course, I bid thee
farewell; and exhort thee to keep thine eye steadfast on the author and finisher
of thy salvation. All besides, will fail and forsake thee. All, all on earth is
shadow, all beyond is substance.

NIGHT THOUGHTS.
But a little while, and as well the hand which has written, as the eye which
reads these lines, shall become cold and inactive, and moulder in the dust:
speedily, oh my friend, our days will be completed, and we must bid an eternal
adieu to all things here below! Then let us live like men conscious of this
solemn truth -- let us live like those who know they must ere long die; who
know that they must live for ever. -- So shall we make sure our own salvation;
PHILIPPIANS ii. 12. 2 PETER i^
and, however, strangers to each other here, shall meet and rejoice together in
that blissful kingdom above, where sorrow and affliction shall be known no more.


