

THE BOOK OF KNOWLEDGE: TREATING OF THE WISDOM OF THE ANCIENTS. IN FOUR PARTS.

I. Showing the various and wonderful Opperations of the Signs and Planets, and
other celestial Constellations, on the Bodies of Men, etc.

II. Prognostications for ever necessary to keep the Body in Health; with
several choice Receipts in Physic and Surgery.

III. An Abstract of the Art of Physiognomy and Palmistry, together with the
Signification of Moles, and the Interpretation of Dreams, etc.

IV. The Farmer's Calender, containing, 1st. Perpetual Prognostications for
Weather. 2d. The whole Mystery of Husbandry. 3d. The complete and experienced
Farrier and Cowleech, etc.

WRITTEN BY ERRA PATER, A Jew Doctor in Astronomy and Physic, born in Bethany,
near Mount Olivet in Juda.

Made English by W. LILLY, Student in Physic and Astrology.

TO WHICH IS ADDED, The true Form of all sorts of Bills, Bonds, Counter Bonds,
Indentures, Letters of Attorney and License, Deeds of Gift, Bills of Exchange,
etc.

Worcester, PRINTED BY ISAIAH THOMAS, JUN. Sold WHOLESALE and RETAIL at his
BOOKSTORE.

TO THE READER Desirous of KNOWLEDGE.
THE soul of man being a spark of immortality, infused by its Almighty Maker,
does still retain a relish of its original, that it covets knowledge above all
other things, not confining its speculation to earth, but towering to Heaven,
it searches out the Stars and all their various influences; nay, rifles all
the Constellations, unlocking all the secret cabinet of futurity, and diving
into the vast abysses of things unknown: For man Dame Nature's secret working
does inspect,
He knows how to advise, what to direct:
Into the world, by art and science brings,
And searches out the hidden birth of things.
The unplow'd earth he to his will subdues,
And all it brings forth, he knows how to use:
He seeks out JOVE: his thoughts will not be tried,
In vain from (...) ^he Stars themselves do hide.


Now to satisfy the inquisitive nature of the soul of man, is the design of
this book, which will gratify his understanding with the knowledge of the most
hiden secrets of art and nature, which the wisdom of the ancients have hitherto
concealed, but here made plain to the meanest capacities.

THE BOOK OF KNOWLEDGE: TREATING OF THE WISDOM OF THE ANCIENTS. PART I. Showing
the various and wonderful operations of the Signs and Planets, and other
^^lestial Constellations, on the Bodies of Men, Women and Children, and the
mighty Influences they have upon these that are born under them.
ONE part of the wisdom of the ancients consisted in the observation of several
days and times, and from thence foretelling such good and bad events, as from
long experience they found always to follow: And therefore revising what
ancient astrologers have said, which I found very defective, I have myself made
an exact judgment of what should befall men, women and children, by the day of
the week on which the first day of the year happened to fall: As if it happened
to fall on a

Sunday.] The winter following will be pleasant, the summer seasonable; there
shall be plenty of corn, though the weather in harvest will prove but
indifferent: Fruit shall very much abound, and there will be a very good seed
time following the harvest; shocks of sheep and great cattle shall increase and
prosper, but there shall be robberies in most places, and perhaps war before
the end of the year: Also it denotes the death of prelates and princes,
dissension and discord among men, but not of long continuance.

Monday.] If New Year's Day fall on Monday, expect a hard and cold winter, and
a wet summer, and as a consequence of that, many diseases; the fruits of the
earth very indifferent, which will produce great scarcity in some places: Also
denotes the downfall of the gentry and many marriages among the common people.

Tuesday.] If on Tuesday, the winter shall be wet and the summer very dry; hay
will be scarce, but corn indifferently plenty. Many factions and divisions
among those that sit at the helm, and a great mortality both of men and beasts.

Wednesday.] If on Wednesday it denotes the first part of the winter very hard
and severe, but the last part very mild and gentle, a seasonable spring and
plenty of fruit; but great sickness and many distempers about autumn. Many
fables, with false news, shall be spread abroad, and much discontent among the
common people.

Thursday.] If on Thursday, you may look for a hard winter, but a seasonable
and moderate spring, and a great increase of the fruits of the earth; sheep and
great cattle shall also prosper much, but toward autumn expect to hear of war
and bloodshed abroad, and troubles at home, occasioned by contests and
divisions among the clergy.

Friday.] If on Friday, look for an extreme hard winter, a late spring, and a
dry summer; corn very dear, and fruit very dear, very high winds, occasioning
shipwrecks; cattle will die generally: Women will have very hard labors, and
most others very loose and licentious; thunder and lightning will be very
frequent, and do much mischief.

Saturday.] If on Saturday, the winter shall be moderate, the spring windy, but
the summer shall be both seasonable and fruitful; corn shall be cheap, and
fruit plenty.

Of Astrology; what it is.
ASTROLOGY is the Art that teaches us the influence and effects of the
Celestial Planets upon the bodies of men, women and children, which by their
various aspects, positions and configurations, do foreshew the changes and
mutations both of particular bodies, and also of kingdoms and states.

Some would confound Astronomy and Astrology together, which are in truth
different things: And both have their particular use and excellence. Astronomy
teaches the various and different motions of the planets, and astrology shows
their influences and effects; but now that of the signs and planets more
distinctly. And first the twelve signs of the Zodiac, which govern the several
parts of man's body, and are summed up in verse.

A Description of the twelve Signs in Verse, showing wha^ Part of the Body each
rules.

MAN's head and face Heaven's ram obey,
His neck the neck strong bull does sway,
The arm twining twins guide hands and arms;
Breasts, sides, and stomach Cancer charms,
The lion rules his back and heart,
Bowels and belly's Virgo's part;
Reins, haunches, navel, Libra tends,
Bladder and secrets Scorpio befriends;
The half horsed bowman rules the thighs,
And to the kid our knees suffice;
Our legs are but the butler's fees,
The fish our footsteps oversees.
The Names and Characters of the twelve Signs.
THE first is Aries. This sign governs the head and face, and is by nature cold
and dry.

The second is Taurus. This Sign governs the neck and throat, and is by nature
cold and dry.

The third is Gemini. This sign governs the hands and arms, and is hot and
moist.

The fourth is Cancer. This sign governs the breast and stomach, and is cold
and moist.

The fifth is Leo. This sign governs the heart and back, and is hot and dry.

The sixth is Virgo This sign governs the bowels and belly, and is cold and dry

The seventh is Libra. This sign governs the reins and loins, and is hot and
moist.

The eighth is Scorpio. This sign governs the secret members, and is cold and
dry.

The ninth is Sagittary. This sign governs the thighs and hips, and is hot and
dry.

The tenth is Capricorn. This sign governs the knees and hams, and is cold and
dry.

The eleventh is Aquarius. This sign governs the legs, and is by nature hot and
moist.

The twelfth is Pisces. This sign governs the feet, and is cold and moist.

Besides the names and characters of the twelve signs, they have other names
and characters also by which they are described and called. As Aries is called
the Ram, Taurus the Bull, Gemini the Twins, Cancer the Crab, Leo the Lion,
Virgo the Virgin or Maid, Libra the Balance, Scorpio the Scorpion, Sagittary
the Centaur or half horsed Bowman, or the Archer, his character being half man
half horse, with bow and arrows, Capricorn the Kid or Goat, and Pisces the Fish.

Of the Triplicity of the Twelve Signs.
THESE signs are also divided by astrologers in their several triplicities
according to their several natures; thus Aries, Leo and Sagittary, being all
hot and dry, are called the fiery triplicity; Taurus, Virgo and Capricorn,
being all cold and dry, are called the earthly triplicity; Gemini, Libra and
Aquarius, being all hot and moist, are called the airy triplicity; and Cancer,
Scorpio and Pisces, being all cold and moist, are called the watery triplicity.

Of the Twelve Houses.
THE knowledge and the nature of the houses is reckoned by the ancients a great
mystery, and that which requires great study; for there is nothing relating to
man's life but it is foreshewn by the nature of one of the twelve houses, whose
significations are briefly summed up in the following verse. The first house
shows life, the second wealth does give,
The third how brethren, the fourth how parents live,
Issue the fifth, the sixth diseases bring,
The seventh wedlock, and the eighth death's sting,
The ninth religion, the tenth honor s^ws,
Friendship the eleventh, and the twelfth our w^.


The first house is called the ascendant; because there the sun ascends the
horizon, let it be in what climate it will; and in astrological judgment is
called the house of life.

The second house is the succedent to the ascendant, and is the signification
of riches and wealth.

The third house is the signification of brethren, kindred and alliance.

The fourth house signifies the parents of the native, and all possessions, and
lands of inheritance.

The fifth house is the succedent of the angel of the earth, which is the
fourth house and, therefore signifies mirth and jollity, which is usually the
effect of the birth of children, which is also signified by this house.

The sixth house is cadent from the north angle, and is significant of sickness
and diseases.

The seventh house is the angel of the west, and is significator of wedlock,
and also of lawsuits and quarrels.

The eighth house is succedent from the angel of the west, and signifies death.

The ninth house is cadent, and signifies religion and learning.

The tenth house signifies dignity, honor, and preferment.

The eleventh house has significations of friendship, amity, and hope.

The twelfth house signifies misery, poverty, private enemies, imprisonments
and disgrace.

How many Persons may know under which of the twelve Signs they are born.
HE that is born under Aries is of a nature hot and dry, and of a loud voice,
inclined to choler; and if a woman, subject to barrenness, or at least will
have but few children, and those sickly and perhaps wanting in some of their
members; very desirous of command, and loving to be above others: Such have
also black eyebrows, thick shoulders, and are of a dark swarthy complexion, and
of a middle stature.

Those born under Taurus are of a cold and dry constitution, inclined to
melancholy, one that is sickly, and loves pleasure, yet is very chaste, honest
and religious; seldom angry, but once peovoked seldom reconciled; of short
stature, but well set; short legs, big buttocks, a bull's neck, wide mouth, and
black hair.

Persons born under Gemini are hot and moist, of fair and sanguine complexions,
and affable and courteous in their behavior, endued with wisdom and
understanding, and accomplished with elegance of speech and a good delivery,
having brown hair, brisk and quick eyes, a large breast, long arms, hands and
legs; and a tall, straight and well set body.

Those born under Cancer, which is a watery sign, are cold and moist, and of a
phlegmatic constitution; of a low stature, blackish hair, and a great belly. If
it be a woman, it shows she shall have many children.

Those that are born under Leo (which is hot and dry, and a sign of the fiery
triplicity) are very choleric, of a shrill voice, and viciously inclined; m^^h
addicted to anger, and very subtle; if a woman, barren, of a generous and free
temper, very valiant and courageous, of yellowish or flaxen hair, broad
shouldered, great head and eyes, of middle stature, but lusty body.

Persons born under Virgo, which is a sign of the earthly triplicity, are cold
and dry, of a melancholy constitution, but of a free countenance, very
courteous of behavior, and yet very self opinioned, the body somewhat spare,
but of a good proportion, of a brown complexion, but black hair, and large eyes.

Those born under Libra, which is a sign of the airy triplicity, are hot and
moist, and of a sanguine complexion, fair, and of a good proportion, of homely
visage, well favored, light brown hair, pleasant and courteous, rosy cheeks,
and amiable countenance, somewhat inclining to tallness, and very slender. But
if a woman she will have but few children.

Persons born under Scorpio, which is the sign of the watery Triplicity, are by
nature cold and moist, and consequently phlegmatic, and of a sickly
constitution, yet very fruitful, and withal vicious, fair of countenance, but
of an angry disposition, and many times crooked in their bodies as well as in
their tempers; they are also of a sad colored hair, and of a serious and grave
countenance, very much reserved, but at the same time false and deceitful; the
stature is commonly small, but the body is pretty well set.

Those that are born under Sagittary which is a sign of the fiery Triplicity,
are hot and dry, choleric, tall of stature, hard favored, but fair; brown
hair, which will shed betimes. If a woman, she will have but few children, and
those very weak, but ingenious and exceeding crafty.

Persons born under Capricorn, which is a sign of the earthly Triplicity, are
cold and dry, and of a melancholy constitution, and of a savage and cruel
nature; and much inclined to lechery; the body deformed, of a swarthy
complexion, short of stature, dry and lean; the face also lean and thin, the
color pale and wan, and generally broad favored.

Those born under Aquarius, which is a sign of the watery Triplicity, are hot
and moist, and of a sanguine complexion, and of a sweet and affable condition,
with a countenance very amiable and lovely; of a free and pleasant temper, and
of a chaste, honest, and religious nature, of a fair visage, middle stature,
well shapen body, and bright hair, virtuously inclined, and always conceited.

Those born under Pisces, which is a sign of the watery Triplicity, are cold,
moist, and phlegmatic; of a short stature, often crooked, deformed, and ill
composed both in body and mind, having a great face, pale and wan complexion,
thick shouldered, short necked, and stooping.

By these things persons may know under what sign they were born, if they will
compare themselves with what is here written.

Of the seven Planets, their characters, names, natures; and in what times they
make their Revolutions.
HAVING spoke of the several signs, with the twelve houses, and of their
natures and significations, I come now to speak of the seven planets, or
erratic stars, who in their several orbs or circles, pass through the twelve
houses of the Zodiac in more or less time, according to the largeness or
smallness of their several orbs; and as these planets pass through the twelve
signs, so they are said to be in such and such houses; thus the complement of
one year, for on the tenth of March, at which time the spring and most properly
the year begins, the sun enters in Aries, and having passed through that, in
April he enters into Taurus, in May into Gemini, and so of the rest. And
according to the houses or signs in which any of the planets are, so they are
said to be dignified or debilitated; for when a planet is in a sign of its own
nature, it is dignified; but if in a sign of a contrary nature to its own, it
is then debilitated, or made weaker; and according to their position, their
effects and operations are wonderful upon the bodies of men and women; but I
shall give you their characters, names, and nature.

The first is Saturn, who is by nature cold and dry, of a swarthy, dull,
obscure color, like unto lead; he makes his revolution through the twelve
signs in thirty years.

The second is Jupiter, who is by nature hot, moist, and temperate, he appears
very bright and shining, and is of a warm nature; he makes his revolution in
twelve years.

The third is Mars, of nature hot and dry, he appears of a fiery color, and
makes his revolution in twenty three months.

The fourth is Sol, whose nature is hot, dry, and temperate; his glorious
brightness is sufficiently known to all. He makes his revolution in three
hundred and sixty five days, six hours and twentyfour minutes.

The fifth is Venus, of nature cold and moist, the most bright and splendent
star in all the firmament, she moves equally with the Sun, though her motion
seems to be very irregular, and makes her revolution at the same time.

The sixth is Mercury, whose nature is cold and dry, variable, he is situated
very near the Sun, and is rarely seen; he makes his revolution at the same time
as the Sun and Venus.

The seventh is Luna, or the Moon, which is the last or lowest, and whose
nature is cold and moist, every one knows she is of a pale color, and she
makes her revolution in twentyseven days and eight hours.

Having given you a brief account of the names and nature of the seven planets,
I here add an account of the five aspects also, which are these:

Of the five Aspects.
1. CONJUNCTION, which is when two planets are in one sign, or thirty degrees.

2. Sextile, which is when two planets are distant two signs or sixty degrees.

3. Quartile, which is when two planets are distant three signs, or ninety
degrees.

4. Trine, which is when two planets are distant four signs, or one hundred and
twenty degrees.

5. Opposition, which is when two planets are distant six signs, or one hundred
and eighty degrees.

These are also two opposite points in the ecliptic line, called Nodes, which
we commonly call the Dragons head and tail, thus characterised, Dragon's Head,
Dragon's Tail.

I would now show you the various effects and operations of the seven planets,
as they are posited in the several houses, but I think it most necessary to
give you an explanation of several terms used in the astronomical and
astrological science.

An explanation of the Circle of the Sphere, and some other Terms in Astronomy,
for the easier understanding of this Book, and for further information of the
reader.
THE Equinoctial Circle, Equator, or Equinox, is a great circle or line equally
distant from the two poles of the world, dividing the sphere in the midst.

Zodiac, is a broad oblique circle crossing the Equinoctial in two opposite
places, viz. in the beginning of Aries and the beginning of Libra, so that half
declining toward the north, the other toward the south; and in this circle is
comprehended the twelve constellations of signs, every sign containing thirty
degrees in length, and twelve in breadth. Note also, That the first are
northern signs, and the six last are southern signs.

The Ecliptic Line, is a line imagined to go along the midst of the Zodiac, as
a girdle out of which the sun never goes; but the moon and other planets are
sometimes on one side, and sometimes on the other side, which is called their
latitudes, only the fixed stars alter not their latitude, whether great or
small; but the longitude of a star is in the arch or part of the Ecliptic in
degrees, between the beginning of Aries, and the circle which passes through
the body of the star; where note, that all circles of the sphere or heavens,
whether they are large or small, have three hundred and sixty degrees allowed
to each of them.

Colures are said to be two great moveable circles crossing each other at the
poles of the world, one cutting the Equinox at the beginning of Aries and at
the beginning of Libra, and the other cutting the Ecliptic at the beginning of
Cancer and at the beginning of Capricorn; and so dividing the globe into four
equal parts.

Horizon is a great circle which divides the upper hemisphere, that is the
upper hall of the world from the lower, we being always supposed to be in the
midst.

Meridian is a great circle passing through the poles of the world, and the
poles of the horizon, called Zenith and the Nadir (which are two points, one
directly over our heads the other directly under our feet) on which the sun is
always just at noon; and to go directly north and south, the meridian is
changed; but to go east and west it is changed to sixty miles either way, and
make one degree, of four minutes of time difference under the Equinox, viz.
sixty miles eastward, it is noon four minutes sooner, and sixty miles westward
four minutes later.

Tropicks are supposed to be two lesser circles, parallel with the Equinoctial,
and distant from it on either side, twenty three degrees, thirty one minutes
each; the ecliptic line touches the Tropic of Cancer on the north side of the
equinoctial, and it touches the Tropic of Capricorn on the south side thereof,
so that the sun has its motion between these two circles.

The Artick Circle is equally distant from the north pole, as the Tropicks are
distant from the Equinox twenty three degrees, thirty one minutes.

The Antarctic Circle is the same distance from the south pole.

Zones, so called are five in number, two cold, two temperate and one hot,
which are divided by the two Tropicks and polar circles from each other; the
hot Zone is counted between the two Tropicks that is extended from one to the
other, being about forty seven degrees two minutes broad; the temperate Zones
are extended from the Tropicks on either side, to about fortytwo degrees
sixtyeight minutes, that is northward to the Artick circle and southward to the
antarctick circle and the two cold Zones are each within those two small
circles having the poles for their center.

The poles of the Worlds, are two points exactly opposite to each other in the
heavens, one in the north, the other in the south, the earth being in the
midst, so that it seems to turn about, as if it were borne up by them;
wherefore by some it is termed the axletree of the world, as if there was a
line supposed to be drawn from one pole through the center of the earth to the
other, and the earth turning thereon, though holy writ tells us, The Lord
hangs the earth upon nothing, it being upholden by his mighty power. The pole
artick, or north pole, is elevated above our horizon above fiftyone degrees;
and those stars within that distance from it, never set with us, but keep their
course round it daily; so likewise those that are at that distance from the
south pole, never rise with us, but perform their course in the like order.

Azimuths are supposed lines or circles of distance from the meridian, drawn
from the zenith to any degree, or two degrees of the horizon, or according to
the thirty two points of the mariner's compass, so that in traveling or
sailing any way supposing a circle to go from our zenith directly before us to
the horizon, is the Azimuth, called the verticle point as well as the zenith.

Almicantharats, or Almadarats, or circles of altitude, are imagined circles
passing through the meridian, parallel with the horizon.

The Sphere is a round body, presenting the frame of the whole world, as the
circles of the heaven and the earth; this is sometimes called a martial sphere,
for the orbs of the planets are called their spheres, that is the circles in
which they move.

Ascension is the rising of any star, or of any part of the ecliptic above the
horizon, Descension is its going down.

Right ascension of a star, is that part of the equinox that rises or sets
with a star in a right sphere, but in an oblique sphere, it is that part of the
equinoctial in degrees, containing between the first point of Aries, and that
place of the equinoctial which passes by the meridian with the center of the
star.

Oblique Ascension is a part of the equinoctial in degrees, contained betwixt
the beginning of Aries, and that of the equinox, which rises with any star, or
part of the ecliptic, in an oblique sphere.

Assential difference, is the difference betwixt the right and oblique
ascension, or the number of degrees contained between that place and the
equinox that rises with the center of a star, and that place of the equinox
that comes to the meridian with the same star.

Solstice is in the summer, when the sun is in the beginning of Cancer; and in
the winter when the sun enters into Capricorn; because then the days seem to
stand still, and seem neither to increase nor decrease above two minutes in ten
or twelve days.

Constellation is a certain number of stars, supposed to be limited within some
form or likeness, as Aries the ram, is said to have thirteen stars; Taurus the
bull thirtythree: Arcturus, Orion and the Pleiades, mentioned in Job. ix. 9.
are said to be Constellations.

Perihelium is the point wherein the earth, or any planet, is nearest the sun.

Aphelium is a point wherein the earth, or any planet, is farther from the sun.

Planets, are the seven eratique or wandering stars, called, Saturn, Jupiter,
Mars, Sol, or the Sun, Venus, Mercury and Luna, or the Moon, whose characters,
names and nature, we have mentioned before, and whose influences we shall by
and by give you a farther account of. Those planets have also their several
motions. As,

Direct. Is a planet's moving in its natural course, which is forward.

Retrogade. Is their moving backward contrary to their direct motion.

Combust. Is their being under the sun beams, or within eight degrees of him.

Oriental. Is when a planet rises before the sun, Occidental, after him.

Latitude of the Earth, is the distance of breadth on either side of the
equinox, toward the pole, and they that are under the equinox have no
latitude, but the poles of the world are in the horizon: This is a right
sphere, and every sixty miles directly north or south, are said to make no
degree of latitude, and the height of either pole above the horizon, is
answerable to the degree of latitude in an oblique sphere; as London is counted
to be in latitude fiftyone degrees, thirtytwo minutes, the pole thereof being
elevated as much. The like is to be observed in any other place or region.

Longitude of the Earth, is the outside thereof extended from west to east,
crossing the latitude at right angles, the beginning thereof (according to some
astronomers) is the Canary Isles, so going eastward quite round the world, unto
the same place again, which is three hundred and sixty degrees; and under the
equinoctial is reputed to be two millions one thousand six hundred miles,
reckoning sixty miles to a degree; but then further off the equinoctial, the
fewer miles are in a degree; for at London about thirtyseven makes a degree of
longitude: so these degrees grow less and less, until they are met in the
latitude of ninety, that is under the poles.

Parallels, are lines straight and circular, equally distant from each other,
as the Equinox, Tropicks, and degrees of latitude, etc.

Climate, or Clime, is such a space of earth comprehending between two
parallels, in which space there is half an hour's difference in the sun dials,
and length of the days.

Antipodes, are those whose feet are directly against ours, as if a line was
drawn from one through the center of the earth to the other.

And these shall suffice for an explanation of things, which I have done as
briefly as I could, for he advantage of the reader, to whom possibly these
things (so necessary to be known) may have hitherto been concealed.

Of the Sun's Revolution through the 12 Sings of the Zodiac; with an
Astrological Judgment of those that shall be born, when the Sun is in any of
these Signs.
THOUGH there be seven planets (as we have before showed) yet the sun and moon
being the two great luminaries of the world, have greater influence upon our
bodies than all the rest, and the sun shining by his ow light, and being the
fountain of both light and life, has greater power than the moon, and his
influence is more in any of the twelve houses. I therefore here (because I
affect brevity) give the reader an astrologic judgment of the sun's power and
influence, being in any of the twelve houses; after I have first acquainted my
reader what a house is, and signifies in astrology.

A house is a certain space in the firmament, which is parted and separated by
several degrees, by which the planets have their motion metaphorically, called
houses. For as in a house there may be many mansions, for every planet has a
peculiar or proper place in the firmament, in which it moves and in which it is
resident, containing thirty degrees, by which one house is differenced from
another, and these are thus placed by Astrologers, viz.

The sun being in Aries, makes a person born under it of a toward and peevish
disposition, quickly angry, but as soon pleased; given to study and very
eloquent, but proud, living luxurious, promising all things, but performing
nothing; not beloved among his kindred, and obnoxious to danger among his
enemies; he shall be in danger of receiving harm from four footed beasts, or
being thrown from a horse, and the like; so that he ought to avoid all hawking,
hunting, and other exercise to be performed on horsecback, which are like to be
fatal to him, but in other things he may be more fortunate. If the person born
be a female, though she may be fair and fruitful in children, yet she will be
given to lying, and of so bad a temper and disposition that her husband will
live but uneasy with her. Note, this also, that those born in the day time, the
sun being in Aries, will be fortunate aad happy, but those that are born in the
night, will be unfortunate and come to disgrace.

The sun being in Taurus, makes the native bold and fortunate in attempting
hard and difficult affairs; it shows him also victorious over his enemies, and
a great traveller, but banished from his native country. It also shows one
servile, familiar and angry, but in his old age only; for in his youth he shall
obtain riches by marriage, which shall make him better honored. But when age
comes, it brings sickness with it, and that makes men peevish.

It makes females wanton, yet painful and obedient, but full of Tittle Tattle;
it also shows them inclined to whoredom, which will wear off by degrees; she
shall have many husbands and diverse children.

The sun being in Gemini, denotes a fair child, also one that is wise, liberal
and merciful, also a boaster, and one that runs up and down without any regard
to his business, whereby he shall obtain but little riches of his own, but
shall be of that fidelity and truth, that he shall have the command of the
public treasure: It also denotes one to be of a complaisant behavior, a good
understanding, and acceptable to those with whom he has to do. It shows him
also to be well versed in the mathematical science and arithmetic; and that he
shall be in great danger about three and twenty years of age, either to be hurt
by fire, or bitten by a mad dog.

The sun being in Cancer, shows a person to be of a good wit, humility and
wisdom, but one inclined to pleasure, and the love of women. It also shows one
attempting many things, and especially on seas, and thereby often in danger,
and vexed with many incommodities, and with much poverty and misery, and that
though he may get much, yet he may be never the richer; he shall dig for
treasure, and shall find that which he looked not for: But if it be a maid, she
shall be witty, shamefaced, evil, wise, diligent, nimble and beautiful, soon
pleased, yet deceitful and crafty, saying one thing, and doing another, subject
to many dangers by water, by falling, by childbearing and cholic; and after the
age of twentysix, whether the native, male or female, it promises good
success. It denotes also a person to be painful, faithful, acquainted with
great men, and fortunate in husbandry.

The sun being in Leo, denotes a man proud and arrogant, bold and stout; a
mocker, scorner, unmerciful, cruel, and hard to be entreated; beset with many
enemies, and subject to many miseries; also a captain or other commander,
looking for promotion from great men, unfortunate children, and meeting with
many afflictions by their means, putting himself into many dangers; he shall be
also in danger by fire or sword, and violence of beasts, by whom he shall be in
danger of death; but with prudence may escape all threatened dangers.

But if the native be of the female sex, she shall be bold, have great and
large breasts, and slender legs, which are tokens of stoutness, angers,
slanders, and babbling; though the softness natural to women do alleviate the
excess thereof. She ought however to be especially careful of hot waters, and
fire, by which she will be in great danger; she shall also be much inclined to
sickness, or gnawing of the stomach. But after the age of twentyone years, she
shall be fortunate in riches, which she shall obtain by the help of great men,
and the use of other men's goods: also by housekeeping, beauty and love.

The sun being in Virgo, makes the men fortunate and successful in household
affairs, wise and fruitful, stout and ambitious: his wife shall die suddenly in
his absence; he shall have many things stolen from him, but shall be revenged
on his enemies. He shall be so much given to talk, that he cannot keep his own
secrets. -- It also shows one fairfaced, of a genteel behavior, a lover of
women, and delightful to be in the courts of princes and noblemen. It also
denotes one wise, just, and honorable, a patron and defender of his friends,
also religious and temperate, of a comely personage, and well featured. If the
native be a maiden, she will be witty, honest and modest; of a willing mind
diligent and circumspect; and shall be married about the age of fifteen years.
But whether male or female, they shall be liable to meet with many afflictions.

The sun being in Libra, denotes the person to be fortunate in all maritime
affairs, and that he gains by trading in spices and precious stones. It also
shows a comely body, and a valuable pleasant tongue, a good fame, and one
curious to understand secrets, but not very careful to perform what he
promises, how much soever he may pretend to it. It shows also that he shall
have several wives, and that he shall quickly bury the first. He may also be a
gainer by dead men, who will leave him large legacies. He shall be a lover of
women and entertain unlawful familiararities with them. He shall be also a good
interpreter of dreams, whether he be born by day or night. If the native be of
the female sex, she shall be free and debonair, and of a jocund humor, taking
much delight in herbs, loving the fields, and wandering into strange places.
About 23 years of age she shall have a husband, and be happy, married for her
beauty; pleasantness of conversation, and good behavior, shall much promote
her. Likewise the children of Libra are such as are studious and lovers of
learning; but without special care be taken, they may receive prejudice by fire
or scalding water.

The sun being in Scorpio increases the natives inheritence, and give them a
boldness and stoutness, inclining them likewise to flattery, by which means
those they deal with are often deceived; and when they expect bread may meet
with nothing but a scorpion. It likewise denotes a person full of mirth, given
to jesting and easy of belief, at the same time a conqueror of his enemies. It
makes a woman to be full of craft and wit, and yet her husband shall deceive
her. She shall likewise be subject to pain and the spleen, and have some
extraordinary mark, either in the head, shoulder, or brawn of the arm.

It makes both sexes bold and rash, given to thieving, and to search out hidden
things, also it makes them wanton fornicators, and full of evil thoughts, and
given to too much talking.

The sun being in Sagittary, gives fortune and boldness to take in hand an
enterprise, inclining a person to travel, and take vovages at sea and journies
by land, and not without considerable advantage; it also gives access into
courts of princes, where the native shall be advanced to some honorable post.
It also shows a person given to riding, hunting, hawking, leaping, fighting and
such manly exercises, at which he always comes off with honor, by which means
he is envied and has many enemies, whom yet he shall vanquish and and overcome.
It also shows he shall possess the inheritence of his father, and that he shall
be just, ingenious, faithful, hearty, a sure friend, and a generous enemy. If
the native be a woman, it likewise betokens the same; she shall be industrious,
of an excellent temper; she shall be envied by her enemies, but shall overcome
them; she shall be married about seventeen, and have many children.

The sun being in Capricorn, shows the native shall meet with many afflictions
and adversities, which he shall sustain with many resolutions: Yet it always
shows him angry and fretful, and one that keeps bad company. It also makes him
merry and cheerful; yet he may fall in love to that degree, that he may be
ready to die for his mistress; but if the nativity be by night, he shall be
inconstant; it also shows in age he shall be covetous. He shall thrive in
navigation, especially in the trade toward the east, for from thence his
fortune shall arise. If the native be a woman, she will be modest and bashful,
of a fearful disposition, and very much addicted to travel.

The sun being in Aquarius, makes the native of a friendly disposition,
fearful of waters, and in danger of receiving prejudice thereby; he shall be
subject to sickness and quartidian agues until about the fifteenth year of his
age, after which he shall be more fortunate, for by traveling through diverse
countries, he shall gather riches, which with a liberal hand he shall
distribute; he shall meet with sundry losses and afflictions, especially by
means of his wife and other women; and shall live for a long time without the
enjoyment of her. But she being dead, his affairs will be more fortunate. If
the native be a woman, she shall be comely (...) body, and of a faithful and
canstant mind: she shall be enriched with other men's goods, but her children
shall be a great affliction to her, and she shall receive much damage by them.
She shall not attain to any great fortune until the two and twentieth year of
her age, and then she shall arrive to a competent estate.

The sun being in Pisces denotes a man to be quick, of a valuable and ready
tongue, bold and conceited, but fortunate in finding out hidden treasure: for
this is peculiar to those who are born when the sun is in Pisces, that they
shall find something unlooked for, and shall be also enriched with other men's
goods; it also shows them to be merry and jocose, of a good disposition, and
loving the company of good men; they seldom live very long, but if they reach
to thirtyfive years they may live to a good old age. They shall never be very
rich, except in their own opinions; they are always full of uneasy thoughts,
and are in danger of being brought into captivity by means of women; they have
commonly some mark in the elbow or foot, and their fortune will come from the
mouth. If the native be a woman, she will be bold, contumelious, scold, and
something worse, for she will forsake her own husband, and cleave to an
adulterer.

Thus I have given an account of the influences of the sun, being in any of the
celestial signs, by which any person may know in what sign the sun was at the
time of his birth.

Of the evil or particular Days in every Month in the Year.
THERE are certain days in the years which concerns all persons to know,
because they are so perilous and dangerous; for on these days if any man or
woman shall be let blood, they shall die within 21 days following, or whosoever
falls sick on any of these days shall certainly die: And whosoever begins a
journey on any of these days, he shall be in danger of death before he returns:
Also he that marries a wife on any of these days, they shall either be quickly
parted, or live together in sorrow and discontent. And lastly, whosoever on one
of those days beginning any grea^ousiness it will never prosper, nor come to
the desired perfection. Now since these days are so unfortunate it highly
concerns every one both to know, and take notice of them; which that the reader
may do, I have here set down in the following order:

In January are eight days; that is to say, the 1st, 2d, 4th, 5th, 10th, 15th,
17th, and 19th. In February are three days; that is the 8th, 10th, and 19th. In
March are three days; that is the 15th, 16th, and 21st. In April are two days,
the 15th, and 21st. In May are three days, 15th, 17th, and 20th. In June are
two days, the 4th, and 17th. In July are two days, the 15th, and 20th. In
August are two days, the 20th, and 25th. In September are two days, the 6th,
and 7th. In October is one day, the 6th. In November are two days, the 5th, and
19th, In December are three days, the 6th, 7th, and 11th; and others say, 15th,
and 19th.

Of the Planetary Days and Hours, and how to know under what Planet a Man is
born.
THE planatary hours are those ^ours in which each planet reigns, and has their
chief dominion; of which the ancients gave the following account:

Saturn is Lord on Saturday; Jupiter is Lord on Thursday; Mars is Lord on
Tuesday; Sol is Lord on Sunday, and Luna on Monday.

On Saturday the first hour after midnight Saturn reigns, the second Jupiter,
the third Mars, the fourth Sol reigns, the fifth Venus, the sixth Mercury, and
the seventh Luna; and then again Saturn the eight, Jupiter the ninth, Mars the
tenth, Sol the eleventh, Venus the twelfth, Mercury the thirteenth, Luna the
fourteenth; and then the third time, Saturn the fifteenth, Jupiter the
sixteenth, Mars the seventeenth, Sol the eighteenth, Venus the nineteenth,
Mercury the twentieth, and Luna the one and twentieth hour: Then in the fourth
place, Saturn the two and twentieth, hour, Jupiter the three and twentieth, and
Mars the four and twentieth: And then Sol begins the first hour after midnight
on Sunday, Venus the 2d hour, Mercury the 3d, and also the 24th, which is the
hour of Mercury, and then Luna begins the first hour after midnight on Monday,
Saturn the 2d, Jupiter the 3, and so to the 24th, which is the hour of Jupiter,
and then Mars begins the first hour after midnight on Tuesday, and Sol the
second, and so forward hour by hour, and planet by planet, according to their
order, by which every planet reigns the first hour of his own day; and so
likewise the 8th, 15th, and 22d. As for instance, Saturn reigns the first hour,
the 8th, 15th, and the 22d on Saturday, Sol the same hours on Sunday, Luna the
same on Monday, Mars the same on Tuesday, Mercury the same on Wednesday,
Jupiter the same on Thursday, and so Venus on Friday; which for the readier and
easier finding out, I have thus set down.

A TABLE of the Planetary Hours for every Day in the Week.
Sund. Mond. Tuesd. Wedn. Thurs. Frid. Satur. Pl. H. P. H. Pl. H. Pl. H. Pl. H.
Pl. H. P. H. 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 5 5 5 5 5
5 5 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 10 10 10 10 10 10
10 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 13 13 13 13 13 13 13 14 14 14 14
14 14 14 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 16 16 16 16 16 16 16 17 17 17 17 17 17 17 18 18
18 18 18 18 18 19 19 19 19 19 19 19 20 20 20 20 20 20 21 21 21 21 21 21 21 22
22 22 22 22 22 22 23 23 23 23 23 23 23 24 24 24 24 24 24 24

This Table is so easy, it needs little explanation. -- Its use is to find what
planet rules any hour of the day, every day in the week. As for example, I
desire to know what planet rules on Wednesday, at 7 o'clock at night; under the
title of Wednesday, I look for 9, which answers to 7 o'clock at night; for the
natural day consists of 24 hours, beginning after midnight, so that from 12 at
noon, you begin to reckon 13, 14 15, etc. you find that the 19th hour from
midnight, answers to 7 o'clock at night, over against which you will find which
shows that to be the hour of the sun. And if you would know what planet rules
at 7 in the morning that day, you will find against 7, which shows that Venus
rules that hour; and so of any other hour in the day.

But I shall now come to speak of the significations of the planetary hours of
each planet, and what it portends to those that are born in them. The hour of
Saturn is strong, and is good to do all things that require strength: Such as
fighting or bearing burdens, or the like; but for those things it is very evil.
He that is born in the hour of Saturn, is slow, dull and melancholy, of a
dogged temper and disposition, black and swarthy of complexion, being
quarrelsome, wrathful, and very malicious.

The hour of Jupiter is in all things good, and denotes peace, love and
concord: He that is born in the hour of Jupiter, is of a ruddy and sandy
complexion, fair hair, well proportioned body, and of a lovely countenance, his
face rather broad than long, well spoken and courteous, of a very affable
carriage, sober, just and religious. The hour of Mars is evil, and denotes the
person born in it, to be of a choleric constitution, and of a robust strong
body, soon angry, and hard to be reconciled; his face red, and his eyes
sparkling and fiery, much addicted to fighting, and ready to quarrel with every
man he meets, which often times brings him to an untimely end. The hour of the
Sun signifies great strength, and is very unfortunate for kings and princes. He
that is born in that hour, has sharp eyes, brown hair, and a round face,
denotes one that is a great projector, aims at high things, but is often
disappointed, and seldom brings his designs to pass.

The hour of Venus is very propitious and fortunate, but is better by night
than day, especially midday, for then the sun covers it. He that is born in
this hour has fair hair, soft eyes, a little forehead, and round beard; very
complaisant in his carriage, mighty amorous, and a great admirer of women; much
addicted to singing and gaming, and spends his money in courting the female sex.

The hour of Mercury is very good, but chiefly from the beginning to the
middle: He that is born in this hour, his situation inclining to tallness, a
sharp long face, long eyes, and a long nose: His forehead narrow, long beard
and thin hair, long arms and long fingers; of a good disposition, and an
obliging temper, much given to reading, and very desirous of knowledge,
delighting to be among books; very eloquent in his speech, and yet addicted to
lying; and if he be poor, he is commonly light fingered.

The hour or the Moon is both good and evil, according to the day: For from the
4th to the 17th it is good to those that are born under it; but from the 17th
to the 20th, it is counted unfortunate to be born under it; and from the 20th
to the 27th, very unhappy. He that is born in the hour of the Moon, especially
upon her own day, shall be pale faced, of a thin, meagre visage, with hollow
eyes, and of a middle stature, he appears very courteous and obliging, but is
very crafty and deceitful, setting about many things, but so inconstant and
variable in his humor, that he is presently off of them again, and setting
about something else; insomuch, that what he cries up in one hour, he shall as
much cry down the next; he is also very malicious, and will never forget an
affront once offered him, his constitution phlegmatic.

Thus have I given the reader the judgment of the ancients upon the planetary
hours, and what they portend to those that are born under them, by which a
person, comparing himself with what is here set down, may easily know under
what planet he was born.

Of the Signification of the Seven Planets, with respect to Men's Bodies.
BEFORE I conclude my discourse of the seven planets, their nature and
influences, I shall give you an account of the signification of them, as they
respect the several parts of man's body, and the diseases that they govern,
that proper remedies may be applied accordingly.

Saturn governs the right ear, the bladder and the bones; and the diseases he
governs, are quartian agues, concerns, black choler, rheums, coughs, palsies,
looseness of the blood, etc.

Jupiter governs the lungs, ribs, liver, seeds, arteries, and left ear; and the
diseases incident to them, are pleuricies and apoplexies, and such as proceed
from 100 great a quantity of blood, or from wind in any part of the body.

Mars governs the gall, the veins and the reigns, and their distempers; which
are fevers, yellow jaundice, madness, choler carbuncles. Mars also governs the
stones and privy members of man or woman in part.

The Sun governs the eyes, heart, and right side, and the diseases relating to
them; such as colds, especially in the stomach and liver, fluxes in the eyes,
cramp, headache, etc.

Venus governs the liver, loins, matrix, paps and throat: The diseases whereof
are weakness in the body, and members, catarrhs, French pox, etc.

Mercury governs the brain, thought, memory, speech and tongue, and also the
distempers incident thereto, are falling sickness, madness, coughs, hoarseness,
stammering, phthysic, and rheums.

The Moon governs the left eye of a man, and the right eye of a woman, also the
stomach, belly, and the left side; and the diseases proper to them, are
dropsies, palsies, rotten coughs, surfeits, worms in children, king's evil,
falling sickness, convulsion fits, dimness of sight, small pox, and measles.
Here note, That in all distempers, before you apply any thing to the patient,
it is proper and necessary to consult the motions and positions of the planets;
and when by the table of planetary hours before recited, you know what planet
rules; you must in the next place consider the nature of that planet, as
whether it be fierce or cruel, as Mars; or friendly and benevolent, as Jupiter;
also whether they be cold and moist, or hot and dry, and what is the
predominent complexion, whether the sanguine choler, phlegm or melancholy; as
also what member of the body it governs, and what disease is under its power.
These things being diligently weighed and considered, will furnish the
ingenious physician with grounds sufficient to make a judgment of the true
nature of the disease, whereby he may apply the suitable and proper remedies
that shall best consist with, and the most prevalent against the destemper;
whereas the want of a due consideration of the matter, cause the physicians
oftentimes to administer those medicines that rather kill than cure, though
these very medicines may be good against the same disease to a patient under
other circumstances, and falling sick under a different position of the signs
and planets.

The End of the FIRST PART
THE BOOK OF KNOWLEDGE: TREATING OF THE WISDOM OF THE ANCIENTS. PART II.
Containing Prognostications for ever necessary for keeping the Body in Health,
etc.
AS I have found in the Astrological Science there are four different sort of
humors in the the body of man, of which the four complexions are formed and of
these one is made of yellow choler, another of black choler, a third phlegm,
and a fourth of blood: And if any of these be wanting the body must perish,
because they equally sustain it.

And all those ought to be kept in an equality, or if one be predominent over
the rest, it puts the body out of order and brings diseases, which many times
end in death, for the blood stagnated and gathering into clots, causes
shortness of breath, which by degrees growing less and less, at last proves
without remedy; but if a person be let blood in the beginning of those
disordered humors, the danger may be easily prevented. To purge the blood.

R. Of both sorts of scurvy grass, of each six handfuls, of ground ivy eight
handfuls, of sage six handfuls, of scapwort root, four ounces. Acrimony and
cresses, of each four handfuls; of rosemary flowers, two drams, of leaves of
rosemary and balm, of each a handful, four orange peals, a large nutmeg sliced;
put all into four gallons of new ale; and when it has done working, stop the
barrel close. Take a pint every morning, and at four in the afternoon.

Likewise the black choler, or melancholy, is extremely dangerous, and when it
gains the ascendant over the other, do great prejudice to the body several
ways, causing diverse distempers; and sometimes prevails so much over the
senses, that a man becomes in a manner a mere idiot, and also raises a kind of
scurf all over the body, which sometimes turns to the measles, and are,
besides, very apt to make a man afraid even of his own shadow, and turn a stout
man into a coward, and a well bred person into one that is unmannerly: But by
the use of proper medicines, such as herbs, flowers, and the like, all this may
either be prevented or cured: -- First shave the head, then bleed plentifully,
afterward purge well with the extract of Hellebore; lastly, let them use the
following diet drink.

R. Epithymum, dodder of thyme, wood sorrel, of each a handful, rosemary
flowers, lavander flowers, of each two drams, primrose and cowslip roots, of
each an ounce, dock root half a pound; slice the roots and infuse all in a
gallon of small ale, and drink as common drink. White Phlegm is also very
hurtful, if it exceed in quantity and overpower the other humors, for then
they cause the gout, and diverse diseases, and are also prejudicial to the feet,
legs knees, hands and reins, causing evil favor both from the teeth, mouth,
nose and ears; but also this may be cured by medicines compounded of roots and
flowers; likewise by physical drinks, and taking a vomit.

R. Dried rosemary tops rose leaves, lavander flowers, red sage and mint, of
each a handful, roots succory, two ounces, senna hermoducts turbith, and
seammony, of each two drams, of zedoary, ginger, cloves and cubebs, of each one
dram, infuse them in three quarts of good white wine for two days; take a wine
glass full three times a day.

Yellow Choler, is likewise very bad when it predominates in the body,
affecting the heart, and troubling the brain, and indeed weakening all the
members of the body, causing a general faintness, with such a loss of appetite,
that neither meat nor drink will go down: -- Besides which, it alters a man's
color, and is hurtful to the eyesight. This also may be helped by taking a
vomit, and applying proper medicines, compounded of the roots and flowers of
several herbs.

R. Of the roots of turmerick half an ounce, tods of centary the less, roman
wormwood and horehound, of each an handful, roots of the greater nettle two
ounces, boil them in three pints of water to the half, then add two scruples of
saffron tied up in a bag, and a pint of white wine, give it a warm or two, and
strain it for use; dose, a small glass full night and morning.

Note. That the four humors are the four complexions, which have their several
times of dominion or government in the body of man, according to the several
seasons of the year.

I. Of the Disposition of the Humors in the Body of Man in the Winter Quarter,
under the Signs of Copricorn, Aquarious and Pisces.
THAT humor or complexion that governs man's body in tht winter quarter, is
phlegm, which is cold and moist, and is under the dominion of Capricorn,
Aquarious and Pisces. This is predominant from the 24th of December, till the
25th of March.

II. Of the Spring Quarter, and what Humor is predominant therein, which is
governed by Aries, Taurus and Gemini.
THAT humor which is predominant in the second quarter, or spring, is black
choler, and is hot and moist, and their signs are Aries, Taurus and Gemini, and
have their chief rule over the breast. They initiate the 22d of March, and
terminate the 3d of June.

III. Of the Disposition of the Humors in the third Quarter, under Cancer, Leo
and Virgo.
THE third part is the summer quarter, and the complexion presiding therein, is
yellow choler, is hot and dry, and the signs this quarter is under, are Cancer,
Leo and Virgo; which commences the 24th of June, and continue to the 29th of
September.

IV. Of the Disposition of the Humors in the fourth Quarter, under Libra,
Scorpio and Sagittarious.
THE fourth part of the autumnal quarter, and the humor bearing rule therein,
is melancholy, cold and dry, whose signs are Libra, Scorpio and Sagittarious,
and continue their reign from the 29th of September, till the 24th of December.
By a due observation of these several seasons, and take heed to keep to the
rule of contraries, both as to clothing, food, and physic, according to what
is in this book related, and through the divine benediction, he may keep
himself free from all distempers. Note. That Pillitory of Spain, chewing in the
mouth, purges both head and body. And also commun seed and fennel seed, being
eaten, is good to prevent phlegm, which is the cause of most of the distempers
that annoy the body of man.

V. Of the Body of Man from the four Parts of the World.
MUCH also may be known of the body of man from any disposition of the four
parts of the world; that is to say, east, west, north and south.

First. As to the east; this signifies the disposition to be fiery and
juvenile, and betokens summer. In this part the water is thin and high
colored, the gross male very hard and ruddy, and the spirit somewhat thick and
glutenous. The signs in this part or quarter, are Aries, Leo and Saggittarius;
and the distempers signified hereby, are hot, dry, and subject to a choler: If
a person be taken sick in those original signs, he is in danger, and cannot be
cured but by medicaments of a contrary nature, that is cold and moist, and his
diet ought also to be of the same nature: Which advice, if he follows, he may,
by God's grace and mercy, be recovered.

R. Barley water a gallon, leaves of mallows, marshmallows, violets, of each a
handful, roots of marshmallows, half a pound, liquorish four ounces; boil all
to three quarters, strain, and drink it for a common drink. Purge once a week
with extrasdum rudis.

Secondly, As to the west; this signifies the disposition to be airy, brisk and
adolescent, and betokens the spring.

In this quarter, the water is high colored, but yet thick withal, and the
gross male very thick and ruddy, the spittle beings tenuous and of a sweetish
taste, and the excrementious parts disordered. The signs that govern the west
are Gemini, Libra and Aquarius. Accidental distempers are such as proceed from
sanguine complexions, being hot and moist; and therefore the medicines that
best compose them, are cold and dry, and care must be taken that the diet of
the patient be of the same kind.

R. Shavings of ivory, hartshorn, china, sarsaparilla, of each two ounces,
raspings of box an ounce and a half, green twigs of the willow half a pound,
quicklime water a gallon, boiled to three quarters, and drink as common drink;
you may sweeten it with sugar or honey.

Thirdly, As to the north; this signifies the disposition to be dull and
earthly increasing in years, and betokens autumn.

In this quarter the water is thin and whitish; the gross male is thick, and of
taste like vinegar, the excrements will tetulent. The signs that have
nomination in the north, are Taurus, Virgo and Capricorn. Sententional
distempers proceed from melancholy, and are cold and dry, which are best cured
by medicines hot and moist, and the food that the patients eat, ought to b^ of
the same kind.

R. Crab's eyes, calcined hart's horn, eggshells finely powdered, cream of
tartar, of each two drams; of sage half a dram, three times a day, in a
spoonful of good sack, drinking a glass after it.

Fourthly, As to the south; this signifies the disposition to be cold, watery
and weak, like to old age, and betokens winter.

In this quarter, the water is somewhat thick, pale, and white, the gross male
pale and thick, and the spittle renuous and sweet, the excrementuous matter
being weak. The signs that bear rule in the south, are Cancer, Scorpio and
Pisces. Meredian distempers proceed from phlegm, and are cold and moist, and by
necessary consequence, those medicines that oppose it, must be hot and dry, and
of the same nature must his diet also be, that would either prevent or cure
such distempers. R. Lignum Vitae a pound, sassafrass a pound, root of master
wort an ounce, angelica roots two ounces, shavings of ivory, liquorish, of each
four ounces, sweet fennel seed bruised half an ounce; boiled in two galons of
water to six quarts, and drain it off for common drinking.

VI. Directions for letting Blood in each of the twelve Months.
January] THIS month beware of letting blood on the 1st, 2d, 5th, 10th, 15th,
19th, 20th, and 25th days. because of these days it is very dangerous; but to
drink good white wine fasting, will both cleanse the body, and procure an
appetite, but if thou have a desire to be let blood, and necessity urge it, see
that the sign be good for that purpose, or else it is better letting it alone.

February.] I caution thee this month to beware of cutting any pottage made of
ducks or mallows, for they are right perilous, and if thou have occasion to let
blood, whether it be on the wrist or arms, let it not be upon the 4th, 8th,
16th, or 18th days, unless the sign be very good, and the necessity very urgent.

March.] In this month take care how you eat figs or raisins; also sweet meats
or drinks, but eat hot meat, and if thou have occasion to be let blood, let it
be on the right arm, and upon the 5th, 11th, or 17th days, for then thou may
do it with advantage, it being good against all sorts of fevers, but take heed
of bleeding on the 1st, 15th, 16th, 19th, or 28th days, if thou can possibly
avoid it; but if thou art under a necessity, see that the sign be favorable.

April.] In this month I would advise thee to be let blood in the left arm, and
upon the 3d, 12th, or 15th days, for thereby thou shall both prevent the
headache and strengthen the eyesight all the year after. -- In this month also
eat fresh and hot meat; but take heed of bleeding on the 7th, 8th, 10th, and
20th days, for on those days it will be perilous.

May.] In this month it is good to walk abroad early in the morning, and to
drink sage ale, and to eat sage and fresh butter, and other good meats and
drink, but neither eat the head nor feet of any creature during this month.
Letting blood may also be good for thee on the 1st, or the 8th day, on which
arm thou pleases, as likewise on the 27th or 28th days, and thou shall find it
beneficial against all distempers; but take heed of the 2d, 6th, and 25th days,
for then it will be hurtful.

June.] It is the opinion of some physicians, that in this month it is good to
drink cold waters fasting, every morning, and to be temperate in thy meat and
drink, and if thou have occasion to bleed, do it on the 28th day, and it may be
beneficial; but take heed that thou bleedest not on the 7th, 10th, 16th, 18th,
nor 20th, for those are dangerous.

July.] In this month abstain from Venus, for now both the brain and humors
are open, bleed not at all this month, except on very urgent necessity, and
then he sure thou avoid bleeding on the 13th and 15th days, for they are
perilous.

August.] In this month forbear eating any sort of worts, or any kind of hot
meats, drink of spices, and avoid bleeding on the 1st, 20th, 29th, and 30th
days, on the other days, if necessity urge, thou may, but without an
absolute necessity, it is better to let it alone.

September.] In this month thou may eat fruit without danger, provided it be
ripe, and not infected, out bleed not on the 4th, 16th, 21st, nor 22d, days;
for then thou will find it prejudicial; but if thou bleedest on the 27th, or
28th days, either for the ^alling sickness, frenzy, dropsy, or palsy, thou
shall not need to fear them that year.

October.] In this month if you drink wine, and other wholesome liquors, it
will comfort thy heart: -- but bleed not unless there be great occasion, and
then ^ee that the sign be good for thee: And yet let the occasion be what is
will, I advise thee to forbear bleeding on the 3d, 4th, and 5th days.

November.] In this month bleed not at all, unless upon great necessity; for
now the blood lies in the head vein, neither is it convenient for thee to
bathe, but thou may vent thee a little of grasing; for all the humous are
now apt to bleed. But if urgent necessity requires thou be let blood, yet see
that thou bleedest not on the 5th, 6th, 15th, 19th, 28th, nor 29th days.

December.] In this month bleed not at all, without it be absolutely necessary;
and yet, even in such a case, be sure thou do not on the 5th, 7th, 15th,
17th, nor 22d day; but on the 26th day, thou may bleed without danger. In
this month also see that thou keep thy shins from the fire.

Whoever it is that does intend to bleed,
Let 'em to the foregoing rules take heed:
For these directions were by the ANCIENTS penned,
To caution those that do to bleed intend;
For here thou all the several days may see,
In which thy bleeding may unhealthful be:
Nor need'st thou of a doctor ask advice,
Our AUTHOR here has been so very nice.
VII. Directions for the letting of Blood, showing where Every Vein in the Body
of Man may be readily found.
THOSE that are troubled with the megrims, fevers lethargy, or pains in the
head, must be let blood in the vein which is in the midst of the forehead.

Those that are of a dull understanding, and are troubled with deafness and
shortness of breath, also those that have the measles or leprosy, must be let
blood in the arterial vein behind the ears. Those that are troubled with too
much blood in the brain, which is bad for the sight, ought to be let blood in
the arterial veins near the temples; which is also very good against the gout,
megrim, and diverse other distempers of the head.

For imposthumes, swelling in the throat, quinsey, and other such like
distempers, let a man bleed in the two veins under the tongue.

When the leprosy proceeds from abundance of blood it will be proper to bleed
in the two original veins in the neck; but not without the advice of a
physician.

Those that are troubled with phthysic, and short-winded, and are given to spit
blood, ought to bleed in the arm, and they will find ease.

Bleeding at the liver vein in the arm takes away the extraordinary heat of the
body, and keeping it in a good state of health, and it is very available
against the yellow jaundice, and imposthumes of the liver, and against the
palsy.

The pains that come from the stomach and side, as blains, bletches,
imposthumes, and diverse other accidents that proceed from too much repletion of
blood, are cured in letting blood in the vein between the master finger and the
little finger.

For the dropsy, let blood on the right side, between the womb and the branch.
And here, note, the party should bleed proportionable, according to their
fatness, or leanness, and this ought not to be done without the advice of a
doctor.

For blotches and imposthumes proceeding from the groin, let blood in the vein
named Sophon, which is one of the three under the ankle of the foot. It is also
of great advantage to courses to descend in men, and to prevent the
Hemorrhoides in the secret parts.

When any person is taken by the pestilence, caused by repletion of humors,
let them bleed in the vein that is between the wrist of the feet, and the great
toe; -- but let the patient be sure to bleed within twentyfour hours after he
is first seized with this distemper, and let it be with respect to the
patient's body whether it be fat or lean.

If the eyes run with water, or be red, or any other ill, proceeding from the
overflowing of blood and humors; let the patient bleed in two veins that are
in the angle of the eyes.

If the nose be red and pimpled, and the face be red and pimpled in the like
manner, and be troubled with red drops, scabs, pistules and other infections,
that may proceed from too much blood; let the patient bleed in the vein which
is at the end of the nose.

For the toothache, and the canker in the mouth, let the party troubled be let
blood in the four veins that are in the gums in the mouth. Those that are
tainted with a stinking breath, let them be let blood in the vein that is
between the lip and the chin.

There are four veins in each arm, the biggest of the four is from the head,
the heart challenges the second, and the third from the liver; the last is
called the lower liver vein, and comes from the melt. These different veins
should be bled upon different occasions: As for instance, for pains in the
head, eyes, brain, heart, sweeled faces, and those that are red; it is most
proper to bleed that vein in the arm which has relation to the head. For
fevers, either tertains or quartans, the lower liver vein is the most proper to
be blooded; but then care must be taken that the orifice be made wider, and not
so deep as usual, lest thereby it not only gathers wind, but also damages a
sinew that is underneath it, called the lizard.

There are three veins in each, and that above the thumb is proper to bleed, in
order to remove the heat of the face, and to dissipate the thick blood, and
humors that are in the head, this vein being more proper than the arm.

Against all fevers, tertains and quartans, phlegms, and other obstructions
about the paps and the melt, letting blood between the little finger and the
leech finger, helps very much.

Against pain and humors in the groin and genitals, bleed a vein in the thigh.

Against pains in the flanks, and to dissipate all humors that would gather
therein, and to restrain too great a flux in the menstrues in women, it
exceedingly helps to bleed the vein under the ankle of the foot, without, which
is called the Sciot.

VIII. Choice Receipts both in Physic and Surgery.
1. Of the great Virtue of CORUS MARCUS.
IT is a powder which you may have at the apothecaries, and this above all
other medicines in the world, is the most excellent against the bloody flux,
used as follows: -- Take one ounce of conserve of roses, and one scruple of
Corus Marcus, and mix them together, then let the patient eat in the morning,
and fast thereon two hours; and this (by the grace of God) will help him,
although he has had it never so long, or sore: It is also given above all other
medicines, in the latter end of a dropsy, and also against the flux of the
menstrum, bleeding at the nose, and all other fluxes whatsoever; it helps
those that spit blood; it is excellent to stop the flux in wounds, and to heal
them and dry them; yet strew the powder thereon.

2. Of the Virtue and Operation of the Quintessence of Honey and the Oil of Wax.
YOU may understand, that honey is rather a liquor divine, than human, because
it falls from heaven upon herbs and flowers, and is such a sweet thing, that
the like cannot be found on earth: This quintessence is of such a virtue, that
if a man be almost dead, and drink two or three drams thereof, he will
presently recover. If you wash any wound therewith, or other sore, it will
quickly heal. It is excellent against the cough, catarrh, or pain of the melt,
and many other diseases, it helps the falling sickness, palsy, and preserves
the body from putrefaction. The oil of wax works in wounds miraculously
healing them, be the same never so big and wide (being before wide stiched up)
in the space of eleven or twelve days, but smaller wounds in three or four
days, by anointing the same therewith, and laying a cloth thereon wet with the
same.

Moreover, for inward diseases it is excellent; it provokes urine which is
stopped, it helps stiches, and pain of the loins, if you drink one dram
thereof in white wine; it helps the cold gout, or sciatica, and all other
griefs coming of cold.

3 Of the manifold Operations of the Oil of Cinnamon.
THIS oil is of a malicious nature, for it pierces through the flesh and
bones, being very hot and dry, and is good against all cold and moist diseases,
being comfortable for the head and heart, working the same operation on a dying
man as the former. To be short, the oil is of such operation and virtue, that
if a man drinks never so little, he shall feel it work to his fingers and toes
ends, therefore it pierces through the whole body, helping the diseases that
come of cold and phlegmatic humors: It avails much with women in travel; it
drives away the measles and spots, if the face and hands be anointed
therewith; it warms the breast, and helps the cold cough; it consumes all cold
fluxes that proceed from the brain and head, and causes quiet sleep; in brief,
this oil may be used instead of the natural balm for many diseases.

4. How to make Oil of Rosemary Flowers, with its Virtue.
TAKE rosemary flowers and stamp them, then put them into a glass with strong
wine and stop it close, setting it in the sun for five or six days, and then
distill it with a soft fire, and you shall have both water and oil, which you
must separate, keeping the oil close in a glass, whose virtue are these: -- It
helps against all pains in the head, although they have continued seven
years; it comfort the memory, and also preserves the eyes, if you drink now
and then a drop or two, and then put another into the eyes; it helps those
that are deaf, if it be put into the ears; and also drink with good wine it
opens all stoppings of the liver and melt, and helps against the dropsy and
yellow jaundice; it breaks wind, eases cholic, and rising of the mother.

It is also excellent against the pestilence or those that have drank poison,
if they drink of this oil, and lay them down to sweat, it comfort the heart,
and cleanses the blood, and makes a man merry, and causes a good color, it
helps those that have the canker and fistula, and the like; and to be brief,
it helps all diseases of the body that come of cold and moist humors,
although ever so evil.

5. How to cure that troublesome Companion, the Ague.
TAKE the common bitter drink without the purgatives two quarts, salt of
wormwood two ounces, the best English saffron a dram. After you have taken the
vomit, or a convenient purge, take half a pint of this three times a day, viz.
In the morning fasting, three o'clock in the afternoon, and last at night.

6. How to cure that tormenting Disease, the Cholic.
TAKE anniseed, sweet fenel seeds, coriander, carraway seeds, of each two
drams, cummin seeds a dram, and put them into a quart of Nantz brandy; let them
infuse three days, shaking the bottle three or four times a day, then strain
and keep it for use. Take two or three spoonfuls in the fit.

7. How to help Deafness, and expel Wind from the Head.
TAKE five or six drops or more of wine, or good aquavitae, in a spoon, and
holding down your head on one side, let one pour the same into your ear, let it
continue there for about the space of half a quarter of an hour, still holding
your head aside that they run not out, and then you shall hear a most terrible
noise and rumbling in your head, which is the wind; then turn your head aside,
and the water will run out again very hot; now when you have done thus much on
one side, you may do as much on the other, but be sure keep your head warm
after you have done; this I have often proved, and found ease thereby.

8. How to give ease, and help the raging Pain of the Teeth, without drawing.
THIS is also performed with the spirit of wine, or good aquavitae (as you have
read in the former receipt) by pouring it in your ears, especially on that side
where the pain lies, but after you have let the water run from your ears, then
with more of the same water (against the fire) you must rub and chafe your
cheeks, and under your jaws, and under your ears, stroaking of them upwards,
with your hands toward the neck, to drive back the humors; for it is nothing
else but a cold rheum, that distilleth from the head into the gums, which
causes the pain, therefore be sure to keep the head warm when you have done.

9. How to strengthen and comfort the Eyes.
DIP a clean rag into a few drops of aquavitae, and with the same wipe the
corners of the eyes, eyebrows, and temples, which will keep back the rheum, and
greatly strengthen and comfort the eyes; of which I have often made trial, and
found much comfort.

10. Of Persons who have Bones broken, and also Dislocations, or Joints
displaced, with their Cure.
MANY times it happens, that legs, arms, and fingers are broken, or out of
joint, and the parties so hurt are void of help, by reason they have no surgeon
near them: Therefore, for the relief of such persons, I have here set down some
directions, by which they may be eased of their pain; But I will not wish them
to trust to their own skill, if they have any expert surgeon near at hand.

If a leg or an arm be broken, then have a care to place the member in the same
manner as it were before, which you will do in this manner:

Take a towel, and make it fast about the place where it is broken, and then
take another towel and fasten it underneath the place where it is broken, and
then cause two men to pull those two towels, that they may thereby extend or
stretch out the member, and when the member is stretched forth at length, place
the broken bones as they were at first, and so by little and little, let them
slack their pulling; then have a cloth ready, so big that it may compass the
whole member; wet this both in the white of an egg and oil of roses mingled
together, and lay it upon the grieved part, then roll it about with a linen
roller of four fingers broad, and two yards long; wet the roller in the water
and vinegar mixed together.

First, Roll it about the fracture three or four times; then downward, and then
upward, and fasten it; then roll it with another roller after the same manner,
on these place thin splints of light wood armed with tow, one fingers breadth
from each other, and bind them on with tape, then place the member on some loft
pillow for twenty days; but if a painful itch do arise, open and foment the
place with warm water, and then anoint it with Unguentum Album, and roll it up
again If a finger be broken, roll it with a convenient roller, and splint it,
and use the means aforesaid.

11. A precious Salve for all those that have any Member out of joint, called
JEMMY of BRUNSWICK'S SALVE.
THIS Salve has healed those that have had their members out of joint, or that
have been wounded, and could not stir or bow the member where they had the
hurt; for by this salve did he bring many stiff and crooked joints again to
their former strength, to the great admiration of all men, both surgeons and
others.

How to make the Salve.] Take two ounces of old hog's grease, and of duck's
grease, and goose grease, hen's or capon's grease; linseed meal, fenugreek
meal, of each two ounces; oil olive, eight ounces; opop^nax, mastich, and
frankincense, of each an ounce; dissolve the gums in white wine, that are to be
dissolved, and powder the other; mingle them all together when stirring.

12. How to order and dress a Wound, when it is at first hurt; with the Remedy.
FIRST remove all such things as are in the wound, as clotted blood, wood,
iron, or the like* then dry the blood with a cloth or sponge, and wash with
cold white wine, apply some unguents or balms to the same, and on that a
plaster fit for a wound, then roll it gently and in a good form, for that
helps to hasten the cure. If the wound be of any length, you may stitch it in
three or more places, but be sure to leave a place at the lower part thereof,
for to purge itself thereby.

The end of the SECOND PART.
THE BOOK OF KNOWLEDGE: TREATING OF THE WISDOM OF THE ANCIENTS. PART III. Being
an Astract of the Art of Physiognomy and Palmistry, together with the
signification of Moles, and Interpretation of Dreams.
Of Physiognomy, and the Judgment made thereby.
PHYSIOGNOMY is an ingenuous science of knowledge of nature, by which the
inclinations and dispositions of every creature are understood; and because
some of the members are uncompounded, and enrire of themselves, as the tongue,
the ears, etc. and some of a mixed nature, the eye, the nose, and others; we
therefore say, that there are many signs which agree and live together, which
inform a wise man how to make his judgment, before he be too rash to deliver it
to the world.

Nor is it to be esteemed a foolish and idle art, seeing it is derived from the
superior bodies. For there is no part of the face of the man, but what is under
the peculiar influence or government, not only of the seven planets, but also
of the twelve signs of the Zodiac, and from each governing part is the nature
and inclination of a man or woman plainly foretold, if the persons undertaking
this province, or pretending to it, be an artist. Which, that my reader may
attain to, I shall set these things in a clearer light by the following figure.



By this the reader may see, at the first glance, that the forehead is governed
by Mars; the right eye is under the dominion of Sol; the left eye is ruled by
the Moon, or Luna; the right ear is the care of Jupiter, the left of Saturn;
the ruling of the nose is claimed by Venus (which by the way is one reason that
in all unlawful veneral encounters, the nose is so subject to bear the scars
which are gotten in those wars) and the nimble Mercury, the significator of
eloquence, claims the dominion of the mouth, and that very justly.

Thus have the seven planets divided the face among them, but not with so
absolute a sway, but that the twelve signs of the Zodiac come in for a part;
and therefore the sign of Cancer presides in the uppermost part of the
forehead, and Leo attending upon the right eyebrow, Sagittary does upon the
right eye, and Libra upon the right ear; upon the left eye and eyebrow, you will
find Aquarius and Gemini and Aries taking care of the left ear; Taurus rules in
the forehead, and Capricorn the chin; Scorpio takes upon him the protection of
the nose; Virgo claims the precedence of the right cheek, and Pisces of the
left. And thus the face of man is cantoned out among the signs and planets,
which being carefully attended to, will sufficiently inform the artist how to
pass a judgment. For according to the nature of the sign or planet ruling, so
also is the judgment to be of the part ruled; which all those that have
understanding know easily how to apply.

I shall now proceed to give a particular judgment of the several parts of the
body: And first. Of the head. A large head shows a person stupid and of a dull
apprehension, also a very small head signifies the same; but the head of a man
being neither great nor small, is the prognostic of a wise man; for all
extremes are irregular, and a deviation from nature; and experience has made it
manifest, that a great head and small members, do always produce much
indiscretion and folly, both in man or woman; but we must also consider the
several parts of the head: And first,

Of the Hair.] The hair is only the excresence of a moist brain; yet the
ancients observe several things from it; as, if the hair be thin, it shows a
man to be of a weak constitution; but if curled and thick, it shows the person
to be of a hot complexion: If the hair be stiff, and stand upright, either upon
the head, or any other part of the body, it shows the person extremely subject
to fear, and very apt to be frighted. If the hair be thick and lank, it shows
the person to be meek and humble, and his constitution inclined to cold.

Of the Forehead.] A large forehead shows a liberal man; but the forehead
narrow, denotes a foolish person: A long forehead shows one apt to learn, and a
high forehead, swelling and round, is a sign of a crafty man, and a coward; a
forehead full of wrinkles, shows a man to be envious and crafty.

Of the Eyes.] The eyes being moist and clear, shows mirth, good manners, and
an honest life, but if the eyes be declining and looking downward, or red and
very great, they betoken fleshy lust; small hallow eyes signify covetousness;
gray eyes an evil man, hollow eyes a crafty man, rolling eyes a wicked and
vicious man, black eyes denote a sharp and piercing wit, but one lustful and
incontinent; great eyes denote sloth; trembling eyes sluggishness; glittering
eyes betokens drunkenness; smilling eyes show a merry life; eyes of diverse
colors,, and small, denote one crafty and flattering; eyes turned toward the
nose, show a man given to women; great drooping eyes, with an unstable
countenance, show a man mad; the circle of the ball green, declares a crafty
wicked man, and a thief; moist eyes denote stoutness of stomach, perfect speech
gluttonous and mad; high eyes, large, clear, pure and moist, are tokens of
circumspection, diligent persons, and lovers; eyes always running, without
sickness cause it, show foolishness; small and hollow eyes, the covetous,
deceitful, and angry man; cheerful eyes betoken just men, of pleasant
disposition, kind and holy; twinkling eyes, show a thief and one that lays wait
to catch and ensnare men; blear eyes signify a whoremaster.

Of the Eyebrows.] Upright eyebrows are amiable, but the eyebrows hanging over,
show an effeminate person. The brows very hairy, denote an impediment in his
speech, and the brows being extended to the temples, show a man to be a sloven,
and uncleanly.

Of the Ears.] Open ears show a man to be without reason and understanding;
great ears an unwise man, and small ears a fool; square ears, and of a middle
size, show a learned and wise man.

Of the Nose.] A great nose shows a good man; a little nose a deceitful person.
A sharp nose denotes an angry person, and a scold; thick and low, a person of
bad manners. The nose stretching to the mouth, denotes honesty, strength, and
aptness to learning. A nose like an ape, betokens a libidinous and riotous
person; a long crooked nose, magnanimity and generosity.

Of the Mouth.] A very big mouth, with the upper lip hanging over, signifies a
man foolish and unsteady, also a rash man, a babbler, a glutton, and an ungodly
man. An indifferent large mouth, shows a bold and courageous man, a warrior.

Of the Lips.] Thin lips with a little mouth, shows an effeminate person.
Slender, thin and fine lips, betokens eloquence; fleshy and great lips, a fool;
and those whose teeth bear up their lips, are generally contumelious,
slanderers, unfaithful, also addicted to the love of women.

Of the face.] A lean face is a token of a wise man; the face plain and flat,
denotes a man of strife: The face without any rising or swelling, denotes a
person injurious and unclean; a fleshy face shows a man apt to learn; a sad
face sometimes denotes foolishness, and sometimes wisdom. A fat face shows a
man to be a liar, and foolish; a round face signifies folly; a great face shows
a man dull and slow about business; a well proportioned face shows a person to
have virtuous qualities, and to live a commendable life, whether they be rich
or poor.

Of the Voice.] A shrill voice denotes a person to be choleric and hasty. A
great and hoarse voice shows a person to be injurious, and of a merciless
temper. A weak and low voice shows a man to be fearful and cowardly. A grave
and slow voice shows a man to be of a sedate and quiet temper, and one of great
strength.

Of the Neck.] A neck inclining to the right side, shows a temperate man; but
turning to the left side, a fool, and a man given to unlawful love. A crooked
neck shows a covetous man. A thick neck denotes a rude, barbarous, ill natured
man. A long slender neck shows a man to be a coward. A thick and long neck, a
furious and stubborn person. A mean neck, a strong and virtuous man, and one
inclined to learning.

Of the Breast.] A broad breast is always good, and presents magnanimity,
boldness, honesty and courage. A narrow breast denotes imbecility, or weakness,
both of body and mind. A pursy or gross breast, shows a man to be moross, cross
and void of pity. The pap^ or dugs hanging down from the breast, shows a
violent choleric man.

Of the Back.] A broad back is a sign of strength; but the mean proportion of
both back and breast is always commendable. A crooked or hunch back, is
generally a token of a nigardly and covetous person.

Of the Belly.] A lank belly, with a high breast, denotes a man of
understanding, courage, counsel; but a great belly shows an indiscreet,
foolish, proud man, and given to luxury.

Of the Arms.] Very long arms are a sign of boldness, strength and honesty.
Short arms denote a fomenter of discord and strife among friends.

Of the Hands.] The hands very short, denote a clownish, rude, ill bread
person; and if fat and fleshy, with the fingers so also, it shows they are
inclined to theft. Small hands and long fingers denote a person of a genteel
carriage, but crafty.

Of the Legs.] Large and well set legs denote boldness; large legs and full of
sinews, show fortitude and strength. Slender legs denote ignorance; short and
fat legs cruelty. Legs crooked and hollowed inwardly is a sign of very ill men.
Soft and swelling legs show a man to be of very ill manners. The skin cross and
short, with a sharp heel, and fat thighs, denotes madness to happen to that
party.

Of the feet.] Small and slender feet denote hardness, but the feet full of
flesh declare foolishness.

II. Of Palmestry, showing the various Judgments drawn from the Hand.
ISAALL next say something of Palmestry, which is a judgment made of the
conditions inclinations, and fortunes of men and women, from the various lines
and characters which nature has imprinted in the hand, which are almost as
various as the hands that have them. And to render what I shall say more plain,
I will in the first place present the scheme or figure of a hand, and explain
the various lines therein.



By this figure the reader will see that one of the lines, and which indeed is
reckoned the principal, is called the line of life; this line incloses the
thumb, separating it from the hollow of the hand. The next to it, which is
called the natural line, takes its beginning from the rising of the fore
finger, near the line of life, and reaches to the table line, and generally
makes a triangle, thus. The table line, commonly called the line of fortune,
begins under the little finger, and ends near the middle finger. The girdle of
Venus, which in another line so called, begins near the joint of the little
finger, and ends between the fore finger and the middle finger.

The line of death is that which plainly appears in a counter line to that of
life, and by some is called the sister line, ending usually at the other end;
for when the line of life is ending, death comes, and it can go no farther.
There are also lines in the fleshy parts as in the ball of the thumb, which is
called the mount of Venus; under each of the fingers are called mounts, which
are each one governed by a several planet, and the hollow of the hand is called
the plain of Mars. I now proceed to give judgment of these several lines. And
in the first place take notice, that in Palmestry the left hand is chiefly to
be regarded; because therein the lines are most visible, and have the strictest
communication with the heart and brains. Now having promised these, in the next
place observe the line of life, and if it be fair, extended to its full length,
and not broken with an intermixture of cross lines, it shows long life and
health; and it is the same if a double line of life appears, as there sometimes
does. When the Stars appear in this line, it is a significator of great lossess
and calamities: if on it there be the figure of two O's, or a Y, it threatens
the person with blindness. If it wraps itself about the table line, then does
it promise wealth and honor to be attained by prudence and industry; if the
line be cut or rugged at the upper end, it denotes much sickness. If this line
be cut by any line coming from the mount of Venus, i^ declares the person to be
unfortunate in love, and business also, and threatens him with sudden death. A
cross between the line of life and the table line, shows the person to be very
liberal and charitable, and of a noble spirit. Let us now see the signification
of the table line.

The table line, when broad, and of a lovely color, shows a healthful
constitution, and a quiet and contented mind, and courageous spirit: But if it
have crosses toward the little finger, it threatens the party with much
affliction by sickness. If the line be double, or divided in three parts in any
of the extremities, it shows the party to be of a generous temper, and of a
good fortune to support it; but if this line be forked at the end, it threatens
the person shall suffer by jealousies, fears, and doubts, and with the loss of
riches got by deceit. If three points such as these... are found in it, they
denote the person prudent and liberal, a lover of learning, and of a good
temper. If it spreads itself toward the fore and middle fingers, and ends
blunt, it denotes preferment. Let us now see what is signified by

The middle Finger.] The line has in it sometimes (for there is scarce one hand
in which it varies not) diverse significant characters. Many small lines between
this and the table line threatens the party with sickness, and also gives him
hopes of recovery. A half cross branching into this line, declares the person
shall have honor, riches, and good success in all his undertakings. A half moon
denotes cold and watery distempers, but a sun or star upon this line promises
prosperity and riches. This line doubled in a woman shows she will have several
husbands, but without any children by them.

The line of Venus, if it happens to be cut or divided near the fore finger,
threatens ruin to the party, and that it shall befall him by means of a
lascivious woman, and bad company. Two crosses upon this line, one being on the
forefinger, and the other bending toward the little finger, shows the party to
be weak, and inclined to modesty and virtue; and indeed, it generally denotes
modesty in women; and therefore those who desire such wives, usually choose
them by this standard.

The liver line, if it be strait and crossed by other lines, shows the person
to be of a sound judgment, and a piercing understanding; but if it be winding
crooked, and bending outward, it shows deceit and flattery, and that the person
is not to be trusted. If it makes a triangle, or a quadrangle, it shows the
person to be of a noble descent, and ambitious of honor and promotion.

If it happens that this line and the middle line begin near each other, it
denotes a person to be weak in his judgment, but if a woman, danger by hard
labor.

The plain of Mars being in the hollow of the hand, or if the line passes
through it, which renders it very plain, is fortune: This plain being hollowed,
and the lines be crooked and distorted, threaten the party to fall by his ill
conduct. When the lines begin at the wrist, long within the plain, reaching the
brawn of the hand, they show the person to be one given to quarreling, often in
broils, and of a hot and fiery spirit, by which he shall suffer much damage. If
deep large crosses in the middle of the plain, it shows the party shall obtain
honor by martial exploits; but if it be a woman, that she shall have several
husbands, and easy labor with her children.

The line of death is fatal, when any crosses or broken lines appear in it; for
they threaten the person with sickness and a short life. A clouded moon
appearing therein, threatens a child bed woman with death. A bloody spot in the
line, denotes a violent death. A star like a comet threatens ruin by war, and
death by pestilence; but if a bright sun appear therein, it promises long life
and prosperity.

As for the lines in the wrist being fair, they denote good fortune; but if
crossed and broken, the contrary.

Thus much with respect to the several lines in the hand. Now as to the
judgment to be made from the hand itself: If the hand be soft and long, and
lean withal, it denotes the person of a good understanding, a lover of peace
and honesty, discreet, serviceable, a good neighbor, and a lover of learning.
He whose hands are very thick and very short, is thereby signified to be
faithful, strong and laborious, and one that cannot long retain his anger^* He
whose hands are full of hairs, and those hairs thick; and great ones, and his
fingers withal crooked, he is thereby noted to be luxurious, vain, false, of a
dull understanding and disposition, and more foolish than wise. He whose hands
and fingers do bend upwards, is commonly a liberal man, serviceable, a keeper
of secrecy, and apt (to be poor for he is seldom fortunate) to do any man
courtesy. He whose hand is stiff and will not bend at the upper joint near his
finger, is always a wretched miserable person, covetous, obstinate,
incredulous, and one that will believe nothing that contradicts his own private
interest. And thus much shall suffice to be said of judgment made by Palmestry.

III. Of the signification of Moles in any Part of the Body.
A MOLE on the forehead of a man o^ woman, denotes they will grow rich, and
attain to great possessions, being beloved of their friends and neighbors.

A mole on the eyebrow shows a man to be incontinent, and given to the love of
women; but if it be a woman, it signifies a good husband.

He or she that has a mole on the nose, signifies they love their pleasure more
than any thing else.

A mole on the chin, shows the party shall never stand in need of his kin, but
shall get money and grow very rich.

A mole on the neck, denotes him honorable and prudent in all his actions; but
if a woman, it shows her a weak judgment, and apt to believe the worst of her
husband.

A mole on a man's shoulder signifies adversity, and threatens him with an
unhappy end; but a woman having a mole in the same place, shows she shall
abound in honor and riches.

A man or woman having a mole on the wrist or hand denotes increase of
children, but affliction in old age.

A man or woman having a mole near the heart upon the breast, shows them
irregular, wicked, and malicious.

A mole on the belly shows the person shall be addicted to gluttony and
laciviousness.

A mole on the knee shows a man shall be fortunate in marrying, and that his
wife shall be beautiful, virtuous, and very wealthy; a woman having one in the
same place shows she shall be virtuous, happy, and fruitful in children.

A mole on the foot shows a man shall get riches and be happy in his children;
if a woman has the same it also betokens her the same happiness.

IV. Of the Interpretation of Dreams as they relate in good or bad Fortune, etc.
TO dream you are bit by a serpent signifies some danger will befall you by
secret and subtle enemies. To dream you fly in the air, signifies a speedy
journey, or some hasty news. To dream you fight and overcome, signifies you
will get the better in lawsuits or other controversies. To dream a lion fawns
upon you, denotes the favor of great persons. To dream of black coffins and
mourners denotes the death of some loving friend or relation. To dream you see
a friend dead, denotes the person to be in good health. To dream you are in a
field of standing corn, betokens prosperity and love. To dream of gathering up
small pieces of money, betokens loss and disappointment, but receiving of money
profit and advantage. To dream you are on horseback, and that he runs away with
you, denotes you shall speedily be called away from some business contrary to
your liking. A woman dreaming she kisses another woman denotes disappointment
in love and barrenness. To dream you are pleasantly sailing on calm water
denotes a peaceable and quiet life; but if a storm, it denotes trouble. For a
woman to dream a ring is put on her finger, denotes success in love and
marriage; but if it be suddenly took off, or near off, it signifies
disappointment in love, and the breaking off the match. To dream of fire
denotes anger and loss. To dream you see a sow with pigs denotes fruitfulness.
To dream you are hunting a hare, and she escapes; denotes disappointment in
business. To dream a louse falls from your neck, betokens the sign of friends.
To dream you are courting a beautiful woman, betokens flattery. To dream you
are sailing against your will, to descend from a pleasant hill, betokens
falling from promotion, and disappointment in preferment. To dream of a sudden
fit of joy at the fight of any thing, betokens the arrival of friends. To dream
you are at banquets, but do not eat, betokens scarcity. To dream you put on a
new glove, and it remains so, betokens new friendship or marriage. To dream you
fall into a deep pit, denotes some sudden surprise or danger. A woman to dream
she is with child, betokens sorrow and heaviness. To dream that you can quench
fire, denotes overcoming anger, and recovery from sickness. To dream you hear
a voice, but see not what utters it, denotes you shall be deluded by feigned
pretenders. To dream you are walking in a garden of flowers, and among groves
of trees, denotes much pleasure and delight to ensue from virtuous
conversation. To dream of moons contending in the firmament, donotes division
among friends and relations. To dream your teeth are drawn or drop out, denotes
the loss of children or other relations. To dream of drinking unmercifully,
denotes displeasure, crosses and sickness. To dream you are pursued by furious
wild beasts, but cannot avoid them, denotes danger from enemies. To dream you
see your deceased brothers or sisters, signifies long life. To dream you are
shooting with a bow, signifies honor and preferment. To dream you are making
candles, denotes great rejoicing. To dream you are going to hear divine
service, signifies consolation. To dream you build a church or erect an altar,
signifies some of thy family will become a priest. To dream you see a person
sitting or lying in a church, signifies change of apparel. To dream you are
playing with cards is a very good sign.

V. Pleasant Questions in Arithmetic.
1. A THIEF breaking into an orchard, stole a certain number of pears, and at
his coming out he met three men, one after another, who threatened to accuse
him of theft, and for to appease them he gave unto the first man half the pears
that he had stole, who returned him back 12 of them; then he gave unto the
second half of the pears he had remaining, who returned him back 7; and upon
the third man he gave half his residue, who returned him back 4; and in the end
he had still remaining 36 pears. Now I do demand how many pears he stole in
all? To answer this question you must work backwards; for if you take 4 from 20
there will remain 16, which being doubled makes 32, from which abate 7, and
there will remain 25, which being doubled makes 50, from which subtract 12, and
^here will remain 38, which again being doubled, makes 76, the true number he
gathered.

2. Let the party that thinks double the number that he thought, which done,
bid him multiply the sum of them both by 5, and give you the product, which
they will never refuse to do (it being so far above the number thought) from
which if you abate the last figure of the product (which will always be a
cipher of 5) the number thought will remain.

Example. Let the number thought be 53, which doubled makes 106, and multiply
by 5, makes 530; then if you take away the cipher which is the last place,
there will 53, the number thought.

3. A certain man having three daughters, to the eldest he gave 21 apples, to
the second he gave 16 apples, and to the third he gave ten apples, and sent
them to market to sell them, and gave them command to sell one as many a penny
as the other (namely seven a penny) and every one to bring home so much money
as the other, and neither change apples nor money's one with another. How could
that be?

This to some may seem impossible, but to the arithmeticians very easy. For
whereas the eldest had three pence worth and one apple over, the second two
pence worth and two apples over, and the youngest had one penny's worth and
three apples over; so that the youngest had so many single apples and one
penny's worth, as the eldest had penny worths and one apple over. So
consequently to the second proportionable t^ them both. They made their market
thus, -- a steward coming to buy fruit for his lady, bought all the apples they
had at seven a penny, leaving the odd ones behind; then had the eldest sister
three pence and one apple, the middle sister two pence and two apples, and the
youngest one penny and three apples. The steward brought the fruit to his lady,
she liked it so well that she sent him for the rest, who replied there were but
a few remaining.

She, notwithstanding, sent him for them at any rate. The steward coming to the
market again, could not buy the odd apples under a penny a piece, he was fain
to give it, then had the youngest sister three pence worth, the middle sister
two pence worth, and the eldest one-penny's worth, and so they had all four
pence a piece, and yet sold as many for a penny one as another, and neither
changed apples nor moneys one with another, as they were commanded.

4. A man bought 120 eggs at three a penny, having 120 to the hundred, also he
bought 100 more at two a penny, having likewise 120 to his hundred; these eggs
being mingled, he sold them 5 for two pence, and 120 to the hundred as he
bought them: The question is, whether he gained or lost in the bargain?

If you work by the rule of three direct, you shall find that his 120 eggs, at
three for a penny, came to three shillings and four pence, and his 120, at two
for a penny, came to five shillings, which being added, makes eight shillings
and four pence. Then again, to see what they come to at five for two pence,
work likewise by the rule of three direct, and you shall find that 240 at 5 for
two pence, comes to but eight shillings, whereby the seller loses four pence
of the money that they first cost him.

The End of the THIRD PART.
THE BOOK OF KNOWLEDGE: TREATING OF THE WISDOM OF THE ANCIENTS. PART IV. The
Farmer's Calendar; Containing, 1st. Perpetual Prognostications for Weather. 2d.
The whole Mystery of Husbandry. 3d. The complete and experienced Farrier,
Cowleech, Shepherd and Swineherd, etc.
A YEAR is the principal part of time, by which not only the ages of man and
other things, but also the times of many actions in the world, their beginning,
progress, continuance and intervals are measured: and is a periodical
revolution of a great circle of months and days, in which the four seasons of
Spring, Summer, Autumn and Winter, are, after one revolution of the sun,
ordained to return to their courses.

But there are diverse sorts of years, as say the ancients, according to diverse
nations, which are different from one another, reduced to the rule of celestial
motions. The year is divided in astronomical and political parts.

The astronomical year is two fold, that is Solar and Lunar.

The solar year is the time in which the sun, by his proper motion, departing
from one point of the ecliptic, returns to the same again. And there is called
either natural or syderical.

1. The natural or tropical year, is the space of time in which the sun is
departing out of the tropical, equinoctial, or solstitial point, and returning
through the ecliptic, returns to the same again.

This natural, or tropical year, contains 365 days, 5 hours, 49 minutes, 15
seconds.

The true and unequal tropical year, is sometimes more, and sometimes less than
the equal, by 6 or 7 minutes; so it increases, or decreaseth, according to the
swift or slow progress of the equinoctial or solstitial points.

2. The syderial year is the space of time in which the sun returns to the same
star, from whence he departed; and is 365 days, 6 hours, 6 minutes, but in the
seconds there is a difference among authors.

Now the lunar year is likewise two fold; the common, which is 12 moons, or 354
days, 8 hours, etc.

The embillismal, which is 13 moons or lunations, containing 383 days, 21
hours, etc.

The political and civil years, are such as are commonly used for the
distinction of times, wherein respect had either to the motion of the sun or
moon only, or to them both together, according to the custom of diverse nations.

The Julian or old Roman year, consisted of 365 days and 6 hours; this Julian
account, or year, is used by the English, Muscovites, Syrians, Abassenees and
Ethiopians, though the names of the months differ. It is held to begin (with
the vulgar) on the 1st of January, which is therefore called New Year's Day;
but according to the state accounts, the year begins not till the year; as for
example: The first day of January next will be reckoned the first day of the
year 1797. But because the state first account begins not till the 25th of
March they commonly write the date double, thus 1719 -- 20 from the 1st of
January till the 25th of March, after which they write only 1720.

The Gregorian, or new Roman year, is so called, because mended by Pope Gregory
XIII. consists of 365 days, 5 hours, 40 minutes and 12 seconds* It begins on
our 22d of December, being ten days before the Julian, and received in all
countries, as owing the authority of the Sea of Rome, and in some protestant
countries also; as in six of the seven provinces, Utrecht keeping the Julian
account.

I. Of Months.
THE months by which we measure the year, are of two sorts, viz. astronomical,
and political, and each has several divisions; astronomical or natural, are
according to the motion of the sun and moon; and be either Solar or Lunar; the
Solar are the space of time in which the sun runs through a twelfth part of the
Zodiac, of which there are two sorts, mean or equal, true or unequal; an equal
solar month, is the time in which the sun by his mean motion, goes a twelfth
part of the Zodiac, and is always 30 days, 10 hours, 26 minutes, 6 seconds,
etc. But the true or apparent, is according to the true motion of the sun
through the Zodiac; for when he is in, or near his apogaeon, the months are
longer, but when he is in, or near his perigaeon, they are shorter. Lunar
months are referred to the moon's motion, and are chiefly three fold, viz. --
First, periodical, which is the space of time in which the moon, by her motion,
goes through the Zodiac, and is about 27 days, 8 hours; secondly, synodical,
which is the space of time from one conjunction to another, being performed
according to the moon's mean motion, in 29 days, 22 hours, 44 minutes, and
about 4 seconds: But according to the moon's true motion, it is sometimes
greater or lesser, by about 12 hours. -- Thirdly, the month of illumination, or
apparition, is said to be 28 days, or four weeks, it being the longest time
that the moon is to be seen between the change and change: Lastly, the
political months are evil and usual: As every nation best please; which differ
both in proportion and name.

II. Of Days and Hours.
DAYS are either natural or artificial^. A day natural is one entire revolution
of the sun about the earth, which is performed in 24 hours, containing both day
and night: And this day the English begin at midnight; but the astrologers
begin at midday, or noon. An artificial day is from sunrising to sunsetting:
differs in length of sequal hours, according to the sun's place in the Zodiac,
and latitude of the region; but in unequal hours (called planetary hours) are
22, so that one hour is the 12th part of the day, be it long or short, and the
hours that make an artificial, are from ^ to 6; that is, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

I shall now give some brief directions for the knowledge of the weather.

III. Signs of Fair Weather.
THE sun rising bright and clear, if he drive the clouds before him into the
west. If at the rising there appears a circle about him, and it vanishes
equally away. If the sun be red. If the moon be clear three days after the
change, or three days before the full. If the clouds appear with yellow edges.
A cloudy sky, clearing against the wind. The rainbow after the rain appearing
meanly red. Mists coming down from the hills, and setting in the valleys; or
white mists rising from the waters in the evening. Crows or ravens gaping
against the sun. Beetles flying in the evening. Bats flying abroad sooner than
ordinary. Many flies or grots playing in the sunshine at evening.

IV. Signs of Rain.
IF the sun be fiery red at his rising. If he shows pale and wan. If the moon,
three or four days after the change, is blunt at both ends, the thicker, the
more. A circle about the moon. If the great stars be only seen, and they look
only dim. The rainbow appearing in a fair day, the greater it is, the more
rain. Birds washing themselves. The chattering of a pie, peacocks and ducks
often crying. The owl crying chewit often; swallows flying low; the working of
an insect called a spinner. Many worms appearing above ground. The beasts
eating greedily, and licking their hoofs. The biting of fleas, gnats, etc. The
soot falling much from chimnies. The sweating of stones. A circle round a
candle. Aches in ancient people's limbs or corns. Bells heard at a farther
distance than usual. Sparks gathering together in the fire. No dew morning nor
evening, etc. All these are sure signs of rain.

V. Signs of Wind or Tempest.
RED clouds appearing in the morning. Much shooting of stars. The rainbow red.
Black circles with red streakes about the moon, stars dim and fiery. Autumnal
fair, a windy winter. Cloulds flying swift in the air. Fire burning pale or
buzzing. Ravens clapping themselves with their wings. The high flying of the
hern. Crying of swine. The herb trefoil looking very rough.

VI. Of the Rainbow.
THE rainbow is that bow which the Almighty was pleased to place in the
firmament, as a token for Noah, that he would drown the earth no more. As to
the natural cause of it; it is caused by many beams striking upon a hollow
cloud, with which it is soon repelled and driven back against the sun; and this
arises variety of colors, by the mixing of clouds, air and fiery light
together: There it is soon in oppositjon to the sun, for the most part in the
evening.

VII. Of Rain.
THE ancients describe rain to be cold and earthly vapors or humor, is
exhaled from the earth and waters by the beams of the sun, and carried into the
middle region of the air, where, by the extremity of the cold, it is thickened
in the body of a cloud; and afterward being dissolved through an accession of
heat, it falls upon the earth; and this is done by GOD's power, and at his
appointment, as the prophet Amos witnesses. Amos iv. 6. and ix. 6.

VIII. Of Hail.
HAIL is nothing but rain congealed into ice by the coldness of the air
freezing the drops after the dissolving or the cloud; and the higer it comes,
and the longer it tarries in the air, the rounder and lesser it is; we have
sometimes great showers of hail in the heat of summer after a thunder clap;
which does manifest, that the air at the same time is extreme cold, thus to
congeal the water therein, notwithstanding the heat then upon the earth.

IX. Of Snow.
SNOW (as say the ancients) is of the ^ame ^umour that hail is, but only looser
parts; and therefore in the summer time is melted into rain before it comes
down.

X. Of Frost and Dew.
IN the day time, through the heat of the sun, there is a cold and moist vapor
drawn up a little from the earth; which, after the setting of the sun, descends
on the earth again, and is called dew; but if by the coldness of the air it be
congealed, it is called frost; and therefore in hot seasons, and in windy
weather, dews are not so frequent, nor so much, as after a calm and a clear
night; for when frosts happen, they dry up wet and moisture; for the ice being
melted, the water is proportionably less.

XI. Of Wind.
WIND is said to be an exalation hot and dry, engendered in the bowels of the
earth: and being gotten out, is carried side long upon the face of the earth,
and cannot mount upwards above the middle region of the air, which, by reason
of its coldness, does beat it back, so as by much strife, and by meeting other
exhalations, its motion is forced to be rather round than right in its falling;
and this makes it a wristpost or whirlwind, which oftentimes, by its violence,
carries many things with it from place to place.

XII. Of Earthquakes.
THE ancients affirm that the cause of earthquakes is plenty of winds gotten,
and confined within the bowels of the earth which is striving to break forth,
causing a shaking, or sometimes a cleaving of the earth, and thereby the
destruction of many people, and ruin of whole towns and cities, as the fate of
Sicily has but lately shown us* by sinking of mountains, and rising of valleys.
But though what I have said may be the natural cause of earthquakes, yet
doubtless, the final cause is God's anger against provoking sinful people;
which ought to make our fears to tremble, lest God for our sins should cause
the earth under us to do so.

XIII. Of Thunder and Lightning.
THUNDER and lightning is occasioned by an exhalation hot and dry, and being
carried up into the middle region of the air, and there into the body of a
cloud: Now these two contrarieties being thus shut or enclosed into one place
together, they fall at variance, whereby the water and fire agree not, till
they have broken through, so that fire and water fly out of the clouds, the
breaking whereof, makes that noise which we call thunder, and the fire is
lightning; which is first seen, though the thunder crack be first given,
because our sight is quicker than our hearing; for sooner the thunder is heard,
after the lightning is seen, the nearer it is to us.

XIV. Of the Eclipses and Causes.
BY an eclipse, in general, is understood a defect of light happening in some
of the celestial bodies, and is ca^sed by the interposition of an oblique body,
and our sight. Now the opinion of astronomers are, that all the planets of
themselves are dark bodies, having no light but what they receive from the sun,
but the sun and fixed stars are naturally luminous; whence it will follow, that
any planet interposing betwixt the sun and our sight, so also our primary
plannet coming betwixt the sun and its secondary, deprives the secondary of its
light, and consequently renders such secondary planet unilluminated to its
primary.

2. Of Eclipses of the Sun.
AN eclipse of the sun is caused by the diametrical interposition of the moon
betwixt the sun and the earth, which commonly happens at the new moon, or when
she is in conjunction with the sun; but every new moon does not cause an
eclipse, because of her latitude; yet the sun seldom escapes a year together
without appearing eclipsed in some part of the earth or other, because twice in
one year the sun and one node meet; also in the conjunction, or new moon, does
not happen just at the sun's passing by the node, but within half a degree from
the node, he then must suffer an eclipse greater or lesser, according as the
node is nearer or remote from him at he time of true conjunction; but if the
meeting of the sun, and either node, happen at the very full moon, then she
shall totally escape an eclipse of the new moon.

3. Eclipses of the Moon.
AN eclipse of the moon is nothing but her being deprived of the sun's light,
by the interposition of the earth betwixt the sun and her, which can never
happen but when the moon is at full; nor does it always happen then because of
latitude, for if the sun of the semidiameter of the moon, and the earth's
shadow, at the time of the true full, be more than the moon's latitude, she
will be eclipsed; but if the sun of the semidiameter be less than the latitude,
she cannot suffer an eclipse that is full; and though every full moon there are
not an eclipse, yet she rarely passes a year together without being eclipsed
little or much, for the sun passes her nodes every year.

4. Eclipses either Total or Partial.
TOTAL eclipses are such as quite cover the illuminated body, and are either
central or not; central a^^ when the centers of the sun, earth and moon being
in a straight line, or when the centers of the sun earth and moon coincide; not
central, are when the centers do not coincide, though notwithstanding they may
be total: Partial, are when the sun, moon, or other luminous bodies are but
partly darkened.

Now the moon being less than the earth, much less than the sun, solar eclipses
are never or very rarely total; yet if it happen the moon be perigaeon and the
sun apogaeon, an eclipse of the sun may be total; for when the moon's apparent
diameter exceeds the sun's considerably, and her quick and perfect shadow
reaches the superficies of the earth, by which such places that are situated
within the compass of this perfect shadow (the diameter which is about 300
miles) do lose the whole light of the sun, which has caused such darkness, that
the stars have appeared at noonday, and so dreadful, that the birds have fell
to the ground.

XV. Of the four Quarters of the Year; and first of the Spring.
THE spring of vernal quarter begins when the sun enters into the Ram or Aries
(which is with us the tenth day of March, astronomically) thereby making the
days and nights equal to all the world, the sun then rising due east, and
setting due west. This quarter continues white the sun goes through Aries,
Taurus and Gemini.

This quarter is naturally hot and moist; the most temperate in all the year,
being both pleasant and healthful, and most convenient for taking of physic,
either to remove chronical distempers, or to prevent them for the time to come.

2. Of Summer.
THE summer or festival quarter, begins when the sun touches the first minute
of Cancer or the Crab, thereby making the longest days and shortest nights, to
those that dwell on the north side of the equinox, which usually happen about
the month of June, after which the days decrease. This quarter continues till
the sun has gone through Cancer, Leo and Virgo.

This quarter is hot and dry; for then the sun is in full height and strength,
bringing in perfection the productions of the earth, the time of gathering in
the harvest, being chiefly in the last month of this quarter.

3. Of the Autumnal Quarter.
THE autumnal quarter begins when the sun is said to touch the first minute of
Libra, or Balance, thereby making the day and night again of equal length,
which is usually upon the 12th day of September, then likewise the sun rises
due east, and sets due west. This quarter continues while the sun goes through
Libra, Scorpio and Sagittary.

This quarter is generally held to be cold and dry, though it often proves
moist and wet; for the sun now withdraws his heat, and thereby causes the
falling of the leaves from the trees, whence this quarter is also called the
fall of the leaf.

4. Of the Winter.
THE winter, or hymeneal quarter, begins when the sun touches the first minute
of the tropical sign Capricorn, which is for the most part about the middle of
December, thereby making the shortest days and longest nights to those who
dwell on the north side of the equinoctial; and the contrary to those that
dwell on the south side. This quarter continues while the sun makes his
progress through Capricorn, Aquarius and Pisces.

This quarter continues cold and moist, being directly opposite to summer; for
now the fields look barren and the trees naked.

XVI. The experienced Husbandman; showing how to Manure, Plough, Sow and Weed,
etc.
THE first point of husbandy is, to prepare the ground; the second to plough it
well; the third to dung it well. The ways of doing this are diverse, according
to the nature of every soil and country. Only take notice, that all great
fields are tilled with the plough and shear, but the lesser with the spade.

The season of the year, and the weather also, is to be observed in the
ploughing of the ground; you must not plough in wet ground; nor yet after very
little rain, that is, if after a great drought, a little rain falls which has
not gone deep, but only wet the upper part, for the ground ought to be
thoroughly mellowed, but not too wet, for if it be too wet, you can expect but
ilttle benefit that year; you must therefore observe that the season be neither
too dry, nor too wet, for much dryness will hinder it from working well,
because either the hardness of the earth will resist the plough, or if it
should enter, yet it never will break the clods small enough, which will be
hurtful to the next ploughing, but if your first ploughing has been in a dry
season, it will be necessary to have some moisture in your second stiring,
which will also make your labor the more. When the ground is rich and wet
withal, it is to be stired, when the weeds are full grown, and have their seeds
in the top, which being ploughed so thick, that you can see where the coulter
has gone, utterly kills^ and destroys them; besides through many stirrings,
your fallow is brought to so fine mould, that it will need very little
harrowing when you sow it; and seeing so much depends upon the well ploughing
of the ground, the husbandman must try whether his ground be well ploughed or
not, or otherwise, the stalks being covered with the mould, he may be easily
deceived; to be certain, therefore, let him thrust down a rod in the sorrow,
and if it pierce alike in every place, it is a sign the ground is well ploughed,
but if it be shallow in one place, and deep in another, the ploughing is
faulty. If you are to plough upon a hill, you must not plough up and down, but
thwart, for so the inconvenient steepness is to be avoided, and the labor of
men and cattle made more easy, but then you must be careful not to plough
always one way, but sometimes higher, and some times lower, working as^ope as
you see needful.

As to the season of ploughing, it must be chiefly in the spring, the ground
being in the summer too hard, and in the winter too dirty; but in the spring,
the ground being mellowed, is the more easy to be wrought upon; and the weeds
are then turned in, and being plucked up by the roots before they are seeded,
will not spring again, but help to enrich the ground, And therefore the middle
of March is usually the best time to begin ploughing. But yet if the ground be
light and sandy, it may be ploughed in the winter, if the weather will permit.
A slender and level ground, subject to water, should be ploughed in the end of
Augu^t, and stirred again in September, and prepared for sowing about the
middle of March. The light hilly ground is broke up about the middle of
September, for if it be broken up before, it may be burnt up by the sun, and
have no goodness remaining in it, being barren and without juice. But this
shall suffice to be spoken of breaking up the ground.

Now if your ground be barren and cold, producing store of weeds or rushes, or
to bring it to a moderate heat, and so make fruitful, let it be manured with
lime. The limestones may be had among quarries of stones, and in diverse other
places, and you may burn them in a kiln, in the most convenient place you have
to save the carriage; and when you have sanded your ground and hacked it, make
your lime small, and on every a^re bestow thirty or forty bushels of lime,
spreading it, and mixing it well with earth and sand; and the stronger and
sharper the lime is, the better the earth will be, and you will find your
improvement answer your labor. And here note, that it is no matter what color
your lime stones are, whether white or gray, so that they be but sharp and
strong in quality to give a good tincture to the earth, it being the strength
and goodness of the lime, and not its beauty, that produces the profit. It is a
greater help to a cold, clayey wet ground; such grounds are also very much
helped by laying dung, or any soil that is fattening, either of cattle, or such
as is cast out of pond lakes, or muddy ditches, for barren and hot earth can
never be overlaid with good manure and compost, for that warms the earth, and
it is the want of warmth makes it unfruitful.

As for the hacking and sanding before mentioned, the first is, after the
ground has been turned up with the plough, to go over it with a long hoe, or
hack, and cut in pieces the grass which you see turned up with ridges or
furrows, or any uneven lumps, that it may be dragged away, burnt, or carried
together with the weeds, not to grow up again, to incumber the corn. And
landing it, to bring loads of sand, and lay them in convenient places,
spreading them lightly, or thick (as you see occasion) over the ground, that
the lime mixing with it, may the better embody with the mould, and produce a
good crop.

But beside what I have already mentioned, there are several other ways of
manuring land: I will mention some of them, for the husbandman's better
information. But here it will not be amiss to take notice, that what will do
very well for one sort of land, will not do at all for another; and therefore
in manuring of land, regard must be had to the nature of it: As for example;
for a clayey ground, lime and sand is excellent to manure it with, but for a
barren sandy ground, good marle is much more proper. If it be asked, What this
marle is? I answer, it is a rich cliff clay, an enemy to all weeds that spring
up of themselves, and gives a generative virtue to all seeds that are sown in
the ground. It is of a glewy substance, in quality cold and dry, and was earth
before ti was marle, it is nothing but a rich clay of diverse colors, according
to the strength of the sun and climate where it is produced. This is so good a
manure, that well laid on, it will enrich the barrenest ground for ten years,
and some for thirty. To find it, take an auger whimble, made to hold many bits,
one longer than another, till you have tried, by drawing the earth into one
place, then proceed in the most proper places till you come to the marle, and
the properest places are in the lowest parts of high countries, near the brooks
and lakes, and in the high parts of low countries, upon the knolls or little
hills, and in the clefts of steep banks, or branches in hills opening
themselves; in some places it lies deep, in others shallow; and commonly
barrenly sandy grounds are verged with it, lying very deep. Having found it,
dig it up in great lumps, and lay it in heaps a yard distance one from another,
and when it is dried, spread all the heaps. -- Many mix the marle with the
sand; but because this is not so easy to come at, I will speak of others more
general, that will enrich any poor sand or city for grain, with less trouble
and cost than before.

Woolen rags are very profitable for manuring and enriching of land, a sackful
and half being sufficient for dressing an acre of arable ground. The way of
using them is to chop them very small, and spread them an equal thickness over
the land before the following time, and then coming to fallow, let the plough
take them carefully into the ground, and cover them.

Shavings, or waste horns, or hoofs of beasts, are very good to manure land
withal; scatter the shavings in the same manner, and plough them in after heat.
These will keep the ground in like quality as the rags, for five years
together, without any renewing. The hoofs of cattle are approved of for this,
and may be had of trotter and tripe men, etc. and must be used as the rags and
shavings. Soap ashes, when the lie has been drained from them, is of excellent
use in this case, and has besides the property of killing weeds and insects
that breed in the ground, and eat up the corn. The hair of beasts enriches
land, being strewed and ploughed in, and there let it lie to rot. Also malt
dust is much available to this purpose, allowing three quarts of it to an acre.
And to enrich your dung or laystall, is to throw often beef broth, and other
waste broths upon it, as also soap suds; and in so doing one load will be worth
three of the same kind that is not so used. But this shall suffice as to
manuring of ground.

In sowing of your seed, let your grain be the best, and scatter it according
to the art of good husbandry, and let your sprinkling be a medium, not too
much, nor too little. But to make the seed prosper the better, steep it in
thick slimy water, that drains from dunghills, and if no such is to be had near
at hand, steep cow dung in water, and soak the seed in it; wheat will be well
soaked in 18 hours; barley in 36; peace in 12; but rye and oats may be sowed
dry, for that agrees best with them.

But when the seed is sown, all is not done; you must take care to prevent the
designs of those that will make void all your labor, and defeat your hopes, or
else, though you have sown your corn, you shall never see it come up; rooks,
crows and daws, are great devourers of grain, who will be sure to be about you
when you go to sow; to keep these at a distance, shoot some of them, and hang
them upon poles in diverse angles of your field; stick their feathers along the
ridges of the land; lay trains of gunpowder and blow the powder up, or let it
lie scattered in the most frequented places, and the scent of it will make them
forsake the field, especially now and then shooting a little; you may also take
great numbers of them by placing strong thick brown paper, twisted taper wise,
like those on sugar loaves, in holes of the earth, the broad top coming even
with the ground, bird lime the inside, and scatter some grain in it, and then
the fowl putting in his head to take it out, the paper so limed will stick
close, and rise with him, when being blindfolded, in amaze he will fly up a
great height, and will fall down again, so that if you be near at hand, he may
easily be taken. Also the scattering nux vomica, mingled with paste, if taken
by them (as seldom misses) will, make them so sick that they will forsake the
field. If you lime your corn they will forsake it; and so they will, if it be
steeped in water wherein wormwood has been boiled, or infused; or else
sprinkling your corn with the dregs of bitter oil, and it will do the like,
making them cast it up sick, and not desirous of any more: And these with
hanging bunches of feathers on lines or sticks, that the wind may dangle and
twirl them about, may help to preserve your corn when newly sown; and this last
also may be used when it is ripe. But these di^ections relate only to fowl,
who, notwithstanding all you can do, will be sure to come in for a share with
you.

But there are other destroyers of your corn besides birds, which you must
likewise take care to destroy; among which are the pismires or ants, who will
do a great deal of mischief by biting off the chits or sprouts, so that it will
never grow, but rot in the ground: To prevent this, search in the cornfields
well, especially under the hedges, and the roots of old hollow trees, or on the
tops of hills cast up; and if you find them there, put your limed water strong
and hot among them, presently after sunsetting, and it will destroy them. For
want of lime make a lie of wood ashes and it will do the same, though not so
effectually.

Another devourer of corn, ^e your droves of great black beetles, which lie
under the clods, and in sprouting time do much mischief. To destroy these make
smokes in the field, in a still night or when there is a little breathing wind
that may carry it over the surface of the ground, with wet rubbish or moldy
peace straw, hay, or such like, and it will kill them, or chase them out of the
ground; for they are of all other creatures, the greatest enemies to smoke, and
can least endure it. But if your ground be limed, or if you sow lime among your
corn, you may trouble yourself with them no farther, for if they bite where the
lime has touched, it kills them.

The next vermin to be destroyed is field rats and mice, and water rats also,
for these destroy a great deal of grain, which to prevent, and ruin them, find
out their round holes when the field is bare, and put hemlock seed into them,
which they will eat, and it will kill them, the sprinkling of juice of
hellebore i^ them, will also do the like: But that which I prefer above the
rest is, to beat common grass very small, mix it with a little copperas,
vitriol, and coarse honey, and make it up in pellets, and scatter it in their
haunts, in the mouth of their holes, or other like places, and the scent will
draw them from all parts, and once eating it, they will certainly die. This
also may be used in granaries and barns, for other rats and mice, with good
success.

Slugs and snails are another sort of devourers, which do much mischief to corn
and peace just sprouting up; to kill these, the best thing is foot or lime,
sprinkled thin over the ground, for touching it they will die.

Grasshoppers also do much injury, by feeding on the leaf and blossom of corn
and pulse, from the first to the last: These are not easily destroye^d, the
best way to get rid of them, is, by sprinkling corn with water wherein
wormwood, rue, or centaury has boiled, till the strength of them are taken away
by the water; and if they bite where the sprinkling happen, they will die. The
scent of any bitter thing being so offensive to them, that they are never found
where any such things grow.

Moles are another vermin to be destroyed, for they are in a double regard
destructive to corn; that is, in eating the roots, and rooting it up; not
making distinction of any sort, and tasting all alike; there are diverse ways of
taking them, but not so easily when the corn is well grown, for then they do
the greatest mischief, when their tracts, or casting up their hills, cannot be
discovered so easily; however, you must do as well as you can; and when you see
them casting, or moving in their tracks, strike them with an iron of many
spears; or dig pits in their track, and set earthen glazed pots, which they
will blindly fall into, and cannot scramble out; or fill an earthen jug with
pitch, rosin and brimstone, with some loose tow or rag, and firing it, clap the
neck to the mouth of the hole, and the air in the earth drawing in the scent to
a great distance, will stifle them; or mix juice of hellebore with rye meal,
scatter little bits in the furrows, and finding it in their way, they will
greedily eat it, and die.

Having showed you how to destroy such vermin as are devourers of corn, it will
now be necessary to say something about weeding your corn when it is sprung up;
for weeds are very offensive and destructive to corn, hindering its growth, and
choking it up.

When the corn is sprung up about a foot above the ground, those sorts of soil
that are apt to produce weeds, will require your looking after to root them
out: If they be thistles, or such as are great and offensive, they must be
taken away with hooks and nippers, cutting them off close by the roots, or
rather pulling them up by the roots, if you can do it without breaking the
ground, so as to bring corn along with them. The nipper may be made with two
long pieces of wood rivetted, to be opened like a pair of pincers, with
saw-teeth, closing in one another, that they may take the surer and firmer hold
without slipping. And these weeds may be much hindered in their growth, by
sowing two bushels of bay salt in an acre of land, as you do your wheat; for
though is is a friend to corn, in making it prosper and increase, yet it is an
enemy to the weeds, and hinders their growth.

2. How to turn barren Lands into good Pasture and Meadows.
HITHERTO I have been speaking of the ordering of corn, I come now to speak of
enriching the earth for meadow and pasturage. And this is two ways, viz. by
watering and manuring it. And for this use, the lower the ground lies (so it be
not subject to overflowings, or too much wet) the better it is, and the sooner
made good. Consider in the next place, what kind of grass it naturally
produces, whether clear and entire, or mix^^ with that of worse growth, the
first is best; but if it be of a worse sort, intermixed with thistles, broom
and offensive weeds, then grub and pluck them by the roots, clearing the ground
of them as well as you can, then dry them, mix them with straw, and burn them
upon the swarth of the ground, and spread the ashes upon it, then fold your
sheep upon the ground for severel nights, that their dung may increase its
strength, and their feet trample up the grass; then scatter it well over with
hay seeds, and go over them with a roller, or beat them with a flat shovel,
that they may be pressed into the ground to take root; then over these scatter
hay, or the rooting of hay under stacks, or the sweeping of the barns, or moist
bottoms of any hay that has been good, and is moist, and of no other use, then
spread on your manure, as horse dung, man's odure, or the dung of any beast,
which being thinned, and the clods well broken, let it lie till the new grass
spring through it; but do not graze it the first year, lest the cattle tread it
up, not having yet taken very good root, but mow it that it may have time to
come to perfection; and though the first year it may prove short and coarse,
yet the second it will be fine and very long, and in great plenty. And dressing
it thus but once in twenty years, will continue it for good meadow or pasture;
especially if in dry seasons you have water to relieve it, which may be done by
bringing springs through it, or gathering the violent fallings of rain into a
ditch on the other side of it, or by any other conveyance, according to the
situation of the ground; on the ascending part, to overflow it so long that it
soak deeper than the roots of the grass, to continue its moisture for the
nourishment of it for a considerable time. And here note, that the best season
for watering of meadows, is from the beginning of November to the end of April,
and the muddier or more troubled the water is, the better, for then it brings a
soil upon the ground; and this generally happens after hasty showers, and great
fluxes of rain. And if you have many fields lying together, especially in a
descent, you may make a convenience in the uppermost, to pen up the water till
it is very well soaked; and then by a ^^uice, or breaking down of a dam, let it
into the next; and so, by a small addition of water, transmit it to many.

XVII. The experienced Farrier and Cowleech, etc. containing above an Hundred
approved Receipts and Medicines for the cure of all Distempers in Cattle, as
Horses, Kine, Sheep and Hogs; with Directions how to find and know what their
Diseases and Infirmities are.
1. FOR a galled back, take honey and unslacked lime, beat, put it in a linen
cloth, bind it close, and lay in the embers all night, then strew it on the
galled place; but if it bleed, strew thereon a little verdigrease, and old shoe
leather burnt to ashes.

2. For a bruised back, take a good quantity of roach alum burnt, two handfuls
of barley burnt, mix them, and put upon the sore morning and evening, but if
the ^ore be corrupt, and full of dead flesh, then use more of the alum than
barley; if it begin to heal, use more of the barley powder than alum; if you
have no alum, take butter or verdigrease, melt it very hot, and pour it on the
sore twice or thrice a day, and bind a little hay thereon, that the horse may
not rub it off. -- If it swells keep it warm, dip a wad of hay in water, lap it
on the sore, and keep on an old saddle.

3. For a broken wind, take boar's dung, and powder it, and pour a good
quantity of it into milk lukewarm; give the horse a quart every third day, and
in four or five times it will cure him.

4. For a hoarse cough, take five or six eggs, and lay them in sharp white wine
vinegar, till the shells be somewhat soft, then fling them down his throat, and
it will cure forth with.

5. For the belly bound, take good wort, and so much soap as an egg, mixed
together, and give it to your horse to drink.

6. For the bots, take a good handful of egrimony, and make the horse eat it
early in the morning, and keep him fasting for a pretty while after it.

7. For the hide bound, take fenugreek, turmeric, anniseed, bay berries,
liquorish and cummin seeds, of ea^e a like quantity, beat them to powder, mix
them well together, and give him a spoonful in ale or beer at a time, blood
warm, and this will cure him speedily.

8. For a canker, take a handful of salt and burn it black, a penny worth of
bole ammoniac, a halfpenny worth of alum, and a handful of sage, boil all
these in a quart of chamber lie, till one half be wasted, wash the horse
therewith every twenty four hours, and after you have washed the sore five or
six times, then take a little turpentine, wash it in clean water, put to it a
little powder of brimstone, and a little honey, boil them in the same water,
and wash the sore place therewith, and it will cure him.

9. In the mouth, take red sage and rue, of each a handful, half a pound of
alum, and burn it, or honey and white copperas, of each two pence worth, boil
these in a pint of white wine vinegar; then take the third or fourth feather of
a goose wing, put a strong thread fast about your finger, dip it in the water,
and wash his nose therewith; and if he snorts up the feather, the thread will
pull it back. This will heal it in three weeks. Also you may (if the time of
the year will serve) boil in your vinegar a little handful of ribwort, bitony
and dazies, which is very good.

10. For a green wound; take white wine and warm it, and wash the wound all
over, then take turpentine, honey of roses and wax, melt them together, and
stir them continually till they incorporate. If it be a cut, put tow in it, and
fill it; if it be a hole, make tents and put into it.

11. For a festered sore, take lime, tow and horse dung, temper them well
together with pepper and the white of an egg, lay it to the sore for the space
of five day, and it will heal it.

12. For a shot or stake, take sallad oil, turpentine and bees wax, of each a
penny worth, and so much rosin as an egg, boil all these together, and sprinkle
on them a little verdigrease, then make clean the wound, and make tents, and
put them into it.

13. A good drink, take pulus diapentha, two pence worth, anniseeds and
liquorish, in powder, of each a half penny worth; of sack a quarter of a pint,
and a little sallad oil, mixed together, warm them blood warm, but no warmer,
then give it to the horse with a horn to drink, and let him stand tied with his
bridle a while after.

14. For the haw, o^ horn in the eyes, to help your horse yourself, if you
cannot have a farrier to do it, take a cord (for want of nippers) with a stick,
and twitch his nose hery hard, and hold him fast, then take the upper lid of
each eye, and with a needle and thread give it a stitch to the top of the
horses ear, and underneath the eyelid you shall see a skin with a hard gristle
or horn, which, with a sharp penknife, you may cut out; but be careful in
cutting it too much; then take a little small beer or ale, and spurt it in to
wash it, and it will help him.

15. For the pearl in the eye, take the juice of salendine, the juice of ground
ivy, and woman's milk, mixed together, and squirt it into the eyes as often as
you think fit, till it goes away.

16. For itching and burning in the eyes, take rose water, plantain water,
myrtle, houseleek and flower water of tuta prepared, of camphire, of stuse
without opium, and the whites of roasted eggs, of each three grains; set the
water on the fire till it be hot, and beat them so for the space of three or
fours hours, then strain them, and keep the liquor in a brass vessel well
stopped: apply this to the corner of the eyes.

17. To cure a fistula, when you are certain it is so, scald it with honey and
sheep's suet, for that will keep it from bleeding; then sl^t the nether end of
the sore, and put in so much mercury as a pea, it being well abated with sallad
oil, lay it on with a feather; then take a penny worth of verdigrease, one half
penny worth of red lead; beat all these together, then wash the sore with water
made of copperas, elder leaves in summer, but with the inner bark of elder in
winter: And after the washing, put the powder on the sore, and drop in some
sallad oil.

18. For a festula in the head, take the juice of houseleek, and dip a lock of
wool in it, put it in his ear, and bind it fast, observe to do this once a day
and it will help him.

19. For a fever, let him bleed in the thigh, in the middle vein, some four
fingers breadth under the rowel, or else take the vein in the neck, and
afterward give him a drink.

20. For a farcy, take tanner's ouse, and beef brine, boil them well together,
sc^m them, then put in the powder of salt petre, and wash therewith as you see
occasion, till he be cured.

21. For the glanders, take twenty cloves of garlic, four quarts of ale, and
one penny worth of sallad oil, peel and beat the garlic, and mix them
together, and give it him to drink; then take a pan of coals and strew on them
the powder of brimstone, laying it on a little wet hay, and hold it under the
horse's nose in a funnel, that the smoke may ascend to his nostrils, and
perfume him well with the same, and then ride him forth till he begins to
sweat, and set him up warm, and an hour after give him meat.

22. For galled thighs, wash them with the water of roses, plantain, myrtle and
the leaves of mallows, then anoint the place with ungentam ^opilion.

23. For a strain or stroke, take flower of linseed, turpentine and life honey,
of each a like quantity, boil them all together with white wine, till they be
thick, like an ointment, then spread it on a cloth, and lay it to the grief,
and it will take away any pain in the sinews.

24. For a hot impostume, stamp liver wort and hog's grea^e, then mix it hot,
and lay it on the sore place.

Or for impostumes in the ears or head, take a penny worth of pepper beaten to
fine powder, a spoonful of swine's grease, the juice of a handful of rue, two
spoonfuls of strong vinegar, mix all well together, renewing it once in two
days, till the swelling goes away.

25. For a cold imposthume, stamp balm, mix it with hog's grease, and lay it in
the manner of a plaster.

26. The mare's evil, take oat meal, mallows, wormwood, horehound and smallage,
wring them together and boil them till they are soft; then lay it to the grief,
and it will bring it to a head, then launch it, and take red lead, bole
ammoniac and rosin, beat them well together, and lay it on the place.

27. For the menage, take one penny worth of May butter, a half penny worth of
brimstone in powder, and the juice of hemlock, and boil them all together; then
with an old wool card scrape away the hairs, and lay on the medicine cold,
where the menage is: Then with a warm bar of iron or fire shovel, put to it
easily, and in three or four times doing it will cure him.

28. To help an over rid horse that forsakes his meat: Wash his mouth with
vinegar and salt, and he will feed after a while.

29. To help a poor horse in flesh: Give him two pence worth of horse ^air, in
one penny worth of ale, and doing this two or three times, it will make him
recover his flesh.

30. For a horse that is pursy, take the powder of gentian at the apothecaries,
give him some of that in water or ale, and it will help him.

31. To staunch blood, take the scrapings of the outside of a potage pot that
you see the meat in, lay it on the bleeding place plaster wise, and it will
stanch the blood forthwith.

32. For the scratches, take English honey, verdigrease, and the powder of
brimstone, beat them well together, and wash the place very clean, and then
anoint it all over.

33. For the ring bone or spavin: It grows with a hard knot between the knee,
the hoof and the hair; When you perceive it, burn it with an hot iron, and
anoint the hair about with neat's foot oil, and it will help it.

34. For the staggers, take two pence worth of turmerick, anniseed, long pepper
beaten, and falled oil, of each one penny worth, give him this to drink, rowel
him in the forehead, and put in a piece of nutmeg; then take a spoonful of aqua
vitae, and a spoonful of salt, put it into one of his ears, and so likewise in
the other ear, and bind them up for the space of twentyfour hours together.

35. For the pole evil, take running water and chamber lie, of each a quart,
put therein a pint of salt, and boil them till they come to a quart; then boil
them in a little wad of hay, and after you have strained it, apply it very hot
to the sore.

36. For a pr^ik, take turpentine, tar, pitch and beef suet, of each a dram,
and one head of garlic; boil all these together, and lay them as hot as can be
suffered, and if it chance to break out about the hoof, anoint the place with
the same stuff, and it will draw and help it.

37. To help a horse that cannot sta^e, take beer, anniseeds, and sallad oil,
of each one penny worth, and elecampane, give it him to drink, and draw out his
yard, and wash it with butter and a little white wine vinegar, two or three
days together, and it will give him ease, and cure him.

38. For the strangles, or strangullion, take crumbs of brown bread, bay
berries, or of the leaves in powder, temper them with May butter, and give them
in little balls three days together, and it will cure him.

39. To help any swelling, take hemlock, stamp it and mix it with sheep's dung
and vinegar, and make of it a plaster, and apply it to the swelled place.

40. To cure any swelling in the leg: Mark the ground where the said leg or
foot does stand, and with a knife or other thing, dig up a turf or piece of
earth just where the leg or foot did stand, hang the same on a white thorn, if
it be summer, or dry weather; if it be winter or wet weather, hang it in your
chimney, and as the turf or earth dries, so shall the swelling cease.

41. For a broken bone, or joint out: You must first bathe the grieved place
with warm patchgrease, then put about it a binding plaster of pitch, rosin,
mastic and sallad oil, well mixed together, and melt^d on the fire; then fold
that limb about with fl^x, then splint it with soft, broad, flat, strong
splints, but ^^move them not for fifteen days together, except, the rowels
slacken, and then you may straiten them again; yet it is a good sign: If it
swell, and the roller grow straighter, you may give it ease, it being bound too
hard; and thus dressing it every fifteen days, the bone will knit; and if any
gross matter appear; bathe it twice or thrice a day.

42. For the yellows, cho^ sallendine and rue very small, mix it with fresh
butter and sallad oil, give it him, let him bleed in the forehead.

43. To skin sores, take melted butter and str^ upon it the powder of rofin a
day or two; then take two spoonfuls of very thick cream, and with the foot of
the chimney make a paste thereof, and spread it upon the sore.

44. To cause a stomach, stamp garlic and pepper together, give it to him;
then rub his teeth with salt, ti^^ in a clout to a stick, and thrust it into
his jaws and let him chew upon the bridle a while after it.

45. For splinter or spavin, take mercury, or white arsenic ground to powder,
then make a little slit the length of a barley corn, to the bone on the top of
the raising up the skin, with a corner, and put in as much mercury or arsenic,
as will lie upon the slit, and tie up the horse's head to the rock, so that he
may not bite the sore place, for the space of two or three hours; for then the
anguish will be over, and so let him fall to his meat. It will rot and go away
of itself, and you may heal the sore with the former salve prescribed in the
43d cure.

46. For a loose hoof, take bees wax, hog's grease, and turpentine, of each a
like quantity; melt the wax and hog's grease, dissolve the turpentine into it,
and stir it well together then put it in an earthern pot to cool, and with the
same anoint the corner of the hoof, and putting wheat bran unto it, boiled very
hot, and stop it in the horse's feet, helps a frotuse or sounde^.

47. To repair a broken hoof, take twelve heads of garlic and bruise them, of
rosin and a^lum each two ounces, mingle them with half a handful of ass's dung,
then boil them together, and anoint the hoof therewith.

48. For a gall or hurt with the saddle, that does swell; seethe an onion in
water, and so lay it as hot to his back as can be suffered, bind it fast and it
will assuage the swelling.

49. For the vives, take a penny worth of English honey, a handful of violet
leaves, and stamp them together, and it will cure without fail.

50. To help all cramps, take peace grease or patch grease and wine vinegar, a
like quantity, boil it, and being melted very hot, with the same bathe twice or
thrice a day, and exercise moderately before and after dressing it; it will not
only take away his pain, but also remove all swellings or cramps whatsoever.

51. To cure worms, or bots, take hartshorn and savin, stamped or chopped
together, mix it with good strong vinegar, and give it to drink; or with your
hand wash his fundament with brine, or with the water of germandine, it will
give him ease presently.

52. To help a tired horse; pour a quart of good wine or ale down his throat,
and it will very much refresh him. -- If your horse in travel fall suddenly
sick, where no town is nigh, alight, and with a knife or bodkin prick him in
the roof of his mouth, and make him bleed, suffering him to chew and eat his
own blood is a cure to himself.

53. If a horse in halting bow not his hoof, mingle hemp with the white of an
egg, and stop the foot under the shoe; but if it be a wound, put in the powder
of oyster shells and verdigrease, to dry it up, or the white of an egg with
soap and vinegar.

2. The experienced Cowleech.
1. HOW to know and help a cow that is like to cast herself: She will look
hollow eyed, and pine; take the grounds of ale and the powder of cinnamon,
liquorice and ginger, and give her to drink.

2. For a cow that has cast her calf; take grains and long pepper, of each two
penny worth, in powder, and give it her to drink in milk.

3. For a cow that has calved and cannot glean; take a quart of good ale, boil
it and skim it well, then put in a handful of the flower of barley malt, and
give her to drink in a warm mash.

4. To keep calves from worms; when they are troubled therewith they will run
up and down, and not stand still in a place, but quiver and shake, and hold
their heads toward their side; take southern wood, or wormwood, and bruise it
with dry figs and flitchets, and make a paste thereof, and put them into the
throat.

5. For weaning of calves; take five branches of tansey, five branches of
rosemary, and sprigs of mint, stamp them, and give the juice to drink, with
four spoonfulls of good verjuice.

6. To increase milk; take sugar candy, cinnamon, and strong drink, and give it
to drink now and then.

7. To help the beasts that cannot piss; take and bruise cardus benedictus,
then strain it with white wine, and so give it to drink.

8. For the cholic; take the powder of one penny worth of ginger, and so much
of the powder of liquorice, give it in a quart of milk, and it will help her.

9. For loss of cud; take half a pint of urine, bay salt and wall earth, of
each a handful, mix them well together, and wash the roof of the mouth; but
pull out the tongue and force some down.

10. If a cow be bruised, she will piss blood; take perriwinkle, comfret,
hartstongue and blood wort, chop and stamp them in a mortar, wring out the
juice and give a little thereof at a time in rennet to drink.

11. For a gore; take ashes finely sifted, and mix them with the grounds of ale
or beer, and make it thick like butter, and so lay it thereon; use this and it
will heal it.

12. If a cow have the fret, her milk will go away, and she will lie with her
legs along: take a little dandelion and groundsel, and boil them well in good
strong ale, then strain out the liquor, and give it her.

13. For a beast that cannot dung; take hay, seethe it well, stamp it, and
strain the liquor, and put into it fresh grease and soap, and give it,

14 If the beast be sick of the gall, and ready to burst; take a pint of stale
ale, one penny worth of ox gall, and a handful of salt, mix them together, and
give it to drink, and it will cure forthwith.

15. If a cow's gall do run, she will scour and hang down her ears; take
sallendine* turmeric, and rennet, boil them well and strain them, then give it
luke warm.

16. If a beast be grieved in the lungs, it will be hoarse, short winded, and
hang out the tongue; take a pint of stale ale, a half penny worth of bole
ammoniac beaten, of hemp seed and long wort, of each a handful, beat them well
together.

17. If a beast be sick of the murrain, it will rattle in the throat; take a
pint of stale ale, long pepper and grains, of each one half penny worth, of
fenugreek a farthing worth, beat them well, and mix them together, and give it
warm to drink. Or you may let them be let blood in the nostrils, and give him
sugar candy, cinnamon, and turmeric, beaten and put in milk.

18. For the staggers; take cloves and fennel seeds, beat them to powder, and
with milk give it the beast to drink, and then let him bleed.

19. If beasts be maw sick their eyes will settle in their heads, and they will
groan much, and pine away; take a pint of milk, a spoonful of tar, a half penny
worth of honey, mix them together, and give it to the beast to drink warm.

20. The more evil, is known by the staling of blood; take more water and more
grass otherwise called rosa solis, chop these herbs small, and give the beast a
dishful three or four times a day.

21. The tangen, and what it is: It is a disease known by the swelling of the
tongue, or by a bleb thereon, it makes them rough furred in the throat, and to
swell. To cure it, take a handful of dry mole's earth, prick the bleb with the
point of a knife, then rub the root of the tongue about the bleb very well with
the earth, and cast some urine into the beast's mouth.

22. A purge for cattle. Let the beast blood in the neck vein, then take a
quart of ail, boil it and skim it well, then take it off and put into it a
spoonful of the juice of garlic, and as much tar, then take sugar candy,
fenugreek and brimstone, all beaten to powder, the quantity of three spoonfuls:
brew all together with the ale, till it be cool, putting in a quarter of a pint
of sallad oil, so give it to the beast to drink fasting, and after it chafe it
to and fro for a pretty little while.

23. For the asprung; take a running water, leaven and salt, rub her mouth and
nostrils therewith, and break the bleb under the tongue.

24. For the dry root; take legwort, sallendine and bay salt, of each an
handful, and four heads of garlic, stamp all these together, then take a
quarter of a pound of leaven, a little dishful of soot, work it with the other
things, then take a quart or less of good ale, in two sponfuls of mother, one
penny worth of long pepper beaten, and give it the beast to drink, and then
chafe her up and down an hour, but keep her from water five or six hours after.

25. For the itch. With old urine and ashwood ashes make a strong lie, then to
a pint of this lie put tar, black soap, copperas, pepper brimstone, boar's
grease, staneface, plantain, of each a like quantity, as much as will make the
lie a thick salve, and with the same anoint all the sore places, and it will
kill and heal.

26. For a beast that has eaten venomous herbs; a good handful of wormwood,
chop it very small, put it into a good quantity of ale or beer, and give it the
beast to drink three or four days together, in the morning.

27. For the garret in the maw; take a good quantity of whole mustard seed, and
mix it with wine or strong ale, and give it to the cow.

28. For the canker in the mouth; take woodbine leaves, sage, salt, and
plantain; of each a handful, boil them well in a quart of running water, with
half a pint of honey, and a pint of good strong vinegar, mixed together, wash
the beast's mouth once a day.

29. For infirmities in the eyes; take an egg and put out half the white, then
fill it again with salt, and roast it on the embers so long that you may beat
it to powder, then mix that powder in a spoonful of water of eye bright, and as
much of the juice of houseleek, washing the beast's eye twice or thrice a day,
if it does not help them, bleed in the temple vein.

30. For inflammation in the eyes; take southern wood, and bruise it with
vinegar, and lay it to the e^e; for a sore eye, spirt beer therein, or chew the
leaves of ground ivy, and drop it into the eye, with the juice thereof, with
the powder of ginger.

31. For a cow that has the wither; take the more of the flower de luce, wash
them close, stamp them well, and mix it with a penny worth of long pepper in
powder, make thereof three balls of the bigness of an egg, and give the beast
one in drink for three or four days together.

32. To make a cow take bull; give her of the herb called cow make, which
grows like a white gilly-flower among corn, two hours before she shall take
bull, if she should refuse the bull.

33. Against the biting of a mad dog; take garlic and put it into a linen
cloth, then chafe and rub the bitten place therewith. Or take root of great
bu^, bruised with salt, laid to the place, it will help man or beast.

34. To fasten teeth; first prick his gums beneath on both sides, within and
without, and the gums above with the point of a knife, then take a whetstone or
rough pebble, rub the gums therewith, and make them ^eed; so done, chafe them
well with suet, and they will fasten again, or rub them with sage and salt.

35. How to geld or cut a calf; you shall cause one to hold down his forepart
or legs, then bind his hinder legs with some cord half a yard asunder, let his
feet be bound, and let the said holder set both his knees on the cord, nigh to
his legs, and so cut him gently, and anoint his flanks with some grease, then
rub his flanks with cold water mixed with salt, and he shall do well.

36. Against hide bound; take and stamp the leaves of the flower de luce, then
strain it with good ale, and so give it them warm.

37. Against pissing of blood, or bloody flux; if this disease be newly begun,
you shall take a frog, and cut off his left leg, and so put him alive in the
beasts mouth; but then you must have ready a handful of salt mixed with a pint
of good strong ale; and so soon as you can, after the frog, give the beast to
drink, and make him swallow down all together.

But if your beast have continued long, then shall you take of sharp tanner's
ouse, with old Marclemas beef, mixed and well stirred together, and then give
it to the beast.

The experienced Shepherd.
FOR the sheep that have the staggers, give them one penny worth of treacle,
one race of turmeric, and one penny worth of English fastron, all mixed
together.

2. For sheep that make red water; take a little piece of roach alum, a little
piece of butter, mix it together, and give it them as you see occasion.

3. For the scab and itch; take tar and fresh grease, of each a like quantity,
mix them well with the juice of chervill and a little brimstone; make a salve,
and anoint the fore place therewith.

4. Looseness of teeth, and grief of the mouth; take salt, sage, and earth, of
each a like quantity, beaten together, and rub the mouth and gums of the sheep
until you make them bleed.

5. For the general rot, or water in the belly; take sage, tansey, holy
thistle, horse mint, wormwood-flowers, rosemary, rue, plantain, dill and
lungworth of each a like quantity, beaten in the mortar, then strain out the
juice, and to five spoonfuls of it, put into a pint of honied water boiled,
with two spoonfuls of the powder of bay berries, long pepper, liquorice, and
anniseed, of each alike; then taken from the fire, put in two spoonfuls of good
salt, and as much sweet butter as a walnut, stir all together, and give it to
the sheep lukewarm, in a horn, to drink morning and evening rubbing the mouth
very well with salt, is a certain and approved cure.

4. The complete Swineherd.
FOR the murrain or garret; take gunpowder, bay salt, bole ammoniac, and
garlic, beat them, together, with a knife make a hole between their claws, put
in a quantity of a hazle nut, and let them bleed under the tongue, or in the
shoulder vein.

2. For scurf or manginess; let them bleed in the tail, then take black soap,
brimstone, vinegar, swine's grease and honey mixed together, of each a like
quantity, and anoint the swine all over with it, having first rubbed off all
the scurf and filth with a wool card.

3. For a sow that eats her pigs; watch the pigging, and take the least or
worst pig, and anoint it all over with the juice of the herb called stone crop,
and give her to eat, and she will never do the like again.

4. For the measles, or pox; let them bleed under the ears, or in the tail,
then bind the sore with the bark of green osiers, then take an ounce of
treacle, the juice of wormwood, liver worth, and gall worth, half a pint of red
oaker and hen's dung, of each a handful, and of barley meal three handfuls,
mixed with a bottle of urine and honey all together, put it into two gallons of
sweet warm wash, and give it to the swine to drink, and anoint all the sore
places with boar's grease and brimstone, mixed together.

The End of the FOURTH PART.
The true FORM of all Sorts of BILLS, BONDS, INDENTURES, LETTERS of ATTORNEY
and LICENSE, DEEDS, BILLS of EXCHANGE, etc.
A Bill of Penalty.
KNOW all men by these presents, that I John Jenkins, of the town of Milton, in
the county of Suffolk, and Commonwealth of Massachusetts, victualler, do
acknowledge myself indebted to Martin Moneyman, of Roxbury, in the county and
commonwealth aforesaid, grazier, in the sum of twenty pounds, of good and
lawful money of Massachusetts, to be paid unto the said Martin Moneyman, his
heirs, executors, administrators, and assigns, in or upon the 19th day of
September next ensuing the date hereof, without fraud or further delay: For and
in consideration of which payment, well and truly to be made and done, I bind
myself, my heirs, executors, and administrators, in the penal sum of forty
pounds, of the like lawful money, firmly by these presents: In witness whereof,
I have hereunto set my hand and seal this twenty fifth day of March, in the
year of our Lord God, 1796.

JOHN JENKINS.
Signed, Sealed, and Delivered, in presence of Titus Testimony, Andrew Ames.


Note. The mark, in this and the forms subsequent, represents, the seal, which
in this, and in all those in which it appears, ought to be affixed; the person
who executes any of them, is, in the presence of the witnesses, to take off the
seal (that is the instrument, with which the impression was made) and then
taking the paper or parchment, in his or her light hand, is to pronounce these
words. I deliver this as my act and deed for the purposes within mentioned.

A short Bill or Note of one's Hand.
KNOW all men by these presents, that I Peter Pennyless, of the town of Boston,
in the county of Suffolk, and Commonwealth of Massachusetts, blacksmith, do
owe, and own myself to stand indebted to Robert Rich of Sul^^n, in the county
of Essex, and Commonwealth aforesaid, gent. in the just and due sum of ten
dollars, of lawful money of Massachusetts, which by these presents, I promise
to pay unto him, the said Robert Rich, 21, or upon the sixth day of October
next ensuing the date hereof: For the true performance of which payment, well
and truly to be made, and in witness hereof, I have set my hand to these
presents, this thirteenth day of June, 1796.

PETER PENNYLESS.

Among men of business the following form is commonly used, and is equally
effectual in law:

I PROMISE to pay to Mr. Robert Rich, or his order the sum of ten dollars, five
months after date, for value received, this thirteenth day of June, 1796, by
PETER PENNYLESS.

This note is transferrable to another, if Robert Rich writes his name on the
back thereof; but then if Peter Pennyless does not pay it, Robert Rich is
liable thereto.

A penal Bill from two to one.
KNOW all men by these presents, that we Laurence Luckless and John Jones, both
of Boston, in the county of Suffolk, and Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
weavers, do acknowledge and own ourselves to scand indebted to George Greedy,
of the town of Roxbury, ^n the county and Commonwealth aforesaid, felt maker,
in the just and due sum of forty dollars, of good and lawful money of
Massachusetts, to be paid unto him the said George Greedy, his heirs,,
executors, administrators, or assigns, at or upon the thirteenth day of October
next ensuing the date hereof, without fraud, or further delay; for and in
consideration of which payment, well and truly to be made, we do bind our
heirs, executors, and administrators, in the penal sum of eighty dollars of the
like lawful money, firmly by these presents. In witness whereof, we have
hereunto set our hands and seals, this thirteenth day of June, in the year of
our Lord, 1796.

LAU. LUCKLESS. JOHN JONES.
Signed, Sealed, and Delivered, in presence of William Witness. Timothy Testis.


Note, That bills without penalty are of no more force or lasting than book
debts, as they are not sealed; yet they are esteemed better security, because
the party's hand, if he contends, may be proved against him: But often times, on
an adjustment of accounts, it is usual to have the party's hand to the book,
which is as valid as the other; but, in my opinion, there ought to be a witness
to either of them.

Note also, All obligations ought to be in English, and the words at length;
they may be suited to any condition, by only altering the name or names, place
or places of abode, title or titles, sum or sums of money, date, etc.

A Bond from one to one.
KNOW all men by these presents, that I Abel Darmell, of the town of Boston, in
the county of Suffolk, and Commonwealth of Massachusetts, gent. am held and
firmly bound to John Melver, of the said town, Esquire. in the sum of fifty dollars
of good and lawful money of Massachusetts, to be paid to the said John Melver,
or to his certain attorney, his executors, administrators, or assigns; for the
true payment whereof, I bind myself, my heirs, executors and administrators,
firmly by these presents, sealed with my seal. -- Dated this twentyfirst day of
January, in the year of out Lord, one thousand seven hundred and ninetysix.

The condition of this obligation is such, that if the above bounden Abel
Darmell, his heirs, executors, or administrators, do well and truly pay, or
cause to be paid, to the above named John Melver, his executors,
administrators, or assigns; the full sum of twentyfive pounds of good and
lawful money of Massachusetts, o^ the twentieth day of August next ensuing the
date hereof, with the lawful interest thereof; then this obligation to be void,
or else to remain, continue, and be in full force and virtue.

ABEL DARMELL.
Sealed and delivered in the presence of George Needy. Thomas Trusty.


A general Release:
KNOW all men by these presents, that I Peter Peaceable, of Boston, in the
county of Suffolk, and Commonwealth of Massachusetts, tobacconist, have
remised, released, and for ever quit claim to William Winter, of Roxbury, in
the county aforesaid, fishmonger, his heirs, executors and administrators, of
all and all manner of action and actions, suits, bills, bonds, writings, debts,
dues, duties, accounts, sums of money, leases, mortgages, judgments by
confession or otherwise obtained, executions, extents, quarrels, controversies,
trespasses, damages, and demands whatsoever, which by law or equity, or
otherwise soever, I the said Peter Peaceable, against the said William Winter,
ever had, and which I, my heirs, executors, or administrators, shall or may
claim, challenge, or demand, for or by reason, means, or colors of any matter,
cause, or thing whatsoever, to the day of the date of these presents.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and seal, this fourteenth day
of June, etc.

PETER PEACEABLE.

An Indenture of Apprenticeship.
THIS Indenture witnesses, That Richard Reynolds, son of Robert Reynolds, late
of Boston, in the county of Suffolk, has put himself, and by these presents
does voluntarily put himself Apprentice to John Carpenter, housewright, of said
town, to learn his art, trade, or mystery, and after the manner of an
apprentice, to serve him from the day of the date hereof, for and during the
whole term of seven years next ensuing: During all which time, he the said
apprentice his master shall faithfully serve, his secrets keep, his lawful
commands every where gladly obey. He shall do no damage to his said master, nor
see it be done by others, without letting or giving notice thereof to his said
master. -- He shall not waste his said master's goods, nor lend them unlawfully
to others. He shall not commit fornication, nor contract matrimony within the
said term. At cards, dice, or other unlawful game, he shall not play, whereby
his said master may be damaged. With his own goods, or the goods of others,
during the said term, without license of his said master, he shall neither buy
nor sell.

He shall not absent himself day nor night, from his said master's service
without his leave; nor haunt ale houses, taverns, or play houses: But in all
things behave himself as a faithful apprentice ought to do, during the said
term. And the said master shall use the utmost of his endeavors to teach, or
cause to be taught and instruct, the said apprentice, in the trade and mystery
he now professes, occupies, or follows; and procure and provide for him the
said apprentice, sufficient meat, drink, apparel, washing and lodging, fitting
for an apprentice, during the said term. And for the true performance of all
and every the said covenants and agreements, either of the said parties bind
themselves unto the other by these presents. In witness whereof, they have
interchangeably put their hands and seals, this fifteenth day of June, in the
year of our Lord, 1796.

A Letter of Attorney.
KNOW all men by these presents, That I Calvin Gay, of Boston, in the county of
Suffolk, and Commonwealth of Masschusetts, apothecary (for diverse
considerations and good causes me hereunto moving) have made, ordained,
constituted and appointed, and by these presents do make ordain, constitute and
appoint, my trusty friend William Wagstaff, of Milton, in the county aforesaid,
gent. my true and lawful attorney, for me and in my name, and to my use, to
ask, demand, recover, receive, of and from A. B. of Roxbury, in the said
county, the sum of sixty dollars; giving, and by these presents granting to my
said attorney, my sole and full power and authority, to take, pursue, and
follow such legal courses, for the recovery, receiving, and obtaining of the
same, as I myself might or could do, were I personally present; and upon the
receipt of the same, acquitances and other sufficient discharges, for me, and
in my name, to make, sign, seal and deliver; as also, one or more attorney or
attorneys, under him to substitute or appoint, and again, at his pleasure to
revoke; and further to do, perform, and execute for me, and in my name, all and
singular thing or things, which shall or may be necessary, touching and
concerning the premises, as fully, thoroughly, and entirely, as I the said
Calvin Gay, in my own person, ought or could do in and about the same;
ratifying, allowing, and confirming, whatsoever my said attorney shall lawfully
do, or cause to be done, in and about the execution of the premises, by virtue
of these presents; In witness whereof I have hereunto set my and and seal, the
sixteenth day of June, in the year of our Lord, 1796

A Letter of Attorney by a Seaman.
KNOW all men by these presents, that I Timothy Tarpaulin, mariner, now
belonging to the ship Rye, for diverse good causes and considerations me
thereunto moving, have, and by these presents do make my trusty friend Henry
Hearty, of Boston, in the county of Suffolk, and Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
baker, (or my beloved wife Penlope Tarpaulin) my true and lawful attorney, for
me, and in my name, and for my use, to ask, demand, and receive, of and from
the captain or agent of said ship, or whom else it may concern, as well of all
such wages and pay, bounty money, prize money, and all other sum and sums of
money whatsoever, as now are, and which hereafter shall and may be due, or
payable unto me: Also all such pensions, salaries, smart money, or other money
and things whatsoever, which now are, or at any time hereafter shall or may be
due to me, for my service, or otherwise, on board said ship, or any other ship,
frigate or vessel: Giving and hereby granting, unto the said attorney, full and
whole power, to take, pursue and follow such legal ways or courses, for the
recovery, receiving and obtaining, and discharging upon the said sum or sums of
money, or any of them, as I myself might or could do, were I personally
present: And I do hereby ratify, allow and confirm, all and whatever my
attorney shall lawfully do, or cause to be done, in and about the execution of
the premises, by virtue of these presents: In witness whereof, I have hereunto
set my hand and seal, this tenth day of June, 1796.

TIMOTHY TARPAULIN.

A Deed of Gift.
TO all people to whom these presents shall come, I George Generous, do send
Greet^ng. Know Ye, That I the said George Generous, of the town of Worcester,
in the county of Worcester, tanner, for and in consideration of the love, good
will and affection which I have and do bear toward my loving sister, Sarah
Sorrowful, of the same town and county, widow, have given and granted, and by
these presents do freely give and grant unto the said Sarah Sorrowful, her
heirs, executors, or administrators, all and singuar my goods and chattles, now
being in my present dwelling house, in the town aforesaid, known by the name of
Fisher's Figgary; of which (before the signing of these presents) I have
delivered her, the said Sarah Sorrowful, an inventory signed with my hand, and
bearing even date, to have and to hold all the said goods and chattles in the
said premises or dwelling houses, to her the said Sarah Sorrowful, her heirs,
executors, or administrators from henceforth, as her and their proper goods and
chattles, absolutely without any manner of condition. In witness whereof, I
have hereunto put my hand and seal, this sixteenth day of June, 1796.

GEORGE GENEROUS.
Signed, Sealed and delivered in the presence of David Drayton. Aaron Atkins.


Note, This precedent may be extended to the giving away of cattle, corn,
house, or land if not entailed, etc. but the particulars must be named, etc.

Of Bills of Exchange.
BILLS of Exchange are either inland or foreign. The inland bills are drawn by
one trader in one city or town, upon another of another city or town in the
same kingdom; as London upon Bristol, or Exeter upon London, etc. and these
chiefly concern our shopkeepers and wholesale traders, either of town or
country, and the foreign more immediately concerns the merchants.

Bills of exchange, if handsomely drawn, must be written in a fair hand, on a
long piece of paper, about three inches broad, and writ in form after the
following precedent.

A Bill payable at Eight.
London 16th June, 1796.
AT sight hereof, pay to Mr. Aaron Loring, or his order, the sum of Ninety
Dollars, for value received of Charles Cash; and place it to account, as per
advice from

Your humble servant, DAN DRAWBILL.

To Mr. Peter Punctual, Grocer, in High Street, Bristol.
Note. A bill at sight is payable three days after the acceptor sees it.

A short Will in legal Form.
IN the name of GOD, Amen, I William Weakly, of the town of Boston, hatter,
being very sick and weak, ^n (or in perfect health of) body, but (or, and) of
perfect mind and memory, thanks be given unto GOD; calling into mind the
mortality of my body, and knowing that it is appointed for all men once to die,
do make and ordain this my last will and testament; that is to say, principally
and first of all, I give and recommend my soul into the hand of Almighty GOD
that gave it, and my body I recommend to the earth, to be buried in a decent
christian burial, at the discretion of my executors: Nothing doubting, but at
the general resurrection I shall receive the same again, by the mighty power of
GOD. And as touching such worldly estate wherewith it has pleased GOD to bless
me in this life, I give, demise, and dispose of the same in the following
manner and form.

First. I give and bequeath to Elizabeth, my dearly beloved wife, the sum of
one thousand dollars, lawful money of Massachusetts, to be raised and levied
out of my estate, together with all my household goods, debts, and moveable
effects.

Also, I give to my well beloved daughter, Elizabeth Weakly, whom I likewise
constitute, make, and ordain the sole executrix of this my last will and
testament, all and singular my lands, messuages, and tenements, by her freely
to be possessed and enjoyed. -- And I do hereby utterly disavow, revoke and
disannul all and every other former testaments, wills, legacies, bequests and
executors, by me in any wise before mentioned, willed and bequeathed; ratifying
and confirming this, and no other, to be my last will and testament. In witness
whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and seal, this twelfth day of June, 1796.

WILLIAM WEAKLY.
Signed, sealed, published, pronounced and declared, by the said William
Weakly, as his last Will and Testament, in the presence of us who, in his
presence, and in the presence of each other, have hereunto subscribed our
names. Henry Hardy. Levi Lewis. Hiram Hale.


The testator, after taking of the seal, must, in the presence of the
witnesses, pronounce these words, I publish and declare this to be my last will
and testament.

Note, If a will be already made, and the person has no mind to alter it, but
to add something more, there may be affixed the following Codicil, or Schedule
to it, and it will stand good in law, as part of the will.

A Codicil to a Will.
Be it known to all men by these presents, that I William Weakly, of Boston,
hatter, have made and declared my last will and testament in writing, bearing
date the twelfth day of June, one thousand seven hundred and ninetysix. I the
said William Weakly, by this present Codicil, do ratify and confirm my said
last will and testament, and do further give and bequeath upon my loving cousin
and godson William Weakly, ^unior, the sum of two hundred dollars of good and
lawful money of Massachusetts, to be paid unto him the said William Weakly, by
my executrix, out of my estate: And my will and meaning is, that this codicil
be adjudged to be a part and parcel of my last will and testament.; and that
all things therein mentioned and contained, be faithfully and truly performed,
and as fully and amply in every respect, as if the same were so declared and
set down in my said last will and testament.

Witness my hand this twentieth day of June, 1796. WILLIAM WEAKLY.
Signed, in the presence of us A. B. C. D.


The Wheel of Fortune, and what is meant by it.
WHEN any desire to know a question, state any number not exceeding 30^ to that
lot the number of the day be added and the first letter of your name, which
perhaps may prove a figure letter, and let the number be divided by three, and
if the division comes out even, then expect a good issue of what you require,
whether relating to love, business or the like; but if broken, and odd, then
the success will be bad, if not altogether unfortunate.

Several Queries resolving in Matters of Love and Business, by throwing a Die,
or pricking at a Figure, after the Form and Rules of the following Table.
WHAT number you throw, or what number or letter you prick upon, they being
covered with a piece of paper, through which you must prick, go to the same
number and letter in the following solutions, for a true answer.

THE FORTUNE TABLE.
A 2 3 4 5 6 B 2 3 4 5 6 C 2 3 4 5 6 D 2 3 4 5 6

As to what kind of a Husband a Widow or Maid shall have.
A HANDSOME youth be sure you will have,
Brown hair, high nose, he will keep you brave.
2. A man unto thy lot shall fall,
Straight, but neither short nor tall.
3. An honest tradesman is thy lot,
When he proffers slight him not.
4. Fair, ruddy, bush hair is thy love,
He Will keep the well, and call the still his dove,
5. A widower, though rich, thou wilt marry,
You for a husband will not long tarry.
6. Proper and gay will be the man,
That will thee wed, my pretty Nan.
Whether a Maid shall have him she loves.
BE not too coy, he is your own,
But through delay he may be gone.
2. He of your wishes does not know,
He Would soon comply if it were so.
3. Come f^^ thy heart at rest I say,
He will but plunder and away.
4. Fear not, thy neighbor is the man,
And he will have thee if he can.
5. Show him more kindness, he will speak,
His heart with silence else will break.
6. Sigh thou no more, he does relent,
And his inconstancy repent.
How many Husbands you may expect, etc.
COME in the town thou first shall wed,
A stranger next shall grace thy bed.
2. With one well loved thy life shall be,
And happy days in marriage see.
3. The stars three husbands do presage,
And thou shall die in good old age.
4. Wed thou betimes, or else I fear,
Thou will not much for wedlock care.
5. Too much pride will make thee tarry,
Yet after all that, thou shall marry.
. Accept the ring thy love does give,
For long in wedlock he will not live.
Whether it be best to marry or not.
DON'T fear, thy husband will be kind,
And it is one shall please thy mind.
2. If he be of complexion fair,
For thee that man I do prepare.
3. Come never fear, it will be well,
Or say I can no fortune tell.
4. Pray loose no time, for if you do,
Age will come on, and you may rue.
5. If this match flip, you may long stay,
Then take kind will without delay.
6. Cupid commands thee now to do it,
Then pr'ythee make no more dispute.
FINIS.

