A NEW TREATISE ON THE CONSUMPTION: CONTAINING AN ATTEMPT TO INVESTIGATE ITS
REAL NATURE BY AN ATTENTIVE VIEW OF ITS PREDISPOSING AND PROXIMATE CAUSES: AND
A REFUTATION OF SOME MISTAKEN THEORIES RESPECTING THE DISEASE. TO WHICH IS
ANNEXED A SYSTEMATIC MODE OF TREATMENT. BY AN ADVOCATE FOR USEFUL IMPROVEMENT.

PRINTED AT NEWFIELD, (CONNECTICUT) BY IRA JONES. MDCCXCVI.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE design of the Author in publishing the following pages, being not merely
to amuse gentlemen of the faculty, but for the general benefit of all such as
may be prompted by motives of interest or curiosity to peruse them; he has
endeavored for that reason to render his short treatise as intelligible as
possible, by carefully avoiding the unnecessary use of technical and abstruse
phrases and confining himself to as plain and familiar terms as the nature of
the subject would admit.

But having necessarily made use in certain instances in the phraseology of the
late Dr. Brown, of the terms Excitability -- excitability redundant and
excitability exhausted, has thought proper to tender the following definition
as the sense in which he wishes these expressions to be understood.

By excitability is meant that principle of susceptibility inherent in all
animated nature, but more obvious in the animal world, that capacity of being
acted upon by the application of certain external agents or powers designed by
the wise author of nature for the support and continuence of our animal
existence; among which agents or powers are included meat, drink, exercise,
air, mental passions, etc. In short every thing which serves to excite or
quicken the wheels of action in the system. And these agents or exciting powers
are denominated stimulants.

By excitability redundant, is to be understood that irritable week and
infeebled state of the body, induced by a privation or withholding the agency
or aid of the stimulating powers.

By excitability exhausted or wasted is meant that state of the body consequent
to a too free, too strong, or a long continued application in certain cases, of
the stimulating agents whereby the susceptability is overpowered and finally
extinguished.

PREFACE.
VIEWING the ravages the Consumption has made, and is still making among
mankind, and that not with an eye of indifference, and observing, that, benefit
derived from medical aid in such cases, fell much short of what is common in
most other complaints incident to the human frame, I was led to consider
attentively the theory on which the common mode of practice was founded; to
become very inquisitive about the nature of this disease; to search the writing
both ancient and modern of all the authors I could obtain on the subject, and
carefully to examine its progress and operation on such as were affected with
it, whenever opportunity presented. In the course of these researches I
discovered a new mode of practice, (first adopted by Dr. May, and after him
followed by several other gentlemen of the faculty,) attended with very
flattering success. This mode, is by the doctor supported by reasonings,
warranted by experiment and justified by facts, which clearly evince, that the
inflammation heat, etc. in the consumption originate from a source, directly
the reverse of what had hitherto been the prevailing opinion, and point out in
a very striking manner the propriety of his new mode of practice. This
discovery afforded me not a little consolation, and I was encouraged to hope,
that the grating sounds ` If you have got the consumption lay aside your
physician, he will do you more harm than good,' so often pronounced by the
friends of the sick, might in process of time be forever banished from my ears;
but my exultation was very much eclipsed, when I found that some, be the cause
what it might, were still engaged in opposition to what I supposed might be
justly styled, a new and valuable discovery; while others less callous to
conviction, assented to the facts related; but at the same time, either from a
wish to reconcile all parties, or out of respect to the eminency of the
sounders of the former theory, were laboring to establish a variety of the
disease, notwithstanding the identity of effect produced thereby on the human
frame, so incontrovertibly proves the identity of the cause.

Under these circumstances, solicitous for the good of my countrymen and the
honor of the profession (whose merit depends on their usefulness) and persuaded
that every honest attempt to correct error to arrest the progress of disease,
prevent its ravages and ameliorate the condition of mankind would meet with a
candid and favorable reception. I have ventured to write and offer the
following sheets to the perusal of the public, in which I have endeavored to
investigate the nature of the disease, by carefully attending to its
predisposing and proximate causes, and by plain and simple reasoning show the
propriety of the new mode. In the same method, I have endeavored to obviate
such objections as occurred, by showing the mistaken ground of the former
theory and the impropriety of conceiving a variety or diversity of the disease.
In prosecuting this business I found myself compelled, on account of the
recency, plausibility and authority, of the writings of Dr. Rush, to make
several strictures on his arguments, as he, notwithstanding his great
discernment, appears still to be entangled with the old doctrine, and has
offered many things in its favor; not doubting, that instead of taking umbrage
at the freedom, his benevolent mind, will place him among the first to
patronize this feeble effort in quest of useful philosophy, more especially
when he reflects, that such is the condition of mortality, that no genius
however exalted is equal to every thing, that the greatest in their attempts
for useful discovery have often been foiled, while others, whose abilities
would poorly compare, improving on their hints, have compassed that knowledge
which their wiser preceptors had in vain labored to obtain.

Before I dismiss this subject, it is with pleasure I acknowledge my
indebtedness to this great and valuable man for his assiduous attention to all
the phenomena of the sick, both in the disease treated of and every other that
comes within his inspection. The fullest confidence in the accuracy and candor
with which his observations are made has induced me to select such of them as
suited my purpose in preference to my own and to make use of them as the basis
of the following work.

The author considering that the greatness or obscurity of a character by which
a system in any of the sciences is ushered to the world may operate to the
prejudice of further investigation, either by being too implicitly followed in
the one case, or too inconsiderately rejected on the other, has chosen to
withhold his name from the public and leave the fate of his performance to be
decided by its value in the opinion of the candid reader, to whose just
strictures it is respectfully submitted, by one who ardently wishes to
alleviate human misery and increase the happiness of man.

A New Treatise, etc.
I. BY the term CONSUMPTION, or PHTHISIS PULMONALIS is generally understood
that state of indisposition of the human system, wherein the patient is
attended with a constant cough, accompanied with expectoration of purulent
matter from the lungs, hectic fever, colliquative night sweats, general wasting
of the body, and lastly a colliquative diarrhoea accompanied with oedematus
swellings of the lower limbs; after which last appearance life soon closes its
scene. This is a general description of this fatal malady. Some variations
however may be observed perhaps in viewing a variety of cases; yet there will
always be a sufficient number of these leading traits to determine its species.

II. In the following pages I have attempted to investigate its nature in order
to devise some rational plan to obviate its baneful effects on the human
species. It will therefore be necessary for me, Firstly, To enquire, what or
whence its origin? Whether it is generated by a variety of causes, or proceeds
from a simple source. Secondly, What is the nature of the disease or state of
the body producing the phenomena peculiar to it? Whether this state is
different in different subjects, or in other words, are there more species of
the disease than one?

III. Thirdly. If there is a variety, how many, and their causes and nature?

IV. In pursuing my first enquiry it appears to me to lead to sources or powers
whose operations either directly or indirectly conspire to debilitate our whole
system; and far from being that local disease which has been imagined by many.
Yet I think we have just reason to conclude from its effects on the lungs, that
the agency of the powers inducing debility produces a greater diathesis on the
lungs, than on any other given part of the system. This proposition, that it is
a general disease, originating from debility has been so ingeniously treated,
and clearly evinced by the celebrated Dr. Rush, in his 2 vol. medical
enquiries, that I have chosen to quote his view verbatim, as his observations
on this part of the subject so fully coincide with my own sentiments, except
his strict analogy with the disease in question, and pneumoniac inflammation:
in this I must beg leave to differ. He begins by saying, (page 86.)

V. That the Pulmonary Consumption is a disease of debility.

VI. This I infer, 1st, from the remote and exciting causes which produce it.
The remote causes, are pneumony, catarrh, haemoptysis, rheumatism, gout,
asthma, scrophula, nervous and intermitting fevers, measles, repelled humors
from the surface of the body, the veneral disease, obstructed menses, sudden
growth about the age of puberty, grief, and all other debilitating passions of
the mind; hypochondriasis, improper lactation, excessive evacuation of all
kinds, more especially by stool, Sir George Baker relates in the second volume
of the medical transactions, that Dr. Blanchard had informed him that he had
seen the consumption brought on ten persons out of ninety, by excessive purging
used to prepare the body for the smallpox. I have seen a case of consumption
in a youth of 17, from the spitting produced by the intemperate use of segars.


cold and damp air, external violence acting upon the body; Dr. Lind says that
out of 360 patients whom he attended between July 1st, 1758, and July 1st,
1760, in consumptions, the disorder was brought on one fourth of them by falls,
bruises, and strains received a year or two before the disease made its
appearance.


and finally every thing that tends directly or indirectly to impair the vigor
of the system.

VII. The most frequent exciting cause of consumption is the alternate
application of heat and cold to the whole external surface of the body, but all
the remote causes which have been enumerated, operate as exciting causes of
consumption when they act on previous debility. Original injuries of the lungs
seldom induce this disorder except they first induce a debility of the whole
system by a troublesome and obstinate cough.

VIII. 2. From the occupations and habits of persons who are most liable to
this disorder. These are studious men, and mechanics who lead sedentary lives
in confined places; also women, and all persons of irritable habits, whether of
body or mind.

IX. 3. From the period in which persons are most liable to be affected by this
disorder. This is generally between the 18th and 36th year of life, a period in
which the system is liable in a peculiar manner to most diseases which induce
the disorder, and in which indirect debility is oftener produced than in any
other stage of life, by the excessive exercises of the body and mind in the
pursuits of business or pleasure.

X. I have conformed to authors, in fixing the period of consumptions between
the 18th and 36th year of life, but it is well known that it sometimes appears
in children, and frequently in persons beyond the 40th or even 50th year of
life.

XI. II. The pulmonary consumption is a primary disease of the whole system.
This I infer,

XII 1. From the causes which produce it, acting upon the whole system.

XIII 2. From the symptoms of general debility which always precede the
affection of the lungs. These symptoms are a quick pulse, especially toward
evening; a heat and burning in the palms of the hands; faintness, headache,
sickness at stomach, and an occasional diarrhoea. I have frequently observed
each of these symptoms for several months before I have heard of a single
complaint in the breast.

XIV. 3. From the pulmonary consumption alternating with other diseases which
obviously belong to the whole system. I shall briefly mention these diseases.

XV. The rheumatism. I have seen many cases in which this disease and the
consumption have alternately, in different seasons or years, affected the
system. In the winter of 1792, three clinical patients in the Pennsylvania
hospital exemplified by their complaints the truth of this observation. They
were relieved several times of a cough by pains in their limbs, and as often,
the pains in their limbs seemed for a while to promise a cure to their pulmonic
complaints.

XVI. The gout has often been observed to alternate with the pulmonary
consumption especially in persons in the decline of life. Dr. Sydenham
describes a short cough continuing through the whole winter, as a symptom of
gouty habits. A gentleman from Virginia died under my care in the spring of
1788, in the 45th year of his age, with all the symptoms of pulmonary
consumption, which had frequently alternated with pains and a swelling in his
feet.

XVII. The pulmonary consumption has been observed to alternate with madness.
Of this I have seen two instances, in both of which, the cough, and
expectoration were wholly suspended during the continuance of the derangement
of the mind. Dr. Mead mentions a melancholy case of the same kind in a young
lady; and similar cases are to be met with in other authors. In all of them the
disease proved fatal. In one of the cases which came under my notice, the
symptoms of consumption returned before the death of the patient.

XVIII. I have likewise witnessed two cases in which the return of reason after
madness, was suddenly succeeded by a fatal pulmonary consumption. Perhaps the
false hopes, and even the cheerfulness which so universally occur in this
disorder, may be resolved into a morbid state of the mind, produced by a
general derangement of the whole system. So universal are the delusion and
hopes of patients with respect to the nature and issue of this disorder, that I
have never met with but one man, who, upon being asked what was the matter with
him, answered unequivocally, 'that he was in a consumption!'

XIX. Again. Dr. Bennet mentions a case of 'a phthisical patient who was seized
with a violent pain in the teeth for two days, and in whom, during that time,
every symptom of a consumption, except the leanness of the body, altogether
vanished;' and he adds further, 'that a defluxion on the lungs had often been
relieved by salivary evacuations.' Treatise of the nature and cure of
consumptions -- exercitation X.




XX. I have seen several instances in which the pulmonary symptoms have
alternated with headache and dyspepsia; also with pain and noise in one of the
ears. This affection of the ears sometimes continues throughout the whole
disease without any remission of the pulmonary symptoms. I have seen one case
of a discharge of matter from the left ear without being accompanied by either
pain or noise.

XXI. In all our books of medicine are to be found cases of consumption
alternating with eruptions on the skin.

XXII. And who has not seen the pulmonary symptoms alternately relieved, and
reproduced by the appearance or cessation of a diarrhoea, or pains in the
bowels.

XXIII. To these facts I shall only add, under this head, as a proof of the
consumption being a disease of the whole system, that it is always more or less
relieved by the change which is induced in the system by pregnancy.

XXIV. 4. I infer that the pulmonary consumption is a disease of the whole
system from its analogy with several other diseases which, though accompanied
by local affections, are obviously produced by a morbid state of the whole
system.

XXV. The rheumatism, the gout, the measles, smallpox, the different species
of cynanche; all furnish examples of the connections of local affections with a
general disease; but the apoplexy, and the pneumony furnish the most striking
analogies of local affection, succeeding a general disorder of the system in
the pulmonary consumption.

XXVI. The most frequent cause of apoplexy is a general debility of the system,
produced by intemperance in eating and drinking. The phenomenon of the disease
are produced by an effusion of blood or serum, in consequence of a morbid
distention, or of a rupture of the vessels of the brain. The pulmonary
consumption begins and ends in the same way, allowing only for the difference
of situation and structure of the brain and lungs. After the production of
predisposing debility from the action of the remote causes formerly enumerated,
the fluids are determined to the weakest part of the body. Hence effusions of
serum or blood take place in the lungs. When serum is effused, a pituitous or
purulent exporation alone takes place; when blood is discharged, a disease is
produced which has been called haemoptysis. An effusion of blood in the brain,
brought on by the operation of general debility, has been called by Dr.
Hoffman, with equal propriety, haermorrhage of the brain. The effusion of blood
in the lungs in consequence of the rupture of a blood vessel is less fatal than
the same accident when it occurs in the brain, only because the blood in the
former case is more easily discharged from the system. Where no rupture of a
blood vessel is produced, death is nearly as speedy and certain in the one case
as in the other. I have seen two cases of sudden death from hemoptysis. In one
of them there was very little blood discharged through the mouth.


Dissections show many cases of suffocation and death, from the lungs being
preternaturally filled with blood or serum. From this great analogy between the
remote and proximate causes of the two diseases which have been described, I
have taken the liberty to call them both by the name of apoplexy. The only
symptom which does not accord with the derivation of the term, is, that in the
apoplexy of the lungs, the patient does not fall down as if by an external
stroke which is most frequently the case in the apoplexy of the brain.

XXVII. The history of the remote and proximate causes of pneumony will furnish
us with a still more remarkable analogy of the connection between a local
affection, and a general disease of the system. The pneumony is produced by
remote exciting causes, which act on the whole system. The whole arterial
system is frequently agitated by a fever in this disorder before a pain is
perceived in the breast or sides, and this sever generally constitutes the
strength and danger of the disease. The expectoration which terminates the
disorder in health, is always the effect of effusions produced by a general
disease, and even the vomicas, which sometimes succeed a deficiency of bleeding
in this disorder, always depend upon the same general cause. From this view of
the analogy between pneumony and pulmonary consumption, it would seem that the
two diseases differed from each other only by the shorter or longer operation
of the causes which induce them, and by the greater or less violence and
duration of their symptoms. The pneumony appears to be an acute consumption,
and the consumption a chronic pneumony. From the analogy of the pulmonary
consumption, with the diminutive term of certain fevers, I have taken the
liberty of calling it a pneumonicula.

XXVIII. 5. I infer that the pulmonary consumption is a disease of the whole
system, from its existence without ulcers in the lungs. Of this there are many
cases recorded in books of medicine.

XXIX. Dr. Leigh informs us in his natural history of Lancashire, that the
consumption was a very common disease on the sea coast of that country; but
that it was not accompanied either by previous inflammation or ulcers in the
lungs. It was generally attended, he says, by an unusual peevishness of temper.

XXX. 6. And lastly, I infer, that the pulmonary consumption is a disease of
the whole system, from its being relieved, or cured, only by remedies which act
upon the whole system. This will appear, I hope, hereafter, when we come to
treat of the cure of this disorder.

XXXI. Let us now inquire how far the principles I have laid down will apply to
the supposed proximate causes of consumption. These causes have been said to
be; an abscess in the lungs, haemoptysis, tubercles, catarrh, hereditary
dathesis, contagion, and the matter of cutaneous eruptions or sores repelled,
and thrown upon the lungs. I shall make a few observations upon each of them.

XXXII. 1. An abscess in the lungs is generally the consequence of a neglected,
or half cured pneumony. It is seldom fatal, where it is not connected with a
predisposition to consumption from general debility, or where general debility
is not previously induced by the want of appetite, sleep and exercise, which
sometimes accompanies that disorder of the lungs. This explination of the
production of consumption by an abscess in the lungs, will receive further
support from attending to the effects of wounds in the lungs. How seldom are
they followed by pulmonary consumption; and this only because they are as
seldom accompanied by predisposing general debility. I do not recollect a
single instance of this disorder having followed a wound in the lungs, either
by the bayonet, or a bullet, during the late war. The recoveries which have
succeeded such wounds, and frequently under the most unfavorable circumstances,
show how very improbable it is that a much slighter affection of the lungs
should become the cause of a pulmonary consumption.

XXXIII. A British officer, whom I met in the British camp, a few days after
the battle of Brandywine in September, 1777, informed me that the surgeon
general of the royal army had assured him, that out of twenty-four soldiers who
had been admitted into the hospitals, during the campaign of 1776, with wounds
in their lungs, twenty-three of them had recovered. Even primary diseases of
the lungs often exist with peculiar violence, or continue for many years
without inducing a consumption. I have never known but one instance of the
hooping cough ending in consumption, and all our books of medicine contain
records of the asthma continuing for 20 and 30 years without terminating in
that disorder. The reason in both cases, must be ascribed to those two original
disorders of the lungs not being accompanied by general debility. One fact more
will serve to throw still further light upon the subject. Millers are much
afflicted with a cough from floating particles of flour constantly irritating
their lungs and yet they are not more subject to consumption than other
laboring people. Hence `a miller's cough,' is proverbial in some places, to
denote a cough of long continuance without danger.

XXXIV. 2. The haemoptysis is either a local disease, or it is the effect of
general debility of the whole system. When it is local, or when it is the
effect of causes which induce a temporary or acute debility only in the system,
it is seldom followed by consumption. The accidental discharge of blood from
the lungs, from injuries, and from an obstruction of the menses in women, is of
this kind. Many persons are affected by this species of haemorrhage once or
twice in their lives, without suffering any inconvenience from it afterward. I
have met with several cases in which it has occurred for many years every time
the body was exposed to any of the causes which induce sudden, direct, or
indirect debility, and yet no consumption has followed it. The late king of
Prussia informed Dr. Zimmerman that he had been frequently attacked by it
during his seven years war, and yet he lived notwithstandng above twenty years
afterward without any pulmonary complaints. It is only in persons who labor
under chronic debility, that an haemoptysis is necessarily followed by
consumption.

XXXV. 3. I yield to the popular mode of expression when I speak of a
consumption being produced by tubercles. But I maintain that they are the
effects of general debility communicated to the bronchial vessels which cause
them to effuse a preternatural quantity of mucus. This mucus is sometimes
poured into the trachea from whence it is discharged by hawking, more
especially in the morning; for it is effused more copiously during the languid
hours of sleep than in the day time. But this mucus is frequently effused into
the substance of the lungs, where it produces those tumors we call tubercles.
When this occurs, there is either no cough See Med. Com. vol. 2.
or a very dry one. That tubercles are formed in this way, I infer from the
dissections and experiments of Dr. Stark Clinical and Anatomical Observations,
p. 26, 27. See also Morgagni, letter xxii. 21.
who tells us that he found them to consist of inorganic matter that he was
unable to discover any connection between them and the pulmonary vessels, by
means of the microscope or injections, and that they first opened into the
trachea through the bronchial vessels. It is remarkable that the color and
consistence of the matter of which they are composed, is nearly the same as the
matter which is discharged from the trachea, in the moist cough which occurs
from a relaxation of the bronchial vessels.

XXXVI. I am aware that these tumors in the lungs have been ascribed to
scropula. But the frequent occurrence of consumptions in persons in whom no
scrophulous taint existed, is sufficient to refuse this opinion. I have
frequently directed my enquiries after this disorder in consumptive patients,
and have met with very few cases which were produced by it. It is probable that
it may frequently be a predisposing cause of consumption in Great Britain, but
I am sure it is not in the United States of America.

XXXVII. 4. The catarrh is of two kind; acute and chronic, both of which are
connected with general debility, but this debility is most obvious in the
chronic catarrh: hence we find it increased by every thing which acts upon the
whole system, such as cold and damp weather, fatigue, and above all by old age,
and relieved or cured by exercise, and every thing else which invigorates the
whole system. This species of catarrh often continues for twenty or thirty
years without inducing pulmonary consumption, in persons who pursue active
occupations.

XXXIX 5. In the hereditary consumption there is either an hereditary debility
of the whole system, or an hereditary mal-conformation of the breast. In the
latter case, the consumption is the effect of weakness communicated to the
whole system, by the long continuance of difficult respiration, or of such
injuries being done to the lungs as are incompatible with health and life. It
is remarkable, that the consumptive diathesis is more frequently derived from
paternal than maternal ancestors. [The reader will notice that the observations
under figure 6 are here omitted -- the subject of them was wholly on contagion,
the particular quality or power of which can be known only by analogy of
effects, and of course no possitive inference could be drawn from it -- the
author has therefore passed them over as being of no use in his primary design
which is to establish his theory upon known facts.]


XL. 7. I grant that cutaneous humors, and the matter of old sores, when
repelled, or suddenly healed, have in some cases fallen upon the lungs and
produced consumption. But I believe, in every case where this has happened, the
consumption was preceded by general debility, or that it was not induced, until
the whole system had been previously debilitated by a tedious and distressing
cough.

XLI. Since my first question is so fully answered by Dr. Rush, in the
preceding paragraphs, I shall pass to the next in order; viz. What is the
nature of the disease or state of body producing the phenomena peculiar to it,
etc?

XLII. Our surest guide to this discovery is, to take a view of the
predisposing causes and their effects on the human frame. As they all clearly
appear from Dr. Rush's observations, to be powers inducing debility in the
system either by their direct or indirect operation, the inference is plain and
easy; viz. That the derangements we experience in the consumption, by which our
bodies are wasted and finally destroyed is the result of defect of power or
want of energy in the several functions of the system. The answer to the
remaining part of the question is so fully involved in what has been said, that
no further notice need be taken of it: for debility is nothing more, nor less,
nor aside of debility from whatever source it is produced; whither by powers
abstracting from, or adding too much stimulus to the system. While this is the
case no diversity of species can be rationally conceived of.


The last query, viz. How many species and their different causes and natures,
also naturally looses its existence. So that it would now seem that nothing
remained but to devise a proper method to restore the energy of the several
functions, by counteracting the predisposing causes, or in other words, a
proper method of cure.

XLIII. But alas! such is the power of tradition, such the veneration for the
opinions of men of medical fame, that a tonic or sthenic Active -- opposed to
weak and indolent.
inflammatory consumption, is still warmly contended for. Even the great Dr.
Rush, (whose ideas in other respects are worthy the exalted character he
sustains) is upon the list of its supporters. As this opinion has still so many
advocates, some of whom are men of influence, humanity impels me to attempt its
refutation. I shall therefore proceed to examine the several phenomena, etc. on
which they found their arguments; and by a careful and candid investigation
endeavor to show, that by the laws of animal nature there is no foundation in
any of them for such a conclusion.

I shall first take notice of an argument made use of to support the doctrine
of inflammatory or tonic consumption; viz. That debility even though it be
chronic and habitual predisposes to inflammatory diathesis. See Dr. Rush's
medical inquiries, vol. 2, page 116, where speaking of blood letting in the
consumption, he says, It may seem strange to recommend this debilitating remedy
in a disease brought on by debility. Were it proper in this place I could prove
that there is no disease in which bleeding is prescribed, which is not induced
by predisposing debility in common with pulmonary consumption. I shall only
remark here, that in consequence of the exciting cause acting on the system
(rendered extremely excitable by debility) such a morbid and excessive
excitement is produced in the arteries, as to render a diminution of the
stimulus of the blood absolutely necessary to reduce it. This is followed by
two cases to confirm the doctrine, in one of which he bled fifteen times in six
weeks, and the other eight times in two weeks: in the last it is added with
happy effects. But he does not give us any particular statement of these
cases;; so that we may at least conjecture that the Doctor might be mistaken in
giving those cases the appellation of consumption or phthisis pulmonalis. After
reading this paragraph, I turned back to paragraph VII, to see what this
`exciting cause' should be? But on an attentive perusal I could find nothing in
that nor in the predisposing or remote causes. See par. VI, (which the Dr. says
may operate as exciting) which could not produce such an excessive excitement
in the arterial system; nor in fact any (which operate by a direct agency)
except the alternation of heat and cold It must be always confessed that when
the excitability is accumulated by cold, the stimulus of heat acts with
increased force on our system.
. And indeed many of them there enumerated; viz. Grief and other debilitating
passions of the mind, hypochondriasis, improper lactation, excessive evacuation
of all kinds, especially by stool, cold damp air, etc. would lead the mind to a
very different conclusion. But waving this seeming impropriety by supposing we
may mistake the Doctor's meaning (which is very possible) and admit that he
does not mean to confine our attention to the paragraphs alluded to, but to any
strong stimulus or exciting power: yet even in this view another difficulty
will arise of equal magnitude, since we may not hesitate to declare that every
exciting cause or power invariably counteracts debility, and of course is
justly adapted (when properly bounded) to prevent the progress of that chronic
That the debility is of this kind, which brings on or produces the derangements
peculiar to the consumption and is that kind our author means to refer us to in
the passage quoted from the 116th page of his 2d vol. Med. Inquiries -- Is
evident, not only from the general tenor of what we have quoted in the former
part of this work, but clearly so from what is recorded and implied in page 108
of said vol. where speaking of what ought to be done in the predisposition or
first stage, says the remedies in this stage of the disorder are simple and
certain, they consist in a desertion of all the remote and exciting causes of
the disorder, particularly sedentary employments, damp or cold situations and
whatever tends to weaken the system, -- when the disease has not yielded to
this desertion of its remote and exciting causes, I have recommended the cold
bath steel and bark with great advantage -- however improper or even dangerous
these remedies may be after the disease assumes an inflammatory or hectic type.


debility by which the disease is ushured on, and after commenced to retard its
progress. And indeed our authors remark in the 115th page, affords not a little
support to this proposition: where after saying that There are cases in which
patients in a consumption are suddenly snatched away by an attack of pneumony,
he says, I met with one case only in which, contrary to my expectation, the
patient mended after an attack of acute inflammation of the lungs, so as to
live two years. Another fact must equally serve to confirm my proposition,
mentioned by Dr. Rush, and also by Dr. Cullin. The latter says, vol. 2, page
415. The pregnancy of women has often retarded the progress or a phthisis; but
commonly it is only until after delivery when the symptoms of phthisis return
with violence and soon prove fatal. By comparing these states together; viz.
Before and after delivery, the result must be, that the more sthenic powers
there are excited in the system, the more those derangements in consequence of
debility, are obviated. For we observe in pregnancy, that the subject, after
recovering from those complaints peculiar to the first months, to grow fleshy,
and in many instances so sthenic as to require repeated blood letting: but
directly after delivery their cases in general are reversed; first by lochial
evacuation, and afterward by lactation.

XLIV. `Again, our author (Dr. Rush) page 112, when speaking of the analogy
between the pneumonia and consumption, says, The cough in the consumption in
like manner is first dry, attended by a discharge of blood from the lungs which
is more copious than in a pneumany only because the lungs are more relaxed in
the former, than in the latter disorder. This relaxed state of the lungs,
(which according to the Doctor's general proposition, see paragraphs V and XI,
is in common with the rest of the system, (though the diathesis in the lungs is
somewhat the greatest and fully accords with his theory of predisposition,) is
an indisposition, which to remove, reason suggests, that the agency of those
very powers (properly regulated) which naturally generate pneumoniac
inflammation is absolutely necessary; and this is notably confirmed by the two
facts last related in par. XLIII, especially the first, to which may be added
the great benefit patients of this description derive from the use of stimulant
and tonic remedies. This suggestion is further supported by the utility
experienced in that relaxation in the genitals, occasioned by long continued
gonorrheas, by adding cantharides to the medicines usually employed; which,
when given in any considerable quantities do in fact excite inflammation in
those particular parts.

XLV. Besides, we have great reason to doubt, whether an inflammation of any
considerable duration, can exist in such a state of chronic debility; on
account of the weak unstable state of the system in all such cases: much less
to conceive of one of six, or even of two weeks standing. And this doubt is
increased by the Dr. himself in what he says in the volume alluded to, see page
185, where speaking of dropsies he says, It is probable that the same
difference should be observed, between the treatment of dropsies, in warm and
cold climates, that is observed in the treatment of inflammatory fevers. He
then observes, The tonic action probably exists in the system in both climates;
in the former it resembles the tides which are suddenly produced by a shower of
rain, and as suddenly disappear; whereas in the latter, it may be compared to
those tides which are produced by the slow and gradual addition of water from
numerous streams, which continue for days and weeks together to exhibit marks
of violence, in every part of their course. Here a query naturally suggests
itself, whether there is, or can be any difference between a habit debilited by
the powers enumerated in the former part of this work, or one induced by living
in or near the torrid Zone? Whether they will not alike subject the system to
those sudden changes on the application or abstraction of stimuli which form
such a disparity between the latter, and the more permanent habits of the
nothern latitudes?

XLVI. But what could be the complaint for which the Dr. continued to bleed for
six weeks, until he had bled fifteen times? And of the one for which he bled
eight times in two weeks? The latter he speaks of as being `attended with the
happiest effects.' To this I answer. It is highly probable, it was a sthenic
catarrh, and not different from a peripneumony only in degree and duration:
both the consequence of sthenic powers on a sthenic habit. I will not contend
with the Doctor for saying they are always `induced by some predisposing
debility,' if he means by it, nothing more than what he calls acute in
paragraph XXXIV, or the sudden abstraction of stimuli in a permanent or sthenic
habit, by cold or cold damp, etc. We often hear patients of this description
date the origin of their complaints to some such exposure.
as any sthenic or stimulating power, succeeding such an abstraction, acts with
much more energy than if it had not taken place: the abstraction allowing the
excitability to accumulate. And although patients ascribe the origin of their
complaints to such exposure to cold, etc. yet in the narration they give us,
they do not inform us of any symptoms of any consequent disease, until after
they are in a more comfortable situation, or in other words, until after the
application of stimuli; some being taken by the fire side, others in a warm
room, others in a warm bed; and most generally after taking some refreshment as
they call it. And when the stimulus or sthenic power is sudden and
considerable, on such permanent or sthenic habit it is easy to foresee that an
inflammatory pyrexoe, peripneumony, etc. will be the consequence. But if such
stimulus or sthenic power be applied more moderately, by its less violent
operation on such permanent habit it may continue a considerable time (say six
weeks) producing catarrh's, etc. without inducing indirect debility; and
repeated bleeding, in such case be of great utility. On the other hand, reason,
experience and the remarks of the Doctor himself in the passage last quoted all
conspire, to determine what would be the situation of the asthenic Defect of,
or want of energy.
infirm, or chronic debilitated subject, under such alternate exposures.

XLVII. Having finished the disagreeable task of animadverting on the arguments
of so learned and respectable a writer as Dr. Rush, I shall now proceed to
examine some of the principal phenomena, on which the contenders for a tonic
inflammatory consumption found their arguments. These are,

XLVIII. 1st. That copious bleedings, in cases of hoemoptoe's An effusion of
blood from the lungs.
are less frequently followed by pulmoniac complaints than the less profuse.

2d. The occurrence of a hard pulse in the disease.

3d. The expectoration of purulent matter in the disorder, somewhat similar to
that which is raised in the breaking of an ulcer or abscess in the lungs.

4th. The supposed benefit of blood letting, and frequent relief produced by it.

XLIX. In reply to the first; viz. `That copious bleedings, etc. I shall advert
in the first place to the history of those profuse bleedings at the lungs which
take place previous to any pulmoniac complaints. Here we shall find they
generally, if not always happen in consequence of some accident which has
befallen the patient otherwise in health. Dr. Boarhaave, if I rightly remember,
lays much, if not his whole stress on the case of a man who bled profusely on
being violently thrown out of a carriage; who, being much neglected as to any
kind of stimulants, recovered without any pulmoniac complaints. On the other
hand those smaller bleedings we find which are followed by pulmoniac
complaints, generally if not always attend people laboring under chronic
debility.

L. By attending to these remarks, and comparing them with Dr. Rush's
observations, see paragraph XXXIV, we shall be led to conclude that in the
cases of the first description, it was the previous vigor and health of the
subject which preserved the patient from future evil consequences, and that the
wound made of so much consequence in either case could not be worthy our
attention; this is fully evinced, not only from what is there said, but by
adverting to the frequent bleedings at the nose and fauces which take place
without being followed with the slightest traces of inflammation.

LI. Hence the attentive enquirer would be ready to wonder if haemorrhages
under such circumstances are so safe, from whence came the idle whim of
following them with repeated bleedings, which would land the patient in a
chronic debility, a state wherein (to use the Doctors own words,) haemoptysis
is necessarily followed by a consumption, he would likewise be equally
surprised to hear such phaenomina made use of as an argument to support the
idea of an inflammatory or sthenic consumption. Nay he would be naturally led
to consider the latter bleedings (the small or less profuse) as symptoms of the
weak patulus, and irritable state of the vessels, rather than a disease or its
origin; and be confirmed in the opinion when he reflected on the material
benefits experienced from the use of the bark and other tonic remedies to
remove it.

LII. I shall close my dissertation on this head by noticing a clause in Dr.
Barry's treatise on the consumption, published in the year 1727, page 226,
where he gives it as his decided opinion, that the slow small bleedings proceed
from the bronchial arteries. Admitting this to be the case, which from the
peculiar weakness experienced at the breast immediately after such bleedings we
are disposed to believe, we shall readily conjecture why such patients should
be liable to pulmoniac complaints, on account of the debilitating effects, the
loss of blood from this artery must have on the lungs: as it is pretty evident
that from these arteries the lungs derive their entire support, the pulmonary
arteries being destined for another purpose.

LIII. The next subject under consideration is the occurrence of a hard pulse
in consumptive diseases.

It must always appear a paradox in nature to suppose a tonic, or sthenic state
of the arteries, while the rest of the system is wasteing away through debility
or want of energy: but that a hard pulse which has been generally considered as
a pathognomonic sign of sthenic or tonic energy, does sometimes occur in the
consumption we must believe, unless we dispute the veracity of Dr. Rush, even
when the principles of life and animation have nearly ceased. He says in page
111, I have seen two cases in which a hard pulse, and other symptoms of
inflammatory action appeared in the last hours of life. We may easily surmount
this difficulty, by attending to the effects of irritating powers on
debilitated habits, which exhibit that false appearance of strength and vigor
through the system so conspicuously observable on the accession of spasms, or
sudden derangements of the mental functions. I think I may venture to assert,
that I have myself experienced several instances where the phenomena appeared
in the arterial system, in debilitated subjects laboring under spasms or other
strong irritations, even to such a degree as to beget a doubt, whether I had
not mistaken the cause: but on the application of stimulants, the perterbation
subsided and the pulse softened. In this way only I can account for an
expression in the new Edinburgh Dispensatory, where speaking of the effects of
opium Opium is now generally allowed to rank among the highest stimulants.
, it is said the action of the arterial system is diminished, the pulse for the
most part softer, etc. Coincident with the above, I would beg leave to insert
an extract from a paper published in the New London Medical Journal for 1792,
page 33, communicated by Mr. Stringer, Surgeon, Riegate in Surry; which is as
follows.

`RIEGATE, November 31st, 1791.

LIVE. The term inflammation appears to me to admit of a greater extent and
division than is generally allowed. In particular that sufficient stress is not
laid between the inflammatory diathesis of the system, and local inflammation
arising from irritability occasioning spasms.

That inflammation is found to exist in relaxed debilitated habits, excited and
kept up by irritation of some peculiar acrimony, totally contrary and
independent of any inflammatory diathesis, as in scrophula, veneria, etc. will
not be denied: and that pleuritic and peripneumoniac symptoms frequently arise
in debilitated habits from irritations and spasms independent of any general
inflammation, seems to me evident, from particular observations and the success
of a contrary mode of treatment to that generally adopted in the cure of those
diseases.

LV. In a general inflammatory affection, the pathognomoniac symptoms do not
always immediately occur, for in some instances the action of the arterial
system is retarded; giving a week, soft, and sometimes a trembling and
intermitting pulse. In this case, upon opening the vein, the circulation is
raised, the pulse becomes full and hard, the blood sizy, and all symptoms of
true and active inflammation appear. This is frequently the case on the first
attack of an inflammatory fever, arising from the violence of the action
exciting a compression upon the arterial system, this compression being removed
either by natural, or atificial means the symptoms of increased arterial action
become evident.

LVI. On the contrary, the action of the heart and arteries, from some tempory
exciting cause, is frequently increased under circumstances of general debility
in the habit. Pleuritic peripneumoniac, and other inflammatory symptoms, often
taken place under these circumstances, where profuse evacuations, if they do
not occasion immediate mischief, commonly lay a foundation for future evils. I
am afraid there is reason to doubt that the phthisis pulmonalis has been
frequently brought on by to free a use of the lancet, and other evacuants. If
the lungs escape, a terrible train of nervous afflictions is the consequence.

LVII. Venesection is too strenuously insisted on and too frequently repeated
at a time when opiates with or without other antispasmodics, by allaying the
irritation, and spasms (which is often the only remaining cause of inflammatory
symptoms, even after frequent bleedings have been had recourse to) would more
speedily relieve the present symptoms, prevent the ill consequences of too
great a deprivation of the vital fluid, and give room for further observation
on the subsequent treatment of the disease.

LVIII. I have had frequent occasions to observe the good tendency of this
practice, and with difference to superior judgment, cannot help wishing to lay
peculiar stress on the efficacy of anodynes and antispasmodics, in many cases
of thoracic inflammation, a proof that irritation and spasms are frequently the
exciting cause particularly in debilitated habits; even in plethoric habits,
spasms may be only remaining cause of the symptoms still existing as strong as
ever, even after the most liberal use of the lancet, as seems to be evinced by
the following

CASE.
LIX. I was desired to see a man who had hung himself with a handkerchief, and
was a short time after cut down. He appeared to be middle aged, healthy,
muscular and strong. His eyes were fixed, his teeth fast shut, and he foamed at
the mouth like a person dying, from compression, or concussion of the brain,
his pulse hard, strong, and full.

LX. I hesitated not, but for expedition sake, cut off his coat and pierced a
vein in each arm from which his pulse not flagging in the least, about two
pounds of blood were drawn, as nearly as could be ascertained from the
confusion in the place.

LXI. He did not appear to be the least relieved, on the contrary the spasms
became general and it required the strength of several persons to hold him; the
blood flowed from the orifices in the arms at every contraction of the muscles
with violence that could only be equalled by the puncture of a large antery and
could not be restrained either by pressure, bandage, or compress; I began to
think that either some of the vessels in the head had been burst by the
compresion of the handkerchief on the neck, or that considerable injury had
been done to the head from the fall in cutting down, though there was no external
appearance of it.

LXII. The man appearing to be still getting worse, and no prospect of benefit
arising from further bleeding, I was induced to try whether spasms alone might
not be the present cause of derangement in the censorium, for which purpose he
was forced to swallow fifty drops of tincture of opium. This speedily had the
desired effect of lessening the disturbance in the whole system; he grew quiet
and dosed an hour or two, when the convulsions threatening to return, the
opiate was repeated with the same good effects as before, till he took near two
hundred drops in the space of fourteen hours, which in the end threw him into a
sound sleep, and he awoke perfectly in his senses, tho a slight mania attacked
him a few days afterward, which left him by the use of proper evacuations.

LXIII. The expectoration of purulent matter in the disorder, comes next to be
discussed.

This appears to be an argument made use of in favor of a sthenic, inflammatory
consumption, from a supposition that it arises from the same origin as a
vomica, and is considered as an open ulcer of the lungs: hence the idea of
inflammatory and supurative stages of the consumption; conceiving mean time of
no other inflammation but a sthenic or tonic one, and frequent bleedings have
been urged to prevent the second or supurative stage.

LXIV. That this is not the case must appear evident, not only by considering
that all the predisposing causes are such as indicate atonia in the system; but
by reflecting that this is frequently, if not always preceded by an
expectoration of vicid mucus from the glands, or vessels of the lungs, and
sometimes in considerable quantities, plainly indicating, that those vessels,
instead of being in a state of tonic inflammation, are become weak and patulus.

LXV. The last argument I shall notice, which is used to support the idea of an
inflammatory tonic consumption, is `the supposed benefit of blood letting, etc.'

Supposed I call it, for I cannot conceive any foundation for it in nature: for
in cases of pluirisy, peripneumony, etc. where reason and long experience
evince the great utility of blood letting; we find that purging, sweating, and
indeed every evacuation which serves in a measure to empty the vessels, operate
in common with bleeding, to render the pulse slower, abate the thirst, cool the
body, and not only case the distress, but make the patient feel more vigorous,
and approach nearer health. Is this the case in the consumption? Does not
sweating, purging and every other natural evacuation, ultimately quicken the
pulse, increase the thirst and fever? And although they may for the present
abate some distressing symptom, yet the debility (which appears in fact to be
the disease) is felt by the patient to increase; and instead of returning
health, the marks of dissolution are more strikingly painted. That this is the
case I believe every experienced practitioner will admit. The question then
must be, if every other evacuation, which empties the vessels and debilitates
the system, so useful in truly tonic and sthenic cases, is so injurious in the
consumption, why not bleeding also? This idea is further corroborated by
reverting to the effects of pregnancy, (see paragraph XLIII) where we see that
even a natural suppression or cessation of the customary evacuation of the
blood It may be said that the blood taken up to nourish the foetus fully
compensates for the retention of the blood, etc. but if so, why the so frequent
necessity of bleeding in those cases?
has retarded the progress of the disease. I will readily admit that bleeding
frequently affords relief from the spasms, etc. about the breast; and so will a
diarrhoea or pain in the bowels, (see paragraph XXII.) I have myself been
lately a witness of the fatal effects of even a moderate attack of a dyssentery
in the disorder; which did indeed greatly relieve the breast of my patient, but
increased the disease even to a speedy dissolution. That spasms and the pain
and uneasiness resulting from them may give way to any thing that effects any
considerable revolution or diversion in the system, is too evident to need
other testimony than experience. But as a fact, with some observations,
consonant to the foregoing, now lies before me, I shall take the liberty to
insert it. The author speaks as follows. A certain gentleman in his desk,
speaking of the method of curing apilepsy or the falling sickness, and
recommending among other evacuent and otherwise debilitating means, small but
frequently repeated bleedings, unguardedly contradicts himself in his very next
sentence. However, says he, we regular practitioners are liable to be too
cautious and even timid sometimes. For I have known a bold practitioner in the
country, who cured an epilepsy by very profuse bleeding. A few months after the
patient died of a universal dropsy, but the epilepsy never returned. I would
ask this gentleman, what sort of a cure that was, which, converted a disease,
which may come and go for many years, nay even for a long life time into one
that in a very short time proved fatal? What reason would a podagric have to
thank any one, who should convert the gout in him upon any violent attack, into
a fatal dropsy? That sort of treatment is not curing a disease but increasing
it, and even that to death. The convulsive symptoms of an asthenia may pass
away; but the asthenia remains, you may cease to call it epilepsy; but dropsy
still shows that the cause of this disease remains, nay is prodigiously
increased.

LXVI. In making these remarks on bleeding in the consumption, I would not wish
to have them applied to every case of predisposition, since it is evident it is
sometimes ushered on by indirect debilitating powers. In this case, in the
early stage of the predisposition bleeding may be of service by lessening in a
degree the morbid excessive excitement. But this ought to be before that degree
of debility is induced which constitutes the disease; and is never to be
performed after that degree of weakness is induced wherein the excitability
does not readily accumulate upon such abstraction, and the patient, instead of
being thereby weakened, shall feel more vigorous.

LXVII. From the foregoing observations, I think it must appear, that the
theoretical reasonings made use of to reconcile the idea, that chronic debility
is or may be the predisposing proximate or exciting cause of a tonic
inflammatory diathesis; and the inferences drawn from the various phenomena
therein mentioned, are all the product of a misguided imagination and have no
real foundation in nature. And we are after all left to conclude that those
powers which induce debility, produce those derangements, consequent, or
resulting from debility. Hence a rational mode of cure immediately strikes the
mind; viz. The application of stimulant and tonic remedies (properly regulated)
in order to counteract the predisposing causes, and restore the lost vigor and
energy to the system. The justness of this idea is abundantly proved by facts
recorded in medical history, within these few years past, especially since the
ingenious Dr. May has presumed to doubt the rationality of the former theory of
the disease, step aside from the old track of prescriptions and adopt the above
method of cure, (see his papers published in the London Medical Journal, vol.
IX, page 286) the success of his practice has emboldened him and others to
persevere in the same system, and, with the happiest effects. See a paper from
Dr. Percival of Manchester (England) published in Memoirs of London Medical
Society, vol. II. A second paper from Dr. May, published in London Medical
Journal, vol. XI, page 255. One also from Edmond Pitts Gapper, Surgeon at Mere
in Wiltshire, published in said Journal, vol. XI, page 388; and likewise one
from A. Lawrence, published in the New London Medical Journal, vol. II, page
288, all fraught with facts illustrating the utility of such a mode of
practice, to which many more might be added which have occurred in this
country. But as I have neither leisure to collect, nor room to insert them in
the narrow limits I have prescribed to myself, I must necessarily pass them
over and proceed from this general indication, to a more particular method of
cure.

LXVIII. As has been before observed, this disease, or more properly state of
the system may be induced by two very opposite powers; viz. Direct and indirect
debilitating; and although they both terminate in the reduction of the system to
such degree of imbecility as to produce all the phenomena which constitute or
characterise a consumption; some difference of application may however be
necessary, in order to obviate the agency of those powers and restore the
system. I shall therefore divide this part of my subject into two distinct
heads, beginning first with the mode necessary to be observed when the disease
is produced by powers directly debilitating.

LXIX. Before I proceed I would beg leave for the illustration of what is now
before us, to point the reader to an evident law of nature which may be daily
observed, in which both species of debility are strikingly laid open to our
view; and which may not only serve as a clue to the more just application of
remedies, but likewise throw some further light on the preceding part of this
work.

LXX. The law of nature I would here allude to is that debility necessarily
connected with childhood and old age: the first termed direct, the last
indirect. The first for want of continued and gradually increased application
of stimuli, by which the redundant excitability is gradually reduced; the
latter by too long application, by which the natural excitability becomes worn
out, or exhausted; both feeble and irritable In the course of my reading in
medical books, I have more than once seen morbid irritability referred to as
the proximate cause of the derangements in the sick -- a good way of getting a
long where we wish to be esteemed philosophers when we have no better reason to
assign -- but the attentive observer not satisfied with superficial speculation
would be apt to ask whence this morbid irritability -- If we would spend a
little more time in the study of physiology and a good deal more by the bed
sides of our patients it is probable we should not so frequently be compelled
to make such miserable evasive shifts.
in proportion as they (...) from that stage in which exciting powers have
their due effect on the excitability.

LXXI. Although the analogy of childhood weakness will not strictly apply to
chronic debility induced by withholding the ordinary stimulus in persons who
have once acquired a degree of firmness, as in the former, no derangement of
the functions takes place: yet the simularity is notably conspicuous in the
following respects, viz. That they are alike liable to indirect debility from a
too great application of stimuli, and so vice verse. And though they each may
have their excitability daily kept reduced to a healthy standard by stimuli, it
is also evident that by this very means the excitability is constantly
acquiring additional vigor or permanency, requiring stronger and stronger
stimuli to reduce it, until a certain degree of firmness is established which
constitutes manhood in the one, and restored strength and permanency in the
other.

LXXII. The principal agents which effect the foregoing purposes, by keeping
the redundant excitability reduced to a healthy standard, are 1st. Exercise.
2d. Regimen. 3d. Mental Passions. 4th. Pure Air. And 5thly. When these fail,
Medicine.


EXERCISE.
LXXIII. The utility of exercise is made notably evident from facts recorded in
medical history, not only in persons who have voluntarily engaged in it, but in
many who have been compelled of necessity vigorously to use it for a length of
time, both in consumptive complaints, and other derangements from debility. And
not only facts, but the laws of animal nature instruct us that exercise not
only gives excitement to the whole frame, and increases the appetite; but
likewise promotes assimilation and digestion in every part of the system
destined to perform those functions; it increases the action and power of the
vessels in the remote parts of the body, whereby more exerementitious matter is
thrown off through the external and remote vessels The utility of this effect
receives confirmation from paragraph XL.
, and of course the vessels of the lungs are less burdened.

LXXIV. But this like all other stimulating agents, ought to be as exactly
adapted to the state of debility in the patient as possible. It ought to be
vigorous enough on the one hand to produce a sufficient degree of excitement
through the system; to reduce the excitability to a healthy point or standard; to
be increased as strength and permanency increases; for reasons mentioned in
paragraph LXXI. And on the other hand, it ought always to be so carefully
bounded that the patient may endure it most of his waking hours without
endangering indirect debility. The mode of it ought to be so contrived as to
produce less excitement on the lungs, than in any other given part of the
system; for as in this disease the diathesis is greater in them, than in the
rest of the body, it is evident they may more easily be overcome, or thrown
into a state of indirect debility, (hence the impropriety of walking,
especially up hill or up stairs, and speaking long sentences with a raised tone
of voice,) before sufficient excitement is given to the rest of the system.
Besides, the cough (though induced by direct debilitating powers) is every day
more exercise than is any way necessary for the lungs and naturally tends to
increase the diathesis, by adding indirect to direct debility.

REGIMEN.
LXXV. Various articles of diet have been recommended as salutary in
consumptive cases, such as milk from various animals, (which has been extolled
almost as a specific) ripe fruits, such as grapes, oranges, Before we hastily
determine on the specific quality of any article of diet in any particular
complaint, we ought not only to consider the state of the excitability, (of
which hereafter in the text) but the place of residence, sex, age, season of
the year when made use of, habit, and inclination or taste of the subject on
whom the salutary effects are experienced.

Dr. More, in a letter to a friend, published in his travels relates two cases,
who mended much on the use of ripe grapes. The one on whom the fairest trial
was made, being confined to them and bread only for diet, (the other made use
of meat occasionally) was a young woman who resided in Switserland. From her
age, sex, and place of abode, (if I mistake not, but little flesh is eaton in
that country, in comparison to America) we may safely conjecture she had not
been accustomed or habituated to a strong stimulating diet -- the time of her
using this diet was mid summer -- add to this she had a peculiar fondness for
this kind of fruit -- all which taken collectively, would strike the mind very
differently, when applied to an American male in the winter season: with a
total disrelish for such food, we should at once conclude he must famish for
want of support, and not only so, have his calamity increased by the chilling
accesency of the fruit -- whereas in the former we may conceive of sufficient
support not only from what we may conclude was her habit of dieting, from the
custom of the country, but from her age, sex, and peculiar inclination or
taste, (which last would induce her to eat freely and add the agreeable
stimulus of distension, to the other salutary effects) and not only so, the
moderate accesency, at that season of the year would serve to counteract the
over stimulus of heat, and preserve a due equilibrium of excitement in, and
through the system. This last remark, will serve as a general rule, to show us
when, and why oranges are of utility.


etc. have been followed with salutary effects. Others again have been much
benefited by beef steaks, and the strongest and highest stimulating diet.

LXXVI. By taking a retrospective view of the preceding paragraphs, and turning
our attention to the laws by which animal nature is governed, it will require
no great discernment to discover when and how each of these seeming
contradictory modes of dieting, may be salutary in cases of debility. Milk, and
rich subacid sacharine fruits when equal to produce that reduction of the
redundant excitability, to an easy comfortable point; and where any thing
stronger would endanger indirect debility, are no doubt the most proper diet:
but, not because they act as antiphlogisties (as was the ancient term) and
oppose that propensity in the system to sthenic or tonic inflammation or
inflammatory disposition. This is evident, not only from what has been already
adduced to prove that the danger in this disease is from the reverse of such a
state, and that every thing which proves salutary must do it by invigorating,
not debilitating, but also, from the great benefit derived from the use of the
strongest and most durable stimulating diet, such as beef steaks, etc. in those
cases where it can be dispensed with, without producing indirect, debility. And
indeed it ought always to be kept in memory, that where our only expectation of
removing the derangements in the system, is to restore the energy of the
functions; that as in exercise, so in diet and drinks, they ought to be as
stimulating and durable as can be, consistant with the accumulated state of the
excitability, and increased as the power of improving them increases. And here
I would just observe that exercise, besides other valuable purposes, helps us
much in the dispensing with, and improving by such a regimen; and likewise such
regimen increases our ability for exercise. This shows the advantage of uniting
every stimulant to recover a debilitated habit. Before I close this article I
think it my duty to remark the utility of raw eggs, which by experience I have
found to afford much durable nourishment, and to be easily dispensed with even
in a very accumulated state of the excitability. They may be broken into a
glass of wine, or any other convenient vehicle, or beat to pieces with sugar
and a little spirit and water added, as best suits.

MENTAL PASSIONS.
LXXVII. As these are various and have a diversity of effects on the human
system, I shall here notice those only which excite vigor, and of course
counteract debility. These are mirth, joy and resentment. The latter I feel a
disapprobation of; while the former innocent ones, which are so much in the
power of a circle of intimate friends to excite, and have such powerful effects
in all cases of debility, deservedly claim the strictest attention. In a late
conversation with a person on this subject, I was informed of a gentleman,
belonging to a family who had nearly all died of a consumption: and he, had
several times been brought very low by the same symptoms, but had survived, and
now to my knowledge enjoys a tolerable share of health; who to use my
informants expression, `had kept it off by laughing.' He was described as
possessing a fund of good humor, and would himself rekindle the merriment
whenever the company grew dull. But this, as well as all other stimulants,
ought to be kept within discretionary bounds, lest by over action, indirect
debility should be the result.

PURE AIR.
LXXVIII. Whether the doctrine of the particular use or manner in which pure
air proves of such importance to our existence, as alleged by professor
Blumenbach in his physiology be true or not; yet its vivifying effects, as in
faintings, etc. falls within the observation of almost every person: and every
practicing physician must be sensible of the disagreeable consequence of foul
air on patients laboring under any degree of oppression at the breast. These
well known effects render it strikingly necessary, that patients of debilitated
habits particularly in pulmoniac complaints, should pay the strictest attention
to pure air, by avoiding small and close rooms, large assemblies where the air
is rendered noxious by numerous respirations, and also large cities. They ought
to spend their time in an open country, or off a distance at sea, as the mixed
air near the coasts proves deleterious in pulmoniac complaints, which appears
by facts recorded by Dr. Rush. It is proved likewise from experience that warm
climates have frequently proved salutary in consumptive complaints. The natural
stimulus of the heat I would here observe, that where a sufficiently warm air
is not attainable, warm flannel worn next the skin, and comfortable clothing
otherwise may in some measure make amend, for the deficiency.
not only keeps up the energy of the functions in general, but by its
particular operation on the remote vessels, will aid the salutary agency of
exercise in disburdening the lungs, by promoting a more general perspiration.

MEDICINE.
LXXIX. The foregoing powers of exercise, regimen, etc. being the most natural
agents to restore the impaired energy of the system, a seasonable attention to,
and a constant perseverance in them, will generally be easiest, safest and most
efficacious. And when the desired effect can be obtained, and ease, health and
permanency restored by these natural agents, direct medicine can be of no
service, except in casualties. But as in all cases of direct debility, such a
reduction of excitabiliry is so necessary to be kept up, as to procure a steady
and easy performance of every function, in order to promote its increasing
permanency; (see paragraph LXXI) and that state being not always attainable by
the powers enumerated, the kind auxiliary of medical stimulants may be
necessary; and as tone and firmness is so necessary to be acquired before
health can be established, remedies called tonics may have their share of
utility. At the head of the former, stand opium and ether, and among the
latter, are bark, myrrh, elixirvitriol and iron.

LXXX. The discerning practitioner by attending to the foregoing, will easily
determine the object, the time, application, and quantity of these medicaments,
or of less powerful substitutes, as different habits and circumstances shall
require. But opium, although of the greatest utility in this disease, is so
liable to abuse in unskilful hands I feel myself constrained to make some
observations on the use of it. This noble drug appears to take the lead of
every other stimulant, and by its uniform operation over the whole system,
serves by the suddenness of its effects to reduce in a very short time the most
confused derangements (when such derangements are the effect of debility) to a
state of steadiness, tranquillity and ease. In the consumption, it mitigates the
cough, relieves oppression, abates spasms, and promotes expectoration of any
redundancy. But such is the energy of its stimulus that much damage has been
done in cases of chronic debility by over dosing and thereby inducing indirect
debility. As our sole object in this case is to effect that degree of reduction
of excitability wherein we perform our functions with steadiness, ease and
tranquillity, and that the smallest quantity beyond, must prove injurious by
inducing indirect debility; I would recommend to every attending Physician,
when this stimulant is necessary, by careful attendance to learn what is the
smallest dose requisite, and how often repetition may be necessary.

LXXXI. Having thus far taken a brief view of the principal remedies for the
disease when generated by direct debilitating powers; I shall now bestow a few
thoughts on it as induced by the reverse, viz. powers indirectly debilitating.

LXXXII. Chronic indirect debility which happens at the season of life in which
consumptions prevail, differs from that which attends old people in this
respect, in the latter, by long and gradual application of a variety, or in
other words of every stimulant subservient to life and health, the excitability
in every part and every organ is so worn down and decayed, that it looses the
power of any durable excitement, so that no prospect of a restoration can
exist: whereas the former is commonly induced by one kind of stimulus alone,
and although the excitability is over powered, and the system debilitated by the
continued application of one powerful stimulant, yet it is commonly if not
always the case, that in the mean time, less of every other stimulant is
applied than in ordinary healthy cases. Hence we may conceive instead of a
wasted, a rather accumulated excitability, so far as it respects every exciting
power except the one which by its over action has induced the debility.
Consequently by gradually withholding the particular hurtful stimuli, and a
proper application of such stimulants as have had no share in causing the
debility, we may expect the derangements to be removed, and health and vigor
again rekindled.

LXXXIII. The caution given in cases of direct debility not to carry the
effects of stimulants beyond a just degree of excitement, that is, such a
degree as best suits the natural, easy performance of the functions, ought
strictly to be attended to in the present case; and the more diffusable
necessary stimulants ought carefully to be lessened, as the more permanent ones
(such as nearer accord with a state of health) may with safety be introduced.

LXXXIV. The notion of curing chronic indirect debility, by direct debilitating
powers, however proper it may be in its approach, yet when actually induced has
no foundation in nature; for as before observed, debility is debility let the
source of it be what it may, and cannot be removed otherwise than by a proper
application of stimulants. To this, facts abundantly testify.

LXXXV. I shall here finish my remarks for the present by relating in a concise
manner, only a single case recorded in the New London Medical Journal, to
evince my last proposition. A strong man, aged about 42 years who had been too
familiar with spiritous liquors, was seized with a fit resembling an apoplectic
paroxism, upon which a general paralisis speedily supervened, extending in a
short time, over the whole system, rapidly debilitating every function of the
body. After remaining in this situation for seven weeks, and the aggravated
symptoms having almost precluded every prospect of recovery; he was, contrary
to expectation by the application of the highest stimulating and tonic remedies
(brisk purges being occasionally administered) restored in five or six weeks to
perfect health. See Medical Journal, vol. 1st, page 257.

APPENDIX. Containing observations on the duty of Physicians, strictures on the
use of Medicine, etc.
IT is an opinion long imbibed by the vulgar, that diseases are eradicated by
some specific power in medicine which destroys them, or expels them from the
system through some evacuating outlet; hence it is that a cure is expected (if
the right medicine can be but hit on) in a very short time, even in the most
chronical cases. Not so much as dreaming that medicine (evacuents excepted) are
possessed of no power or quality different from the common agents or powers by
which life is constantly upheld and supported, excepting in degree of efficacy;
nor again suspecting that most of the derangements we experience originate from
the too strong or want of due application of those common agents; of course the
most important part of the cure, viz. a due regulation of regimen, exercise,
passions, etc. etc. is entirely overlooked and treated with what may be justly
esteemed a criminal neglect by the patient, especially in diseases which are
ushered on by slow and gradual steps; mean while he will immediately grow
uneasy with his physician, unless he is constantly craming him with some
powerful drug: the natural consequence of which, is, in the first place, the
patient is foreclosed from all the benefit which might be derived from a due
regulation of those very powers or agents which by their undue application
produced the derangements or disease; and of improving their energy in
restoring the several functions of the body to a vigorous performance of all
their offices; the efficacy of which cannot be doubted, but that it must be
great by any man of observation, when he reflects how soon the functions of our
bodies become weakened and deranged by withholding, even in a small degree, the
aid of any of those ordinary powers, The effects of exchanging warm, dry and
serene air for cold, damp and fowl -- the effects of exchanging an easy
pleasing train of ideas and good company for melancholy apprehensions and
irksome companions -- the effects of laying aside a generous regimen and using
one too low and sparing, and the effects of exchanging a proper degree of
exercise for a sedentary life, are too conspicuous to escape the notice of
every man of observation.
nor can it be much doubted, but that their efficacy is equal to all that is
requisite in most cases of the disease in question, especially the more
chronical kind, for the slowness of the progress of the derangements clearly
indicate the hurtful powers not to be great or powerful, destroying only by
continuence.

In the second place, by daily gorging the patient with powerful drugs, he must
be constantly exposed, even if those made use of be of the class of powers
indicated, yet by their over acting beyond what is requisite to counteract the
hurtful powers, (which must ever be the case where a due attention to the non
naturals or common agents is sufficient) the system is suddenly hurried into
the opposite extreme, and neither the debility nor derangements are any how got
the better of, but the reverse. This being so generally the case, it highly
behooves the faculty who are called to prescribe for patients in the disease in
question, as they would be tender of the lives and welfare of their patients
and their own reputation; in the first place, to endeavor to banish those false
notions not only from their patients, but from their attending friends, and by
explaining natures own system to them more clearly, encourage them in a rigid
perseverence in the use of such exercise, regimen, change of air, etc. etc. as
shall be best adapted to their situation; rigid I say: as experience teaches us
that in all cases of long continued debility, not only that, but the consequent
derangements (which derangements as occur particularly in this disease, as
frequent coughing, profuse expectoration, large night sweats, etc. serves to
augment the debility) become habitual, and as it were constitutional, and of
course must require strict attention in avoiding on the one hand, those hurtful
powers by which the debility was induced; and on the other, a careful attention
to the use of all those powers calculated by their constant and gradually
increased application to restore the permanency of the excitability, and recall
the several deranged functions to their several offices, and continued in for a
length of time sufficient to establish a considerable share of strength and
firmness, as it must be rationally supposed, that the patient will much more
readily relaps into all those derangements, peculiar to the disease, by any
neglect of proper support, than if he had never been accustomed to them.

I have dwelt longer, and been more explicit on this particular subject, on
account of the embarrassments well adopted plans are subjected to through the
mistaken notions of the sick; say exercise for an example; how seldom is it put
in practice by the patient to any purpose? Riding on horse back for instance,
when it bids fair to be of utility if attended to a suitable time every day;
the patient perhaps will attend to it two or three times a week, when
convenience serves; and that in general, in such a manner as rather to expose
him, than be of any service.

I wish not to be understood by any thing said, to any how seclude the use of
medicine, even in cases of the most chronical debility; where the natural
agents which cherish and support, life and vigor fail of being adequate (as
before suggested); in such cases their aid is indispensably necessary, and
frequently it may be found of utility not only to make use of medicional
stimulants and tonics, but blistering the parts of the breast, where, by the
pain, etc. we have reason to suspect a more than equal degree of the diathesis;
occasional puking, the patient may be also indicated and other collateral
prescriptions which do not fall immediately under the general indication of
cure. In this place I cannot forbear the recommending to the faculty; the trial
(at least) of the shavings of Jamaica mahogany wood in decoction in cases of
diarrhoea, which frequently occur in this disease; as from some experience I
have had of its use, it appears to me, to be possessed of a stimulant and tonic
power or quality peculiarly adapted to the excitability of the intestinal
canal, and bids fair to be of utility; the way I used it, was to put 1 oz. of
the shavings into a quart of water and boil down to a pint; the dose, 1 oz. of
the decoction three or four times a day.

Again, I would here further observe, that as has been before remarked, `that
the slowness of the progress of the disease indicates weakness of the hurtful
powers;' so vice verse, in proportion to its rapidity of progress, the strength
or increased power of those agents; is indicated, so in like gradations our
attention ought to be aroused to the auxiliary aid of medicine; hence more
medicine and that in larger potions may be requisite in the more quick
consumptions, than the more slow.

END.
The Reader is requested to correct the following Errors.

Page 1, line 5, for pusulent read purulent. P. 16, l. 18, strike out not. P.
24, l. 7, for the read this. P. 26, l. 14, for difference read deference. --,
l. 20, after be insert the. P. 28, l. 16, for vicid read viscid. P. 33, l. 8,
for reduce read recede. P. 36, l. 5 of note, for solutary read salutary.



