MEMOIRS of JAMES LACKINGTON, Who from the humble station of a Journeyman
Shoemaker by great industry, amassed a large fortune, and now lives in a
splendid style, in London.

CONTAINING, Among other curious and facetious Anecdotes, a succinct account of
the Watch-nights, Classes, Bands, Love Feasts, etc. of the Methodists; with
specimens of Mr. WESLEY's and Mr. WHITFIELD's mode of preaching, and the means
made use of by them in propagating their tenets.

WRITTEN BY HIMSELF. Formerly one of the brethren of Mr. WESLEY's Church.

NEWBURGH: PRINTED BY D. DENNISTON, FOR J. FELLOWS, NEW YORK. -- 1796 --

A TRIPLE DEDICATION.
FIRST, TO THE PUBLIC.
"In things indiff'rent Reason bids us choose,
"Whether the whim's a monkey or a muse."
CHURCHILL.
WERE I to address you in the accustomed declamatory strain which has long been
adopted as the universal language of dedications, viz. FLATTERY, I should not
only merit your contempt, for thus endeavoring to impose upon your
understandings, but also render myself ridiculously conspicuous, by a feeble
attempt to perform that, for which, as well by nature as long established
habit, I am totally disqualified.

On the other hand, I should esteem myself equally meriting your censure, as
being guilty of a flagrant species of ingratitude, were I to omit availing
myself of so favorable an opportunity as now presents itself of expressing the
respect and veneration I entertain for you, resulting from the very extensive
and ample encouragement with which you have crowned my indestatigable exertions
to obtain your patronage, by largely contributing to the diffusion of science
and rational entertainment, on such moderate terms as were heretofore unknown.

Permit me to indulge the pleasing hope, that when I assert my mind is deeply
impressed with the most grateful sense of the obligation, I shall be honored
with credit. If this opinion be well founded, to enlarge on the subject were
superfluous -- if otherwise, the strongest arguments, the most splendid and
soreible language could convey, would not ensure conviction; I therefore
desist, fully persuaded that the most satisfactory demonstration I can possibly
exhibit of the sincerity of this declaration, will be, an inviolable adherence
to that uniform line of conduct which has already secured your approbation to a
degree eminent as unprecedented, and which is indeed daily rendered more
evident, by a progressive increase in the number and extent of your commands;
trusting, that so long as you find my practice invariably correspondent to
those professions so frequently exhibited to your notice (from which to deviate
would render me unworthy your protection) you will, in defiance of all
malignant opposition, firmly persevere in the liberal support of him whose
primary ambition it is, and during life shall be, to distinguish himself as,

Your much obliged, And devoted servant, JAMES LACKINGTON.
Chiswell-Street, October, 1791.
DEDICATION.
SECONDLY, To that part of the numerous body of BOOKSELLERS of Great Britain
and Ireland, whose conduct JUSTLY claims the additional title of RESPECTABLE;

Whose candor and liberality he has in numerous instances experienced, and
feels a sensible pleasure in thus publicly acknowledging.

And LASTLY (though not least in Fame) To those sordid and malevolent
BOOKSELLERS, whether they resplendent dwell in stately mansions, or in wretched
huts of dark and grovelling obscurity;

"I Will give every one a smart lash in my way." To whose assiduous and unwearied
labors to injure his reputation with their brethren and the public, he is in a
considerable degree indebted for the confidence reposed in him, and the success
he has been honored with, productive o^ his present prosperity.

THESE MEMOIRS are, with all due discrimination of the respective merits of
each, Inscribed by THE AUTHOR.

PREFACE.
IF among the multitude of memoirs under which the press has gr^^ned, and with
which it still continues to be tortured, the following sheets should afford
some degree of entertainment, as a relaxation from more grave and solid
studies, to an inquisitive and candid reader (those of an opposite description
are not to be pleased with the ablest performance) and he should deem it not
the worst, nor the most expensive among the numerous tribe, I shall esteem
myself amply rewarded; had I, however, been disposed to be more attentive to
entertainment, and less to veracity, I might, to many, have rendered it much
more agreeable, though ^ess satisfactory to myself, as I believe the
observation long since made to be just, that few books are so ill written, but
that something may be gleaned from their perusal.

Should the insignificance of my life induce any person better qualified to
present the world with his, big with interesting events, my disposing of
several large editions of that performance will afford me more solid
satisfaction as a bookseller, than any success or emolument which can possibly
arise from this, my first, and most probably last, essay as an author.

If unfortunately any of my kind readers should find the book so horrid dull
and stupid, that they cannot get through it, or if they do, and wish not to
travel the same road again, I here declare my perfect readiness to supply ^^eat
with abundance of books, much more learned, much more entertaining, much more
^^^tty, much more -- whatever they please, they never shall want books while L.
is able to assist them; and whether they prefer one of his writing, or that of
any other author, he protests he will not be in the smallest degree offended;
let every author make the same declaration if he can.

Should my memoirs be attended with no other benefit to society, they will at
least tend to show what may be effected by a persevering habit of industry, and
in upright conscientious demeanor in trade toward the public, and probably
inspire some one, of perhaps superior abilities, with a laudable ambition, to
emerge from obscurity, by a proper application of those talents with which
Providence has favored him, to his own credit and emolument, as well as the
benefit of the community. To such an one I ever have, and ever shall wish every
possible success, as it has uniformly been my opinion, that whatever is thus
acquired, is more honorable to the parties than the possession of wealth
obtained without any intrinsic merit or exertion, and which is too frequently
consumed with rapidity in the pursuit of vice and dissipation.

One word to my old friends the booksellers under number three of my
dedication. This publication it is to be expected will tend to excite some
degree of mirth in them. Conscious that I have often been the cause (however
unintentional on my part) of exciting less pleasing sensations in them, I will
readily allow them full scope; however, according to the well known adage, "Let
them laugh who win," I hope they will indulge me in the some propensity of
laughing, if not at them, at least with them.

As a proof of my friendly disposition, I shall here add a piece of advice,
which I do not hesitate to pronounce will, if attended to, entitle them to
promotion in my first class of bookselbers, and eventually prove more
beneficial ^t^nn a constant perseverance in the mode of conduct they have
nitherto pursued; and those who have children will, I hope, see the propriety
of inculcating the same doctrine to them for their future benefit; and as I
sratter myselt my ^atwice will prove equally productive of benefit (...) year
numbers of the community at large, as to (...) sellers. It is this: If they
observe any person by industry and application endeavoring to obtain an honest
livelihood in that line for which his talents or disposition have qualified
him, never to attempt, by dark inuendoes, sly hints, and false aspersions, to
injure him, as, if he happens to be a man of a becoming spirit, such conduct
will only tend to increase his exertions, and render him still more cautions to
obtain a good character; in so doing their weapons will recoil on themselves,
and they will have the mortification to see him flourish, whilst they become
objects of contempt in the eyes of the public, and will of course be avoided by
them.

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION.
THAT I might not be justly charged with ingratitude, I take this opportunity
of thanking my friends, customers, and the public, for their candid reception
of my volume; the sale of which, and the encomiums I have received on the
subject, both by letter and otherwise, have far exceeded my most sanguine and
self-flattering expectations.

But, left I should be over vain, I must at the same time declare, that I have
received scurrilous abusive letters from several of Mr. Wesley's people, merely
because I have exposed their ridiculous principles and absurd practices; but
more particularly, for having pulled off the hypocritical veil from some of
those sanctified deceivers which are among them.

The numerous letters of approbation which I have received from rational
intelligent gentlemen, convinces me that I have not wronged the cause of manly
and rational christianity, nor was it ever my intention so to do.

I here also present my compliments and sincere thanks to my impartial friends,
under the second class of my dedication, for the friendly disposition they have
shows, in freely distributing my Memoirs among their customers and they may be
assured, that I will not let slip any opportunity of making them proper returns
for all their favors.

VERSES Occasioned by reading The Memoirs of JAMES LACKINGTON.
SINCE your Pen, Friend Unknown, such improvement conveys,
It Is but justive to you that this Trib^^e repays;
For as dear as the Light to the thoughts of the Blind.
Is the Pen, or the Voice, that enlighten the Mind;
And the more, as from Nature and Genius untaught
Your various adventures and humor are brought,
Which display all the farce of the Methodist Plan,
The shame of Religion, of reason, and Man;
While no Libertine Motives their Secrets dispense,
But Propriety joins hand-in-hand with good Sense.
Oh! with thee, could the Crowd view each sanctified scene,
Where the Hypocrite often wears Simplicity's mein;
Where youth, second-childhood, and weakness of Sex,
Are objects they ever prefer to perplex i
Like thee, they would contem^, or indignantly leave,
Whom Folly, and Knav'ry, combine to deceive;
And whose Newgate-Conversions blasphemously paint
The Wretch most depraved, the most excellent Saint.
Go on; and discover each latent design,
And your rivals expose, who against Learning combine:
Over such craft shall fair conduct, like thine, still prevail,
And an envied success lay them low in the Scale.
But an Time is too short all your steps to retrace,
Let your LIFE speak the rest, and succeed in their place:
How Books mend the manners; and now so abound,
Where Rudeness and Ignorance lately were found.
But plain Truth, for itself, it must still be confessed,
Is the faithfullest advocate -- therefore the best:
So I rise from the Feast with a satis^ed mind,
That the same every Taste, and eath Temper, may find,
Still, to drop all comparison, Mentals the fare,
That needs only good-taste to invie us to share;
Entertainment and Knowledge, the objects in view;
Then receive, as the Donor, the Praise' that is due.
C. H -- S.
BURY ST. EDMUND --
MEMOIRS OF J. LACKINGTON.
LETTER I.
DEAR FRIEND,
YOU have often requested me to devote what few leisure moments I could spare,
in minuting down some of the principal occurrences of my life, with a view,
sooner or later, of exhibiting the account to the public eye; who, as you were
pleased to say, could not but be somewhat curious to learn some well
authenticated particulars of a man, well known to have risen from an obscure
origin to a degree of notice, and to a participation of the favor of the
Public, in a particular line of business, I may without vanity say, hitherto
unprecedented. This will appear more conspicuous if you consider, that I was
not only poor, but labored under every other disadvantage.

Ever willing to pay a becoming deference to the judgment of a person of your
acknowledged merits, and whom I have the felicity of numbering among my firmest
friends. yet being less anxious to appear as an adventurer among the numerous
tribe of authors, than to continue a considerable vender of the produce of
their labors, I have continually delayed complying with your kind wishes.

I should probably have still delayed compil^ng my narrative, if the editors of
a certain periodical publication, who monthly labor to be witty, had not
deemed me of sufficient consequence to introduce into their work, what they are
pleased to call a Portrait of me! and though it was by them intended as a
caricatura, yet I am persuaded it will appear to those who best know me, as a
daubing more characteristic of the heavy brush of a manufacturer of signs, than
the delicate pencil of a true portrait-painter; and on that account I should
most certainly have considered it as unworthy notice, had they not daubed me
with false features. This at once determined my w^^^^ing resolution, and I am
now sully resolved to minute down-such particulars of my pasinge through lise,
as, though not ^d^^^^d ^i^h an elegance of style, will, I assure you, possess
what to you, I flatter myself, will be a greater recommendation, viz. a strict
adherence to truth. And though no doubt you will meet with some occurrences in
which you may find cause for censure, yet I hope others will present
themselves, which your candor will induce you to commend. Should you be able
to afford the whole a patient perusal and think the account meriting the public
eye, I shall cheerfully submit to your decision, convinced that you will not,
"With mean complacence ever betray your trust,
"Nor be so civil as to prove unjust."


John Dunton, a brother Bibliopole, long since exhibited a whole volume of
dullness, which he called his "Life and errors." -- The latter term I believe
might be a very proper appendage to the title page of the innumerable lives
which have been, and which will be published: For what man will dare to say of
himself, his life has not been loaded with errors? That mine has been such, I
readily acknowledge; and should this narrative be published, many perhaps may
deem that act another (possibly the greatest) error. To those I shall only
observe, that "to err is human, to forgive divine."

And of you, for the present, after informing you, my next shall contain a
faithful account of particulars relative to the early part of my life, with
assuring you that I am, etc.

LETTER II.
"Why should my birth keep down my mounting Spirit?
"Are not all creatures subject unto time;
"To time, who does abuse the world,
"And sills it full of hotch-podge bastardy?
"There Is legions now of beggars on the Earth,
"That their original did spring from Kings;
"And many monarchs now, whose fathers were
"The riff-raff of their age; for time and fortune
"Wears out a noble train to beggary;
"And from the dunghill millions do advance
"To state; and mark, in this admiring world
"This is the course, which in the name of sat
"Is seen as often as it whirls about;
"The river Thames that by our door does run,
"His first beginning is but small and shallow,
"Yet keeping on his course grows to a sea."
Shakespeare's Cromwell.
DEAR FRIEND,
IN my last I hinted that I should consine myself to a plain narrative of
facts, unembellished with the meretricious aid of lofty figures, or
representations of things which never had existence, but in the brain of the
author. I shall therefore not trouble you with a history of predictions which
foretold the future greatness of your humble servant, nor with a minute account
of the aspects of the planets at the very auspicious and important crisis when
first I inhaled the air of this bustling orb; for, extraordinary as it may
appear, it has never yet occurred to me, that any of the adepts in the
astrological science have made a calculation of my nativity; it is probable this
high honor is by the planets destined to adorn the sublime lucubrations of the
very ingenious Mr. SIRLEY, in the next edition of his stup -- endous work! And
here for the honor of the crast let me remark, that this most subline genius,
has with myself to boast (and who would not boast of their genealogy in having
a prince for their ancestor?) in being a Son of the renowned PRINCE CRISPIN.

A volume has been written with the title of "The Honor of the Tailors; or the
History of Sir JOHN HAWKWOOD." But were any learned writer to undertake -- The
honor of the Shoemakers or the history of --, how insignificant a figure would
the poor Tailors make, when compared with the honorable craft!

"Cobblers from Crispin boast their Public Spirit,
"And all are upright downright men of merit."
Should I live to see as many editions of my Memoirs published, as there have
been of the Pilgrim's Progress, I may be induced to present the world with a
Folio on that important subject.

But to begin -- Were I inclined to pride myself in genealogical descent, I
might here boast that the family were originally settled at White Lackington,
in Somersetshire, which obtained its name from one of my famous ancestors, and
give you a long detail of their grandeur, etc. but having as little leisure as
inclination to boast of what if true would add nothing to my merits, I shall
for the prefent only say. that I was born at Wellington in Somersetshire, on
the 31st of August, (old style) 1746. My father George I ackington was a
Journcyman Shoemaker, who had incurred the displeasure of my grandfather for
marrying my mother, whose maiden name was Joan Trott. She was the d^ughter of a
poor weaver in Wellington; a good honest man, whose end was remarkable, though
not very fortunate; in the road between Taunton and Wellington he was found
drowned in a ditch where the water scarcely covered his face: He was, it is
conjectured,

" -- Drunk when he died."
This happened some years before the marriage of my Father and Mother.

My grandfather George Lackington had been a Gentleman Farmer at Langford, a
village two miles from Wellington, and acquired a pretty confiderable proper^y.
-- But my father's mother dying when my father was but about thirteen years of
age, my grandfather who had two daughters, bound my father apprentice to a Mr.
Hordly, a master shoemaker in Wellington, with an intention of setting him up
in that business at the expiration of his time. But my father worked a year or
two as a journeyman and, then displeased his father by marrying a woman without
a shilling, of a mean family and who supported herself by spinning of wool into
yarn, so that my mother was delivered of your friend and humble servant, her
firstborn, and hope of the family, in my grandmother Trott's poor cottage; and
that good old woman carried me privately to church unknewn to my father who was
(nominally) a Quaker, that being the religion of his ancestors.

About the year 1750 my father having three or four children, and my mother
proving an excellent wife, my grandfather's resentment had nearly subsided, so
that he supplied him with money to open a shop for himself. But that which was
intended to be of very great service to him and his family, eventually proved
extremely unfortunate to himself and them: for as soon as he found he was more
at ease in his circurnstances, he contracted a fatal habit of drinking, and of
course his business was neglected; so that after several fruitless attempts of
my grandfather to keep him in trade, he was, partly by a very large family but
more by his habitual drunkenness, reduced to his old state of a journeyman
shoemaker: Yet so infatuated was he with the love of liquor, that the endearing
ties of husband and father could not restrain him; by which baneful habit
himself and family were involved in the extremest poverty.

"To mortal men great ^space^ be;
"But of all packs, no pack ^space^"
(...) So that neither myself, my Brothers or Sisters are indebted to a Father
searcely for any thing that can endear his memory, or cause us to reflect on
him with pleasure.

"Children, the blind effects of love and chance
"Bear from their birth the impression of a Slave.
DRYDEN. My father and mother might have said with Middleton, "How adverse runs
the destiny of some creatures!
"Some only can get riches and no children,
"We only can get children and no riches;
"Then (...) the prudent part to check our will,
"And, till our state rise, make our blood stand still.


But to our mother we arei ndebted for every thing. "She was a woman take her
for all in all, I shall not look upon her like again." Never did I know or hear
of a woman who worked and lived so hard as she did to support eleven children;
and were I to relate the particulars it would not gain credit. I shall only
observe, that for many years together, she worked generally nineteen or twenty
hours out of every twenty-four; even when very near her time, sometimes at one
hour she was seen walking backwards and forwards by her Spinning-wh^el, and her
midwife sent for the next.

Out of love to her family she totally abstained from every kind of Liquor,
water excepted, her food was chiefly broth, (little better than water and
oatmeal) turnips. potatoes, cabbage, carrots, etc. her children fared something
better, but not much, as you may well suppose. When I reflect on the
astonishing hardships and sufferings of so worthy a woman, and her helpless
infants, I find myself ready to curso the husband and father that could thus
involve them in such a deplorable seen of misery and distress. It is dreadsul
to add, that his habitual drunkenness shortened his days nearly one half, and
that about twenty years fince he died. unregretted by his own children; nay
more while nature shed tears over his grave, reason was thanksul that the cause
of their poverty and misery was taken our of their way. Read this, ye inhuman
parents, and shudder! Was a law made to banish all such fathers, would it not
be a just, nay even a mild law?

Here, sir, permit me to drop so gloomy a subject, and again subseribe myself,
etc.

LETTER III.
"Some venial trailties you may well forgive"
FRANCIS's Horace.
DEAR FRIEND,
AS I was the eldest, and my father for the first few years a careful
hard-working man, I fared something better than my brothers and sisters. I was
put for two or three years to a day-school kept by an old woman: and well
remember how proud I used to be to see several ancient dames lift up their
hands and eyes with astonishment, while I repeated by memory several chapters
out of the New Testament, concluding me from this specimen to be a prodigy of
Science. But my career of learning was soon at an end, when my mother became so
poor that she could not afford the mighty sum of twopence per week for my
schooling. Besides I was obliged to supply the place of a nurse to several of
my brothers and sisters. The consequence of which was, that what little I had
learned was presently forgot; instead of learning to read, etc. it very early
became my chief delight to excel in all kinds of boyish mischiefs; and I soon
arrived to be the captain and leader of all the boys in the neighborhood.

I was about ten years of age, when a man began to cry apple-pies about the
streets, I took great notice of his methods of selling his pies, and thought I
could do it much better than him. I communicated to a neighboring baker my
thoughts on the subject in such a manner as gave him a very good opinion of my
abilities for a pie merchant, and he prevailed on my father to let me live with
him. My manner of crying pies, and my activity in selling them, soon made me
the favorite of all sac^^ as purchased halspenny apple-pies, and halspenny
plumb-puddings, so that in a few weeks the old pie-merchant shut up his shop. I
lived with this baker about twelve or fifteen months, in which time I fold such
large quantities of pies, puddings cakes, etc. that be often declared to his
friends, in my hearing that I had been the means of extricating him from the
embarrassing circumstances in which he was known to be involved prior to my
entering his service.

During the time I continued with this baker, many complaints were repeatedly
made against me for the childish follies I had been guilty of, such as throwing
snow-balls, frightening people by slinging serpents and crackers into their
houses, etc. I also happened one day to overturn my master's son a child about
four years old whom I had been driving in a wheel-barrow. Dreading the
consequences I immediately slew from my master's house and not knowing what
else to do I went home to my suber, who you may easily concei^e, could not
a^^^rd to keep me idle, so I was soon set down by his side to learn his own
trade; and I continued with him several years, working when he worked, and
while he was keeping Saint Monday, I was with boys of my own age fighting,
cudgel-playing, wrestling, etc. etc.

LETTER IV.
"Who gather round, and wonder at the tale
"Of horrid apparition, tall and ghastly,
"That walks at dead of night, or takes his stand,
"Over some new-open'd grave: and (strange "to tell!)
"Evanishes at crowing of the cock."
BLAIR'S Grave.
DEAR FRIEND,
I Must not forget an odd adventure that happened when I was about twelve years
of age.

I had one day walked with my father to Holywell lake, a village two miles from
Wellington, where meeting with some good ale, he could not sind in his heart to
part from it until lato at night. When we were returning home by the way of
Rock-well-Green, (commonly called Regue-Green from a gang of ^obbe^s and
housebreakers who formerly lived there) having just passed the bridge, we were
met by several men and women, who appeared to be very much frightened, being in
great agitation. They informed us that they were returning back to Rogue-Green,
in order to sleep there that night, having been prevented from going home to
Wellington by a dreadful Apparition, which they had all seen in the hollow way,
about a quarter of a mile distant; adding, that a person having been murdered
there formerly, the ghost had walked ever since; that they had never before
paid much attention to the wellknown report; but now they were obliged to
crediti, having had ocular demonstration. My father had drank too large a
quantity of ale to be much afraid of any thing, and I (who could not let slip
such an opportunity of showing my courage) seconded matters for the poor
terrified people to return with is; and as I offered to lead the van, they were
prevailed on to make the attempt once nore; but said, that it was rather
presumptuous, and hoped that no dreadful confequence would ensue, as all the
company, they trusted, were honest-hearted, and intended no harm to any person;
they moreover added, that "God certainly was above the Devil." I then advanced,
and kept bebefore the company about fifty yards,

"Whistling aloud to bear my courage up."
But when we had walked about a quarte of a mile, I saw at some distance before
u in the hedge, the dreadful apparition that had so terrified our company. Here
it is! (said I "Lord have mercy upon us!" replied some of me company, making a
full stop; and woold have gone back, but shame prevented them. I still kept my
distance before, and called out to them to follow me, assuring them that I was
determined to fee what it was. They then fell one behind another, and advanced
in single files. As I proceeded I too was seized with a timid apprehension, but
durst not own it; still heeping on before, although I perceived my hair to
heave my hat from my head, and my teeth to chatter in my mouth. In fact I was
greatly agitated at what I saw; the object much resembled the human figure as
to shape but the size was prodigious. However I had promised to see what it
was, and for that purpose I obstinately ventured on about thirty yards from the
place, where I first had sight of it. I then perceived that it was only a very
short tree, whose limbs had been newly cut off, the doing of which had made it
much resemble a giant. I then called to the company, and informed them with a
hearty laugh, that they had been frightened at the stump of a tree.

This story caused excellent diversion for a long time afterward in
Wellington, and I was mentioned as an hero.

The pleasure and satisfaction I received from the discovery, and the honor I
acquired for the courage I possessed in making it, has, I believe, had much
influence on me ever after; as I cannot recollect that in any one instance I
have ever observed the leaft fear of apparitions, spirits, etc. since.

"What education did at first receive,
"Our ripened age confirms us to believe."
POMFRET. While I am on this subject, I cannot resist the temptation of
relating a truly ridiculous affair that happened about this time at Taunton.

In the workhouse belonging to the parish of St. James, there lived a young
woman who was an idiot. This poor creature had a gr^^^ aversion to sleeping in
a bed, and at bedtime would often run away to a field in the neighborhood,
called the Priory, where she slept in the cowsheds.

In order to break her of this bad custom, two men agreed to try if they could
not frighten her out of it. And one night, when they knew that she was (...)
took a white sheet with them, and (...) to the place, one of the men concealed
himself to see the event while the other wrapped himself up in the sheet, and
walked backwards and forwards close before the cowshed in which she lay. It was
some time before Molly paid any attention to the apparition; but at last up she
got. "Aha! (said she) a white devil!" and by her manner of expressing herself
she thought it was very strange to see a white devil. And soon after she
exclaimed, "A black devil, too! a black devil, too!" With that the man who had
the sheet on, looked over his shoulder, and saw (or imagined he saw) a person
all over black behind him; the sight of which made him take to his heels. Molly
then clapped her hands as fast as she could, crying out at the same time, "Run,
black devil, and catch white devil! Run, black devil, and catch white devil!"
and was highly diverted. But this proved a serious adventure to the white
devil, as he expired within a few minutes after he had reached his own house;
and from that time poor Molly was left alone to sleep in peace.

About ten years after the above affair, at Wivelscombe, nine miles from
Taunton, a gentleman farmer's house was alarmed every night between twelve and
one o'clock. The chamber doors were thrown open, the bedclothes pulled off the
beds, and the kitchen furniture thrown with violence about the kitchen, to the
great terror of the family, insomuch that the servants gave their master and
mistress warning to leave their places, and some of them actually quitted their
service. This dreadful affair had lasted about six weeks, when a young
gentleman who was there on a visit, being in bed one night, at the usual hour
he heard his chamber door thrown open, and a very odd noise about his room. He
was at first frightened; but the noise continuing a long time, he became calm,
and laid still, revolving in his mind what he had best do. When on a sudden he
heard the spirit creep under his bed, which was immediately lifted up, etc.
This convinced him that there was some substance in the spirit; on which he
leaped cut of bed, s^cared the door, and with his ^^ken staff belabored the
ghost under the bed as hard as he could, until he heard a female voice
imploring mercy. On that he opened his chamber door, and called aloud for a
light. The family all got up as fast as possible, and came to his room. He then
informed them that he had got the spirit under the bed; on hearing which, most
of them were terribly frightened, and would have run off faster than they came,
but he assured them, they had nothing to fear; then out he dragged the
half-murdered spirit from its scene of action. But how great was their surprise
and shame, when they discovered that this tormenting devil was no other than
one of their servant girls about sixteen years of age, who had been confined to
her bed several months by illness.

This ghost was no sooner laid, than two others alarmed the neighborhood; one
of which for a long time shook a house every night, and terribly distressed the
family; at length they all resolved one night to go over the whole house in a
body, and see what it was that so agitated the building. They examined every
room, but in vain, as no cause could be discovered. So they very seriously as
well as unanimously concluded, that it must be the devil.

But about a fortnight after this, one of the family being out late in the
garden, saw a great boy get in at the window of an old house next door (part of
which was in ruins), and soon after the house began to shake as usual, on which
the family went out of their own habitation, and entered the old house where
the boy was seen to get in; yet for a long time they could not discover any
person, and were just turning to come out again, when one of the company
observed the boy suspended above their heads, striding over the end of a large
beam that ran across both houses.

It was then apparent that the violent agitation of the adjoining house was
occasioned by nothing more than his leaping up and down on the unsupported end
of this beam.

Another apparition had for a long time stolen many geese, turkeys, etc. and
although it had been seen by many, yet nobody would venture to go near it, until
at length one person a little wiser than the rest of his neighbors, seeing the
famous apparition all over white stealing his fowls, was determined to be fully
satisfied what kind of spirit it could be that had so great a predilection for
poultry. He accordingly went round the yard, and as the apparition was coming
over the wall, he knocked it down. This terrible ghost then proved to be a
neighboring woman, who had put on her shroud in order to deter any persons
should they by chance see her, from coming near her. --. Thus, though she had
for a long time successfully practiced this ingenious way of procuring poultry,
the old fox was caught at last.

This is so prolific a subject, that I could fill many pages with relations of
dreadful specter, which for a while have reigned with tyrannic sway over weak
minds, and at length when calm Reason was suffered to assume its power, have
been discovered to be no more objects of terror than those I have here noticed.
But doubtless many such instances must have occurred to you.

It has indeed often astonished me, that in this enlightened age there should
yet remain numbers, not in the country only, but even in the metropolis, who
suffer themselves to be made miserable by vain fears of pre^ernatural
occurrences, which generally owe their origin to the knavery of some
illdisp^^ed person, who has a sinister purpose to answer thereby, or to the
foolish desire of alarming the minds of weak people; a practice sometimes
(though intended as fun) productive of very serious consequences. Now and then,
indeed, these terrors are owing to accidental and ridiculous causes. As an
instance, I shall give you an account of a terrible alarm which some years
since took place in an Hospital of this city, as related to me by a gentleman,
who at the time resided in the house, for the purpose of completing his medical
education, and on whose veracity I can confidently rely.

For several nights successively a noise had been heard in the lower part of
the building, like the continual tapping against a window, which led the night
nurses wisely to conclude it must certainly be occasioned by the Spirit of one
of the bodies deposited in the dead-house endeavoring to escape; the sound
seeming to proceed from that partic^lar quarter. The dread of these fogacious
ladies at last became such, as totally to prevent their going from ward to ward
to^do their duty, and determined my friend to attempt to lay this perturbed
spirit; which however he apprehended would mo^e ^^^dily, as well as effectually
be perfor^^^^^ (...) the astistance of a good cudgel, than by ^^^orcisins; he
therefore, instead of con^^^^^ the Chaplain, gave orders the next (...) soon as
the usual dreadful sound was he (...), to give him notice. This you may suppose
they did not neglect doing, though at the same time they were shocked at his
temerity, and apprehensive for the consequences. -- Impressed with an idea of
the alarm being occasioned by some servant or patient in the house, he
immediately sallied forth, with a candle in one hand, and a good tough twig in
the other, accompanied by two of the men servants of the Hospital, accountred
in the same manner, resolved that if detected the party should meet with an
ample reward. The dead-house was passed; the noise continued; though it
evidently proceeded from a window at some distance in the area -- When the
cavalcade came near the scene of action, the window suddenly and violently
broke, without any thing being seen. This my friend confessed, for a moment
occasioned his making a halt; but as nothing visible ha^ escaped through the
area, it occurred to him something might have made an entrance that ^^^y;
accordingly he proceeded to the intornit part of the building, and on opening
the door, the apparition immediately not only appeared but disappeared, and
that so instantaneously as not to afford time to apply the remedy intended. And
what think you, was this dreadful spirit? That you may exercise your ingenuity
at guessing, I will here conclude.

LETTER V.
" -- Were thy education never so mean,
"Having thy limbs, a thousand sair courses
"O^^er themselves to thy election.
BEN JOHSON'S livery Man in his Humor.
"Laugh if you are wife."
MARTIAL.
DEAR FRIEND,
A CAT -- An odd beginning of a Letter. by the bye -- but here highly important
and proper, as tending to relieve you from the anxious thoughts which, (no
doubt) must have filled your mind on the subject of the concluding part of my
former letter. I must give you one laughable instance more, which lately
h^ppened. Mr. Higley, the bookseller famous for selling odd volumes or broken
sets of books, lived next door to a public-house in Russell-court, Drury Lane;
this public-house was separated from his habitation only by a slight wainscot
partition, through which Mr. Higley caused an hole to be cut and a slider put
over it, so that when he wanted (...) beer, he always drew back the slider and
had it handed to him through this convenient aperture.

The night after Mr. Highley's death, which happened a few months since, the
man who was left to take care of the corpse, about tw^lve o'clock hearing the
landlord and his family going up stairs to their beds, on a sudden drew back
the slider and hallood through the hola "Bring me a pint of beer." This order
the ^^ndlord and his family heard, and were ter^^^ly ala^^eed, as they really
thought it had proceeded from the ghost of their neighbor Higley; the poor
maid let fall the warming-pan, which came tumbling down the stairs; the
landlady being within the reach of her husband's legs, caught fast hold of
them, which in his fright he mistook for poor Higley. But the man burs;ting
into a hearty laugh, restored the spirits of our host and his family.

Having now, I dare say, had enough of Ghoste^^, I will proceed with my
narration.

(...) time that I lived with the (...) became so celebrated for selling (...)
number of pies, puddings, etc. that (...) years following, application was
(...) my father, for him to permit me to (...) Almanacks a few market days
before and after Christmas. In this employ I took great delight, the country
people being highly pleased with me, and purchasing a great number of my
Almanacks, which excited envy in the itinerant venders of Moore, Wing, Poor
Robin, etc. to such a degree, that my father often expressed his anxiety lest
they should some way or other do me a mischief. But I had not the least
concern, for possessing a light pair of heels, I always kept at a proper
distance.

O, my friend, little did I imagine at that time, that I should ever excite the
same poor mean spirit in many of the booksellers of London and other places!

I was fourteen years and a half old when I went with my father to work at
Taunton, seven miles from Wellington. We had been there about a fortnight, when
my father informed our master, George Bowden, that he would return to
Wellington again. Mr. Bowden was then pleased to inform my father that he had
taken a liking to me, and proposed taking me apprentice; I seconded Mr.
Bowden's motion (having a better prospect in continuing with him (...) ^^^^^ing
to Wellington with my (...)) as be offered to take me without any (...), and to
find me in every thing. My father accepted his offer, and I was immediately
bound apprentice for seven years to M^^ George and Mrs. Mary Bowden, as honest
and worthy a couple as ever carried on a trade.

"Religious, punctual, frugal, and so forth:
"Their word would pass for more than they were worth."
POPE. They carefully attended to their shop six days in the week, and on the
seventh went with their family twice to an anabaptist meeting; where little
attention was paid to speculative doctrines; but where sound morality was
constantly inculcated.

"For modes of faith let graceless zealots fight,
"His cannot be wrong whose life is in the right."
But in this, as in many other places of worship, it was performed in a dull
spiritless manner; so that the excellent morality taught there was not so much
attended to as it would have been had it been enforced, or re ^^foreed by the
captivating powers of oratory.

I well remember, that although I constantly ^^tended this place, it was a year
or two before I took the least notice of the fermon, which was read; nor had I
any ^dea that I had the least concern in what the minister was (as it is called)
preaching about. For, "Who a cold, dull, lifeless drawling keeps,
"One half his audience laughs, whilst the other slceps.
"Sermons, like plays, some please us at the ear,
"But never will a serious reading bear;
"Some in the closet edify enough,
"That from the pulpit seemed but sorry sluff.
"'It Is thus there are who by ill reading spoil
"Young's pointed sense, or Atterbury's style!
"While others, by the force of eloquence,
"Make that seem fine, which scarce is common "sense.
"But some will preach without the least pretense
"To virtue, learning, art, or eloquence.
"Why not? you cry: they plainly see, no doubt;
"A priest may grow right reverend without."
Art of Preaching.

LETTER VI.
"Youth is the stock whence grafted superstition
"Shoots with unbounded vigor."
MILLER'S M^^^^^^
DEAR FRIEND,
AT the time that I was bound apprentice, my master had two sons, the eldest
about seventeen years old, the youngest fourteen. The eldest had just been
baptized, and introduced as a member of the arianistical dipping community
where my master and his family attended. The boy was a very sober industrious
youth, and gave his father and mother much pleasure. The youngest was also a
good lad. Thus every thing continued well for some time aster I had been added
to the family. Both of the boys had very good natural parts, and had learned to
read, write, keep accounts, etc. But they had been at schools where no variety
of books had been introduced, so that all they had read was the Bible. My
master's whole library con^sted of a school-size Bible, Watts's Psalms and
Hymns, Foot's Tract on Baptism, Culpepper's Herbal, the History of the Gentle
Grast, an old imperiect volume of Receipts in Physic, Surgery, etc. and the
Ready Reckoner. The ideas of the family were as (...) ribed as their library.
My master (...) ^ttention to business and working hard, "minding the main
chance." On Sunday (...) went to meeting; my master on that day (...) short
grace before dinner, and the boys read a sew chapters in the Bible took a walk
for an hour or two, then read a chapter or two more.

"What right, what trao, what fit we justly call,
"And this was all our care -- for this is all."
We then supped, and went early to bed, perfectly satisfied with having done
our duty; and each having a quiet conscience, soon sell into the arms of
"Nature's son nurse! swee steep."

I cannot here omit mentioning a very si^gular (...) of my master's: Every
moning at all se^sons of the year, and in all weathers, he rose about three
o'clock, took a walk by the riverside round Frenchware-sields, stopped at an
alehouse that was early open to drink half a pint of ale, came back before six
o'clock, then called up his people to work, and went to bed again about seven.

Thus was the good man's family jogging easily and quietly on, no one doubting
but he should go to heaven when he died, and every one hoping it would be a
good while first.

"A man should be religious, not superstitious."

But alas! the dreadful crisis was at hand that put an end to the happiness and
peace of this little family. I had been an apprentice about twelve or fifteen
months, when my master's eldest son George happened to go and hear a sermon by
one of Mr. Wesley's preachers, who had left the plough-tail to preach the pure
and unadulterated Gospel of Christ. Ey this sermon the fallow ground of poor
George's heart was ploughed up, he was now persuaded that the innocent and good
life he had led would only sink him deeper into hell: in short he found out
that he had never been converted, and of course was in a state of damnation,
without benefit of Clergy. But he did not long continue in this damnable state,
but soon became one of " -- The sanctified band,
"Who all holy mysteries well-understand."
SIMPKIN.

He persuaded himself that he had passed through the New ^irth, and was quite
sure that his nume was registered in the Book of Life, and (to the great grief
of his parents) he was in r^^lity become a new creature.

"It Was (...) grace that made him toss "and (...),
"Which in his entrails did like jollup rumble."
OVID'S Epist. Burlesqued. George had no sooner made things sure for himself,
than he began to extend his con^^^n to his father, mother, brother, and me; and
very kindly gave us to understand, that he was sure we were in a very
deplorable state, "without hope, and without God in the world," being under the
curse of the Law. In the long winter nights, as we sat at work together, he
proved (in his way) that every man had original sin enough to damn a thousand
souls; and a deal was said on that subject: Quotations were made from some deep
author who had asserted, that there were "infants in hell but a span long;" and
that "hell was paved with infant sculls," etc. As to Morality, George assured
us it was of no avail; that as for good works, they were only splendid sins;
and that in the best good work that any creature could perform, there was sin
enough to sink the doer to the nethermost hell, that it was faith alone that
did every thing, without a grain of morality; but that no man could have one
particle of this mysterious faith, before he was juftified; and that
jus^isication was a sudden operation on the soul, by which the most execrable
wretch that ever lived might instantaneously be assured of all his sins being
pardoned; that his body (...) that very moment became the living temple of the
Holy Ghost; that he had fellowship with the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; and
that Spirit was to be their constant and infallible guide.

My master very seldom heard any of these conversations, but my good mistress
would sit down for hours together, with her Bible in her lap, from which she
would read such scriptures as proved the necessity of living a good life,
performing good works, etc. she also did her best to consute the t^^^ts of
Original sin. Imputed righteousness. doctrine of the Trinity, etc. etc.
Unfortunately the good woman had no great talents for controversy; however
Coorge had a very tenacious memory, and ca^^loyed all his thoughts on these
subjects, so that John his younger brother, and I also (two competent judges no
doubt) thought that he had the best of the argu^^^^ on these edifying subjects,
and about five months after George's conversion, John w^nt to hear those only
true Ambassadors from Heaven, "Who stroll and teach from town to town
"The good old (...) which some believe
"To be the devil that tempted Eve
"With knowledge, and do still invite
"The world (...) ^^^chief with new light."
BUTLER.

These devil-dodgers happened to be so very ^^^^^ful (that is very noisy) that
they soon sent John home, crying out, he should be damned! he should be damned
forever!

But John soon got out of the damnable state, and assured us that all his sins
were forgiven, merely by believing that he had passed from death into life, and
had union and communion with God. He now became as merry as before he had been
sorrowful, and sung in Mr. Wesley's strain, "Not a doubt shall arise
"To darken the skies,
"Nor hide for a moment my God from my Eyes."


John sung to me, and said to me a deal in this wonderful strain, of which I
did not comprehend one syllable.

" -- His words were loose
"As heaps of sand, and scattered wide from sense
"So high he mounted in his airy throne,
"That when the wind had got into his head,
"It turned his brains to frenzy.
But these extraordinary accounts and discourses, together with the
controversiea between the mother and the sons, made me think they knew many
matters of which I was totally ignorant. This created in me a defire for
knowledge, that I might know who was right and who was wrong. But to my great
mortification, I could not read. I knew most of the letters, and a few easy
words, and I set about learning with all my might. My mistress would sometimes
instruct me; and having three half pence per week allowed me by my mother, this
money I gave to John (my master's youngest son) and for every three half pence
he taught me to spell one hour; this was done in the dark, as we were not
allowed a candle after we were sent up stairs to bed.

I soon made a little progress in reading; in the mean time I also went to the
Methodist meeting. There, as "enthusiasm is the child of melancholy," I caught
the infection. The first that I heard was one Thomas Bryant. known in Taunton
by the name of the damnation preacher; (he had just lest off cobbling soles of
another kind.) His sermon frightened me moft terribly. I soon after went to
hear an old Scotchman, and he assured his congregation, that they would be
damned, and double damned, and treble damned, and (...) ^rever, if they died
without (...) faith.

Thi^ (...) ^octrine and noisy rant and enth^^^^^^ (...) ^orked on my passions,
and made (...) ^^^^^ve myself to be really in the damm^^^^ ^^^^ion that they
represented; and in (...) ^^^^erable state I continued for about a (...)
^^being all that time unable a work (...) up to the proper key.

(...) ^ining and repeating enthusia^^^ (...) hymns, and ignorantly apply^^^
ourticular texts of scripture, I got my imagination to the proper pitch, and
thus was I born again in an instant, became a very great favorite of heaven,
had angels to attend all my steps, and was as familiar with the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, as any old woman in Mr. Wesley's connection; which by the bye,
is saying a great deal.

LETTER VII.
"No sleep, no peace, no rest
"Their wandering and afflicted minds ^ossess'd;
"Upon their souls and eyes
"Hell and eternal horror lies,
"Unusual shapes and images,
"Dark pictures and resemblances
"Of things to come, and of the worlds below,
"Over their distempered sancies go:
"Sometimes they curse, sometimes they pray unto
"The gods above the god^ ^^^^th;
"No sleep, but waking now (...) death.
(...) ^^RAT.
DEAR FRIEND,
IT is per^^^^ worth remarking, that what the methodists wall conviction of
sin, being awakened, etc. is often a most dreadful state, and has the v^^^ same
effect on such as have lived a very innocent life as it has upon the most
notorious offenders; this conviction (as they call it) is brought about by the
preachers heaping all the curses in the Bible on the heads of the most virtuous
as well as most vicious; for, say they, he who keeps the whole law and
offends but in one point, is as much in a state of damnation, as he that has
broken every one of the commandments, or commitied robbery, murder, etc. so
that they pour out every awsul denunciation sound in the Bible, and many not
sound there, against all who have not the methodistical faith: this they call
shaking the people over the mouth of hell.

Thus are many who before possessed "consiences void of offense toward God and
ma^^^^d" tricked out of their peace of mind, by the ignorant application of
texts of scripture. Their fears being once so dreadfully la^^ed, they often
become insupportable to themselves and all around them; many in this state have
put a period to their existence, others run mad, etc.

If the above terror of conscience was only to take place in knaves and
rascals, there would be no reason for blaming the methodists on that head; "the
wretch deserves the hell he feels."

But the case is otherwise amongst the methodists, they work on the fears of
the most virtuous; youth and innocence fall victims daily before their threats
of hell and damnation, and the poor seeble minded, instead of being comforted
and encouraged are often by them sunk into an irrecoverable state of gloomy
despondence and horrible despair.

It is true that many of their hearers are not only methodistically convinced,
or alarmed, but are also hocus pocusly converted; but with thousands that is
not the case, even with those who join their society, where so much of divine
love, assurance, and ecstasies are talked of, where enthusiastic, rapturous,
intoxicating hymns are sung, and befides the unhappy mortals in their own
community, thousands there are who have loll their peace of mind by
occasionally hearing their sermons.

And even those among (...) have arrived to the highest pitch of enthusiasm,
and who at times talk of their soretaste of heaven, and of their full assurance
of ^in^ forgiven, and of talking to the Deity as sumiliarly as they will to one
another; (all which, and much more, I have heard a thousand times) yet even
those very pretended savorites of heaven are (if we believe themselves)
miserable for the greatest part of their time, having doubts, fears, horrors of
mind, etc. continually haunting them wherever they are. Between twenty and
thirty years since some thousands of them in London took it into their heads
that the world would be at an end on such a night, and for some days previous
to this fatal night, nothing was attended to but fasting and praying, and when
it came, they made a watch-night of it, and spent it in prayer, etc. expecting
every moment to be the last; and it is remarkable, that thousands who were not
methodists gave credit to this ridiculous prophecy, and were terribly alarmed;
but the next morning they were ashamed to look at one another, and many durst
not appear in their shops for some time afterward. But others of them said
that God had heard the prayers of the righteous, and so spared the world a
little longer. Some years after that Mr. Wesley alarmed his people all over
England with the tail of a comet; great numbers were dreadfully apprehensive
lest this comet should scorch the carth to a cinder; but the saints by prayer
made the comet keep a proper distance.

Charnock, of the last century, in his discourse on Providence, has proved (in
his way) that the universe was created and kept agoing for the sake of the
elect, and that as soon as their number is complete, the whole will be
destroyed.

The fanatics in every age have found their account in making their followers
believe the end of the world was at hand. In some of the wills and deeds by
which estates have been given to monasteries, etc. in France, they have
expressed their belief of the world's being nearly at an end, as a reason for
making such liberal donations to the church. -- But it is happy for us that in
England such wills would be set aside. A case of this nature occurred while
Lord Northington was at the head of the law department. Reilly the preacher,
had whedled, or frightened, an old woman (Mrs. Norton) out of a deed of gist of
fisty pounds per year, but after the old woman's panic and fear of damnation
was over, she had recourse to Chancery and his Lordship annulled the deed of
gist. His Lordship's remarks on such kinds of imposition are very curious, and
worth your reading. See Collectanea Juridica, vol. 1. p. 458.

In fact, the very best of the methodists are like children, elated or
depressed by mere trisles; and many who joined them while young and ignorant,
quit their society as they attain to years of discretion, or as their judgment
is better informed.

LETTER VIII.
"Religion's luster is by native innocence
"Divinely fair, pure, and simple from all arts;
"You daub and dress her like a common mistress,
"The harlot of your sancies; and by adoing;
"False beauties, which she wants not, make the "world
"Suspect her angel sace is soul within."
ROWE'S Tamerlane.
DEAR FRIEND,
THE enthusiastic notions which I had imbibed, and the desire I had to be
talking about religious mysteries, etc. answered one valuable purpose; as it
caused me to embrace every opportunity to learn to read, so that I could soon
read the easy parts of the Bible, Mr. Wesley's Hymns, etc. and every leisure
minute was so employed.

In the winter I was obliged to attend my work from six in the morning until
ten at night. In the summer half year, I only worked as long as we could sce
without candle; but notwithstanding the close attention I was obliged to pay to
my trade, yet for a long time I read ten chapters in the Bible every day; I
also read and learned many hymns, and as soon as I could procure some of Mr.
Wesley's Tracts, Sermons, etc. I read them also; many of them I perused in
Cloacina's Temple, (the place where my Lord Chesterfield advised his son to
read the classics, but I did not apply them after reading to the farther use
that his Lordship hints at.)

I had such good eyes, that I often read by the light of the Moon, as my master
would never permit me to take a candle into my room and that prohibition I
looked upon as a kind of persecution, but I always comforted myself with the
thoughts of my being a dear child of God; and as such, that it was impossible
for me to escape persecution from the children of the devil, which epithets I
very piously applied to my good master and mistress. And so ignorantly and
imprudently zealous (being a r^al methodist) was I for the good of their
precious souls, as sometimes to give them broad hints of it, and of the
dangerous state they were in. Their pious good old minister, the Reverend Mr.
Harrison, I called "a blind leader of the blind;" and I more than once assured
my mistress, that both he and his whole stock were in a state of damnation
being "strangers to the hope of Israel, and without God in the world." My good
mistress wifely thought that a good stick was the best way of arguing with such
an ignorant infatuated boy as I was, and had often recourse to it; but I took
care to give her a deal of trouble; for whenever I was ordered in my turn to
read in the Bible, I always selected such chapters as I thought militated
against Arians, Socinians, etc. and such verses as I deemed savorable to the
doctrine of Orgined Sin, Justification by Faith, imputed Righteousness, the
doctrine of the Trinity, etc. On such parts I always placed a particular
emphasis, which puzzled and teazed the old lady a good deal.

Among other places I thought (having so been taught by the methodists) that
the sixteenth chapter of Ezekiel very much favored the doctrines of original
sin, imputed Righteousness, etc. that chapter I often selected and read to her,
and she as often read the eighteenth chapter of the same prophecy, for the sake
of the parable of the Father's eating sour grapes.

Whenever I read in St. Paul's Epistles on Justification by faith alone, my
good mistress would read in the Epistle of St. James, such passages as say that
a man is not justified by faith alone, but by faith and works, which often
embarrassed me not a Jittle. However I comforted myself with the conceit of
having more texts of Scripture on my side of the question than she had on her
side. As to St. James, I was almost ready to conclude, that he was not quite
orthodox, and so at last I did not much mind what he said.

" -- False opinions rooted in the mind,
"Hoodwink the soul and keep our reason blind.
"In controverted points can reason sway,
"When passion or conceit hurries us away?"
Hitherto I had not frequented the methodist meetings by the consent or
knowledge of my master and mistress; nor had my zeal been so great as to make
me openly violate their commands. But as my zeal increased much faster than my
knowledge I soon disregarded their orders, and without hesitation ran away to
hear a methodistical sermon as often as I could find opportunity. One Sunday
morning at eight o'clock my mistress seeing ^her sons set off, and knowing that
they were gone to a methodist meeting, determined to prevent me from doing the
same by locking the door, which she accordingly did; on which in a
superstitious mood. I opened the Bible for direction what to do (ignorant
methodists often practice the same superstitious method) and the first words I
read were these, "He has given his angels charge concerning thee, lest at any
time tho^ should dash thy foot against a stone." This was enough for me; so
without a moments hesitation, I ran up two pair of stairs to my own room, and
out of the window I leaped, to the great terror of my poor mistress. I got up
immediately, and ran about two or three hundred yards, toward the
meeting house; but alas! I could run no farther; my feet and ancles were most
intolerably bruised, so that I was obliged to be carried back and put to bed;
and it was more than a month before I recovered the use of my limbs. I was
ignorant enough to think that the Lord had not used me very well, and resolved
not to put so much trust in him for the future.

This my rash adventure made a great noise in the town, and was talked of many
miles round. Some sew admired my amazing strength of faith, but the major part
pitied me, as a poor ignorant, deluded and infatuated boy.

LETTER IX.
"One makes the rugged paths so smooth and even,
"None but an ill-bred man can miss of heaven.
"Another quits his stockings, breeches, shirt,
"Because he fancies virtue dwells in dirt;
"While all concur to take away the stress,
"From weightier points, and lay it on the less."
Stillingsleet on Conversation. "'Gad I Have a thriving traffic in my eye,
"Near the mad mansions of Moorfields I Will bawl;
"Friends, fathers, mothers, sisters, sons and all,
"Shut up your shops, and listen to my call.
FOOT.
DEAR FRIEND,
IN the fourth year of my apprenticeship my master died; now although he was a
good husband, a good father, and a good master, etc. yet as he had not the
methodistical faith, and could not pronounce the Shibboleth of that sect, I
piously feared that he was gone to hell.

My mistress thought that his death was hastened by his uneasy reslections on
the bad behavior of his sons after they commenced methodists, as before they
were converted each was dutiful and attended to his trade, but after they
became saints they attended so much to their spiritual concerns that they acted
as though they supposed they were to be fed and clothed by miracles, like Mr.
Huntingdon, who informs us in his book called "The Bank of Faith," that the
Lord sent him a pair of breeches, that a dog brought him mutton to eat, fish
died at night in a pond on purpose to be eaten by him in the morning; money,
and in short every thing he could desire he obtained by prayer. Thus as foot
says, "With labor, toil, all second means dispense,
"And live a rentcharge upon providence."


To give you a better idea of methodistical ignorance and neglect of ordinary
means of living, etc. I will relate one instance more. Mary Hubbard (an old
woman of Mr. Wesley's society) would often wash her linen, hang it out to dry,
and go away to work in the fields, or to Taunton market, four miles from her
house; and when blamed, she would answer "that the Lord watched over her, and
all that she had, and that he would prevent any person from stealing her two
old smocks, or if he permitted them to be stolen he would send her two new in
their stead." And I seriously assure you, sir, that there are many thousand
Mary Hubbards amongst the methodists.

As I had been bound to my mistress as well as my master, I was of course an
apprentice still. But after my master's death I obtained more liberty of
conscience (as I called it) so that I not only went to hear the meth did
sermons, but was also admitted into their society; and I believe they never had
a more devou^ enthusiastical member; for several years I regularly attended
every sermon and all their private meetings.

As you are probably unacquainted with the nature of these private meetings, a
short account of them may perhaps afford you some amusement.

The late Mr. Wesley instituted amongst his people, besides the public
preachings, several kinds of private meetings; and as the prayer-meeting is the
least private of any of them, I will sirst take notice of that.

To the prayer-meetings, which were in general held in private houses, they
often invited people who were not of their society. An hymn was first sung,
then they all knelt, and the first person who felt a motion made an extemporary
prayer; when he had done another began, and so on, for about two hours.

But it so happened sometimes, that one of the brethren began to pray without
having the gist of prayer (as they call it) and then he often stuck fast, like
some of the young orators at Coach ker's Hall, etc. Prayer-meetings were held
in such high esteem amongst them that they asserted, more were "born again",
and more " made free from all the remains of sin," or in other words of their
own, "made perfect as God is perfect" in these kinds of meeting, than at public
preaching, etc. Thus, as Pomsret says,

"The spirit heated will strange things produce."
But it is impossible for you, my friend, to form any just idea of these
assemblies, except you had been present at them: one wheedles and coaxes the
Divine Being, in his addresses; another is amorous and luscious; and a third so
rude and commanding, he will even tell the Deity that he must be a liar if he
does not grant all they ask. In this manner will they work up one another's
imaginations until they may actually be said to be in a state of intoxication,
and whilst in this intoxicated state, it often happens that some of them
recollect a text of scripture, such as "thy sins are forgiven thee," or "go and
sin no more," etc. and then they declare themselves to be born again, or to be
sanctified, etc.

They have another kind of private meeting after the public preaching on Sunday
evenings, in which the preacher meets all the members of the society, who stay
behind after the general congregation is dismissed. To this society the
preacher gave such advice as he deemed better suited to a godly few than to a
promiscuous multidue of " outvard court worshippers."

Their love-feast is also a private meeting of as many members of the community
as please to attend; and they generally come from all parts within several
miles of the place where love feasts are held.

When all are met they alternately sing and pray; and such amongst them as
think that their experience (as they call it) is remarkable, stand up in their
place and relate all the transactions between God, the devil, and their souls.
At such seasons as this I have heard many of them declare they had just
received the pardon of all their sins while Brother such-a-one was in prayer;
another would then get up and assert that he was jost at that instant made
perfectly free from sin.

At these times the spirit is supposed to be very powerfully at work amongst
them; and such an unison of sighing and groaning succeeds, that you would think
they had all lost their senses. In this frantic state, many apply to themselves
such texts of scripture as happen to come into their heads.

In the love-feast they have buns to ca^, which are mutually broken between
each brother and sister, and they have also water to drink, which they hand
from one to another. These meetings begin about seven o'clock, and last until
nine, or ten.

In London, Bristol, and other large places, they have some private meetings,
unknown to the community at large. These meetings consist of all married men at
one time, young and ummarried men at another time, the married women by
themselves, and the single women by themselves; and to each of these classes
Mr. Wesley went, and gave such advice or exhortations as he thought suitable to
their situation in life, seldom failing to speak much in praise of celibacy, to
the Maids and Bachelors under his pastoral care. I will in my next give you an
account of their watch-nights, class-meetings, bands, and other particulars.

LETTER X.
" -- Here Gamaliel sage
"Trains up his babes of grace, instructed well
"In all the -- discipline of prayer;
"To point the holy leer: by just degrees
"To close the twinkling eye; expand the palms,
"To expose the whites, and with the sight less balls
"To glare upon the crowd: to rise, to sink
"The docile voice; now murmuring sost and slow,
"With inward accent calm, and then again,
"In foaming floods of rapturous eloquence
"Let loose the storm, and thunder through the nose
"The threatened vengeance."
SOMERVILLE.
DEAR FRIEND,
THE Watch-night begins about seven o'clock. They sing hymns, pray, preach,
sing, and pray again; then exhort, sing and pray alternately, until twelve
o'clock. The hymns which they sing on those nights, were wrote for such
occasions, and abound with gloomy ideas, which are increased by the time of
night; and it must be remarked, that the major part of those who attend these
nocturnal meetings having fasted the whole of the day (according to Mr.
Wesley's orders) are in a very proper state of mind to entertain the most
extravagant whims or enthusiastic notions that can possibly enter the heads of
any visionaries. So that such nights are often very prolific, as numbers are
said to be born again, and become the temples of the Holy Ghost on
watch-nights, which makes those nights esteemed by them.

Mr. Wesley, in every place where his people were numerous, had divided them
into classes, consisting of twelve or fourteen brothers or sisters. Sometimes
men and women met together in the same class (as they called it) and other
classes consisted of all men or all women. Each of these classes had one in it
who was called the leader. In such classes where men and women met together,
the leader was always a brother: and so of course when the class consisted of
men alone. But in the women's classes a sister was always the leader.

When they met together, the leader first gave out an hymn, which they all
sang; after the hymn they all knelt, and their leader made an extemporary
prayer; after which they were seated, and when the leader had informed them of
the state of his own mind, he enquired of all present, one after another, how
they found the state of their souls. Some he found were full of faith and
assurance, others had dreadful doubts and fears; some had horrid temptations;
others complained of a lukewarm state, etc. In these meetings some of the
members spoke of themselves, as though they were as pure as angels are in
heaven, but with the generality of them, it was far otherwise, and nothing was
more common among them than to hear the major part exclaiming against
themselves, and declaring that they were the most vile and abandoned wretches
on this side hell, that they wondered why the earth did not open and swallow
them up alive. But they generally added, that "the blood of Christ cleanses
from all sin," and that "where sin abounded there would grace much more
abound." Indeed it was easy to remark that the reason why they painted
themselves in such odious colous, was only to boast of an astonishing quantity
of grace that God had bestowed on them, in thus pardoning all their
abominations and numbering them with the household of faith, who ought to have
been shut up in the nethermost hell. To each of these the leader gave a word of
comfort, or of correction in the best manner he was able. They then sang and
prayed again. This lasted about one hour. And every one in Mr. Wesley's
connection did, or was expected to meet, each in his own class once in a week.
In these classes each made a weekly contribution toward the general support of
the preachers, etc. Such as were very poor contributed a penny per week, others
twopence, and some who could afford it, sixpence. This money was entered in a
book kept for that purpose, and one in every class called the steward, had the
care of the cash.

I now come to speak of the Bands, which consisted only of justified persons;
that is such as had received the assurance of their sins being pardoned. In the
classes, both the awakened (as they call them) and the justified, and even
those that we e made perfect met all together, as did the married and the
single, and often men and women. but none were admitted into any band but such
as were at least in a justified state, and the married of each sex met by
themselves, and the single by themselves. About ten was the number generally
put in one band; all these must belong to and meet in some class, once a week,
when not hindered by sickness etc. and they were also to meet weekly in their
band. When met, they first sung, then made a short prayer; that done, the
band-leader informed them of the state of his mind during the last week, etc.
He then made enquiry into the state of all present, and each related what had
passed since they last met; and what visitations they had received from God,
what temptations from the devil, the slesh, etc. And it is a maxim amongst them
that exposing to one another what the devil has particularly tempted them to
commit, will make the old fellow more careful how he tempts, when he knows that
all his secrets will be told the next meeting. In the classes they only
confessed in general terms, that they have been tempted by the world, the flesh
and the devil. But in the bands they confessed the particular fins which they
had been tempted to commit, or had actually committed.

The last time I met in band was in London, where an old man (near seventy
years of age) informed us that he had for several weeks together labored under
a very grievous temptation of the devil, who all this time had been constantly
tempting him to commit adultery; he farther informed us, that having let too
much of his house to lodgers, they were obliged to put the maid's bed in the
room where he and his wife slept; and that one morning he had seen the maid
lying asleep, nearly or quite uncovered, and he again assured us that ever
since that time the devil had been every day tempting him to do that which was
naught with the maid. I could not help thinking the old gentleman was right in
charging it on the devil, as there was little reason to think it was any
temptation of the flesh. Permit me to add, that this old buck had a wise about
half his own age. I have been informed that some young men of the brotherhood,
have at times disguised themselves in women's clothes, and have so got into the
women's bands; it may be very curious to hear the confessions of the holy
sisters. By this time I suppose you have had enought of band meetings.

Mr. Wesley instituted another kind of private meeting for the highest order of
his people, called the select bands; to which none were admitted but such as
were sanctified, or made perfect in love, and freed from all the remains of
fin. But as I never prosessed perfection, I was not permitted to enter into
this holy of holies. But I have known a great number of these perfect saints,
of both sexes; and I also lived in the same house a whole year with one of
these entire holy sisters. A few days before I came to live in Chiswell-street,
one of these perfect sisters was detected in stealing coals out of the shed of
one of the sanctified biothers, but she, like the old fellow above mentioned
said it was the devil that tempted her to do it.

Four times every year new tickets are distributed to all Mr. Wesley's people
throughout the three kingdoms. Their ticket is a very sinall slip of paper,
with a text of scrip ure on it, which is exchanged every quarter for some other
text. Such as are only in a class, have a different text from such as are in a
band, so that no one can be admitted into a general meeting of the bands,
appointed by any of the preach ers when he intends to give them an exhortation,
nor into any particular band, by a common society ticket. On the common tickets
are such texts as these: "Now is the accepted time." -- " Awake thou that
sleep," and such like. But those for the band; are in a higher strain; as,
"Be ye persect as your heavenly father is perfect." "Go on unto perfection," --
"Ye are children of the light." -- "Your bodies are temples of the Holy Ghost;"
and other texts of a similar tendency. For these tickets, each poor person paid
one shilling, such as were rich paid more; indeed the money seemed to be the
principal end of issuing tickets, at least in country places, the members in
the community being so well known to each other, that they scarce ever showed
their tickets in order to gain admittance. I forgot to inform you that
prayer-meetings, class-meetings, band-meetings, etc. were in general held in
private houses, belonging to some of the brethren.

LETTER XI.
"Stiff in opinions, always in the wrong;
"Was every thing by starts and nothing long,"
"Then all for women, panting, rhiming, drinking,
"Besides ten thousand freaks that died in thinking.

DEAR FRIEND,
YOU now see what sort of a society I was got into. In country places
particularly, they consist of sarmers, husbandmen, shoemakers, woolcombera,
weavers, their wives, etc. I have heard Mr. Wesley remark that more women are
converted than men; and I believe that by far the greatest part of his people
are females; and not a few of them four, disappointed old ma ds, with foam
others of a less prudish disposition.

Lavater in his essay on physiognomy says, "Women sink into the most incurable
melancholy, as they also rise to the most enraptured heights," In another place
he says, "By the irritability of their nerves, their incapability for deep
inquiry and firm decision, they may easily from their extreme sensibility,
become the most irreclaimable, the most rapturous enthusiasts."

There are thousands in this society who will never read any thing besides the
bible, and books published by Mr. Wesley. For several years I read very little
else, nor would I go (at least very seldom) to any other place of worship; so
that instead of hearing the sensible and learned ministers of Taunton, I would
often go four, five, or six miles to some country village, to hear an inspired
husbandman, shoemaker, black smith, or wool comber; and frequently in frost and
snow have I rose a little after midnight (not knowing what time of night it
was) and have wandered about the town until five o'clock, when the preaching
began; where I have often heard a sermon preached to not more than ten or a
dozen people. But such of us as did attend at this early hour, used afterward
to congratulate each other on the great privilege we enjoyed, then off we went
to our work, shivering with cold.

I was first converted to methodism when I was about sixteen years of age, from
that time until I was twenty-one I was a very sincere enthusiast, and every
spare hour I enjoyed I dedicated to the study of the bible, reading
methodistical books, learning hymns, hearing sermons, meeting in societies,
etc. My memory was very tenacious, so that every thing I read I made my own. I
could have repeated several volumes of hymns; when I heard a sermon, I could
have peached it again, and nearly in the same words; my bible had hundreds of
leaves folded down, and thousands of marks against such texts as I thought
favored the doctrines (or whims) which I had imbibed. So that I stood forth as
the champion of methodism wherever I came.

But alas! my godly strict lise at length suffered interruption. I will give
you a sarther account of the method ^ts when I come to the time when I finally
lest their society.

The election for two members of parliament was strongly contested at Taunton,
just as I attained my twenty-first year; and being now of age, the fix or seven
months, which I had to serve of my apprentiship were purchased of my mistress
by some friends of two of the contending candidates; so that I was at once set
free in the midst of a scene of riot and dissipation. "Present example gets
within our guard,
"And acts with double force, by few repelled."
YOUNG. "Nor shame, nor honor could prevail,
"To keep me thus from turning tail."


As I had a vote, and was also possessed of a few ideas above those of my rank
and situation, my company was courted by some who were in a much higher sphere;
and (probably what they partly intended) in such company I soon forgot my godly
or methodistical connections, and ran into the opposite extreme: so that for
several months most of my spare hours were devoted to the "Young-ey'd God of
Wine! Parent of joys!
"Frohe and full of thee, while the cold sons
"Of temperance, the fools of thought and care,
"Lay stretched in sober slumbers."
MALLAT'S Eur^dice.

Here I had nearly sunk for ever into meanness, obscurity and vice; for when
the election was over, I had no ^^^ger open houses to eat and drink in at free
cost.

However I did not sink quite so low as the commonality of journeymen
shoemakers, but in general worked very hard, and spent my money in better
company.

Notwithstanding, at times I was very uneasy, and although I had not been at
any methodistical meeting during the time that I had lived this dissipated
life, yet my mind was not freed entirely from the superstitious fears I had
there imbibed; so that whenever any person asked me, what would become of me
(that had lived such a holy life) if I should die in the state of backsliding
from "the good old way?" I always acknowledged that I should be eternally
damned, were that to be the case. E^t I must confess that I was not much afraid
of dying in such a state, as I was too much prepossessed with the methodistical
notions of free greece, that would not let me finally be lost, prestaning that I
must wait as it were for a second call to repentance, jushsication, etc. which
I had been taught to believe might take place instantaneously, and put (...) in
a hurry, and so (...).

I often privately took the bible to bed with me, and in the long summer
mornings read for hours together in bed, but this did not in the least
influence my conduct. As you know great events often arise from little causes,
I am now going to relate a circumstance, trivial in itself, though productive
of a more considerable change in my situation, then any I had yet experienced.

I was twenty-one years of age the 11th of September, 1767, the election was
over the latter end of March, 1768. It was in this year that my new master's
wife infisted on my purchasing milk of a milk-maid who was a customer at the
shop; which command I refused to comply with, as I had a smart little milk-maid
of my own. But as my mistress wore the breeches, my master was obliged, by his
wife's order, to inform me that I must comply with her mandate, or get another
master. I lest him without hesitation; and the same afternoon went to
Wellington, took leave of my father and mother, and informed them of my
intention to go to Bristol. After two or three days I returned back to Taunton,
where I stayed a day or two more. In which time I became c^amoured with, or
insatuated by, the beautiful Nancy Trott: and although I saw the impropriety of
the measure, yet I could not resist the fair tempter, who prevailed with me to
permit her to accompany me in my journey.

"Reason was given to curb our headstrong will,
"And yet but shows a weak physician's skill;
"Gives nothing while the raging sit does last,
"But stays to cure it when the worst is past.
"Reason's a staff for age, when nature's gone;
"But youth is strong enough to walk alone."
DRYDEN's Con. of Gran. We rested a week in Bridgewater, where I worked and got
money to convey us to Exbridge, seventeen miles on this side Bristol; and there
I saw my conduct in such a point of view as made me resolve to leave her.

"In well-seign'd accidents, now they hail my ear,
"My life, my love, my charmer, or my dear."
"As if these sounds, these joyless sounds could prove
"The smallest particle of genuine love,
"O! purchased love, retail'd through half the town.
"Where each may share on paying half-a-crown;
"Where every air of tenderness is art,
"And not one word the language of the heart;
"Where all is mockery of Cupid's reign,
"End in remorse, in wretchedness and pain.
Art of living in London. My finances amounted to three shillings and one
penny, out of which I gave her half a crown, and with the remaining sevenpence,
without informing her of my purpose, I set off for Bristol; where I arrived in
a few hours, and got work the same evening.

A few days after I went to the inn where the Taunton carrier put up, to
onquire after Miss Trott, as I wanted to know if she had returned safe to
Taunton. I was informed that she was in Bristol nearly as soon as I was.
Knowing but little of the world, and still less of women of her description, I
was quite unhappy on her account, for fear that being in a strange place she
might be in want and distress; which thought induced me to offer to several of
my countryment five shillings to the first who should bring me an account where
I might find her; but I did not see her until several weeks after that.

The Taunton carrier gave me a letter from my good mistress Bowden (who by
marrying again had changed her name to Dingle). The contents of this letter
very much surprised me. If informed me that a day or two before I sell out with
my last mistress (which was the trisling cause of my having Taunton) Betty
Tucker, a common lass had sworn a child to me; that the parish o^^^^^^s had
been to my master's shop within an hour after I had left it to go to
Wellington, and that they had been at Wellington just as I had left that place,
and afterward hearing that I was in Bridgwater they had pursued me thither.
But the morning on which they arrived, I had set off for Exbridge; and
believing that I had intentionally fled before them, they had given over the
chase for the present.

Reslecting on this affair, although my conduct was very far from entitling me
to entertain such a supposition yet I was then weak enough to imagine, that
being a particular savourite of heaven a kind of miracle had been wrought to
save me from a prison, or from marrying a woman I could not bear the idea of
living with a single week; and as I had not any knowledge of her being with
child (not having seen her for three months before) I had not taken any measure
to avoid the consequence, but put myself in the way of the officers: for, as I
have just told you after I had taken leave of my father and mother, I went back
to Taunton, and walked about publicly one whole day, and part of another.

This girl was delivered about two months afterward of a still born child, so
that I was never troubled for expenses. Methinks you are ready to say with
Pomfret,

"'It Is easy to descend into the snare,
"By the pernicious conduct of the fair:
"But safely to return from their abode
"Requires the wit, the prudence of a God."
LETTER XII.
" -- Learn to sean
"The various foibles of imperfect man."
Art of Living in London.
DEAR FRIEND,
THE subject of my last recalls to my mind a ridiculous affair, which excited
much mirth in that part of the country.

During the election at Taunton, a gentleman one day came in a post-chaise to
the White-hart Inn, kept by Mr. Baldwin, and after having refreshed himself,
strolled into the yard, and seeing the hostler, asked him if he could inform
him where they took in the news? The hostler understanding him in a literal
sense, directed him to a bookseller's shop on the opposite side of the way;
this shop was kept by Miss A -- d -- n, a beautisul young lady of
irreproachable character, and one whose sine understanding and polished taste
did honor to the profession; which profession she only adopted for an
amusement, as she possessed an independent fortune.

Our gentleman on entering the shop, enquired of the shop-maid for her
mistress, but the maid being used to serve in the shop, and knowing that her
mistress had some ladies with her, informed the gentleman that she could help
him to any thing that he wanted. But on his saying he had some private business
with her mistress, he was showed into a back parlour, and the mistress being
informed a gentleman wanted to speak to her, she went directly to him. The
moment she entered the room, he clasped her in his arms, called her a divine
creature, etc. This so alarmed Miss A -- d -- n that she sereamed aloud; on
hearing of which, the ladies preceded by the housemaid and shop-maid repaired
to the parlour, where they found Miss A -- d -- n almost in fits. The gentleman
thinking it was only a trick to raise her price, took but little n^tice, on
which one of the maids ran out and called in several of the neighbors, who on
coming into the parlour, saw with astor^^ meant our Sir Harry Wildair taking
(...) per liberties with Miss A -- d -- n, and d^sired him to desist. But he
desned them not to attempt to put tricks on travelers, and ordered them to
leave the room. Instead of obeying his injunctions they in a resolute tone
ordered our spark to go instantly about his business. However he still kept his
ground, until the mayor of the town, who happened to live just by, was called
in. Mr. mayor demanded to know why he took such freedom with the lady? Our
gentleman, seeing that the affair began to look very serious, now became calm,
and informed the company that having an inclination for a frolic, he had
inquired for a bad house, and had been directed there; adding that if there had
been any mistake, he was very sorry for it, and would beg the lady's pardon. On
hearing this, the company was more surprised than before, and demanded of the
gentleman, who had informed him that that house was a bawdy house? He, without
hesitation replied, the hostler at the White Heart. Upon this the hostler was
sent for, and on his being asked, if he had directed that gentleman, to Miss A
-- d -- n's as to a bawdy, house? The poor fellow, with marks of terror and
surprise answered, no. The gentleman never asked me for a bawdy house, he only
asked me for a house where they took in the news. So that he hostler's
understanding him in a literal sense, caused all the confusion. The affair
however had got so much air that our spark was glad to leave the town
immediately.

A very strange unaccountable circumstance happened in this Inn, about the same
time; one of those occurrences that puzzle the philosopher, and strengthen
superstition in weak minds. Three or four gentlemen of the neighborhood were
drinking wine in one of the rooms, when the landlord of the Inn (as it appeared
to them) walked into the room, and coming up to the table, around which they
were seated, they addressed him with Mr. Baldwin, how do you do? sit down and
take a glass of wine with us; but instead of doing as requested, the supposed
Innkeeper walked out of the room, without making any reply; which not only
surprised, but offended the company, who rung the bell violently, and on the
waiter's appearance, they ordered him to send in his master. The waiter
informed them that his master was not at home. The gentlement replied that he
was at home a sew minutes since, and therefore they insisted on seeing him; but
the man assured them they were mistaken, as his master was in Bristol, and had
been there several days. They then ordered the waiter to send in Mrs. Baldwin,
who immediately appearing, the gentlemen asked her where Mr. Baldwin was, and
she informed them as the waiter had already done, that he was in Brisltol, and
had been there feveral days, on which the gentlemen grew very angry, and swore
that Mr. Baldwin had just before come into the room, and on their requesting
him to partake of their wine, had insulted them by going out of the room,
without deigning to give them an answer. Mrs. Baldwin then drew out of her
pocket aletter she had that morning received from Mr. Baldwin, by which it was
apparent, that he really was in Bristol. The story was then told round the
neighborhood, and all the old women concluded that Mr. Baldwin must certainly
be dead, and that he died at the very instant that the gentlemen saw him come
into the room; but Mr. Baldwin returning two days after, rendered it necessary
for them to vary their story; they then asserted that it was a token, or some
warning of his death, and had no doubt but it would very soon happen. It was
generally though it that Mr. Baldwin was weak enough to pay such attention to the
story and the inserence, as to hurt his health, as he really died within a year
after, and the old women were not a litile ^leased at the event, as it tended
to ^.

A more ridiculous affair happened about ten years since, at the two bells,
opposite Whitechapel church. The landlord was sitting one night with some
jovial company, one of whom happened to say that he prayed to God, that such a
thing should not come to pass, the landlord replied in a good humoured manner,
your prayers will neither do good or harm; upon which the other said a deal to
persuade the host that his prayers would do great things; but the more he said
in praise of his prayers, the more the landlord laughed at, and ridiculed him.
The man at last insisted that he could pray the landlord to death in two months
time, and offered to bet him a crown bowl of punch to the truth of it, which
the landlord accepting, the wager was laid, and almost every night after this,
the man came to the house, and constantly laughed at the landlord, and assured
him that he would lose his wager; and however strange in may appear, our host
did die within the time, and his widow paid the wager. I think there cannot
remain a doubt but that the ridiculous talk of the fellow actually affected the
landlord's mind, and hastened his death, and the following instances tend also
to show how easily the lives of some are shortened.

Being at Bristol about sour years since, I enquired after a worthy leather
seller whom I had sormerly known, and was informed that he was lately dead, and
that his death was supposed to have been hastened by a famous fortune tellers,
who having cast his nativity, declared that he would die within six months,
which afflicted his mind so as to accomplish the prediction. The story of the
late Dr. Pitcairn, of Edinburgh, and the collier is well known.

I have set down the above instances, in order to show how easy it is to trifle
away the lives of our fellow creatures, and surely such who wantonly do it,
must afterward have very gloomy reflections.

LETTER XIII.
"I had a friend that loved me:
"I was his soul: he livid not but in me.
"We were so chose linked in each other's breast.
"The rivits were not found that joined us fast.
DRYDEN's All for Love.
DEAR FRIEND,
I BEFORE mentioned my arrival at Brisiol, where I took a lodging in
Castle-street, at the house of a Mr. James; a much more decent resident than
commonly falls to the lot of journeymen shoemakers.

In this house I found a Mr. John Jones, a genteel young man, just turned of
twenty-one years of age: He was also a son of Crispin, and made women's stuff
shoes; which he sold by the dozen to warehouses. This Mr. Jones and I were soon
very intimate; we kept ourselves neatly dressed, and in general worked head,
spending our money chiesly in the company of women. As, "All men have follies,
which they blindly trace,
"Through the durk turnings of a dubious maze,
"But happy those, who by a predent cane,
"Retreat by times from the ^allac^ous snare^:'
POMFRET.

We followed this course about four months. During this time Mr, Jones once
persuaded me to go with him to the playhouse. where we saw Shakespeare's fine
comedy of "As you like it." This was a seast indeed to me, who had never before
s^en nor even read any theatrical production. It Is impossible for me to
describe my sensations on the occasion. Between the play and the entertainment
(which was the Mayor of Garrat) Mr Edward Shuter performed a short piece called
"The dunken man." This was the only time that I ever saw that extraordinary
genius, but he made such an impression on my mind, that it is impossible I ever
should forget him. I believe it is not generally known, and as sew would ever
have suspected, that this child of Momus was also a child of grace.

Since the publication of the first edition of these memoirs, I have read "The
memoirs of Mr. Tate Wilkinson," patentee of the Theaters Royal of York and
Hull, and was much surprised to learn that the famous Ned Shuter was a gracious
soul. I will give you a passage or two out of Mr. Wilkinson's memoirs, vol. ii.
page 142, 12mo edition, etc. "Mrs. Rich was a methodist, not that I mention it
as a recommendation, or that she was a better christian for bowing at the
shrine of nonsense and hypocrisy. Mr. Foot's lash on methodisin at that time
was severely selt by that sect; their composition is gloom, melancholy, envy,
and spleen; cheerfulness is seldom observed to dawn upon their countenances.
Notwithstanding their boasted inspirations, if methodist preachers had a little
reflection, what must they think of daring to pronounce every theater the
devil's house, and all the players the devil's children! I hope they are
joking; and though it may be joking, I am sorry to say it is wicked. To make a
complete actor requires more requisites to universally excel than almost any
other profession whatever.

"The amazing powers displayed by a Garrick, a Barry, a Mrs. Cibber, and a
Siddons, and many others, is evidently the hand of God; he alone could give the
finish to such intrinsic merit. And that the Almighty has intended them for
that very work is evident; which, if not so produced, the world would have lost
seeing the highest pitch of admiration the human frame can aspire to. To
mention Shakespeare only, prove more than all the beforementioned persons; as
he is a host, and stands unequalled as a moral writer, in many points, as well
the wonder of the world, as an universal genius. I do not wish to insinuate
that every methodist is an hypocrite, but I mean that I think the greatest part
are really so. So of the preachers, I believe there are some in earnest, though
I fear the number might be easily told. When persons get to the hei^ht of a
Whitefield and a Wesley's fame for acting, there is a pride as well as a duty
in behaving well, and they both labored hard: but I dare say neither of those
gentlemen ever refused a golden ticket for their separate benesits any more
than I ever did. O yes, I actually did once resuse five guineas at York! but I
was modest and rejected it; I expected it to be offered the second time -- it
was not; what then? why then I was disappointed, and never will be so soolish
again, if opportunity offers. Let one of the tabernacle boast the same -- they
know better -- and that a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush. But O ye
saints of your own creating! I will preach to you -- mark! judge not of plays
and players lest you be judged. Those who are the most censorious on the
infirmities of others, are usually most notoriously guilty of far greater
failings themselves; and sanctified methodistical slander is, of all the most
severe, bitter and cruel, and is so easily distinguished, unless by the elect,
that it is not worth dwelling any longer upon it.

"In the comedy of the hypocrite, the colonel says he supposes they go to the
play for the benesit of the brethren: Cantwell answers "the charity covers
the sin;" which was actually the case; for in the year 1757, as Sh^^er was
bountiful to the taber-n^cle, Mr. Whitefield not only permitted, but advised
his hearers to attend Shuter's benefit; but (a-la-node theater) for that night
only. A preacher at Hull was once in distress and imprisoned; I actually sent
him a leg of mutton and turnips. Previous to that I had (...) an attendant at
his tabernacle; he entertained great hopes of my conversion; and I certainly
consess to the being wicked enough to have been deemed a tabernacle methodist.
I had then quitted the old playhouse in Lowgate, for a new one in
Pinkle-street. That the principal performers of conventicles love to follow the
smell of a theater is evident, by their particularly consecrating those
unhallowed shops, and thinking them enviable situations to practice their own
love feasts in. "Put out the light, and then" -- So this Reverend Mr.
Rutherford, formerly a London coachman, erected his pulpit on the spot where
Brutus had been in his pulpit also: the pit he converted into pews, and the
stage and side boxes were appropriated for the beaus and belles. Here follows
(most truly copied) his letter to me caused partly by the brass rims not being
come from York to Hull; for he told me over a bottle, to which he had no
aversion, but he wanted a collection to purchase candlesticks, and I having
lest off using those brass rims (when Mr. Garrick changed the mode of lighting
he stage with six branches that used formerly to be (...) downat the end of
every act, which required a nimble fingered candle snuffer) I promised my
reverend father, the methodist, I would light his tabernacle, aye, and
performed it too.

"TO TATE WILKINSON, Esquire

"Dear Sir,

"As your engagements in public and mine run counter, I did not know when to
wait on you as to a proper season; and therefore as you was so good and
sympathising, to act from such a noble spirit of humanity to the distressed, as
proposing to take a pwe in my chapel in Lowgate, I shall leave the four best
pews to the generosity of the persons that engage; so whoever leads the way
will be a pattern for the others. I verily think, without the least flattery,
that your encouragement of such things will be such an honor to the stage, and
bespeak the fame of the comedians, as will perpetuate your name more than
Alexander the greats. I shall be glad to know what place you fix on, and when I
shall wait on you, and whether the candlesticks are come. May heaven lead you
with all kind of bleslings for time and an unseen world.

From your humble and much obliged servant ROBT. RUTHERFORD.

Hull, Jan, 10, 1771.

"At times I have heard good discourses from Mr. Whitefield, delivered with
energy, feeling, and pathos; but then he had been really and truly an actor on
the slage in the early part of his life; and as he liked tragedy, and found
that a pair of squinting eyes (as may be seen by his print) did not move the
young ladies' tender hearts, but produced laughter instead of tears; he d -- d
the stage, and ever after stuck to that text; but he often melted and squeezed
to some purpose many a rich dowager, who felt the power of his feelings from
their mutual sympathy. The low stuff of the preachers in general is not worth
repeating; but to show I have not often attended without sometimes being a good
boy, I will begin with the second best performer in that line I ever saw, and
give his harangue verbatin; and though but frothy stuff, it is much better, and
more like reason than the damnation so teni^ly thundered out, too often in
stage invective; so much so that were they not hardened by the samiliarity of
their sire, brimstone and pitchsorks; if it thund^ed I should sear less if in a
play (...) ^han in the tabernacle, part cularly if near the preacher.

"Mr. Wesley about four years ago, in the fields at Leeds, for want of room for
his congregation in his tabernacle, gave an account of himself by informing us,
that when he was at college he was particularly fond of devils pops (or cards)
and said, that every Saturday he was one of a constant party at whist, not only
for the afternoon, but also for the evening; he then mentioned the names of
several respectable gentlemen who were with him at college. But, continued he,
the latter part of my time there I became acquainted with the Lord, I used to
hold communication with him. On my first acquaintance, said Wesley, I used to
talk with the Lord once a week, then every day, from that to twice a day, till
at last the intimacy so increased, that he appointed a meeting once in every
four hours. He recollected, he said, the last Saturday he ever played at cards;
that the rubber at whist was longer than he expected, and on observing the
tediousness of the game, he pulled out his watch, when to his shame he found it
was some minutes past eight, which was beyond the time he had appointed to meet
the Lord: he thought the devil had certainly tempted him to stay beyond his
hour, he therefore suddenly gave his cards to a gentleman near him to finish
the game, and went to the place appointed, beseeching forgiveness for his
crime, and resolved never to play with the devil's pops again. That resolution
he had never broken; and what was more extraordinary, that his brother and
sister, though distant from Cambridge, experienced signs of grace on that same
day, on that same hour, in the month of October. After the easy acquaintance he
had made, the idea of which I think too solemn to declare and mention in the
familiar manner those self elected people do; what must have become of all the
tribes before us for the last, seventeen hundred years but damnation? how
unfortunate that methodism did not start up through a trap-door many centuries
ago! what a hypocritical led-by-the-nose world it would then have been!

"Mr. Wesley, after expatiating on the devil's pops, said, "Now, my dear
friends! if you think there is no harm follows from playing at cards, why play
at cards: if you think, my dear brethern, there is no harm in hunting a poor
little hare and depriving it of life, why you may go a hunting without being
guilty of sin: I do not say you will be d -- d for that, provided in your
conscience you do not think you are doing wrong. If you think there is no harm
in playing with the devil's books, or going to an assembly, where you shall
stay till two or three o'clock in the morning, and where they dance belly to
belly and back to back, and put themselves in the most unseemly postures; why
if you think there is no harm in going to that assembly, you may go. "I am
told," continued Wesley, "you have a wicked playhouse in Leeds -- I do not say
you will be d -- d for going to see a play, if you think there is no harm in
seeing a play. But now, my dear brethren, let me call you to a recollection of
those trisling matters; though you have heard me repeat that I do not pronounce
damnation on my hearers for playing on the devil's pops, or for killing a
harmless hare and depriving it of life -- though I have not said the devil is
with spreading arms expecting to receive you, but that you may go to an
assembly, or even to the devil's house, without damnation; yet, my dear
brethren, if instead of the devil's pops, the going a hunting, or to the
dancing assembly, or to see a play, you can, like me, get acquainted and enter
into conversation and intimacy with the Lord, who will talk, who will hold
converse with you here on earth -- how can you prefer such vanities of this
foolish world to real bliss in this and the world to come? Here ends Mr. Wesley.

"The Rev. Mr. Whitefield (the first actor in the methodist walk) was of a
contrary cast entirely, and not without humor here and there. His dialect was
very particular; Lurd instead of Lord, Good instead of God, as, O Lurd Good. I
remember a text of his was, May we all work the harder. "There was a poor
woman, and she was a long time before she was converted: she was three score
years and ten -- yes she was; she was three score years and ten: -- "Sir (says
she to the good man that converted her) sir (says she) I am three score years
and ten, I have been a long time about it; but sir (says she) I will work the
harder; yes, sir (says she) I will work the harder!" And O! may you all like
that dear good woman "work the harder." Then followed a groan of applause; for
he had, like Mr. Bays, a selected number of his pit that understood their
cues, and was sure to applaud, and the rest of the house followed of course.
Then Whitefield, looking round the rails of his little desk below -- "What, you
young ones! why you are some of you twelve, some fourteen, and some sixteen
years of age, yet you do not think of going to hell? What?" exclaimed
Whitefield, "twelve and fourteen years of age and not think of going to hell! O
ye little brats you!" and at that instant the old woman groaned, and like sell
Charybdis, murmured hoarse applause; and Whitefield shook his head, and growled
in his white whig exactly like my performance of squintum, as I exactly
practiced it from the serious comical discourse I am now relating. Whitefield
then proceeded thus, "You go to plays! and what do you see there! Why, if you
will not tell me, I will tell you what you see there! -- When you see the
players on the stage, you see the devil's children grinning at you; and when
you go to the playhouse, I suppose you go in ruffles -- I wonder whether St.
Paul wore ruffles? No; there were no ruffles in those days." "I am told,"
continued he archly, "that people say I bawl -- well I allow it, I do bawl, and
I will bawl -- I will not be a velvet-mouthed preacher, I will not speak the
word of Good in a sleepy manner, like your church preachers -- I Will tell you a
story.

"The Archbishop of Canterbury in the year 1675, was acquainted with Mr.
Butterton the player. One day the arch bishop of Canterbury said to Butterton
the player, "pray inform me Mr. Butterton, what is the reason you actors on the
stage can affect your congregations with speaking of things imaginary, as if
they were real, while we in church speak of things real, which our
congregations only receive as if they were imaginary?' "Why, my lord (says
Butterton the player) the reason is very plain. We actors on the stage, speak
of things imaginary, as if they were real, and you in the pulpit speak of
things real, as if they were imaginary." "Therefore," added Whitefield, "I will
bawl, I will not be a velvet-mouthed preacher." I leave the reader to judge on
the good reasoning of methodism. I Cannot help noticing for the honor of the
stage, that Mr. Whitefield could not have betrayed himself into a better story
for its credit (his pointing out an intimacy between the lord archbishop of
Canterbury, and Mr. Butterton) and for the actor, he could not have given a
more substantial and revered authority: and what a joke for Mr. Whitefield to
pronounce damnation on players, when he certainly avowed in his own opinion,
that Mr. Butterton was, what all the world ever acknowledged him to be, a
scholar and gentleman of honor; and Mr. Whitefield gave the players reasoning
and exemplification, for his own mode of preaching. But hypocrisy, like the
cloven foot, will sometimes be espied.

"Some of the wild preachers of this kind, often remind me of Antonio in the
merchant of Venice.

"Mark you this Bassanio!
"The devil can cite scripture for his purpose;
"An evil soul, producing holy witness,
"Is like a villain with a smiling cheek,
"A goodly apple rotten at the heart.
"O! what a goodly outside falsehood has!
"Bell's edition bears this note on these lines. "A most excellent remark this;
for daily experience proves, that some of the worst characters breathing, seek
shelter under scriptural texts; by the misapplication or misconstruction of
which, also, opposite sects uncharitably consign each other to eternal
punishment,"

Page 163. -- " Mr. Whitefield was beyond compare; his manner was then
universally known. -- Mr. Foot was struck by stepping in by chance, and once
hearing Whitefield; the mixture of whose absurdity, whim, consequence, and
extravagance, pleased his fancy and entertained him highly, as Whitefield was
that day dealing out damnation, fire and brimstone, as cheerfully as if they
were so many blessings. What pity it is that our fears only, and not our
reason, will bring conviction; but reason, handled by unaffected pure piety and
religion, would be a day of woe to methodism, and lessen their audiences in
many tabernacles, where they are certain to lament preaching to nobody, though
at the same time wedged to the outer doors, and on the Sunday exclaiming at the
full crowded theaters, which have probably been almost deserted. But Mr. Foot
was only a spy at Whitefield's academy, while I had been a zealot for some
seasons before my encounter at Covent Garden with Mr. Foot. My attendance had
been constant with my friend Shuter, and as he was actually one of the
newborn, and paid large sums to Whitefield, I was always permitted to stay
with him, for he really was bewildered in his brain, more by wishing to acquire
imaginary grace, than by all his drinking; and whenever he was warm with the
bottle, and with only a friend or two, like Maw-worm he could not mind his
shop, because he thought it was a sin, and wished to go a preaching; for
shuter, like Maw-worm, believed he had a call. I have gone with Shuter at six
in the morning of a Sunday to Tottenham Court Road, then before ten to Mr.
Wesley's in Long Acre, at eleven again to Tottenham Court Road tabernacle,
dined near Bedlam in Moorfields (a very proper place for us both) with a party
of the holy ones, went at three to Mr. Wesley's theater there (the tabernacle I
mean) from that to Whitefield's in Moorfields till eight, and then shut up to
commune with the family compact. Now with all this practice and attention, and
with my natural talents, I must have been a blockhead indeed not to have
gleaned some good things (and doubtless Mr. Whitefield was at times a good
preacher, and truly excellent). I therefore really exhibited and obtained a
much stronger likeness as Dr. Squintum, than Mr. Foot did. The week before my
Covent Garden exhibition, I met my friend Shuter at the tabernacle; a great
coolness had continued for some time, as we had not spoke to or even looked at
each other since the breach between us in the year 1758; but as we were met
together in a place of charity and forgiveness to all who subscribed to the
dictator, we became very sociable, and before the conclusion of Whitefield's
lecture were perfectly reconciled. We adjourned to the Rose, and by three the
next morning were sworn friends, and contunued so till death called him away.
Indeed he was above cleven years older than me, and would have been sixty three
had he lived to this time. Ned Shuter was a lively, spirited shrewd companion;
superior natural whim and humor surely never inhabited a human breast, for
what he said and did was all his own, as it was with difficulty he could read
the parts he had to play, and could not write at all; he had attained to sign
an order, but no more. Nature could not have bestowed her gifts to greater
advantage than on poor Ned, as what she gave he made shine not only
conspicuously but brilliantly, and that to the delight of all who knew him on
or off the stage -- he might be truly dubbed "The Child of Nature:" -- He was
no man's enemy but his own. Peace, rest, and happiness. I hope he now pessesses
-- for the poor, the friendless, and the stranger he often comforted; and when
sometimes reduced by his follies, he never could see a real object in misery,
and resist giving at least half he was worth to his distressed fellow creature."

It is singular enough that about this time, although I could not write, yet I
composed several songs, one of which was sold for a guinea; some were given to
the Bristol printers, who printed them and the ballad-fingers sung them about
the streets; on which occasions I was as proud as though I, had composed an
opera. My friend Mr. Jones was my secretary, who before I came to live with him
had not the least relish for books, and I had only read a few enthusiastic
authors, together with Pomfret's poems, this last I could almost repeat by
memory; however I made the most of my little stock of literature, and strongly
recommended the purchasing of books to Mr. Jones. But so ignorant were we on
the subject, that neither of us knew what books were fit for our perusul, nor
what to enquire for, as we had scarce ever heard or seen even any title pages,
except a few of the religious sort, which at that time we had no relish for. So
that we were at a loss how to increase our small stock of science. And here I
cannot help thinking that had fortune thrown proper books in our way, we should
have imbibed a just taste for literature, and soon made some tolerable
progress; but such was our obscurity, that it was next to impossible for us
ever to emerge from it.

As we could not tell what to ask for, we were ashamed to go into the
booksellers shops; and I assure you, my friend, that there are thousands now in
England in the very same situation: many, very many have come to my shop, who
have discovered an enquiring mind, but were totally at a loss what to ask for,
and who had no friend to direct them.

" -- Reason grows apace, and calls,
"For the kind hand of an assiduous care.
"Delightful task! to r^ar the tender thought,
"To teach the y^^ng idea how to shoot,
"To pour the fresh instruction over the mind,
"To breathe the enlivening spirit, and to fix
"The generous purpose in the glowing breast."
THOMSON. One day as my friend Jones and I were strolling about the fair that
is annually held in and near St. James's church yard, we saw a stall of books,
and in looking over the title pages, I met with Hobbes's translation of Homer's
Iliad and Odyssey. I had somehow or other heard that Homer was a great poet,
but unfortunately I had never heard of Pope's translation of him, so we very
eagerly purchased that by Hobbes. At this stall I also purchased Walker's
poetical paraphrase of Epictetus's morals; and home we went, perfectly well
pleased with our bargains.

We that evening began with Hobbes's Homer; but found it very difficult for us
to read, owing to the obscurity of the translation, which together with the
different language, and want of poetical merit in the translator, somewhat
disappointed us: however we had from time to time many a hard puzzling hour
with him.

But as to Walker's Epictetus, although that had not much poetical merit, yet
it was very easy to be read, and as easily ^^^erstood. The principles of the
sloics charmed me so much, that I made the book my companior wherever I went,
and read it over and over in raptures, thinking that my mind was secured
against all the smiles or frowns of fortune.

I now grew weary of dissipating my time, and began to think of employing my
spare hours in something more satisfactory. For want of something else to do, I
went one evening to hear Mr. John Wesley preach in Broadmead, and being
completely tired of the way of life that I had lived (more or less) ever since
I had been out of my apprenticeship, and happening to have no other pursuit or
hobbyhorse, there was a kind of vacuity in my mind; in this state I was very
susceptible of any impressions, so that when I came to hear Mr. Wesley, my old
fanatical notions returned full upon me, and I was once more carried away by
the tide of enthusiasm.

My friend Mr. Jones soon saw with grief and indignation the wonderful
alteration in me; who, from a gay, volatile, dissipated young fellow, was at
once metamorphosed into a dull, moping, praying, psalm-singing fanatic,
continually reprehending all about me for their harmless mirth and gaity.

"For Sain^s themselves will often be,
"Of gifts that cost them nothing, free."
HUDIBRAS. Nothing is more common than to see mankind run from one extreme to
another: which was my case once more.

About this time we left our habitation in Queen Street and took lodgings of
Mr. Jones's mother, on St. Philip's Plain, where lived a brother of Mr. Jones,
who was about seventeen years of age. Soon after we had removed to this place,
the brother, whose name was Richard Jones, was permitted to work in the same
room with my friend and me. They had also a sister about twenty years of age,
who frequently joined our company.

Our room over-looked the churchyard, which contributed to increase my gloomy
ideas; and I had so much of spiritual quixotism in me, that I soon began to
think that it was not enough for me to save my own soul, but I ought in
conscience to attempt the conversion of my companions, who (I really believed)
were in the high road to hell, and every moment liable to eternal damnation. Of
this charitable disposition are almost all the methodists; who, as Hudibras
says.

"Compound for sins they are in^lin'd to,
"By damning those they have no mind to,"
The frequency of newly-opened graves, which we saw from our windows, furnished
me with opportunities for descanting on the uncertainty of life and all
sublunary enjoyments; I assured them that nothing deserved attention but what
related to our everlasting state, and that they might, on their repentance,
receive in one moment the pardon of all their sins, have a foretaste of the
joys of heaven, and know that their names were enrolled in the book of life. I
farther protested that they had no time to lose; that they all stood on the
very verge of hell, and the breaking-brink of eternal torments; with a great
deal more of such edifying stuff.

The youngest brother soon became a convert; and Miss Betsey was born again
soon after. But I had a tight job to convert my friend John; he held out, and
often cursed me heartily, and sung profane songs all day long.

But about four or sive weeks after my re-conversion. John was also converted,
and became a favorite of heaven, so that we considered ourselves as a holy
community.

"Who knew the seat of Paradise.
"Could tell in what degree it lies;
"Could deepest mysteries unriddle,
"As easily as thread a needle."
HUDIBRAS. A laughable affair happened during my residence here. A captain of a
ship one day brought a parrot as a present to a family, the mistress of which
being a methodist, happened to have one of the preachers call in just as the
dinner was putting on the table, so that the captain and the preacher were both
asked to stay. As soon as the table was covered, the preacher began a long
grace, in the midst of which Poll, who had been put in a corner of the room,
cried out, "D -- n your eyes, tip us none of your jaw". This, with the
immoderate laughter of the captain, entirely disconcerted the pious chaplain;
at last he began his grace again, but he had not got to the end before Poll
again interrupted him with "You d -- d canting son of a b -- h". By the above
it appeared that the captain had tutored Poll on purpose to have some fun in
this canting family; however, the good lady of the house made it a point of
conscience to have Polly converted, but found it utterly impossible to effect
that great change in the methodistical way, that is, instan^anccusly, as after
she had scolded her six months for speaking bad words, and had actually taught
her a part of the Lord's prayer, yet Poll would not entirely leave off her sea
language, so that it often happened while the good lady was teaching her to
pray, Poll would out with, "D -- n your eyes, tumble up, you lubbers"; and even
after she had preached to her several years, she would not venture to say that
Poll was in a state of grace; but be that as it will, Poll obtained the name of
Methodist, being called by the neighbors, the Methodist Parrot.

I must inform you also that the poor preacher abovementioned was but just come
out of Wales, and understood English but very imperfectly, and in the course of
his sermon one day he had forgot the English for the word lamb, and after
hammering a good while about it, he out with "Goddymighty's little Mutton, that
took away the sins of the world," which caused a good deal of diversion among
the ungodly.

LETTER XIV.
" -- He was a shrewd philosopher,
"And had read every text and gloss over,
"W^^^^er the crabbed'll author has,
"He und^^stood b^implicit faith;
"Whatever ^^^aptle could enquire for,
"For every (...) he had a wherefore;
"Know more shall forty of them do,
"As far as words and terms could go,
"All which he understood by rote,
"And as occasion served would quote:
"No matter whether light or wrong,
"They might be either said or sung."
HUDIBRAS.
DEAR FRIEND,
MR. John Jones and myself were now greater friends than ever, so that one
would on no account stir out of the house without the other.

Mr. Jones had the advantage of me in temporals, he could get more money, than
I could; but as to grace, and spiritual gists, I had much the advantage of all
our community; so that I was their spiritual director, and if they thought that
any of their acquaintance held any opinions that were not quite found and
orthodox, such were introduced to me, in order that I might convince them of
their errors. In sact, I was looked upon as an apostle, so that whatever I
asserted was received as pure gospel; nor was any thing undertaken without my
advice.

We all worked very hard, particularly Mr. John Jones and me, in order to get
mo^ley to purchase books; and for some months every shilling we could spare ^as
laid out at old book shops, s^^lls, etc. insomuch that in a short time we had
what we called a very good library. This choice collection consisted of Polhil
on precious Faith; Polhil on the Deerces; Shepherd's sound Believer; Bunyan's
Pilgrim's Progress; Bunyan's good news for the vilest of Sinners; his Heavenly
Footman; his Grace abounding to the chief of Sinners; his Life and Death of Mr.
Badman; his Holy War in the town of Mansoul; Hervey's Meditation; Hervey's
Dialogues; Rogers' Seven Holps to Heaven; Hall's Jacob's Ladder; Divine
Breathings of a Devout Soul; Adams on the second epistle of Peter; Adams
Sermons on the black Devil, the white Devil, etc. etc. Collings's Divine
Cordial for the Soul; Pearse's Soul's Espousal to Christ; Easkine's Gospel
Sonnets; the Death of Abel; The Faith of God's Elect; Manton on the epistle of
St. James; Pamble's works; Baxter's Shove for a heavy-arsed Christian; his call
to the Unconverted; Mary Magdalen's Funeral Tears; Mrs. Moore's evidences for
Heaven; Mead's almost a Christian; The Sure Guide to Heaven; Brooks on
Assurance; God's Revenge against Murder; Brooks's Heaven upon Earth; The
Pathway to Heaven; Wilcox's Guide to eternal Glory; Derham's Unsearchable
Riches of Christ; his Exposition of Revelations; Alleine's Sure Guide to
Heaven; The Sincere Convert; Watson's Heaven taken by Storm; Heaven's
Vengeance; Wall's None but Christ; Aristoiles Masterpiece; Coals on God's
Sovereignty; Charnock on Providence; Young's Short and Sure Guide to Salvation;
Wesley's Sormons, Journals, Tracts, etc. and others of the same description.

We had indeed a few of a better sort, as Gay's Fables; Pomfret's Poems;
Milton's Paradise Lost; besides Hobbes's Homer, and Walker's Epictetus,
mentioned in my last letter.

But what we wanted in judgment in choosing our library, we made up in
application; so anxious were we to read a great deal, that we allowed ourselves
but about three hours sleep in twenty-four, and for some months together we
never were all in bed at the same time (Sunday nights excepted). But least we
should oversleep the time allowed, one of us sat up to work until the time
appointed for the others to rise, and when all were up, my friend John and your
humble servant, took it by turns to read aloud to the rest, while they were at
their work.

But this mad scheme of ours had nearly been attended with very serious
consequences. One night it being my turn to watch, I removed to the sire side,
to read some particular passage, and the candlestick which we worked by not
being convenient to move about, and there being no other at that time in the
room, I set up the candle against the handle of a pewter pot, and was so
extremely heavy (owing to much watchfulness) that I sell fast asleep and had
like never to have awaked again; for the candle burned down to the handle of
the pot, melted it off, and then fell on the chair on which it stood; so that
Mr. Jones sound me in the morning, fast asleep, and part of the chair consumed;
which alarmed us all very much, and made us more cautious.

But still we continued our plan of living, so that we made a napid progress in
what we called spiritual and divine knowledge; and were soon masters of the
various arguments made use of by most polemical divines, etc.

And the better to g^^rd my pupils from what I called false do^^rines, I used
often to engage them in various controversies, in which I sometimes took one
side of the question, sometimes the other, in order, to make them well versed
in controversy, and acquainted with the strength of their adversaries. So that
I was, by turns, a Calvinist, an Arminian, an Arien, a Socinian, a Deist, and
even an Atheist. And after they had said all they could to confute me, I would
point out where they had failed, and added such arguments as I was master of,
and in general we were all satisfied. But when we happened to have any doubts,
we had recourse to the bible and commentators of our own side of the question,
and I assure you, my dear friend, this was a very fine hobbyhorse; which, like
Aaron's serpent, swallowed up all the other hobby-horses.

"Light minds are pleased with trifles."
OVID. LETTER XV.
"Laugh where you must, be candid where you can"
POPL.
DEAR FRIEND,
IN the course ^o^^ my reading, I learn that there had been various sects of
philosophers amongst the G^^eks, Romaus, etc. and I well remembered the names
of the most eminent of them. At an old book shop, I purchased Plato on the
immortality of the soul, Plutarch's Morals, Seneca's Morals, Epicurus's Morals,
the Morals of Confucius the Chinese Philosopher, and a few others. I now can
scarce help thinking that I received more real benefit from reading and
studying them and Epictetus, than from all other books that I had read before,
or have ever read since that time.

I was but about twenty-two years of age, when I first began to read those fine
moral productions; and I assure you, my friend, that they made a very deep and
lasting impression on my mind. By reading them, I was taught to bear the
unavoidable evils attending humanity, and to supply all my wants by contracting
or restraining my defires.

It is now twenty-three years since I first perused them; during which time I
do not recollect that I have ever felt one anxious painsul wish to get money,
estates, or any way to better my conditions (...)

"Indead my friend, (...) co^find I (...)
"That wealth could ever my real wishes gain; ^^
"Had ever dis^^^^^d my thoug^^ful, (...)
"Or cost one serious moment, (...)
"I should have (...)
"I learnd (...)
"Were ver^ (...)
And yet I have never since that time let slip any fair opportunity of doing
it. So that all I mean is, that I have not been over solicitous to obtain any
thing I did not possess; but could at all times say, with St. Paul, that I have
learned to be contented in all situations, although at times they have been
very gloomy indeed. Dryden says, "We to ourselves may all our wishes grant,
"For, nothing coveting, we nothing want."
DRYDEN's Indian Emperor".

And in another place he says,

"They cannot want who wish not to have more:
"Who ever said an anchoret was poor?"
DRYDEN's Secret Love. The pleasures of eating and drinking I entirely
despised, and for some time carried this disposition to an extreme. The account
of Epicurus living in his garden, at the expense of about a halfpenny per day,
and that when he added a little cheese to his bread on particular occasions, he
considered it as a luxury, silled me with raptures. From that moment I began to
live on bread and tea, and for a considerable time did not partake of any other
viands, but in those I indulged myself three or four times a day. My reasons
for living in this abstemious manner were in order to save money to purchase
books, to wean myself from the gross pleasures of eating, drinking, etc. and to
purge my mind, and make it more susceptible of intellectual pleasures. And here
I cannot help remarking, that the term Epicure when applied to one who makes
the pleasures of the table his chief good casts an unjust reflection on
Ep^curus, and conveys a wrong idea of that contemplative and very abstemious
philosopher: for although he asserted that pleasure was the chief or supreme
good, yet he also as strongly asserted, that it was the tranquillity of the
mind, and intellectual pleasure, that he so extolled and recommended.

"Some place the bliss in action, some in ease;
"Those call it pleasure, and contemment these:
"Some, sunk to beasts, find pleasure end in pain;
"Some, swelled to gods, confess even virtue vain."
POPE. I continued the above self-denying life until I left Bristol, which was,
on Whitsunday in 1769. I had for some time before been pointing out to my
friend John Jones some of the pleasures and advantages of traveling, so that I
easily prevailed on him to accompany me toward the west of England; and in the
evening we arrived at Bridgowater, where Mr. Jones got work^. He was employed
by Mr. Cash, with whom be continued near twelve months, and in the end married
Mr. Cash's daughter, a very pretty and very amiable little woman, with some
fortune. When my friend was offered work by Mr. Cash, I prevailed on him to
accept of it, assuring him that I had no doubt of my being able to get work at
Taunton: but in that I was disappointed, nor could I get a constant seat of
work until I came to Exeter, and of that place I was soon tired; but being
informed that a Mr. John Tailor of Kingsbridge (forty miles below Exeter)
wanted such a hand, I went down, and was gladly received by Mr. Tailor, whose
name inspires me with gratitude, as he never treated me as a journeyman, but
made me his companion: Nor was any part of my time ever spent in a more
agreeable pleasing manner than that which I passed in this retired place, or I
believe more profitable to a master. I was the first man he ever had that was
able to make stuff and silk shoes, and it being also known that I came from
Bristol, this had great weight with the country ladies, and procured my master
customers, who generally sent for me to take measure of their seet, and I was
looked upon by all to be the best workman in the town, although I had not been
brought up to stuff work, nor had ever entirely made one stuff or silk shoe
before. Nor should I have presumed to proclaim myself a stuff-man, had there
been any such workmen in the place; but as there were none, I boldly ventured,
and succeeded very well; nor did any one in the town ever know that it was my
first attempt in that branch.

During the time that I lived here, I as usual was obliged to employ one or
another of my acquaintance to write my letters for me; this procured me much
praise among the young men as a good editor of letters; (I need not inform you
that they were not good judges). My master said to me one day, he was surprised
that I did not learn to write my own letters; and added, that he was sure that
I could learn to do it in a very short time. The thought pleased me much, and
without any delay I set about it, by taking up any pieces of paper that had
writing on them, and imitating the letters as well as I could. I employed my
leisure hours in this way for near two months, after which time I wrote my own
letters, in a bad hand you may be sure; but it was plain and easy to read,
which was all I cared for: nor to the present moment can I write much better,
as I never would have any person to teach me, nor was I ever possessed of
patience enough to employ time sufficient to learn to write well; and yet as
soon as I was able to subscribe, I wrote verses on some trisle or other every
day for years together.

But I always wrote as fast as I could, without endeavoring to write well, and
that this is my present practice I need not inform you.

I came to this place in but a weak state of body, however the healthy
situation of the town, together with bathing in the salt water, soon restored
me to perfect health. I passed thirteen months here in a very happy manner: but
the wages for work being very low, and as I had spent much time in writing
hymns to every song tune that I knew, besides a number of love verses, letters,
etc. I was very poor; and to complete all, I began to keep a deal of company,
in which I gave a loose to my natural galety of disposition, much more than was
consistent with the grave, sedate ideas which I had sormed of a religious
character; all which made me resolve to leave Kingsbridge, which I did in 1770.

I (...) as for as Exeter the first day, where I wo^^ed about a fortnight, and
said sufficient to carry me to Bridgewater, where I worked two or three weeks
more. Before I arrived there Mr. John Jones had gone back to reside at Bristol,
but as soon as he heard of my being in Bridgewater, he and his brother Richard
sent me an invitation to come to Bristol again and live with them. Finding that
I did not immediately comply, they both came to Bridgewater, and declared their
intentions of not returning to Bristol without me; so that after a day or two I
yielded to their solicitations, and again lived very comfortably with them,
their mother and sister.

I think it was about this period, that I went several times to the tabernacle,
and heard Mr. George Whitefield; and of all the preachers that ever I attended,
never did I meet with one that had such a perfect command over the passions of
his audience. In every sermon that I heard him preach, he would sometimes make
them ready to burst with laughter, and the next moment drown them in tears;
indeed it was scarce possible for the most guarded to escape the effect.

"He had something 'twas thought still more horrid to say.
"When his tongue lost its powers and he sainted away;
"Some say 'twas his conscience that gave him a stroke,
"But those who best knew him treats that and joke;
"'It Is a trick which stage orators use in their need,
"The passions to raise and the judgment mislead."
SIMKIN. In one of my excursions I passed many agreeable hours with the late
Mr. La Bute, at Cambridge, who was well known, he having taught French in that
university upwards of forty years. He informed me that near forty years since,
Mr. Whitefield having advertised himself to preach at Gog-Magog hill, many
thousand people collected together from many miles round. While he was
preaching he was clevated on the highest ground, and his audience stood all
round on the declivity; during his sermon, a young country-woman, who had come
some miles to hear him, and waited several hours, being very faint, owing to
the violent heat of the sun, the breaths of the multitude, as well as the want
of refreshment; and it is very likely much agitated in her mind by the
extraordinary doctrines of the preacher, she fell backwards, just under the
orator, and there lay kicking up her heels. On seeing the poor girl lie in a
kind of convulsion, some of the company moved to assist her, and the women
began to draw down her apron and petticoats over her seet; but Mr. Whitefield
cried out, "Let her alone! let her alone! A glorious sight! a glorious sight!"
No doubt the holy man meant that it was a glorious sight to see a sinner fall
before the power of the word; but the young college bucks and wits construed
his meaning differently, and put the audience into such immoderate sits of
laughter, that even Mr. Whitfield's utmost efforts were not able to restore
their gravity, but he was obliged to dismiss his congregation abruptly.

For a long time after this happened, the Cantabs as they reeled homewards in
the night time, disturbed the sober inhabitants, by loudly exclaiming, "A
glorious sight! A glorious sight! as Doctor Squintum says."

LETTER XVI.
"Love, the most generous passion of the mind,
"The softest refuge innocence can find:
"The safe director of unguided youth,
"Fraught with kind wishes, and secured by truth,
"The cordial drop heaven in our cup has thrown,
"To make the nauseous draught of life go down;
"On which one only blessing God might raise,
"In lands of atheists subsidies of praise;
"For none did ever so dull and stupid prove,
"But felt a God, and blessed his power in love,"
Nonpareil.
DEAR FRIEND,
I MUST now request you to go back with me a sew years, as I have not yet made
you acquainted with my principal amors. I was about seventeen years of age
when an adventure discovered, that although I was so very spiritual, as I
before informed you, I was notwithstanding susceptible of another kind of
impression.

"Oh, let me still enjoy the cheerful day,
"Till many years unheeded over me roll.
"Pleased in my age I trifle life away,
"And tell how much I loved ere I grew old,"
HAMMOND's Love Elegies. Being at farmer Gamlin's, at Charlton, four miles from
Taunton, to hear a methodist sermon, I fell desperately in love with the
farmer's handsome dairy-maid.

"Her homespun dress in simple neatness lies,
"And for no glaring equipage she sighs.
"She gratefully receives what heaven has sent,
"And, rich in poverty, enjoys content,
"Her reputation which is all her boast,
"In a malicious visit never was lost.
"No midnight masquerade her beauty wears,
"And health, not paint, the fading bloom repairs.
"If love's soft passions in her bosom reign,
"An equal passion warms her happy swain."
GAY. At that time I abounded (...) spiritual gifts, which induced this honest
ru^^^ maid to be very kind to me, and to walk several fields with me in my road
back to Taunton, talking all the way of her spiritual distress and godly
concerns; while I poured heavenly comfort into her soul, and talked so long of
divine love, until I found that my affection for her was not altogether of that
spiritual nature. And yet, "We loved without transgressing virtue's bounds:
"We fixed the limits of our tenderest thoughts,
"Came to the verge of honor, and there slopp'd;
"We warmed us by the fire, but were not scorched,
"If this be sin, Angels might live with more;
"And mingle rays of minds less pure than ours."
DRYDEN's Love Triumphant.

After this you may be sure that I did not let slip any opportunity of hearing
sermons at farmer Gamlin's; and I generally prevailed with Nancy Smith; my
charming spiritual dairy-maid, to accompany me part of the way home, and at
every gate I accompanied my spiritual advice with a kiss.

-- "Oh then the longest summer's day
"Seemed too too much in haste; still the full heart
"Had not imparted half: 'twas happiness
"Too exquisite to last. Of joys departed
"Never to return, how painful the remembrance!
BLAIR's Grave. But alas! these comfortable Sunday walks were soon at an end;
as my charming Nancy Smith for some reason or other (I have forgot what) left
her place, and went to live as dairy-maid with a farmer in the marsh country,
between Bridgewater and Bristol, seventeen miles from Taunton; so that I did
not see her for near two years afterward, during which time I gave spiritual
advice to another holy sister, whose name was Hannah Allen.

I prevailed on this lovely maid to attend the methodist preaching at five
o'clock on Monday mornings, and we often met at three or four; so that we had
an hour or two to spend in walking and conversation on spiritual affairs. Had
you seen and heard us on the cold frosty mornings, it would have put you in
mind of Milton's Devils, whom he represents as at times starving with cold:
"Others apart, sat on a hill, retired,
"In thoughts more elevate, and reasoned high
"Of Providence, foreknowledge, will, and fate;
"Fixed fate, free will, foreknowledge absolute;
"And found no end in wandering mazes lost."
Paradise Lost.

But I assure you, my friend, that we were sometimes like the Galatians of old;
we began in the spirit, and ended in the flesh.

With this dear girl I spent all my leisure time, for two or three years; so
that we enjoyed together hundreds of happy and I can truly add, innocent hours.

"O days of bliss! (...)
"To equal this (...)
"Olympus strives in vain (...)
"O happy pair, (...)
"O happy fair! (...)
"O happy, happy swain!"
JOANNES SECUNDUS. But still I never could entirely forget my charming innocent
dairy-maid. In fact I had love enough for both, to have taken either for better
for worse; but my being an apprentice, prevented me from marrying at that time.

It is true I had the greatest love for Nancy Smith; but Hannah Allen had the
advantage of Nancy, as I could see Hannah almost every day, and Nancy only once
or twice in about three years. However I at last fell out with Hannah (on what
occasion I cannot recollect) and I sent Nancy a letter, which made up matters
with her; for, like Stern, I was "always in love with one goddess or other;"
and soon after that, she came to live for a little time at her father's house
at Petherton near Bridgewater, seven miles from Taunton. This happened during
the election at Taunton, when I was changed from a strict methodist to a rake;
and although the wedding ring was purchased, and we were to have been married
in a few days, yet the marriage was put off on account of my dissipated
character, so that I soon after set off for Bristol, as I before informed you:
nor did I see her after that, until my return from Kingsbridge, when I saw her
several times prior to my setting off for Bristol with my friend John Jones,
and his brother Richard.

LETTER XVII.
"The man who by his labor gets
"His bread in independent state,
"Who never begs, and seldom eats,
"Himselt can fix, or change his fate."
PRIOR. "If you will use the little that you have,
"More has not heaven to give, or you to crave:
"Cease to complain. He never can be poor
"Who has sufficient, and who wants no more.
"If but from cold, and pining hunger free,
"The richest monarch can but equal thee.
HORACE Imitated.
DEAR FRIEND,
I HAD not long resided a second time with my good Bristol friends, before I
^enewed my correspondence with my old sweetheart Nancy Smith. I informed her
that my attachment to books together with traveling from place to place, and
also my total disregard for money, had prevented me from saving any; and that
while I remained in a single unsettled state, I was never likely to accumulate
it. I also pressed her very much to come to Bristol to be married, which she
soon complied with: and married we were, at St. Peter's church, toward the end
of the year 1770; near seven years after my first making love to her.

"When joined in hand and heart, to church we went,
"Mutual in vows, and prisoners by consent,
"My Nancy's heart beat high, with mix'dalarms,
"But trembling beauty glowed with double charms
"In her soft breast a modest struggle rose,
"How she should seem to like the lot she chose:
"A smile, she thought would dress her looks too gay:
"A frown might seem too sad, and blast the day.
"But while nor this, nor that, her will could bow,
"She walked, and looked, and charmed, and knew not how,
"Our hands at length the unchanging Fiat bound,
"And our glad souls sprung out to meet the sound.
"Joys meeting joys unite, and stronger shine:
"For passion purified is half divine:
"Now Nancy thou art mine, I cried -- and she
"Sighed soft -- now Jemmy thou art Lord of me!
A. HILL. We kept our wedding at the house of my friends the Messrs. Jones's,
and at bedtime retired to ready-furnished lodgings, which we had before
provided, at half-a-crown per week. Our finances were but just sufficient to
pay the expenses of the day, for the next morning in searching our pockets
(which we did not do in a careless manner) we discovered that we had but one
halfpenny to begin the world with. It is true we had laid in eatables
sufficient for a day or two, in which time we knew we could by our work procure
more, which we very cheerfully set about, singing together the following
strains of Dr. Cotton: "Our portion is not large indeed.
"But their how little do we need?
"For nature's calls are few;
"In this the art of living lies,
"To want no more than may suffice,
"And make that little do."


The above, and the following ode by Mr. Fitzgeral, did we scores of times
repeat even with raptures!

"No glory I covet, no riches I want,
"Ambition is nothing to me:
"The one thing I beg of kind heaven to grant
"Is, a mind independent and free.
"By passion unruffled, untainted by pride,
"By reason my life let me square;
"The wants of my nature are cheaply supplied,
"And the rest are but folly and care.
"Those blessings which providence kindly has lent
"I Will justly and gratefully prize;
"While sweet meditation and cheerful content,
"Shall make me both healthy and wife.
"In the pleasures the great man's possessions display,
"Unenvied I Will challenge my part;
"For every fair object my eyes can survey,
"Contributes to gladden my heart.
"How vainly through insinite trouble and strife,
"The many their labors employ;
"When all that is truly delightful in life,
"Is what all, if they will, may enjoy,"
After having worked on stuff work in the country, I could not bear the idea of
returning to the leather branch; so that I attempted and obtained a seat of
stuff in Bristol. But better work being required there than in Kingsbridge,
etc. I was obliged to take so much care to please my master, that at first I
could not get more than nine shillings a week, and my wife could get but very
little, as she was learning to bind stuff shoes, and had never been much used
to her needle; so that what with the expense of ready furnished lodging, fire,
candles, etc. we had but little left for purchasing provisions.

To increase our straits, my old friend being somewhat displeased at our
leaving him and his relations, took an early opportunity to tell me that I was
indebted to him near forty shillings, of two years standing. I was not
convinced of the justice of the claim, but to avoid dispute, I paid him in
about two months, during nearly the whole of which time it was extremely severe
weather, and yet we made four shillings and sixpence per week pay for the whole
of what we consumed in eating and drinking. Strong beer we had none, nor any
other liquor (the pure element excepted) and instead of tea, or rather coffee,
we toasted a piece of bread; at other times we fried some wheat, which when
boiled in water made a tolerable substitute for coffee; and as to animal food,
we made use of but little, and that little we boiled and made broth of.

During the whole of this time we never once wished for any thing that we had
not got, but were quite contented, and wish a good grace, in reality made a
virtue of necessity. We "Trembled not with vain desires,
"Few the things which life requires."
FRANCIS's Horace. And the subject of our prayer was "This day be bread and
peace our lot,
"All else beneath the sun,
"Thou know if best bestowed or not,
"And let thy will be done.


LETTER XVIII.
"This same Monsieur Poverty is a bitter enemy.
JOHN DORY. "In adverse hours an equal mind maintain."
FRANCIS's Horace.
DEAR FRIEND,
IN a few days after we had paid the last five shillings of the debt claimed by
my friend Mr. Jones, we were both together taken so ill as to be confined to
our bed, but the good woman of the house, our landlady, came to our room and
did a sew trifles for us. She seemed very much alarmed at our situation, or
rather for her own, I suppose, as thinking we might in some measure become
burdensome to her. We had in cash two shillings and ninepence, half a crown of
which we had carefully locked up in a box, to be saved for a resource on any
extraordinary emergence. This money supported us two or three days, in which
time I recovered without the help of medicine; but my wife continued ill near
six months, and was confined to her bed the greatest part of her time; which
illness may very easily be accounted for.

Before she came to Bristol, she had ever been used to a very active life, and
had always lived in the country, so that in coming to dwell in a populous city,
she had exchanged much exercise and good air for a sedentary life and very bad
air; and this I presume was the cause of all her illness from time to time,
which at length, as unfortunately as effectually undermined ^er constitution.
During her first six months illness I lived many days solely on water gruel;
for as I could not afford to pay a nurse, much of my time was taken up in
attendance on her, and most of my money expended in procuring medicines,
together with such trifles as she could eat and drink. But what added extremely
to my calamity was the being within the hearing of her groans, which were
caused by the excruc^ating pains in her head, which for months together defied
the power of medicine.

It is impossible for words to describe the keenness of my sensations during
this long term; yet as to myself, my poverty and being obliged to live upon
water gruel gave me not the least uneasiness.

"In russling seasons I was calm,
"And sailed when for^^ne frowned."
YOUNG. But the necessity of being continually in the sight and hearing of a
beloved object, a young, charming, handsome, innocent wife, "Who sick in bed
lay gasping for her breath;
"Her eyes, like dying lamps sunk in their sockets,
"Now glar'd, and now drew back their feeble light:
"Faintly her speech fell from her fault'ring tongue
"In interrupted accents, as she strove
"With strong agonies that shook her limbs
"And wr^^h'd her tortured features into forms
"Hideous to sight."
BELLER's Injured Innocence.

How I supported this long dreary scene, I know not; the bare recollection of
which is exceedingly painful, even at this distance of time. At last, when
every thing that seemed to promise relief had been ried in vain, some old woman
recommended Cephalic snuff. I own I had not much faith in it; however I
procured it, and in a short time after she was much relieved from the
intolerable pain in her head, but yet continued in a very bad state of health;
her constitution having suffered such a dreadful shock, I thought that no means
could be used so likely to restore it, as a removal to her native air.
Accordingly I left my seat of work at Bristol, and returned with her to
Taunton, which is about seven miles from Petherton, her native place. But in
Taunton I could not procure so much work as I could do; so that as soon at I
thought she could bear the air of Bristol, we returned thither, where she soon
relapsed, and we again went back to Taunton. This removing to Taunton was
repeated about five times in little more than two years and a half.

But at last, finding that she had long fits of illness at Taunton also, as
well as at Bristol, with a view of having a better price for my work I resolved
to visit London; and as I had not money sufficient to hear the expenses of both
to town, I left her all the money I could spare, and took a place on the
outside of the stage coach, and the second day arrived in the metropolis, in
August 1773, with two shillings and sixpence in my pocket; and recollecting the
address of an old townsman, who was also a spiritual brother.

"Whose hair in greasy locks hung down,
"As strait as candles from his crown,
"To shade the borders of his face,
"Whose outward signs of inward grace
"Were only visible in spiteful
"Grimaces, very stern and frightful."
BUTLER's Posth. Works. This holy brother was also a journeyman shoe maker, who
had arrived at the summit of his expectations, being able to keep a house over
his head (as he chose to express himself) that is by letting nearly the whole
of it out in lodgings, he was enabled to pay the rent. This house was in
White-crossstreet, which I found out the morning after my arrival, where I
procured a lodging, and Mr. Heath, in Fore-street, supplied me with plenty of
work.

I laughed then and whistl'd, and sung too most sweet,
Saying, just to a hair I Have made both ends to meet.
Derry-down. LETTER XIX.
"I Will travel no more -- I Will try a London audience;
"Who knows but I may get an engagement."
Wild Oats. "When superstition (bane of manly virtues!)
"Strikes root within the soul; it over-runs
"And kills the power of Reason."
PHILIPS of Gloucester.
DEAR FRIEND,
AT this time I was as visionary and superstitious as ever I had been at any
preceding period, for although I had read some sensible books, and had thereby
acquired a few rational ideas, yet having had a methodistical wife for near
three years, and my keeping methodistical company, together with the gloomy
notions which in spite of reason and philosophy I had imbibed during the
frequent, long, and indeed almost constant illness of my wife, the consequence
was, that those few rational or liberal ideas which I had before treasured up,
were at my coming to London in a dormant state, or borne down by the torrent of
enthusiastic whims, and fanatical chimeras.

" -- Oh! what a reasonless machine
"Can superstition make the reas'ner man!"
MILLER'S Mahomet. So that I soon procured a lodging and work, my next enquiry
was for Mr. Wesley's Gospel-shops: and on producing my class and band tickets
from Taunton, I was put into a class, and a week or two after admitted into a
band.

But it was several weeks before I could firmly resolve to continue in London;
as I really was struck with horror for the fate of it; more particularly on
Sundays, as I found so few went to church, and so many were walking and riding
about for pleasure, and the lower class getting drunk, quarrelling, fighting,
working, buying, selling, etc. I had seen so much of the same kind in Bristol
that I often wondered how God permitted it to stand; but London I found
infinitely worse, and seriously trembled for fear the measure of iniquity was
quite full, and that every hour would be its last. However I at length
concluded, that if London was a second Sodom, I was a second Lot; and these
comfortable ideas reconciled me to the thought of living in it. Besides, some
of Mr. Wesley's people gave me great comfort by assuring me, that "the Lord had
much people in this city:" which I soon discovered to be true, as I got
acquainted with many of those righteous chosen saints, who modestly arrogate to
themselves that they are the peculiar favorites of heaven, and consequently
that any place they reside in must be safe.

In a month I saved money sufficient to bring up my wife, and she had a pretty
tolerable state of health; of my master I obtained some stuff-shoes for her to
bind and nearly as much as she could do. Having now plenty of work and higher
wages, we were tolerably easy in our circumstances, more so than we ever bad
been, so that we soon procured a few clothes. My wife had all her life before
done very well with a superfine broad cloth cloak, but now I prevailed on her
to have one of silk.

Until this winter I had never found out that I wanted a great coat, but now I
made that important discovery; and my landlord showed me one made of a coarse
kind of Bath coating, which he purchased new at a shop in Rosemary-lane for ten
shillings and six pence; so that the next half guinea I had to spare, away I
went to Rosemary-lane (and to my great surprise) was hauled into a shop by a
fellow who was walking up and down before the door of a slopseller, where I was
soon fitted with a great coat of the same fort as that of my landlord. I asked
the price; but how great was my astonishment, when the honest slop-man told me,
that he was so taken with my clean, honest, industrious looks, that he would
let me have it cheaper than he would his own brother, so in one word he would
oblige me with it for five and twenty shillings, which was the very money that
it cost him. On hearing this I crossed the shop in a trice, in order to set off
home again, but the door had a sastening to it beyond by comprehension, nor
would the good man let me out before I had made him an offer. I told him I had
so little money about me that I could not offer any thing, and again desired
that he would let me out. But he persisted and at last I told him that my
landlord had informed me that he had purchased such another coat for ten
shillings and six pence; on which he began to give himself airs, and assured me
that however some people came by their goods, that for his part, he always paid
for his. I heartily wished myself out of the shop, but in vain; as he seemed
determined not to part with me until I had made some offer. I then told him
that I had but ten shillings and six pence, and of course could not offer him
any more than I had got. I now expected more abuse from him, but instead of
that the patient good man told me, that as he perhaps might get something by me
another time, I should have the coat for my half guinea, although it was worth
more than double the money.

About the end of November I received an account of the death of my
grandfather; and was also informed that he had left a will in favor of my
grandmother-in-law's relations, who became possessed of all his effects, except
a small freehold estate, which he left to my youngest brother, because he
happened to be called George (which was the name of my grandfather) and ten
pounds a piece to each of his other grandchildren.

So totally unacquainted was I with the modes of transacting business, that I
could not point out any method of having my ten pounds sent up to London, at
least no mode that the executor of the will would approve of; it being such-a
prodigious sum, that the greatest caution was used on both sides, so that it
cost me about half the money in going down for it, and in returning to town
again. This was in extremely hard frosty weather (I think some time in
December) and being on the outside of a stage-coach, I was so very cold, that
when I came to the inn where the passengers dined, I went directly to the fire,
which struck the cold inward, so that I had but a very narrow escape from
death. This happened in going down. In returning back to town I had other
misfortunes to encounter. The cold weather still coutinuing, I thought the
basket warmer than the roof, and about six miles from Salisbury, I went back
into the basket. But on getting out of it, in the inn yard at Salisbury, I
heard some money jingle, and on searching my pockets, I discovered that I had
lost about sixteen shillings, two or three of which I found in the basket, the
rest had fallen through on the road; and no doubt the whole of what I had left
of my ten pounds would have gone the same way, had I not (for fear of
highwaymen) sewed it up in my clothes. The loss of my silver I bore with the
temper of a stoic, and like Fpictetus reasoned, that I could not have lost it,
if I had not first had it; and that as I had lost it, why it was all the same
as though it had never been in my possession.

But a more dreadful misfortune befell me the next morning; the extreme severe
weather still continuing, in order to keep me from dying with cold, I drank
some purl and gin, which (not being used to drink any thing strong) made me so
drunk, that the conchman put me inside the carriage for fear I should sall off
the roof. I there met with some of the jovial sort, who had also drank to keep
out the cold, so that I sound them in high glee; being asked to sing them a
song, I immediately complied, and forgetting that I was one of the holy
brethren, I sung song for song with the merriest of them; only several times
between the acts, I turned up the whites of my eyes, and uttered a few
ejaculations, as "Lord forgive me!" "O Christ! What am I doing?" and a few more
of the same pious sort. However after eating a good dinner, and refraining from
liquor, I became nearly sober, and by the time I arrived in town quite so;
though in a terrible agitation of mind, by reflecting on what I had done, and
was so ashamed of the affair, that I concealed it from my wife, that I might
not grieve her righteous soul with the knowledge of so dreadful a fall: so that
she with great pleasure ripped open the places in my clothes, which contained
my treasure, and with an heart full of gratitude, piously thanked providence
for affording us such a supply, and hoped that the Lord would enable us to make
a good use of it.

LETTER XX.
"Now since through all the race of man we find
"Each to some darling passion is inclined,
"Let books be still the bias of my mind,"
Anonym. "Fixed in an elbow chair at ease,
"I choose companions as I please."
SWIFT.
DEAR FRIEND,
WITH the remainder of the money we purchased house hold goods, but as we then
had not sufficient to furnish a room, we worked hard, and lived still harder,
so that in a short time we had a room furnished with our own goods; and I
believe that it is not possible for you to imagine with what pleasure and
satisfaction we looked round the room and surveyed our property: I believe that
Alexander the Great never reflected on his immense acquisitions with half the
heartfelt enjoyment which we experienced on this capital attainment.

After our room was furnished, as we still enjoyed a better state of health
than we did at Bristol and Taunton, and had also more work and higher wages, we
often added something or other to our stock of wearing apparel. Nor did I
forget the old-book shops: but frequently added an old book to my small
collection, and I really have often purchased books with the money that should
have been expended in purchasing something to eat; a striking instance of which
follows: At the time we were purchasing household goods, we kept ourselves very
short of money, and on Christmas-eve we had but half a crown left to buy a
Christmas dinner. My wife desired that I would go to market, and purchase this
festival dinner, and off I set for that purpose; but in the way I saw an
old-book shop, and I could not resist the temptation of going in; intending
only to expend sixpence or ninepence out of my half-crown. But I stumbled upon
Young's Night Thoughts -- down went my half-crown -- and I hastened home,
vastly delighted with the acquisition. When my wise asked me where was our
Christmas dinner? I told her it was in my pocket. -- "In your pocket (said she)
that is a strange place. How could you think of stuffing a joint of meat into
your pocket?" I assured her that it would take no harm. But as I was in no
haste to take it out, she began to be more particular, and enquired what I had
got, etc. On which I began to harrangue on the superiority of intellectual
pleasures over sensual gratifications, and observed that the brute creation
enjoyed the latter in a much higher degree than man. And that a man, that was
not possessed of intellectual enjoyments was but a two-legged brute.

I was proceeding in this strain: "And so (said she) instead of buying a
dinner, I suppose you have, as you have done before, been buying books with the
money?" I then confessed I had bought Young's Night Thoughts: "And I think
(said I) that I have acted wisely; for had I bought a dinner, we should have
eaten it tomorrow, and the pleasure would have been soon over, but should we
live fifty years longer, we shall have the Night Thoughts to feast upon." This
was too powerful an argument to admit of any further debate; in short, my wife
was convinced. Down I sat, and began to read with as much enthusiasm as the
good doctor possessed when he wrote it; and so much did it excite my attention
as well as approbation, that I retained the greatest part of it in my memory. A
couplet of Persius, as Englished, might have been applied to me: " -- For this
you gain those meagre looks,
"And sacrifice your dinner to your books."


Some time in June 1774, as we sat at work in our room, Mr. Boyd, one of Mr.
Wesley's people, called and informed me that a little shop and parlour were to
be let in Featherstone-street; adding, that if I was to take it, I might there
get some work as a master. I without hesitation told him that I liked the idea,
and hinted that I would sell books also. Mr. Boyd then asked me how I came to
think of selling books? I informed him that until that moment it had never once
entered into my thoughts; but that when he proposed my taking the shop, it
instantaneously occurred to my mind, that for several months past I had
observed a great increase in a certain old book shop; and that I was persuaded
I knew as much of old books as the person who kept it. I farther observed, that
I loved books, and that if I could but be a bookseller, I should then have
plenty of books to read, which was the greatest motive I could conceive to
induce me to make the attempt. My friend on this assured me, that he would get
the shop for me, and with a laugh added, "when you are Lord Mayor, you shall
use all your interest to get me made an Alderman." Which I engaged not to
forget to perform.

My private library at this time consisted of Fletcher's Checks to
Antinomianism, etc. 5 volumes; Watt's Improvement of the Mind; Young's Night
Thoughts; Wake's Translation of the Apostolical Epistles; Fleetwook's Life of
Christ; the first twenty numbers of Hinton's Dictionary of the Arts and
Sciences; some of Wesley's Journals, and some of the pious lives published by
him; and about a dozen other volumes of the latter sort, besides odd magazines,
etc. And to set me up in style, Mr. Boyd recommended me to the friends of an
holy brother lately gone to heaven, and of them I purchased a bagful of old
books, chiefly divinity, for a guinea.

With this stock, and some odd scraps of leather, which together with all my
books were worth about five pounds, I opened shop on midsummer-day, 1774, in
Featherstone-street, in the parish of St. Luke; and I was as well pleased in
surveying my little shop with my name over it, as was Nebuchadnezzar, when he
said "Is not this great Babylon that I have built?" and my good wife often
perceiving the pleasure that I took in my shop, piously cautioned me against
setting my mind on the riches of this world, and assured me that it was all but
vanity. "You are very right, my dear (I sometimes r^plied) and to keep our
minds as spiritual as we can, we will always attend our class and band
meetings, hear as many sermons, etc. at the Foundery on week days as possible,
and on sabbath days we will mind nothing but the good of our souls: our small
beer shall be fetched in on Saturday nights, nor will we dress even a potatoe
on the sabbath. We will still attend the preaching at five o'clock in the
morning; at eight go to the prayer meeting; at ten to the public worship at the
Foundery; hear Mr. Perry at Gripplegate, at two; be at the preaching at the
Foundery at five; meet with the general society at six; meet in the united
bands at seven, and again be at the prayer meeting at eight; and then come home
to read and pray by ourselves."

LETTER XXI.
" -- Strange vicissitudes of human fate;
"Still alt'ring, never in a steady state;
"Good after ill, and after pain delight;
"Alternate, like the scenes of day and night.
"Since every one who lives, is born to die,
"And none can boast in^ire felicity:
"With equal mind what happens let us bear,
"Nor joy, nor grieve too much for things beyond our care.
"Like pilgrims, to the appointed place we tend:
"The world's an inn, and death's the journey's end."
DRYDEN's Palemen and Arcite.
DEAR FRIEND,
NOtwithstanding the obscurity of the street, and the mean appearance of my
shop, yet I soon found customers for what few books I had, and I as soon laid
out the money in other old trash which was daily brought for sale.

At that time Mr. Wesley's people had a sum of money which was kept on purpose
to lend out, for three months, without interest to such of their society whose
characters were good, and who wanted a temporary relief. To increase my little
stock, I borrowed five pounds out of this fund, which was of great service to
me.

In our new situation we lived in a very frugal manner, often dining on
potatoes, and quenching our thirst with water, being absolutely determined if
possible to make some provision for such dismal times as sickness, shortness of
work, etc. which we had been so frequently involved in before, and could scarce
help expecting to be our fate again. My wife soreboded it much more than I did,
being of a more melancholy turn of mind.

"A sad prophetic spirit dwells with woe."
I lived in this street six months, and in that time increased my stock from
five pounds, to twenty-five pounds.

"London -- the public there are candid and generous, and before my merit can
have time to create me enemies, I Will save money, and a fig for the Sultan and
Sophy."

ROVER.

This immense stock I deemed too valuable to be buried in Featherstone-street;
and a shop and parlour being to let in Chiswell-street, No. 46, I took them.
This was at that time, and for fourteen years afterward a very dull and
obscure situation: as few ever passed through it, besides Spitalfield weavers
on hanging days, and methodists on preaching nights; but still it was much
better adapted for business than Featherstone-street.

A few weeks after I came into Chilwell-street, I bade a final adieu to the
gentle crast, and converted my little stock of leather, etc. into old books;
and a great sale I had, considering my stock; which was not only extremely
small, but contained very little variety, as it principally consisted of
divinity; for as I had not much knowledge, so I seldom ventured out of my
depth. Indeed there was one class of books, which for the first year or two
that I called myself a bookseller, I would not sell, for such was my ignorance,
bigotry, superstition (or what you please) that I conscientiously destroyed
such books as fell into my hands which were written by freethinkers; for really
supposing them to be dictated by the devil, I would neither read them myself,
nor sell them to others.

I went on prosperously until some time in September, 1775, when I was suddenly
taken ill of a dreadful fever; and eight or ten days after, my wife was seized
with the same disorder.

At that time I only kept a boy to help in my shop, so that I sear, while I lay
ill, my wife had too much care and anxiety on her mind. I have been told that
before she was confined to her bed she walked about in a delirious state; in
which she did not long continue, but contrary to all expectation died, in
enthusiastic rant, on the ninth of November, surrounded with several
methodistical preachers.

"Invidious death! how do thou rend in sunder
"Whom love has knit and sympathy made one?
"A tie so stubborn." --
BLAIR'S Grave. She was in reality one of the best of women; and although for
about four years she was ill the greatest part of the time, which involved me
in the very depth of poverty and distress, yet I never once repented having
married her.

" -- still busy meddling memory,
"In barbarous succession, musters up
"The past endearments of our so^ter hours,
"Tenacious of his theme."
BLAIR'S Grave. It Is true she was enthusiastical to an extreme, and of course
very superstitious and visionary, but as I was very far gone myself, I did not
think that a fault in her.

Indeed she much exceeded me, and most others that ever fell under my
observation, as she in reality totally neglected and disregarded every kind of
pleasure whatever, but those of a spiritual (or visionary) nature. Methinks I
here see you sinile: but I assure you she made no exception; but was a complete
devotee, and what is more remarkable, without pride or ill nature.

"Intentions so pure, and such meekness of spirit,
"Must of course, and of right, heaven's kingdom inherit."
SIMKIN. LETTER XXII.
"I Have strange news to give you! but when you receive it,
"'It Is impossible, sir, that you should believe it;
"But as I Have been told this agreeable story,
"I Will digress for a moment to lay it before ye."

DEAR SIR,
A Friend of mine, of whose veracity I entertain the highest opinion, has
favored me with an account of a lady, who has to the full as much, indeed more
of the spirit, but without the goodnature of Nancy Lackington. The fact is as
follows:

"'It Is true it is pity: and pity it is it is true."
Mr. R -- t, a genteel tradesman with whom I am acquainted, having lost his
second wife early in 1790, courted and married one of the holy sisters a few
months afterward. They had lived together about six months, when Mr. R -- t,
one Sunday, being a sober religious man, took down Doddridge's Lectures, and
began to read them to his wife and family. But this holy sister found fault
with her husband for reading such learned rational discourses, which favored
too much of human reason and vain philosophy, and wished he would read
something more spiritual and edifying. He attempted to convince her that Dr.
Doddridge was not only a good rational divine, but to the full as spiritual as
any divine ought to be; and that to be more spiritual he must be less rational,
and of course become fanatical and visionary. But these observations of the
husband so displeased his spiritual wife, that she retired to bed, and left her
husband to read Doddridge's Lectures as long as he chose to his children by a
former wife.

The next morning while Mr. R -- t was out on business, this holy sister,
without saying one syllable to any person, packed up all her clothes, crammed
them into a^ hackney coach, and away she went. Mr. R -- t, poor soul! on coming
home discovered his immense loss, and in an almost frantic state, spent the
first fortnight in fruit less attempts to discover her retreat.

Three weeks after her elopement, was (says Mr R -- t) going down Cheap side
one day, and saw a lady something like my wife, but as she was somewhat
disguised and I could not see her face, was not sure. At last I ventured to
look under her bonnet and sound, that, su^^ enough, it was she. I then walked
thr^^ times backwards and forwards in Cheapside, endeavoring to persuade her
to return with me or to discover where she lived: but she obstinately refused
to return, or to let me see her retreat; and here (says Mr. R -- t) I begged
that she would grant me a kiss; but she would not willingly. However after some
bustle in the street, I took a farewell kiss. Poor dear soul! (sigh^d he) she
is rather too spiritual! for notwithstanding I laid by her side near six
months, she never would be prevailed upon to do any thing carnal; and although
I did all in my power to get the better of her spiritual scruples, yet she was
always so in love with Christ her heavenly spouse, that when she eloped from
me, she was, I assure you, as good a virgin as when I married her.

I must give you one more story of the same nature with the preceding.

A gentleman of London happening to be on a visit at Bristol about three years
since, fell in love with a handsome young lady who was one of the holy
sisterhood; after a few weeks acquaintance he made her an offer of his person
and fortune, and the young lady after proper enquiry had been made into the
gentleman's family, fortune, etc. consented to make our lover happy. They were
soon after married, and the same day set off in a post-chaise toward London,
in order to sleep the first night at an inn, and so save the lady the blushes
occasioned by the jokes common on such occasions; this happy couple had been in
bed about an hour when the cry of murder alarmed the house, this alarm
proceeding from the room that was occupied by the bride and bridegroom, drew
the company that way; the innkeeper knocked at the door and demanded
admittance, our Benedict appeared at the door, and informed the host that his
lady had been taken suddenly ill in a kind of fit he believed, but that she was
better; and after the inn-keeper's wife had been sent into the room to see the
young lady, and had sound her well, all retired to bed.

They had, however, not lain more than two hours, when the cry of murder, fire,
etc. again alarmed the house, and drew many out of their beds once more.

Our young gentleman then dressed himself, and opening the door, informed the
company that he had that morning been married to the young lady in bed, and
that being married, he had insisted on being admitted to the privilege of an
husband, but that the young lady had talked much about the good of her poor
soul, her spiritual husband, etc. and that instead of granting what he
conceived to be the right of every husband, she had thought proper to disturb
all in the house. He added, that having been thus made very ridiculous, he
would take effectual care to prevent a repetition of the same absurd conduct.

He then ordered a post-chaise and set off for London, leaving our young saint
in bed to enjoy her spiritual contemplations in their full extent, nor has he
ever since paid her any attention.

Some time since being in a large town in the west, she was pointed out to me
by a friend, as she was walking in the street.

The above puts me in mind of what Ovid says was practiced by young maids on
the festival of the celebrated nymph Anna Perenna, thus translated by I know
not who: "With promises the amorous god she led,
"And with fond hopes his eager passion fed,
"At length it is done, the goddess yields, she cried;
"My prayers have gained the victory over pride.
"With joy the god prepares the golden bed;
"Thither, her face concealed, is Anna led,
"Just on the brink of bliss, she stands confessed
"The disappointed lover is her jest,
"While rage and shame alternate swell his breast.


I am informed from good authority that there are now in Mr. Wesley's society,
in London, some women, who ever since they were converted, have refused to
sleep with their husbands, and that some of those will not pay the least
attention to any temporal concern whatever, being as they term it, wholly
wrapped up in divine contemplation, having their souls absorbed in divine love,
so as not to be interrupted by the trifling concerns of a husband, family, etc.

LETTER XXIII.
"Women that leave no stone unturned,
"In which the cause might be concerned."
HUDIBRAS. "The man without sin, the methodist Rabbi,
"Has perfectly cured the chlorosis of Tabby:
"And if right I can judge from her shape and face,
"She soon may produce an infant of grace.
"Now they say that all people in her situation
"Are very fine subjects for regeneration."
New bath Guide.
DEAR FRIEND,
BECAUSE some of the holy sisters are in their amors altogether spiritual, you
are by no means to understand that they are all totally divested of the carnal
propensity.

Some of these good creatures are so far from thinking that their husbands are
too carnal in their affections, that they really think that they are not enough
so; and instances are not wanting, in which, owing to their having husbands too
spiritual, they have been willing to receive assistance from the husbands of
other women.

It is but about a year since a certain celebrated preacher used to administer
carnal consolation to the wife of his clerk. This holy communication was
repeated so often, and so open, that at last it came to the clerk's ears, who
watching an opportunity, one day surprised the pious pair at their devotion,
and so belabored the preacher with his walkingstaff, that the public were for
near a month deprived of the benefits resulting from his remarkable gift of
eloquence.

As I am got into the story-telling way, I cannot resist the temptation of
telling another.

A certain holy sister who lately kept a house in a country village, within ten
miles of London; and took in (as they called it) Mr. Wesleys preachers, by
taking in is only meant, that when they came in their turn to preach in the
village she used to supply each with victuals and a bed; ( no doubt but they
slept alone.) This lady was so very remarkable for her spiritual experience and
divine gifts, that she attracted many to her house, besides such as came in the
regular course of their duty, and among the former a preacher from London, from
whom I learnt the affair. This preacher happening to want a wife, and being
very spiritually-minded, actually married her in December 1790, merely for her
great gifts and grace, as her fortune was not above the fiftieth part as much
as his own; and as to person, she is scarce one degree above ugliness itself;
although her husband is well-proportioned, and upon the whole a handsome man.
They had not been married a week, when this simple preacher discovered that his
gifted gracious saint was an incarnate devil, who had married him only to job,
plunder, and -- him, and in a few months between her and her gallants, they
bullied him out of a settlement to the amount of four times the sum she brought
him, and the poor pious preacher thinks that he has cheaply got rid of her.

"Ah, foolish woman! may she one day see,
"How deep she is plunged herself in infamy,
"And with true penitence wash out the stain
"But -- mischief on it -- why should I pray in vain;
"For she is but hardened at the name of grace,
"No blush was ever seen t'adorn her face."
GOULD. The reason why I interest myself in his behalf is, because I am
confident that he really is an honest well-meaning man at the bottom; but
withal one that does not possess the greatest share of understanding, and who
being formerly but a mean mechanic, never had any education; but although he is
a great enthusiast, yet he is one of the good-natured inoffensive so^, who will
do no harm to any person, but on the contrary all the good in his power. I am
only sorry as he lately was an honest useful tradesman, that he should have so
much spiritual quixotism in him, as at thirty years of age to shut up his shop
and turn preacher, without being able to read his primer; which I can assure
you is the case. But here, my friend, you see I forget that these heavenly
teachers only speak as the spirit gives utterance, and that of course all
human learning is entirely superfluous.

" -- "As he does not choose to cull,
"His faith by any scripture rule;
"But by the vapors that torment
"His brains, from hypocondria sent,
"Which into dreams and visions turn,
"And make his zeal so fiercely burn,
"That reason loses the ascendant,
"And all within grows independent,
"He proves all such as do accord
"With him the chosen of the Lord;
"But that all others are accursed,
" It Is plain in Cauricles the first."
BUTLER's Posth. Works. A few years since the methodist-preachers got ^^^^ing
in Wellington (the famous birthplace of your humble servant) and established a
society there, soon after which one of their preachers (at Collompton, a
neighboring town) happened to like a young servant girl, who was one of the
holy sisters, she having gone through the new birth, better than his wife,
because she was an unenlightened. unconverted woman. But this servant girl
happening to be with child, the news soon reached Wellington; and a very
wealthy gentleman who entertained the preachers there followed the preacher of
Collompton's example, and got his own pious maid with child.

"Blessed she though once rejected,
"Like a little wandering sheep;
"Poor maid, one morning was elected
"By a vision in her sleep."
After this some of the society in Wellington began to have all things in
common, and several more of the holy sisters proved prolific; which so alarmed
the parish, that some of the heads of it insisted that the preachers should not
be permitted to preach there any longer. "For, if (said they) the methodist
society continues, we shall have the parish full of bastards."

A similar affair happened at a country town, ten or twelve miles from Oxford,
about two years since, where a very handsome powerful preacher made converts of
a great number of women, both married and single, who were wonderfully
affected, and great numbers flocked to his standard; but he had not labored
there more than a year, before the churchwardens were made acquainted with his
powerful operations on sine young female saints, who all swore bastards to this
holy, spiritual labourer in the vineyard; upon which the gentlemen of the town
exerted themselves, and prevented the farther propagation of methodism; as "The
ladies by sympathy seemed to discover
"The advantage of having a spiritual lover.
"They were sadly afraid that wives, widows, and misles
"Would confine to the -- all their favors and kisses."


The author of a letter to Dr. Coke and Mr. More, published since the first
edition of my memoirs, informs us, that a gentleman of Chesham had a daughter
about seventeen years of age, which he put into the hands of a methodist
parson, to have her converted, and was exceedingly kind and liberal to him; and
we are informed that this rascal converted her first, and debauched her
afterward.

So you see, my dear friend, by the above examples (were it necessary, I could
give you many more) that not all the converted and sanctified females are
thereby become so absorbed in the spiritual delights of the mystical union, as
to have lost all relish for carnal connections; as we find that many among them
are blessed with a mind so capacious, as to be able to participate in the
pleasures of both worlds.

LETTER XXIV.
"It was not good for man to be alone:
"An equal, yet the subject, is designed
"For thy soft hours and to unbend the mind."
DRYDEN, "Woman, man's chiefest good, by heaven designed
"To glad the heart and humanize the mind;
"To sooth each angry care, abate each strife,
"And lull the passions as we walk through life."
Art of Living in London.
DEAR FRIEND,
AFTER a long digression, I must now return to my own affairs.

I continued in the abovementioned dreadful fever many weeks, and my life was
despaired of by all that came near me. During which time, my wife, whom I
affectionately loved, died and was buried, without my once having a sight of
her. What added much to my misfortunes, several nurses that were hired to take
care of me and my wife, proved so abandoned and depraved as to have lost all
sense of moral obligation, and every tender feeling for one who to all
appearance was just on the point of death: several of these monsters in female
shape robbed my drawers of linen, etc. and kept themselves drunk with gin,
while I lay unable to move in my bed, and was ready to perish, partly owing to
want of cleanliness and proper care. Thus situated, I must inevitably have
fallen a victim, had it not been for my sister Dorothy, wife of Mr. Northam of
Lambeth, and my sister Elizabeth wife of Mr. Bell in Soho. These kind sisters,
as soon as they were informed of he deplorable state in which I lay,
notwithstanding some misunderstanding which subsisted between us, and prevented
me from sending for them, hastened to me and each sat up with me alternately,
so that I had one or the other with me every night; and, contrary to all
expectation, I recovered. But this recovery was in a very slow manner.

As soon as I was able to enquire into the state of my affairs, I found that
Mr. Wheeler, sack and rope-maker in Old-street, and Messrs. Bottomley and Shaw,
carpenters and sash-makers in Bunhill-row, had saved me from ruin, by locking
up my shop, which contained my little all. Had not this been done, the nurses
would no doubt have contrived means to have emptied my shop, as effectually as
they had done my drawers.

The above gentlemen not only took care of my shop, but also advanced money to
pay such expenses as occurred: and as my wife was dead, they assisted in making
my will in favor of my mother.

These worthy gentlemen belong to Mr. Wesley's society (and notwithstanding
they have imbibed many enthusiastic whims) yet would they be an honor to any
society, and are a credit to human nature. I hope that I never shall recollect
their kindness without being filled with the warmest sentiments of gratitude
toward them.

"He that has nature in him must be grateful;
"'It Is the Creator's primary great Law,
"That lin^s the chain of being to each other,
"Joining the greater to the lesser nature,
"Tying the weak and strong, the poor and powerful,
"Subduing men to brutes, and even brutes to men."
On my recovery I also learnt that Miss Dorcas Turton (the young woman that
kept the house, and of whom I then rented the shop, parlour, kitchen and
garret) having out of kindness to my wife, occasionally assisted her during her
illness, had caught the same dreadful disorder, she was then very dangerously
ill, and people shunned the house as much as if the plague had been in it. So
that when I opened my shop again, I was stared at as though I had actually
returned from the other world; and it was a considerable time before many of my
former customers could credit that I really was in existence, it having been
repeatedly reported that I was dead.

Miss Dorcas Turton, was a charming young woman, and you must now be made
farther acquainted with her. She is the daughter of Mr. Samuel Turton of
Staffordshire; her mother by marriage, still retained her maiden name, which
was Miss Jemima Turton, of Oxfordshire. Mr. Samuel Turton had a large fortune
of his own, and about twenty thousand pounds with his wife Miss Jemima, but by
an unhappy turn for gaming he dissipated nearly the whole of it, and was
obliged to have ^ecourse to trade to help support his family.

"'It Is lost at dice, what ancient honor won,
"Hard, when the father plays away the son!
He opened a shop as a saddlers ironmonger, but as he was but little acquainted
with trade, and as his old propensity to gaming never quitted him, it is no
wonder that he did not succeed in his business; and to crown all his other
follies, he was bound for a false friend in a large sum; this completed his
ruin.

His wife died in Jan. 1773 and his final ruin ensued a few months after; so
that from that time to his death he was partly supported by his daughter Miss
Dorcas Turton, who cheerfully submitted to keep a school, and worked very hard
at plain work, by which means she kept her father from want. The old gentleman
died a few months after I came into the shop. Being partly acquainted with this
young lady's goodness to her father, I concluded that so amiable a daughter was
very likely to make a good wife; I also knew that she was immoderately fond of
books, and would frequently read until morning; this turn of mind in her was
the greatest of all recommendations to me, who having acquired a few ideas, was
at that time restless to increase them: so that I was in raptures with the bare
thoughts of having a woman to read with, and also to read to me.

"O^ all the pleasures, noble and refined
"Which form the taste and cultivate the mind,
"In every realm where science darts its beams,
"From Thale's ice to Afric's golden streams,
"From climes where Phoebus pours his orient ray
"To the fair regions of declining day,
"The "Feast of Reason" which from READING springs
"To reasoning man the highest solace brings,
"'It Is books a lasting pleasure can supply,
"Charm while we live, and teach us how to die."
Lachington's Shop Bill. I embraced the first opportunity after her recovery to
make her acquainted with my mind, and as we were no strangers to each others
characters and circumstances, there was no need of a long formal courtship; so
I prevailed on her not to defer our union longer than the 30th of january, 1776
when for the second time I entered into the holy state of matrimony.

-- "Wedded love is founded on esteem,
"Which the fair me^i^s of the mind engage:
"For those are charms which never can decay,
"But time, which gives new whiteness to the swan,
"Improves their luster."
FENTON. LETTER XXV.
"Reason re-baptiz'd me when adult;
"Weighed true from false, in her imperial scale,
"Truth, radiant goddess! sallies on my foul!
"And puts delusion's dusky train to flight."
YOUNG. "All the mystic lights were quenched."
LEE.
DEAR FRIEND,
I AM now in February 1776, arrived at an important period of my life. Being
lately recovered from a very painful, dangerous, and hopeless illness, I found
myself once more in a confirmed state of health, surrounded by my L^ttle slock
in trade, which was but just saved from thieves, and which to me was an immense
treasure. Add to the above, my having won a second time in a game where the
odds were so much against me; or to use another simile, my having drawn another
prize in the lottery of wedlock, and thus like John Buncle repaired the loss of
one very valuable woman by the acquisition of another still more valuable.

"O woman! let the libertine decry,
"Rail at the virtuous love he never felt,
"Nor wished to feel. -- Among the sex there are
"Numbers as greatly good as they are fair;
"Where rival virtues strive which brightens most,
"Beauty the smallest excellence they boast;
"Where all unite substantial bliss to prove,
"And give mankind in them a taste of joys above."
HAYWARD. Reflecting on the above united circumstances, I found in my heart an
unusual sensation, such as until then I had been a stranger to; my mind began
to expand, intellectual light and pleasure broke in and dispelled the gloom of
fanatical melancholy; the sourness of my natural temper which had been much
increased by superstition, (called by Swift, "the spleen of the soul,") in part
gave way, and was succeeded by cheerfulness, and some degree of good nature.

It was in one of these cheerful moods that I one day took up the life of John
Buncle; and it is impossible for my friend to imagine with what eagerness and
pleasure I read through the whole four volumes of this whimsical, sensible,
pleasing work; it was written by Thomas Amory, Esquire (who was living in the year
1788, at the great age of 97) and I know not of any work more proper to be put
into the hands of a poor ignorant bigoted superstitious methodist; but the
misfortune is, that scarce one of them will read any thing but what suits with
their own narrow notions, so that they shut themselves up in darkness, and
exclude every ray of intellectual light; which puts me in mind of the
enthusiasts on the banks of the Ganges, who will not look at any thing beyond
the tip of their moses. By the time I had gone through the last volume,

"My soul had took its freedom up."
GREEN. I also received great benefit from reading Coventry's Philemon to
Hydaspes; it consists of dialogues on false religion, extravagant devotion,
etc. in which are many very curious remarks on visionaries of various ages and
sects. The works is complete in five parts octavo. There has also been a decent
Scotch edition, published in twelves, both editions are now rather scarce.

I now began to enjoy many innocent pleasures and recreations in life, without
the fear of being eternally damned for a laugh, a joke, or for spending a
sociable evening with a few friends, going to the playhouse, etc. etc.

In short I saw that true religion was no way incompatible with, or an enemy to
rational pleasures of any kind. As life (says one) is the gift of heaven, it is
religion to enjoy it.

"Fools by excess make varied pleasure pall,
"The wise man's moderate, and enjoys them all."
VOLTAIRE by Franklin. I now also began to read with great pleasure the
rational and moderate divines of all denominations: and a year or two after I
began with metaphysics, in the intricate though pleasing labyrinths of which I
have occasionally since wandered, nor am I ever likely to find my way out.

"Like a guide in a mist have I rambled about,
"And now come at last where at first I sat out;
"And unless for new lights we have reason to hope,
"In darkness it must be my fortune to grope."
I am not in the least uneasy on that head, as I have no doubt of being in my
last moments able to adopt the language of one of the greatest men that ever
existed: "Great God, whose being by thy works is known,
"Hear my last words from thy eternal throne:
"If I mistook, 'twas while thy law I sought,
"I may have erred, but thou were in each though,
"Fearless I look beyond the opening grave,
"And cannot think the God who being gave.
"The God whose favors made my bliss overflow,
"Has doomed me, after death, to endless woe,"


In the mean time I can sincerely adopt the following lines of Mr. Pope.

"If I am right, thy grace impart,
"Still in the right to stay;
"If I am wrong! O teach my heart,
"To find the better way."
Having begun to think rationally, and reason freely on religious matters, you
may be sure I did not long remain in Mr. Wesley's society. What is remarkable,
I well remember that some years before, Mr. Welley told his society in
Broadmead, Bristol, in my hearing, that he could never keep a bookseller six
months in his stock, (all fanatics are enemies to reason.) He was then pointing
out the danger that attended close reasoning in matters of religion and
spiritual concerns, in reading controversies, etc, at that time I had not the
least idea of my ever becoming a bookseller: but I no sooner began to give
scope to my reasoning faculties than the above remarkable assertion occurred to
my mind.

But that which rather hastened my departure from methodism was this. The
methodist preachers were continually reprobating the practice of masters and
mistresses keeping servants at home on Sundays, to dress dinners, which
prevented them from hearing the word of God (by the word of God they mean their
own jargon of nonsense) assuring them if the souls of such servants were
damned, they might in a great measure lay their damnation at the doors of such
masters and mistresses, who rather than eat a cold dinner, would be guilty of
breaking the sabbath, and risking the souls of their servants. But how great
was my surprise on discovering that these very men who were continually
preaching up fasting, abstinence, etc. to their congregations, and who wanted
others to dine off cold dinners, or eat bread and cheese, etc. would themselves
not even sup, without roasted fowls, etc.

This I found to be fact, as I several times had occasion after attending the
preaching to go into the kitchen hehind the old Foundery, (which at that time
was Mr. Wesley's preaching house) there I saw women who had been kept from
hearing the sermon, etc. they being employed in roasting fowls, and otherwise
providing good suppers for the preachers.

"So," said I, "you lay burdens on other men's shoulders, but will not so much
as touch them yourselves with one of your singers."

A ridiculous instance of the same nature happened also some years since at
Taunton. One of Mr. Wesley's preachers, whose name was Cotterrell, assured his
congregation from time to time, that every baker that baked meat on Sundays
would be damned, and every person that partook of such meat would also be
damned; on which a poor baker shut up his oven on Sundays; the consequence was
that he lost his customers, as such bakers as baked their victuals on Sunday,
had their custom on other days, so that the poor baker's family was nearly
reduced to the workhouse; when one Sunday passing before the door where he knew
the preacher was to dine, he was very much surprised to see a baked leg of pork
carried into the house, and after a few minutes reflections he rushed in and
found the pious preacher eating part of the baked leg of pork, on which he bid
farewell to the methodists, and again took care for his family.

It perhaps is worth remarking, that many poor hair-dressers in Mr. Wesley's
society are reduced to extreme poverty, they cannot get employment, as they
will not dress hair on Sundays; and I find that a poor milk woman, who until
the beginning of this year 1792, maintained her family in a decent manner, was
lately frightened out of her understanding by a methodist preacher; her crime
was the selling milk on Sundays. The poor wretch is now confined in Bedlam, and
her five children are in a workhouse.

I at this time know a bookseller, who being a methodist, is so conscientious
as to have his hair dressed on the evening of every Saturday, and to prevent
its being discomposed in the night, he on those nights always sleeps in his
elbow chair. Indeed some tell the story different, and say, that his hair is
dressed on Saturday morning, and by sleeping in his chair he saves the expense
of dressing on Sundays; others say, that the first is the fact, and that he
hinted at it in his shop-bills, in order that the public may know where to find
a tradesman that had a very tender conscience.

I was one day called aside and a hand-bill was given me, and thinking it to be
a quack doctor's bill for a certain disease, I expressed my surprise at its
being given to me in such a particular manner; but on reading it I found it
contained a part^^^lar account of the wonderful conversion of a John Biggs,
when he was twenty-one years of age. Mr. Biggs says, that ever since that time
he has had communion with God his Father every hour. He publishes this bill he
says for the glory of God; but that the public might have an opportunity of
dealing with this wonderful saint and perfectly holy man, he put his address in
capitals, John Biggs, No. 98, Strand. I keep this bill as a curiosity.

LETTER XXVI.
"Good morrow to thee: How do do?
"I only just called in, to show
"My love, upon this blessed day,
"As I by chance came by this way.
BUTLER's Posth. Works. "Let not your weak unknowing hand
"Presume God's bolts to throw,
"And deal damnation round the land,
"On each you judge his foe."

DEAR FRIEND,
I Had no sooner left Mr. Wesley's society, and began to talk a little more
like a rational being, but I found that I had incurred the hatred of some, the
pity of others, the envy of many, and the displeasure of all Mr. Wesley's --
old women! So that for a long time I was constantly teased with their
impertinent nonsense. I believe that never was a poor devil so plagued.

"Superslition is dreadful in her wrath,
"Her dire Anathema's against you dart."
HENRIADE. Some as they passed by my door in their way to the foundery would
only make a stop and lift up their hands, turn up the whites of their eyes,
shake their heads, groan, and pass on. Many would call in and take me aside,
and after making rueful faces, address me with, "O, Brother Lackington! I am
very sorry to find that you who began in the spirit are now like to end in the
flesh. Pray brother, do remember Lot's wife.' Another would interrupt me in my
business, to tell me, that, "he that puts his hand to the plough, and
looks back, is unfit for the kingdom." Another had just called as he was
passing by, to caution me against the bewitching snares of prosperity. Others
again called to know if I was as happy then as I was when I constantly sought
the Lord with my brethren, in prayer meeting, in class, in band, etc. When I
assured them that I was more happy, they in a very solemn manner assured me,
that I was under a very great delusion of the devil; and when I by chance
happened to laugh at their enthusiastic rant, some have run out of my shop,
declaring that they were afraid to stay under the same roof with me, lest the
house should fall on their heads. Sometimes I have been accosted in such an
alarming manner as though the house was on fire, with "Oh! brother! brother!
you are fast asleep! and the flames of hell are taking hold of you!"

A certain preacher assured me, in the presence of several gentlemen, that the
devil would soon toss me about in the flames of hell with a pitchsork. This
same eloquene mild preacher used occasionally to strip to his shirt to dodge
the devil.

Mr. E. a gentleman of my acquaintance, going through some alley, one Sunday,
hearing a very uncommon noise, was led by curiosity to the house from whence it
proceeded, and there he saw elevated above an assembly of old women, etc. this
tailor, s^ript in his shirt, with his wig off and the collar of his shirt
unbuttoned, sweating, foaming at the mouth, and bellowing like a baited bull.
In the above manner it seems he would often amuse himself and his congregation
for near two hours, "Cursing from his sweating tub,
"The cavaliers of Beelzebub."
BUTLER'S Posth. Works.

Some of the Tabernacle saints assured me, that I never had one grain of saving
grace, and that when I thought myself a child of God, I was only deluded by the
devil, who being now quite sure of me, did not think it worth his while to
deceive me any longer. Others advised me to take care of sinning against light
and knowledge, and piously hoped that it was not quite too late; that I had not
(they hoped) committed the unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost. Others
again, who happened to be in a better humor, often told'me that they should
see me brought back to the true sheepfold, as they really hoped I had once been
in a state of grace, and if so, that I always was in grace, in spite of all I
could do: the Lord would never quit his hold of me; that I might fall foully,
but that it was impossible for me to fall finally, as in the end I should be
brought, back on the shoulders of the everlasting gospel, for when God came to
number his jewels, not one would be missing.

One of these righteous men, after passing some encomiums on me for my moral
character, assured me that I had by no means fallen so law as many of God's
dear children had fallen, but fall as low as they possibly can, said he, they
are still God's children, for although they may "be black with sin they are
fair within" He then read to me the following passage out of a pamphlet written
against Mr. Fletcher by Mr. R. Hill. David stood as completely justified in the
everlasting righteousness of Christ, at the time when he caused Uriah to be
murdered, and was committing adultery with his wife, as he was in any part of
his life. For all the sins of the elect, be they more or be they less, be they
past, present, or to come, were forever done away. So that every one of those
elect stand spotless in the sight of God. Is not this a very comfortable kind
of doctrine? The pernicious consequences of such tenets impressed on the minds
of the ignorant followers of these quacks in religion, must be obvious to every
person capable of reflection. They have nothing to do but to enlist themselves
in the band of the elect, and no matter then how criminal their life!

Thus, my dear friend, I was for a long time coaxed by some, threatened with
all the tortures of the damned by others, and constantly teazed some how or
other by all the methodists who came near me.

"Surrounded by foes as I sat in my chair,
"Who attacked like dogs that are baiting a bear."
I at last determined to laugh at all their ridiculous perversions of the
scripture, and their spiritual cant. The consequence (as might be expected)
was, they piously and charitably consigned me over to be tormented by the
devil, and every where declared that I was turned a downright atheist. But the
aspersions of such fanatics gave me no concern, for " -- If there is a power
above us,
"(And that there is, all nature cries aloud
"Through a^l her works) he must delight in virtue;
"And that which he deligh's in must be happy."
ADDISON'S Cato.

And no matter "when or where." After relating such ridiculous stuff as the
above, I think that I cannot conclude this better than with Swift's humourous
and satirical acount of the day of judgment; so humorous that I would no^ have
quoted it had it not been written by a divine of the church of England.

"With a whirl of thought oppressed,
"I sunk from reverie to rest,
"An (...) when seized my head,
"I saw the graves give up their dead:
"Jove arm^d with terrors bursls the skies,
"And thunder roars, and lightning flies!
"Amazed, contus'd, its fate unknown,
"The world stands trembling at his throne!
"While each pale sinner hung his head,
"Jove nodding, shook the heavens and said
"Offending race of human kind,
"By nature, reason, learning blind;
"You who through frailty stepped aside,
"And you who never sell through pride,
"You who in different sects were shamed,
"And come to see each other damned!
"(So some folks told you, but they knew,
"No more of Jove's designs than you)
"The world's mad business now is over,
"And I resent those pranks no more.
" -- I ^o such blockheads set my wit!
"I damn such fools! go, go, you're bit."
LETTER XXVII.
"In London streets is often seen
"A hum-drum saint with holy mein,
"His looks most primitively wear
"An ancient Abrahamick air,
"And like bad copies of a face,
"The good original disgrace."
BUTLER'S Posth. Works.
DEAR FRIEND,
IT being generally known that I had for many years been a strict methodist,
since I have freed myself from their shackles, I have been often asked if I did
not believe or rather know, that the methodists were a vile sect of hypocrites
altogether? My reply has been uniformly in the negative. I am certain that they
are not in general so. The major part of them indeed are very ignorant (as is
the case with enthusiasts of every religion) but I believe that a great number
of the methodists are sincere, honest, friendly people; in justice to those of
that description it may not be amiss to observe, that many artful, sly,
designing persons, having noticed their character, connections, etc. and
knowing that a religious person is in general supposed to be honest and
conscientious, have been induced to join their societies, and by assuming an
appearance of extraordinary sanctity, have the better been enabled to cheat and
defraud such as were not guarded against their hypocritical wiles.

"Making religion a disguise,
"Or cloak to all their villainies."
BUTLER'S Posth. Works. I have also reason to belleve that there are not a few,
who think that they can as it were afford to cheat and defraud, on the score of
having right notions of religion in their heads, hearing what they deem
orthodox teachers, going to prayer meetings, etc.

There are again others who think, that grace is so free and so easy to be had,
or in other words, that as they can have pardon for all kinds of sins, and that
at any time whenever they please, they under this idea make very little
conscience of running up large scores, to which practice I fear such doctrines
as I noticed in my last, from the pen of Mr. Hill, have not a little
contributed.

I have often thought that great hurt has been done to society by the methodist
preachers, both in town and country, attending condemned malefactors, as by
their fanatical conversation, visionary hymns, bold and impious applications of
the scriptures, etc. many dreadful offenders against law and justice, have had
their passions and imaginations so worked upon, that they have been sent to the
other world in such raptures, as would better become martyrs innocently
suffering in a glorious cause, than criminals of the first magnitude.

A great number of narratives of these sudden conversions and triumphant exits
have been compiled, many of them published, and circulated with the greatest
avidity, to the private emolument of the editors, and doubtless to the great
edification of all siuners, long habituated to a course of villainous
depredations on the lives and properties of the honest part of the community;
and many such accounts as have not appeared in print, have been assiduously
proclaimed in all the methodist chapels and barns, throughout the three
kingdoms; by which the good and pious of every denomination have been
scandalized, and notorious offenders encouraged to persevere, trusting sooner
or later, to be honored with a similar degree of notice, and thus by a kind of
hocus pocus, be suddenly transformed into saints.

The following remarks made by the compilers of the Monthly Review for 1788,
page 286, are so applicable to the present subject, that I hope my introducing
the passage will not be deemed improper. After mentioning a couplet in one of
the methodistical hymns, where it is said

" Believe and all your sin's forgiven."
"Only believe and yours is heaven."
they proceed thus: "Such doctrine no doubt must be comfortable to poor
wretches so circumstanced as those were to whom this pious preacher had the
goodness to address his discourse; but some (and those not men of shallow
reslection) have questioned whether it is altogether right, thus to free the
most flagitious outcasts of society from the terrrors of an after-reckoning;
since it is too well known, that most of them make little account of their
punishment in this world. Instead of the "fearful looking for of (future)
judgment;" they are enraptured with the prospect of a joyful flight "to the
expanded arms of a loving savior -- longing to embrace his long lost chidren."
Surely this is not the way (humanly speaking) to check the alarming progress of
moral depravity; to which, one would think no kind of encouragement ought to be
given,"

I must observe farther, that the unguarded manner in which the methodist
preachers make tenders of pardon and salvation, has induced many to join their
fraternity, whose consciences wanted very large plasters indeed! many of those
had need to be put under a course of mortification and penance, but they
generally adopt another method; a sew quack nostrums, which they call faith and
assurance, drys up the wound, and they then make themselves as hateful by
affecting to have squeamish consciences, as they really have been obnoxious,
for having consciences of very wide latitude indeed. And notwithstanding the
affected change, they often are as bad, or worse than ever. As a friend, permit
me to advise you never to purchase any thing at a shop where the master of it
crams any of his pious nonsense into his shop-bills, etc. as you may be assured
you will nine times out of ten sind them, in the end, arrant hypocrites, and as
such, make no scruple of cheating in the way of trade, if possible.

This puts me in mind of one of these pious brethren in Petticoat-lane who
wrote in his shop-windown; "Rumps and Burs sold here, and baked Sheep's heads
will be continued every night, if the Lord permit." The Lord had no objection:
so Rumps, Burs, and Baked Sheep's heads were sold there a long time. And I
remember to have seen on a board, near Bedminster-down, "Tripe and cow-heels
sold here as usual, except on the Lord's Day, which the Lord help me to keep."
And on my enquiring about the person who exhibited this remarkable shew-board,
at the inn just by, I was informed that the pious Tripe-seller generally got
drunk on Sundays, after he returned from the barn-preaching; which accounts for
his not selling tripe on that day, having full employment (though possibly not
so inoffensive) elsewhere.

I also saw in a village near Plymouth in Devonshire, "Roger Tuttel, by God's
grace and mercy, kill rats, moles, and all sorts of vermin and venomous
creatures." But I need not have gone so far, as, no doubt you must remember
that a few years since, a certain pious common council man of the metropolis,
advertised in the public papers for a porter that could carry three hundred
weight and serve the Lord.

I have a few more observations to make on this remarkable sect, but fearing I
have already tired you, shall reserve them for my next.

"Seeming devotion does but gild the knave,
"That Is neither faithful, honest, just, or brave,
"But where religion does with virtue join,
"It makes a hero like an angel shine."
WALLER. LETTER XXVIII.
"Under this stone rests Hudibras,
"A knight as errant as eler was:
"The controversy only lies,
"Whether he was more fool than wise;
"Full often he suffered bangs and drubs,
"And full as often took pains in tubs:
"And for the good old Cause stood buff,
"'Against many a bitter kick and cuff,
"Of which the most that can be said,
"He prayed and preach^d, and preached and prayed."
BUT^ER'S Posth. Works.
DEAR FRIEND,
IT is very remarkable that while I was writing the last five lines of my
former letter to you, on Wednesday the 2d of March 1791, I reccived the news of
the death of Mr. John Wesley, who I am informed, died that morning at his own
house, in the city-road, Moorfields, in the eighty-eighth year of his age. He
had no illness, but the wheels of the machine being worn out, it stopped of
course. As I am on the subject of methodisin, I hope you will not deem it
impertinent, if I devote a few lines to this great parent of a numerous sect,
whom I well knew, and feel a pleasure in speaking of with some respect.

Several days preceding his interment, being laid in his coffin, in his gown
and band, he was exposed to the view of all who came, and the public; and I
suppose that forty or fifty thousand persons had a sight of him. But the
concourse of people was so great, that many were glad to get out of the crowd
without seeing him at all; and although a number of constables were present,
yet the pick-pockets contrived to ease many of their purses, watches, etc.

To prevent as much as possible the dreadful effects of a mob, he was interred
on Wednesday, March the 9th, between five and six o'clock in the morning, in
the burial ground behind his own chapel in the city-road. After which Dr.
Whitehead (the physician) preached his funeral sermon, but notwithstanding the
early hour, many thousands attended more than the chapel would hold, although
it is very large.

As soon as it was known that Mr. Wesley was deceased, a number of needy
brethren deemed it a fair opportunity of prositing by it, and each immediately
set his ingenuity to work to compose what he chose to call a life of him; and
for some weeks since the funeral the chapel-yard and its vicinity has exhibited
a truly ludicrous scene, on every night of preaching, owing to the different
writers and venders of these hasty performances exerting themselves to secure a
good sale; one bawling out, that his is the right life, a second with apious
shake of the head, declares his the real life, a third protests he has got the
only genuine account; and a sourth calls them all vile chea^s and impostors,
etc. so that between all these competitors, the saints are so divided and
perplexed in their opinious, that some decline purchasing either; others
willing "to try all, and keep that which is good," buy of (...) of these
respectable venders of the life and last account of that celebrated character;
while the uninterested passenger is apt to form a conclusion that the house of
prayer is again become a den of thieves. Thus we see those holy candidates for
heaven are so influenced by self-interest that it "Turns meek and secret
sneaking oncs
"To raw-heads ficrce and bloody bones."
HUDIBRAS.

I cannot help thinking that Mr. John Wesley, the father of the methodists, was
one of the most respectable enthusiasts that ever lived; as it is generally
thought that he believed all that he taught others, and lived the fame pious
exemplary life, that he would have his followers practice. The sale of his
numerous writings produced nett profits to the amount of near TWO THOUSAND
POUNDS per annum; and the weekly collection of the classes in London and
Westminster amounted to a very large sum; besides this, great sums were
collected, at the sacraments and love feasts, for quarterly tickets, private
and public subscriptions, etc. etc. In a pamphlet which was published in the
beginning of this year 1792, by an old member of their society, it is asserted
that for the last ten years, the sums collected in Great Britain and Ireland,
have amounted to no less than FOUR HUNDRED THOUSAND POUNDS per annum. Besides
the above, many private collections are made in all his societies throughout
the three kingdoms, so that Mr. Wesley might have amassed an immense fortune,
had riches been his object. But instead of accumulating wealth, he expended all
his own private property; and I have been often informed, from good authority,
that he never denied relief to a poor person that asked him. To needy tradesmen
I have known him to give ten or twenty pounds at once. In going a few yards
from his study to the pulpit, he generally gave away an handful of half-crowns
to poor old people of his society. He was indeed charitable to an extreme, as
he often gave to unworthy objects, nor would he keep money sufficient to hold
out on his journies. One of his friends informs me that he left but L4 10 s.
behind him; and I have heard him declare that he would not die worth twenty
pounds, except his books for sale, which he has left to the "general methodist
fund, for carrying on the work of God, by itinerant preachers," charged only
with a rent of eighty-five pounds a year, which he has left to the wife and
children of his brother Charles.

His learning and great abilities are well known. But I cannot help noticing
that in one of his publications (stepping out of his line) he betrayed extreme
weakness and credulity, though no doubt his intentions were good. What I allude
to is his "Primitive Physic," a work certainly of a dangerous tendency, as the
majority of remedies therein prescribed are most assuredly inefficacious, and
many of them very dangerous, if administered. The consequence of the first is,
that while poor ignorant people are trying these remedies (besides the very
great probability of their mistaking the case) the diseases perhaps become so
inveterate as to resist the power of more efficacious remedies properly
applied, and with regard to those of a highly dangerous nature, how rash to
trust them in the hands of such uninformed people as this book was almost
solely intended for, especially when sanctioned by the name of an author whose
influence impressed the minds of the unfortunate patients with the most
powerful conviction. Many fatal effects, I fear, have been producad by a blind
adherence to this compilation; which carries with it more the appearance of
being the production of anignorant opi^^^ted old woman, than of the man of
science and education. One melancholy instance is fresh in my memory; a much
esteemed friend having fallen an immediate sacrifice to an imprudent
application of one of these remedies.

A very worthy physician to whom the community is highly indebted for his
indefatigable and successful exertions in the cause of humanity, published some
very judicious "Remarks on the Primitive Physic," which however, for obvious
reasons, were not so generally noticed as the subject deserved; as almost all
the admirers of Mr. Wesley's work consisted of his followers (sufficiently
numerous indeed to insure a very extensive sale) these were too bigoted to
condescend to peruse any production tending to enlighten their understandings;
and the public at large, not having paid much attention to it, did not conceive
themselves so materially interested in the "Remarks," though I am firmly of
opinion, if they are perused with that candor with which they appear to be
written, they will have a very beneficial tendency in guarding the public
against the mischief too frequently arising from the "Primitive Physic," and
other quack publications, as absurd as they are injurious.

Permit me just to give you one specimen of the author's wonderful abilities,
by quoting a receipt, which if not an infallible remedy, must at least be
acknowledged to be a singular one.

"To cure a windy Cholic."
"Suck a healthy woman daily; this (says Mr. Wesley) was tried by my father."
Should you, my dear friend, be desirous of perusing a variety of remedies, not
equally judicious as well as efficacious with those of Mr. Wesley, you will
meet with ample satisfaction by turning to "Dom Pernety's Voyage to the
Falkland Islands," page 153 to 162, quarto edition.

Some of the receipts there inserted are so truly curious, I can scarce refrain
from treating you with a specimen or two, but being at the same time not very
delicate, I must decline inserting them, for like Simpkin,

"I pity the ladies so modest and nice."
Should you, however, deem it worth the trouble of turning to the volume, I am
confident the subject must excite a smile at the amazing credulity of the
writer, as well as his folly in expofing such wretched trash to the public eye,
indeed I can hardly persuade myself he could be serious when he wrote them.

The two following receipts I must give you, one being no doubt an effectual
remedy for a grievous complaint of that useful quadruped the horse, the other
at least equally certain for the cure of one of the most dangerous disorders
human nature is subject to.

"To cure a foundered Horse."

"Let him take one or two spoonfuls of common salt in half a pint of water."

"For a malignant Fever."

"A live tench applied to the scet for twelve hours, then buried quietly, or
thrown down the house of office, and the patient will soon recover."

But as I well know you do not possess the faith either of a methodist or a
papid, to put implicit trust in whatever the trachers of either choose to write
or say. I sear lest I have bestowed on you labor in vain, I therefore decline
quoting any more of those extracrdinary remedies.

It was a circumliance pecularly happy for the practitioncrs of physic, though
no doubt a terrible misfortune to the public, that the disserence in religious
principles of these two reverend gentlemen proved an effectual bar to the union
of their medical obilities, which appear so exactly conespondent; had such an
event taken place, that horrid monster disease might by this time have been
banished from the earth, and the sons of AEligsculapius would be doomed to feed
on their own compositions or starve! The Rev. Dr. Fordyce, in a late
publication has also given the world a remedy for the cramp, as delicate as
efficacious.

What a pity that such a character as Mr. Wesley should have been a dupe and a
rank enthusiast! A believer in dreams, visions, immediate revelations,
miraculous cures, witchcraft, and many other ridiculous absurdities, as appears
from many passages of his Journals, to the great disgrace of his abilities and
learning; which puts me in mind of Sir Isaac Newton's Exposition of the
Revelations, Milton's Paradise Regained, Dr. Johnson's unmanly Devotions, etc.
etc. However, we may sasely affirm that Mr. Wesley was a good sincere and
honest one, who denied himself many things; and really thought that he
disregarded the praise and blame of the world, when he was more courted,
respected, and followed than any man living, and he ruled over a hundred and
twenty thousand people with an absolute sway, and the love of power seems to
have been the main spring of all his actions. I am inclined to believe that his
death will be attended with consequences somewhat similar to those which
followed the death of Alexander the Great. His spiritual generals will be
putting in their pretentions, and soon divide their master's conquests. His
death happened at a time rather critical to the methodists, as the
Swedenborgians, or New Jerusalemists, are gaining ground very fast: Many of the
methodists, both preachers and hearers, are already gone over to their party,
many more will now, undoubtedly, follow; and the death of that great female
champion of methodism, the Countess of Huntingdon, which has since happened,
will in all probability occasion another considerable defection from that
branch of methodists, and an additional reinforcement to the Swedenborgians; a
proof of the fondness of mankind for novelty, and the mavelous, even in
religious matters.

I shall conclude my remarks on the methodists in my next.

LETTER XXIX.
"More haughty than the rest, the -- race,
"Appear with belly gaunt, and famished face:
"Never was so de^^^^^ a babe of grace,"
DRYDEN. "Are olios made of conflagration, Their sermons
"Oi gulphs, of brimstone, and damnation,
"Eternal torments, furnance, worm,
"Hell-sire, a whirlwind, and a storm;
"With Mammon, Satan, and perdition,
"And Bel^ebub to help the dish on;
" Belial, and Lucifer, and all
"The nicknames which Old Nick we call.

DEAR FRIEND,
ALTHOUGH Mr. Wesley was possessed of a very great share both of natural and
acquired abilities, yet I suppose it scarcely necessary to inform you, that
this is by no means the case with his preachers in general: for although there
are amongst them some truly sensible, intelligent men, yet the major part are
very ignorant and extremely illiterate: many of these excellent spiritual
guides cannot even read a chapter in the bible, though containing the deep
mysteries which they have the rashness and presumption to pretend to explain.
Many others cannot write their own names. But so great is the ignorance of Mr.
Wesley's people in general, that they often neglect the more rational and
sensible of their preachers, and are better pleased with such as are even
destitute of common sense; really believing that the incoherent nonsense which
they from time to time pour forth, is dictated by the holy spirit; for which
several reasons may be assigned.

It is always observable, that the more ignorant people are, the more
confidence they possess. This considence or impudence, passes with the vulgar,
as a mark of their being in the right; and the more the ignorance of the
preachers is discovered, the more are they brought down to their own standard.
Again, the more ignorant preachers having very contracted ideas of real
religion and manly virtue, of course supply the want of it with a ridiculous
fuss about trifles, which passes with the ignorant for a more sanctified
deportment, and hence arises much of the mischief which has been so justly
charged on the methodists. For by making the path to heaven so very narrow, and
beset with ten thousand bugbears, many despairing to be ever able to walk in
it, have thrown off all religion and morality, and sunk into the abyss of vice
and wickedness. Others have their tempers so soured as to become lost to all
the tender connections of husband, wife, father, child. etc. really believing
that they are literally to hate father, mother, etc. for Christ's sake. Many
have in a fit of despondency put a period to their existence, it having become
a burden too intolerable to be borne. Some have been so infatuated with the
idea of sasting to mortify the slesh, that their strict perseverance in it has
been productive of the most serious consequences: Two instances of which lately
occurred in one family, in the City Road -- The mistress was deprived of her
senses, and the maid literally fasted herself to death; and Bedlam and private
madhouses now contain many, very many melancholy instances of the dreadsul
effects of religious despondency; not to mention the hundreds that have died
from time to time in such places, and the numerous suicides which have been
traced to the same source.

Mr. Bentley says, in his letter to the members of the house of commons, dated
May 12th, 1791, that although he had a fortune of one thousand pounds, and
naturally liked good living, yet that he lived on horse and ass flesh, barley
bread stinking butter, etc. and when he found that his eating such things gave
offense to his neighbors. he left off eating ass flesh- and only lived on
vegetables, as the common sort of food by their dearness hurt his conscience,

A few years since I saw in a sield not seven miles from China-hall a man
tossing up his bible in the air. This he often repeated, and raved at a strange
rate. Amongst other things (pointing to a building at some distance) " That
(said he) is the devil's house, and it shall not stand three days longer!" On
the third day after this I saw with surprise an account in one of the public
papers of that very building having been set on fire, and burnt to the ground,
and thus the poor itinerant disciples of Thespis lost the whole of their
wardrobe and scenery.

This religious maniac soon after preached very often in Smithfield and
Moorfields; but he did not wholly depend on the operations of the Holy Spirit,
as at last he seldom began to preach until he was nearly drunk, or filled with
another kind of spirit, and then he was "a very powerful preacher indeed!" But
the good man happening several times to exert himself rather too much, had
nearly tumbled headlong out of his portable pulpit; these accidents the mob
uncharitably ascribed to the liquor that he had drank, and with mud, stones,
dead cats, etc. drove him off every time he came, until at last our preacher
took his leave of them with saying "that he perceived it was in vain to attempt
their conversion, as he saw that God had given them over to the hardness of
their hearts."

But although this holy man deserted them, yet other spiritual knights-errant
were not wanting, so that a little time before the heaps of stones which lay
for years in Moorfields were removed for the purpose of building on the spot, I
have seen five or six in a day preaching their initiation sermons from those
clevated situations, until they could collect a sufficient sum of money to
purchase pulpits. Some of these excellent preachers received the whole of their
divine education and took up their degrees in Moorfields, and in due time,
after having given ample and suis^^ctory proofs of being properly qualified,
have been admitted to professorships in the noble college situated on the fouth
side of those fields, generally known by the name of Bedlam. You must know,
sir, that many of the lazy part of the communit^ set up stalls in Moorfields to
buy and sell apples, old iron, etc. several of these having heard such edifying
discourses frequently repeated as they sat at their stalls, and observing the
success which those kind of preachers met with, boldly resolved to make trial
of their spiritual gists on the heaps of stones, and have now totally abandoned
their stalls, and are gone forth as ambassadors of heaven, though without being
furnished with any diplomas as such. One of these who cannot read, lately
informed me that he had quitted all temporal concerns for the good of poor
ignorant sinners. However after all, "there is (possibly) a pleasure in being
mad, which none but madmen know." The subject of methodism is so fertile a one,
that were I disposed to enlarge thereon, my correspondence would be extended to
a very considerable length; but instead of pursuing it, I think it better to
apologize for having so long digressed from the main subject of my narrative.

But before I take my leave of the subject, I will in a few words inform you
how the preachers were governed and supported. Mr. Wesley every year ordered
the major part of his traveling preachers in great Britain and Ireland, which
were upwards of two hundred in number, to meet together, one year at London,
the next at Bristol, and the following at Manchester; this meeting he called a
conference. At those conferences, the business of the whole society was
transacted, new preachers admitted, and some turned off, or silenced;
complaints heard, differences adjusted, etc. Mr. Wesley having divided great
Britain into circuits, at those conferences, he appointed the preachers to
every circuit for the following year, and as he well knew the general want of
abilities among his preachers, he limited their time of preaching in one
circuit to a year, and so in some measure, made up the want of abilities by
variety, most of those circuits had three or four preachers every year, and in
many country places, they had but one sermon a week from the traveling
preachers, so that each preacher preached about twelve sermons in the year,
(sometimes it may be twenty) at each place. In every circuit one of the
preachers was called the assistant: to him the various contributions were paid,
and of him might be had any of Mr. Wesley's publications. He also admitted new
members, or turned out any who were judged unworthy of bearing the high
appellation of a methodist.

Each itincrant preacher had a horse found him, which, with himself, is
maintained by some brother or sister wherever they go, as the preachers do not
put up at any inn, and yet they have as regular stages to call at as the
coaches have, they having made converts at convenient distances in most parts
of Creat Britain and Ireland.

Each traveling preacher was then allowed twelve pounds a year, to find
himself clothes, pay ^^rnpikes, (...) besides what they could get privately out
of the old women's pockets. But besides those circuit-preachers, there "are in
the year 1790, in Europe and America, thirteen or fourteen hundred," of local
holdersforth, who do not preach out of their own neighborhood, and those in
general are the most ignorant of all.

Many of the circuit-preachers only travel until they can marry a rich widow,
or some ignorant young convert with money, which has often been the cause of
great unhappiness, in many respectable families. The following poetical
description of the methodist preachers, is so much to my purpose, that I must
insert it: "Every mechanic will commence
" Orator, without mood or tense;
" Pudding is pudding still they know,
"Whether it has a plum or no.
"So, though the preacher have no skill,
"A sermon is a sermon still.
"The Bricklay'r throws his trowel by,
"And now builds mansions in the sky;
"The Cobbler, touched with holy pride,
"Flings his old shoes and last aside,
"And now devoutly sets about
"Cobbling of souls, that never wear out;
"The Baker now a preacher grown,
"Finds man lives not by bread alone,
"And now his customers he feeds
"With prayers, with sermons, groans and creeds;
"The Tinman, moved by warmth within,
" Hammers the gospel just like tin;
" Weavers inspired, their shuttles leave,
" Sermons and flimsy hymns to weave;
" Barbers unreap'd will leave the chin,
"To trim, and shave the man within;
"The Waterman forgets his wherry,
"And opens a celestial ferry;
"The Brewer, bit by frenzy's grub,
"The mashing for the preaching tub
"Resigns, those waters to explore,
"Which if you drink, you thirst no more;
"The Gardener, weary of his trade,
"Tired of the mattock and the spade,
"Changed to Apollos in a trice,
" Waters the plants of paradise;
"The Fishermen no longer set
"For fish the marshes of their net,
"But catch, like Peter, men of sin,
"For catching is to take them in."


I now take a final leave of methodism, with assuring you, that in giving a
general idea of the tenets and practices of a numerous sect who have excited
much public attention, I have invariably had in view to "speak of them as they
are, nothing to extenuate, nor set down aught in malice." Should you wish to
see the crrors of the methodists particularly exposed, you may read Bishop
Lavington's "Enthusiasm of the methodists and baptists compared." It is
esteemed a very good work, it will amuse as well as instruct you. In my next, I
in tended to have resumed the account of my own affairs; but an extraordinary
publication, will tempt me to add, one letter more on the methodists.

LETTER XXX.
"Religion, fairest maid on earth,
"As meek as good, who drew her breath
"From the blessed union when in heaven,
"Pleasure was bride to virtue given;
"Religion ever p^eas'd to pray,
"Possessed the precious gi^t one day;
"Hypocrisy of cunning born,
"Crept in and stole it ere the mern."
CHURCHILI.
DEAR FRIEND,
ALthough I was many years in connection with Mr. Wesley's people, it seems,
according to a pamphlet published a sew months after the first edition of my
memoirs, that I was but supersicially acquainted with Mr. Wesley and his
preachers. The pamphlet is entitled, "A letter to the Rev. T. Coke, LL. D. and
Mr. H. Moore." To which is added, "An Appeal and Remonstrance to the People
called Methodists, by an old member of the Society." This old member informs
us, that he has been acquainted with the methodists twenty-eight years, and if
their preachers are but half as bad as he has drawn them, they are a detestable
set of sly deceiving villains. The letter was occasioned by Dr. Coke and Mr.
Moore's proposals for publishing Mr. Wesley's Life, in opposition to that
advertised under the sanction of the executors) to be written by Dr. Whitehead.

And we are informed that after Mr. Wesley's ma^^^cripts and private papers had
been given up to Dr. Whi^ehead, and the Doctor appointed to write his Life, and
this Life annou^ced to the public by the executors as the only authentic work,
on a misunderstanding taking place between Dr. Whitehead and the preachers,
because the Doctor would not submit his work to be inspected, altered, etc. and
also because the Doctor would not consent to give to the preachers at the
conference nearly the whole of the prosits derived from his labors, they then
sent a circular letter signed by nine of their head preachers, to all their
societies, and advised them to return the subscriptions that they had taken for
Dr. Whitehead's life of Mr. Wesley, and to procure all the subscriptions in
their power for another life of Mr. Wesley, to be written by Dr. Coke and Mr.
Moore.

The following quotations I think will please you, page 8, etc. "That Mr.
Wesley was a great man is an undeniable truth; that is comparitively: -- Great
amongst little people."

"Nothing can exhibit his character as an ambitions man, more than the
following anccdo^e, which I can give from the most authentic author^y. When a
boy he was in the Charter House school; the Rev. A. Took, the author of the
Pantheen, was then master, and observing that his pupil, who was remarkably
forward in his studies, yet he constan^ly associated with the inferior classes,
and it was his custom to be surrounded by a number of the little boys,
haranguing them Mr. Took, once accidentally broke in upon him when in the
middle of an oration, and interrupted him, by desiring him to follow him to the
parlour. Mr. Wesley, offended by being thus abruptly deprived of an opportunity
of displaying his superior abilities, obeyed his master very reluctantly. When
he had got into the parlour Mr. Took said to him: John, I wonder that you who
are so much above the lower forms should constantly associate with them, for
you should now consider yourself as a man, and affect the company of the bigger
boys, who are your equals." Our hero, who could hardly stifle his resentment
whilst his master spoke, boldly replied: -- "Better to rule in hell, than serve
in heaven."

"Mr. Took dismissed his pupil with this remarkable observation to an
affistant master. -- That boy though designed for the church will never get a
living in it: for his ambitious soul will never acknowledge a superior, or be
confined to a parish.

"That he was superior to the prejudices he inculcated to his followers, and
with what contempt be sometimes treated the laypreachers, the following will
show, -- Being at supper one Sunday night (a short time before his death) with
several of the preachers, one of them observed that whenever Mr. Wesley
traveled he was always invited to the houses of the neighboring nobility and
gentry; but when the preachers traveled, ^o notice was taken of them, which he
could not account for. Mr. Wesley replied, "It was the way of the world to
(...) the great, but I say, love me love my d^g! enjoying his triumph with a
hearty (...) at their expense."

After this old members letter comes his Appeal and Remo^^^rance to the
Methodists, which, as coming hom an old methodist, contains some very
extraordinary affertions and facts, and letters more extraordinary. I shall
give you some extracts from it in page 28. "Faith is the ground work of
(methodist) evidence -- it precludes the necessity of every virtue -- it is to
be feared it has sent more of its votaries to Bedlam than to heaven -- is to
wise men a stumbling block, an unintelligible jargon of mystical nonsense,
which common sense and common honesty reject."

Page 30, etc. "It has been computed that the contributions raised among the
members of the different societies in Great Britain and Ireland for these last
ten years, has amounted to no less than FOUR HUNDRED THOUSAND POUNDS per annum.
It has been further proved that about one eighth part of this sum is
appropriated to the purposes for which it was raised, and the remainder is
disposed of at the discretion of the conference, the preachers and the
stewards. This calculation does not include the enormous sums known to be
raised privately by the influence of the preachers in their respective
circuits, under the various pretentions of distress, etc.

"However, I do not pretend to vouch for the accuracy of the calculation, yet I
think it by no means c^^ggerated. What has come within my own knowledge I can
assert with confidence, and I challenge any one to resute it.

"Of Kingswood School, I can speak with certainty: for this foundation, many
thousands have been raised which never were, and I believe never were intended
to be applied to that charity. During eight years that I was at Kingswood, it
not only supported itself, but produced a considerable annual surplus.

"One of the masters of King's School, being desicient in his accounts, he was
judged an improper person to enjoy any place of trust, and was accordingly
dismissed, and appointed to a circuit as a traveling preacher -- but any will
do for that, who has but impudence and hypocrisy -- no matter whether he
possesses a grain of honesty. Now if this was the case with respect to
Kingswood, may we not conclude that the same iniquitous principle pervaded the
administration of the finances in all the different departments?

Page (...), etc. "O how long, ye shecp, will ye ^e the prey of wolves who
sleece and d^^our you at pleasure! and, ye fools, be the dupes of knavery and
hypocrisy?

"Open your eyes, and behold the villain and hyp^crite unn^a^ked, in instances
of the most slagitious crimes, and deeds of the blackst dye! perpetrated by
wretches, whom you tamely suffer to devour your substance, and whom you
cheersully contribute to support in idleness and luxury, which brings into
contempt the gospel, and whose example has done more harm to religion than that
of the most abandoned and profligate open sinner: admitting at the same time
that there may be, and I hope there are, some honest and sincere men amongst
them.

"To begin then with the late Rev. John Wesley. As the founder and head, he
must be considered as the primum mobile, or first mover of this mighty machine
of hypocrisy, fraud, and villainy! Yet were his motives originally laudable in
their intention, virtuous in their object, but unhappy in their consequences.
This I will endeavor to make appear, by an impartial review of his life,
character, and conduct. I flatter myself that I am in some measure qualified,
being totally divested of prejudice, and having no interest in representing him
either as a saint or a devil.

"From what I have observed during near twenty-eight years that I have known
him, I have uniformly found him an bitious, imperious, and positive even to
obstinacy His learning and knowledge various and general, but superficial; his
judgment too hasty and decisive to be always just -- his penetration acute; yet
was he constantly the dupe of his credulity, and his unaccountable and
universal good opinion of mankind. Humane, generous and just. In his private
opinions liberal to a degree inconsistent with strict christianity; in his
public declarations rigid almost to intolerance. From this observation of the
inconsistency of his private opinions and public declarations, I have often
been inclined to doubt his sincerity, even in the profession of the christian
says. In his temper impetuous, and impatient of contradiction; but in his
heart, a stranger to malice or resentment; incapable of particular attachment
to any individual; he knew no ties of blood or claims of kindred; never
violently or durably affected by grief, sorrow or any of the passions to which
humanity is subject; susceptible of the grossest flattery, and the most fulsome
panegyric was constantly accepted and rewarded. In his views and expectations,
sanguine and unbounded, but though often disappointed, never dejected; of his
benevolence and charity much has been said; but it is to be observed,
benevolence is but a passive virtue, and his charity was no more than b^bery;
he know no other use of money but to give it away, and he found out that an
hundred pounds would go farther in half crowns than in pounds; so that his
charity was little more than parade, as he hardly ever essentially relieved an
object of distress: in fact his charity was no more than putting his money to
interest, as the example excited his followers to the practice of the same
virtue, and doubled their subscriptions and contributions. In his constitution
warm, and consequently amorous; in his manner of living luxurious and strictly
epicurian and fond of dishes highly relished, and fond of drinking the richest
wines, in which he indulged often, but never to excess. He was indebted more to
his commanding, positive, and authoritative manner, than to any intrinsically
superior abilities.

"Having thus given the outlines of his character, I shall only observe, that
he appears to have been more a philosopher than a christian: and shall then
proceed to some anecdotes and circumstances which will corroborate my
assertions, and justify my conclusion.

"As the work of God, as it is called, was the sphere of action in which he was
more particularly and conspicuously engaged, and as I have ventured to question
the sincerity of his professions, it is proper that I should state my reasons
for so doing. First then of conversion: in the methodistical sense of the word,
for in the true sense, I apprehend to be neither more or less, than forsaking
vice and practicing virtue; but however, the methodistical sense imports quite
a different thing, and it is in that sense we shall view it. I have made it an
invariable observation, that Mr. Wesley, although he was often in the company
of sensible men, who were capable of forming an opinion, and presuming to judge
for themselves by the light of nature, the evidence of the senses, and the aid
of reason and philosophy; but of such, he never attempted the conversion. In
his own family and amongst his relations, he never attempted, or if he did
attempt he never succeeded: except now and then with a semale, in whom he found
a heart susceptible of any impression he pleased to give. It is remarkable,
that even the children of Mr. C. W. were never converted -- because they, and
most of his relations, possessed sense enough to discover hypocrisy, and
honesty enough to reject the advantage they might have derived from assuming
it. But what is still more e^truordinary, is, that out of so many (...), who
have been educated at Kingsweed, in the most rigid discipline of methodisin,
hardly any have embraced their tenets, or become members of the society. The
reason is pretty obvious, they were taught too much to imbibe the ridiculous
prejudices the founder wished to be instilled into their minds: philosophy and
methodism, are utterly incompatible. When the human mind is informed by the
study of philosophy, it expands itself to the contemplation of things.

"It is true indeed, the work was sometimes attended with power among the
children at Kingswood. Conversions were frequent; but never durable. I myself
was converted some ten or a dozen times; but unluckily, my class leader was
detected in having stolen a pair of silver buckles. This was a dreadful stroke
to the work, and a glorious triumph to the wicked one. The whole fabric of
faith, grace, and all its concomitant vices, as hypocrisy, etc. etc,
experienced a total overthrow! The serious boys as they were called by way of
eminence, fell into the utmost contempt, and ever after, the leader of a class
was styled Captain of the Gang: a convert and a thief were synonimous terms.

"A general conversion among the boys, was once effected, by the late crcellent
Mr. Fletcher: one poor boy only excepted, who unfortunately resisted the
influence of the Holy Spirit; for which he was severely flogged, which did not
fail of the desired effect, and impressed proper notions of religion on his
mind. Unhappily these operations of the Spirit, though violent, were but of
short duration.

"As the conversion of men and women, is a more serious concern than that of
children, I will describe one, to which I was an eye witness among the poor
Colliers at Kingswood. One of those presumptuous and impious sanatical
wretches, who assume the character of ministers of God, and take upon them in
his most holy name, to denounce his curses and vengeance against those who are
far less guilty than themselves: a fellow of this description, of the name of
Sanderson, preaching to a congregation of ignorant, but harmless people; this
sellow, took upon himself in the name of God, to condemn them all to eternal
damnation, painting their deplorable state in the most dreadful colors: some
of his hearers were soon evidently affected by this discourse, which be took
care to improve, and taking the advantage of the kindling spark, addressed
himself more particularly to them, whom he soon "made roar for the disquictude
of their souls." The whole congregation were quickly affected in the like
manner, one and all exclaimed "What shall I do to be saved? Oh! I Am damned! I Am
damned! I Am damned to all eternity! What shall I do? Oh! Oh! Oh! Our performer
observing to what a state he had reduced his audience, redoubled his threats of
divine wrath and vengeance, and with a voice terrible as thunder, demanded, "Is
there any backsliders in the presence of God?" A dead and solemn pause ensued
-- till he exclaimed "Here is an old grey-headed sinner:" at the fame time
striking with his hand violently on the bald pate of an honest old man who fat
under the desk; the poor man gave a deep groan: whether from conviction, or
from the pain of the blow, I know not, for it was far from being gentle. The
farce was not yet concluded: when they were strongly convulsed with these
convictions, he sell down upon his knees, and with the greatest fervency,
accompanied with abundance of tears, he entreated the Lord in mighty prayer, to
have compassion on the poor desponding sinners whom he had brought to a proper
sense of their danger; the prayer continued about ten minutes, accompanied by
the sighs and groans of the converted and alarmed sinners, in concert making a
most divine harmony: when suddenly starting up he pretended to have received a
gracious answer to his prayer, and with a joyful and smiling countenance,
pointing toward the window, exclaimed: -- Behold the Lamb! Where! Where!
Where! was the cry of every contrite and returning sinner, (and they were all
of that description) There! (continued the preacher, extending his arms toward
the window where he pretended first to have espied the Lamb.) In Heaven! In
Colo! making intercession for your sins! And I have his authority to proclaim
to you -- "your sins are forgiven -- depart in peace." -- O, my dearest
brethren, how sweet is the sound of those ex^atic words. "Behold the lamb of
God who takes away the sins of the world!" But could you but feel the pecullar
energy, the divine force, the rapturous and cheering import of the original,
your mouths would be filled with praise, and your hearts with divine joy, holy
exultation, and unspeakable gratitude. -- Only mark the sound of the words,
even that will convey an inexpressible pleasure to your souls, "Hecca Hangus
Dei! Ki dollit pekkaltus Monday!" The schoolboys (who were seated in a pew
detached from the congregation on account of their profane and contemptuous
behavior during service) immediately burst into a loud laugh, on one of the
congregation saying, "O the blessed man! We shall see him again on MONDAY."

In some pages following we have an account of the methodist preacher's first
converting his benefactor's daughter, and then debauching her; also of a
preacher at Beverly, in Yorkshire, that collected fifteen pounds for a poor man
in great distress, and gave him only fifteen shillings, reserving to himself
fourteen pounds five shillings for the trouble of collecting it, with which,
and twenty pounds more he was entrusted with, he decamped the next day, to the
astonishment of the simple on whom he had imposed.

I wish the author as he proposes may soon give us a more particular account of
the methodists, preachers, and people, and also of some of Mr. Wesley's private
opinions, etc.

This pamphlet concludes with very curious letters written by Mr. J. Wesley,
and he informs us in a note that the publisher has his address in order to
direct any person to the author where they may see the original letters. I here
give you the whole of these extraordinary letters.

Page 50, etc.

DEAR SIR,
FOR your obliging letter which I received this morning, I return you thanks.

Our opinions for the most part perfectly coincide respecting the stability of
the connection, after my head is laid in the dust. This, however, is a subject,
about which I am not so anxious as you seem to imagine; on the contrary, it is
a matter of the utmost indifference to me; as I have long foreseen that a
division must necessarily ensue, from causes so various, unavoidable and
certain, that I have long since given overall thoughts and hopes of settling it
on a permanent foundation. You do not seem to be aware of the most effective
cause that will bring about a division. You apprehend the most serious
consequences from a struggle between the preachers for power and pre-eminence,
and there being none among them of sufficient authority or abi^ities to support
the dignity, or command the respect and exact the implicit obedience which is
so necessary to uphold our constitution on its present principles. This is one
thing that will operate very powerfully against unity in the connection, and
is, perhaps, what I might possibly have prevented, had not a still greater
difficulty arisen in my mind: I have often wished for some person of abilities
to succeed me as the head of the church I have with such indefatigable pains,
and astonishing success established; but convinced that none but very superior
abilities would be equal to the undertaking, was I to adopt a successor of this
description, I sear he might gain so much influence among the people, as to
usurp a share, if not the whole of that absolute and uncontrollable power,
which I have hitherto, and am determined I will maintain so long as I live:
never will I bear a rival near my throne. -- You no doubt see the policy of
continually changing the preachers from one circuit to another at short
periods: for should any of them become popular with their different
congregations, and insinuate themselves into the favor of their hearers, they
might possibly obtain such influence, as to establish themselves independently
of me, and the general connection. Besides the novelty of the continual change,
excites curiosity, and is the more necessary, as few of our preachers have
abilities to render themselves in any degree tolerable, any longer than they
are new.

The principal cause which will inevitably effect a diminution and division in
the connection after my death, will he the s^ilu^e of subscriptions and
contributions toward the support of the cause, for money is as much the sinews
of religious, as of military power. If it is with the greatest difficulty that
even I can keep them together, for want of this very necessary article, I think
no one else can. Another cause, which with others will effect the division, is
the disputes and contentions that will arise between the preachers and the
parties that will espouse their several causes, by which means much truth will
be brought to light, which will reflect so much to their disadvantage, that the
eyes of the people will be opened to see their motives and principles, nor will
they any longer contribute to their support, when they sind all their
pretentions to sanctity and love are founded on motives of interest and
ambition. The consequence of which will be, a sew of the most popular will
establish themselves in the respective places where they have gained sufficient
influence over the minds of the people; the rest must revert to their original
humble callings. But this no way concerns me: I have attained the object of my
views, by establishing a name that will not soon perish from the face of the
earth; I have founded a sect that will boast my name, long after my discipline
and doctrines are forgotten.

My character and reputation for sanctity is now beyond the reach of calumny;
nor will any thing that may hereaster come to light, or be said concerning me,
to my prejudice, however true, gain credit.

"My unsoil'd name, the austereness of my life,
Will vouch against it,
And so the accusation overweigh,
That it will stifle in its own report,
And smell of calumny."
Another cause that will operate more powerfully and effectually than any of
the preceding, is the rays of philosophy which begins now to pervade all ranks,
rapidly dispelling the mists of ignorance, which has been long in a great
degree the mother of devotion, of slavish prejudice, and the enthusiastic
bigotry of religious opinions: the decline of the papal power is owing to the
same irresistible canse nor can it be supposed that methodism can stand its
ground, when brought to the test of truth, reason, and philosophy.

I am, etc. I. W.
City Road, Thursday Morn.

Our author informs us that the following was written to a very amiable and
accomplished lady, some years ago. The lady was about three and twenty years of
age.

MADAM,
IT is with the utmost diffidence I presume to address superior excellence:
emboldened by a violent, yet virtuous passion, kindled by the irresistible
rays, and encouraged by the sweetly attractive force, of transcendant beauty,
the elegant simplicity of your manners, the facinating melody of your voice,
and above all, the inexpressible fire of an eye, that the extravagance of the
Muses has given to the goddess of love: but which Nature has bestowed on you
alone.

"They spackle with the right Promethean fire!"

Believe me, my dear madam, this is not the language of romance; but the
genuine exuberant effusions of an enraptured soul. The impression of your
charms was no less instantaneous than irresistible: when first I saw you, so
forcibly was I struck with admiration and love of your divine perfections, that
my soul was filled with sensations so wild and extravagant, yet delightful and
pure! -- But I will not indulge in declaring what are my real sentiments, lest
I should incur a suspicion of flattery. Your mind, superior to fulsome
panegyric, unsusceptible of the incense of affected adulation, would, with just
indignation, spurn at those impertinent compliments, which are commonly offered
with a view to impose upon the vanity and credulity of the weaker part of your
sex: I will not attempt it; but confine myself to the dictates of sincerity and
truth, nor shall a compliment escape my pen, that is not the sentiment of a
devoted heart.

As beauty has no positive criterion, and fancy alone directs the judgment and
influences the choice, we sind different people see it in various lights,
forms, and colors, I may therefore, without a suspicion of flattery declare,
that in my eye you are the most agreeable object, and most perfect work of
created nature, nor does your mind seem to partake less of the divinity than
your person.

"I view thee over with a lover's eye;
No fault thou have, or I no fault can spy."
The reason I did not before declare myself, was the profound and respectful
distance I thought it became me to observe, from a conseious sense of my own
comparitive unworthiness to approach, much less to hope for favor from, the
quintessence of all female perfection. -- Forgive me, my dear Eliza, and
compassionate a heart too deeply impressed with your divine image, ever to be
erased by time, nor can any power, but the cold hand of death, ever obliterate
from my mind the fond imagination and sweet remembrance of Eliza's charms! Nor
can even death itself divide the union that subsists between kindred souls.

Yesterday, my dear Eliza, the charms of your conversation detained me too late
to meet the penitents, as I had promised to do; but "With thee conversing, I
forget
All times, all seasons, and their change."


I hope however, the disappointment of my company did not-deprive them of a
blessing.

This being my birthday, resslections on the revolution of years and the
shortness of life, naturally intrude on my mind. I am now eighty-one years of
age, and I thank God I enjoy the same vigor of constitution I possessed at
twenty-one! None of the infirmities that usually accompany v^ars, either
corporal or mental; and I think it not impostible that I may sulfil my hundred
years, the residue of which shall be devoted to love and Eliza.

I. W.


I sent a person to the author of the above pamphlet, to desire him to give me
a sight of the original of the preceding letters; but he returned for answer,
that he had sent them back to the persons to whom they were written.

LETTER XXXI.
"Passion, it is true, may hurry is along;
"Sometimes the just may devire into wrong,"
VOLT^IRE by Franklin.
DEAR FRIEND,
My new wise's attachment to books was a very sortunate circumstance for us
both, not only as it was a perpetual source of rational amusement, but also as
it tended to promote my trade: her extreme love for books made her delight to
be in the shop, so that she soon became persectly acqu^inted with every part of
it and (as my stock increased) with other rooms where I kept books, and could
readily get any article that was asked for. Accordingly, when I was out on
business, my shop was well attended. This constant attention and good usuage,
procured me many customers; and I soon perceived that I could seil double and
treble the quantity of books if I had a larger stock. But how to enlarge it, I
knew not, except by slow degrees, as my profits should enable me; for as I was
almost a stranger in London, I had but few acquaintances, and these few were
not of the opulent sort. I also saw that the town abounded with cheats,
swindlers, etc. who obtained money and other property, under false pretenses,
of which the credulous were defrauded, which often prevented me from
endeavoring to borrow, lest I should be suspected of having the same bad
designs.

I was several times so hard put to it, for cash to purchase parcels of books
which were offered to me, that I more than once pawned my watch, and a suit of
clothes, and twice I pawned some books for money to purchase others; but I soon
was tired of pawnbrokers, and at that time they were not so restricted, as now,
in respect to interest, and thinking myself imposed on, by being charged more
than was reasonable, I never redeemed the last parcel at all; for, indeed, they
were books that I had bought extremely cheap, so that I borrowed more money on
t^em than they cost me, and in so doing rep^d myself what I had been
overcharged. 'consess we were poor; but, while that is the worst our enemies
can say of us, we are content."

Soon after I commenced bookseller, I became acquianted with what Pope calls
"the noblest work of God," an HONEST man. This was Mr JOHN DENIS, an oilman in
Cannon-street (father of the present Mr. John Denis, bookseller.) This
gentleman had often visited me during my long illness, and having seen me
tranquil and serene when on the very point of death, he formed a favorable
conclusion that I too must be an honest man, as I had so quiet a conscience at
such an awful period. Having retained these ideas of me after my recovery, and
being perfectly well acquainted with my circumstances, he one day offered to
become a partner in my business, and to advance money in proportion to my
stock. This confidential ofter I soon accepted; early in 1778 he became
partner; and we very soon laid out his money in second-hand books, which
increased the stock at once to double.

I soon after this proposed printing a sale catalogue, to which, after making a
few objections, Mr. Denis consented. This catalogue of twelve thousand volumes
(such as they were) was published in 1779. My partner's name was not in the
title page, the address was only "J. LACKINGTON and Co. No. 46,
Chiswell-street." This our first publication produced very opposite effects on
those who perused it; in some it excited much mirth, in others an equal
proportion of anger. The major part of it was written by me, but Mr. Denis
wrote many pages of it; and as his own private library consisted of scarce old
mystical and alchymical books, printed above a century ago, many of them were
in bad condition; this led him to insert neat in the catalogue to many
articles, which were only neat when compared with such as were in very bad
condition; so that when we produced such books as were called neat in our
catalogue, we often got ourselves laughed at, and sometimes our neat articles
were heartily damned. We had also a deal of trouble on another score; Mr. Denis
inserted a number of articles without the authors' names, and assured me that
the books were well known, and to mention the authors was often useless. The
fact was, Mr. Denis knew who wrote those articles; but was soon convinced that
many others did not, as we were often obliged to produce them merely to let our
customers see who were the authors: we however took twenty pounds the first
week the books were on sale, which we thought a large sum. The increase of our
stock augmented our customers in proportion; so that Mr. Denis, finding that
his money turned to a better account in bookselling than in the funds, very
soon^ent the stock near two hundred pounds which I still turned to a good
account. We went on very friendly and prosperously for a little more than two
years; when one night Mr. Denis hinted that he thought I was making purchases
too fast, on which I grew warm, and reminded him of an article in our
partnership agreement by which I was to be sole purchaser, and was at liberty
to make what purchases I should judge proper. I also reminded him of the
prosits which my purchases produced, and he reminded me of his having more
money in the trade than I had. We were inde^d both very warm; and on my sying,
that if he was displeased with any part of my conduct, he was at liberty to
quit the partnership, he in great warmth replied that he would. The above
passed at Mr. Denis's house in Hoxton-square, I then bade him good night. When
Mr. Denis called at the shop the next day, he asked me if I continued in the
same mind I was in the preceding night? I assured him that I did. He then
demanded of me whether I insisted on his keeping his word to quit the
partnership? I replied, I did not insist on it, as I had taken him a partner
for three years, nearly one third part of which time was unexpired; but, I
added, that, as I had always found him strictly a man of his word, I supposed
he would prove himself so in the present instance and not assert one thing at
night and another in the morning. On which he observed, that as he was not
provided with a shop, he must take some time to look for one. I told him he
might take as long a time as he thought necessary. This was in March 1780. He
appointed the twentieth of May, following. On that day we accordingly dissolved
the partnership; and, as he had more money in the trade than myself, he took my
notes for what I was deficient. We parted in great friendship, which continued
to the day of his death; he generally called every morning to see us, and learn
our concerns, and we constantly informed him of all that had passed the
preceding day; as how much cash we had taken, what were the profits, what
purchases we had made, what bills we had to pay, etc. and he sometimes lent me
money to help to pay them.

At his death he left behind him in his private library the best collection of
scarce, valuable, mystical, and alchymical books, that ever was collected by
one person. In his lifetime he prized these kinds of books above every thing;
in collecting them he never cared what price he paid for them. This led him to
think, after he became a bookseller, that other book-collectors should pay
their money as freely as he had done his, which was often a subject of debate
between him and me, as I was for selling every thing cheap, in order to secure
those customers already obtained, as well as increase their numbers.

Mr. Denis was, at the time of his death, about fifty years of age. He informed
me that in his childhood and youth he was weakly to an extreme, so that no one
who knew him ever thought he could live to be twenty years of age; however he
enjoyed an uninterrupted state of health for nearly the last thirty years of
his life; this he ascribed to his strictly adhering to the rules laid down by
Cornaro and Tryon in their books on Health, Long Life and Happiness. His
unexpected death was in consequence of a fever caught by sitting in a cold damp
room.

Over the sad relics of a friend sincere,
The happiest mortal, ^^re, may spare a tear.
LETTER XXXII.
"There is a tide in the affairs of I on,
"Which taken at the s^^ed ^^^ls on to sorune,
"Omitted, all the voyage of their life
"Is bound in shallows and in miseries;
"On such a foul sea are we now afloat,
"And we must take the current when it serves,
"Or lose our ventures."
SHAKESPEARE'S Julius Caesar.
DEAR FRIEND,
IT was some time in the year seventeen hundred and eighty, when I resolved
from that period to give no person whatever any credit. I was induced to make
this resolution from various motives: I had observed, that where credit was
given, most bills were not paid within six months, many not within a
twelvemonth, and some not within two years. Indeed, many tradesmen have
accounts of seven years standing; and some bills are never paid. The losses
sustained by the interest of money in long credits, and by those bills that
were not paid at all; the inconveniences attending not having the ready-money
to lay out in trade to the best advantage, together with the great loss of time
in keeping accounts, and collecting debts, convinced me, that if I could but
establish a ready-money business, without any exceptions, I should be enabled
to sell every article very cheap. When I communicated my ideas on this subject
to some of my acquaintances, I was much laughed at and ridiculed; and it was
thought, that I might as well attempt to rebuild the tower of Babel, as to
establish a large business without giving credit. But notwithstanding this
discouragement, and even You, my dear friend, expressing your doubts of the
practicability of my scheme, I determined to make the experiment; and began by
marking in every book the lowest price that I would take for it; which being
much lower than the common market prices, I not only retained my former
customers, but soon increased their numbers. But, my dear sir, you can scarce
imagine what difficulties I encountered for several years together. I even
sometimes thought of relinquishing this my favorite scheme altogether, as by
it I was obliged to deny credit to my very acquaintance; I was also under a
necessity of resusing it to the most respectable characters, as no exception
was, or now is made, not even in favor of nobility; my porters being strictly
enjoined, by one general order, to bring back all books not previously paid
for, except they receive the amount on del^^ery. Again, many in the country
found it difficult to remit small sums that are below bankers notes, and others
to whom I was a stranger, did not like to send the money first, as not knowing
how I should treat them, and suspecting by the price of the articles, there
must certainly be some deception. Many unacquainted with my plan of business,
were much offended, until the advantages accruing to them from it were duly
explained, when they very readily acceded to it. As to the anger of such, who
though they were acquainted with it, were still determined to deal on credit
only, I considered that as of little consequence, from an opinion that some of
them would have been as much enraged when their bills were sent in, had credit
been given them.

In the first three years after I refused to give credit to any person, my
business increased much, and as the whole of my profits (after paying all
expenses) was laid out in books, my stock was continually enlarged so that my
catalogues in the year seventeen hundred and eighty-four, were very much
augmented in size. The first contained twelve thousand, and the second thirty
thousand volumes: this increase was not merely in numbers, but also in value,
as a very great part of these volumes were better, that is, books of an higher
price.

LETTER XXXIII.
"High in the world of letters, and of wit,
"Enthroned like Jove behold opinion sit!
"As symbols of her sway, on either hand
"The unfailing urns of praise and censure stand;
"Their mingled streams her motley, servants shed
"On each bold author's fels-devoted head."
HAYLEY.
DEAR FRIEND,
I Promised to give you a few remarks on purchasing manuscripts; and as I
seldom make such purchases, and but rarely publish any new books, I think you
may fairly credit me for impartiality. Nothing is more common than to hear
authors complaining against publishers, for want of liberality in purchasing
their manuscripts. But I cannot help thinking that most of these complaints are
groundless: and that were all things considered, publishers (at least many of
them) would be allowed to possess more liberality than any other set of
tradesmen, I mean so far as relates to the purchasing manuscripts and
copy-right.

Not to trouble you with a long enumeration of instances in confirmation of
this assertion, I shall barely mention the following:

It is owing to the encouragement of booksellers that the public is possessed
of that valuable work Johnson's Dictionary; and the same liberality to the
doctor in respect to that publication, his edition of Shakespeare, and the
English Poets will always reslect honor on the parties. So sensible was the
doctor of this, that he asserted booksellers were the best Mecaenas's.

The late sir John Hawkins, Dr. Cullen, the present Dr. Robertson, Mr. Gibbon,
Dr. Knox, etc. etc. arc all striking instances of the truth of my observation.

As I feel a pleasure in mentioning acts of liberality wherever they occur,
suffer me to quote the following passage from sir John Hawkins's Life of Dr.
Johnson.

"The booksellers with whom Mr. Chambers had contracted for his dictionary,
finding that the work succeeded beyond their expectations, made him a voluntary
present of, I think, 500 l. Other instances of the like generosity have been
known of a profession of men, who, in the debates on the question of literary
property, have been described as scandalous monopo^^z^rs, fattening at the
expense of o her m^n^s ingenuity, and growing opulent by oppression."

It is c^^^id^ndy asserted, that the late Dr. Hawkesworth received six thousand
pounds for his compilation of voyages, if so (and I have never heard it
contradicted) I leave it to any considerate person to judge, whether in paying
so enormous a price, the publishers did not run a great risk, when it is
considered how great the expenses of bringing forward such a work, must have
been. I have also been informed that David Mallet, Fsq. was ossered two
thousand pounds for Lord Bolingbroke's Philosophical Works, which he resused.

It ought also to be considered, that frequently the money which is paid for
the copy, is but trisling, compared with the expense of printing, paper,
advertising, etc. and hundreds of instances may be adduced of publishers having
sustained very great losses, and many have been made bankrupts, through their
liberality in purchasing manuscripts and publishing them; and on the other
hand, it must be acknowledged that some publishers have made great fortunes by
their copy rights, but their number is comparitively small.

It should also be remarked that authors in general, are apt to form too great
expectations from their productions, many instances of which I could give you,
but I will only produce one.

A gentleman a few years since showed a manuscript to a publisher, which he
refused to purchase, but offered to be the publisher if the gentleman would
print it, etc. at his own expense which he readily agreed to do, the publisher
then desired to know how many copies should be printed, on which the gentleman
began to compute how many families there were in Great Britain, and assured the
publisher that every family would at least purchase one copy, but the publisher
not being of the same opinion, our author then said that he would print sixty
thousand copies only, but added, he was afraid that another edition could not
be got ready as soon as it would be wanted. However, after a long debate, the
publisher prevailed on him to print only twelve hundred and fifty, instead of
sixty thousand, but promised in case another edition should be wanted in haste,
to make the printers work night and day in order not to disappoint the public.
This work was soon afterward published and advertised at a great rate and for
a long time, but to the infinite mortification of our author, not one hundred
copies were sold, not even enough indeed to pay for the advertisements. In the
preceding instance I am persuaded the publisher did his best to promote the
sale of the work; but in gene^^l where authors keep their own copy-right they
do not succeed, and many books have been consigned to oblivion, through the
inattention and mismanagement of publishers, as most of them are envious of the
success of such works as do not turn to their own account; very many just
complaints are made on this head, so that I am fully of opinion that for
authors to succced well they should sell their copy-rights, or be previously
well acquainted with the characters of their publishers.

"Those who would learning's glorious kingdom find,
"The dear-bought treasure of the trading mind,
"From many dangers must themselves acquit,
"And more than Seylla and Charybdis meet,
"Oh! what an ocean must be voyaged over,
"To gain a prospect of the shining shore!
"Resisting rocks oppose the enquiring soul,
"And adverse waves retard it as they roll.
"The little knowledge now which man obtains,
"From outward objects and from sense he gains;
"He like a wretched slave must plod and swea^,
"By day must toil, by night that toil repeat,
"And yet, at last, what little fruit he gains,
"A beggar's harvest gleaned with mighty paind"
POMFRET. LETTER XXXIV.
"Books, of all earthly things my chief delight;
"My exercise by day, and dreams by night;
"Dispassion'd masters, friends without deceit,
"Who flatter not; companions ever sweet;
"With whom I Am always cheerful, from whom rise,
"Improved and better, if not good and wise;
"Grave, faithful counselors, who all excite,
"Instruct, and strengthen to behave aright;
"Admonish us, when fortune makes her court,
"And when she is absent, solace and support.
"Happy the man to whom ye are well known,
"It Is his own fault if ever he is alone."
ANONYMOUS.
DEAR FRIEND,
IT has been asked, times innumerable, how I acquired any tolerable degree of
knowledge, so as to enable me to form any ideas of the merits or demerits of
books; or how I became sufficiently acquainted with the prices that books were
commonly sold for, so as to be able to buy and sell; particularly books in the
learned and foreign languages.

As to the little knowledge of literature I possess, it was acquired by dint of
application. In the beginning I attached myself very closely to the study of
divinity and moral philosophy, so that I became tolerably acquainted with all
the points controverted between the divines; after having read the great
champions for christianity, I next read the works of Toulmin, Lord Herbert,
Tindal, Chubb, Morgan, Collins, Hammond, Woolston, Annet, Mandeville,
Shaftesbury, D'Argens, Bolingbroke, Williams, Helvetius, Voltaire, and many
other free-thinkers. I have also read most of our English poets, and the best
translations of the Greek, Latin, Italian and French poets; nor did I omit to
read History, Voyages, Travels, Natural History, Biography, etc. At one time I
had a strong inclination to learn French, but as soon as I was enabled to make
out and abridge title pages, so as to insert them right in my catalogues, I
left off for what appeared to me more pleasing as well as more necessary
pursuits; reflecting that as I began so late in life, and had probably but a
very short period to live (and I paid some regard to what Helvetius has
asserted, viz. that "No man acquires any new ideas after he is forty-five years
of age.") I had no time to bestow on the attainment of languages. I therefore
contented myself with reading all the translations of the classics, and
inserting the originals in my catalogues as well as I could; and when sometimes
I happened to put the Genitive or Dative case instead of the Neminative or
Accusative, my customers kindly considered this as a venial fault, which they
readily pardoned, and bought the books notwithstanding.

As I have indefatigably used my best endeavors to acquire knowledge, I never
thought I had the smallest reason to be ashamed on account of my deficiency,
especially as I never made pretentions to erudition, or affected to possess
what I knew I was deficient in. Dr. Young's couplet, you will therefore think
equally applicable to many others as well as myself: "Unlearned men of books
assume the care,
"As eunuchs are the guardians of the fair."
Love of Fame.

I had like to have forgot to ^nform you, that I have also read most of our
best plays, and am so fond of the Theater, that in the winter season I have
often been at Drury Lane or Covent Garden four or five evenings in a week.
Another great source of amusement as well as knowledge, I have met with in
reading almost all the best novels; by the best, I mean those written by
Cervantes, Fielding, Smollet, Richardson, Miss Burney, Voltaire, Stern, Le
Sage, Goldsmith, and some others. And I have often thought, with Fielding, that
some of those publications have given us a more genuine history of man, in what
are called Romances, than is sometimes to be found under the more respectable
titles of History, Biography, etc.

In order to obtain some ideas in Astronomy, Geography, Electricity,
Pneumatics, etc. I attended a few lectures given by the late eminent Mr.
Ferguson, the present very ingenious Mr. Walker, and others; and for some time
several gentlement spent two or three evenings in a week at my house, for the
purpose of improvement in science. At these meetings we made the best use of
our time with globes, telescopes, microscopes, electrical machines, air pumps,
air guns, a good bottle of wine, and other philosophical instruments.

I cannot help regretting the disadvantages I labor under by having been
deprived of the benefits of an early education, as it is a loss that can
scarcely be repaired, in any situation. How much more difficult then was it for
me to attain any degree of proficiency, when involved in the concerns of a
large business?

LETTER XXXV.
" -- Honest Englishmen, who never were abroad,
"Like England only, and its taste applaud.
"Strife still subsists, which yields the better gout;
"Books or the world, the many or the few.
"True taste to me is by this touchstone known,
"That Is always best that is nearest to my own."
Man of Taste.
DEAR FRIEND,
I Thas been long since remarked, that a person may be well acquainted with
books, or in other words, may be a very learned man, and yet remain almost
totally ignorant of men and manners, as Mallet remarks of a famous divine:
"While Bentley, long to wrangling schools confined,
"And but by books acquainted with mankind,
"Dares, in the fullness of the pedant's pride,
" -- Though no judge decide."
Verbal Criticism.

The reading and studying of History, Voyages, Travels, etc. will no doubt
contribute much to that kind of knowledge, but will not alone be sufficient. In
order to become a proficient in that useful branch of knowledge, "MAN KNOW
THYSELF!" was a precept of the ancient philosophers. But I can scarce think it
possible for any man to be well acquainted with himself, without his possessing
a tolerable degree of knowledge of the rest of mankind. In the former part of
my life I saw a deal of what is called low life, and became acquainted with the
customs, manners, dispositions, prejudices, etc. of the laboring part of the
community, in various cities, towns and villages; for years past, I have spent
some of my leisure hours among that class of people who are called opulent or
genteel tradesmen; nor have I been totally excluded from higher circles; but
among all the schools where the knowledge of mankind is to be acquired, I know
of none equal to that of a bookseller's shop, especially if the master is of an
inquisitive and communicative turn, and is in a considerable line of business;
His shop will then be a place of resort for men, women, and children, of
various nations, and more of various capacitics, dispositions, etc.

Would my health permit my constant attendance, I should prefer it, to every
thing in life (reading excepted) and you may recollect that for some years I
sought no other amusement whatever.

Before I conclude, I cannot help observing, that the sale of books in general
has increased prodigiously within the last twenty years. According to the best
estimation I have been able to make, I suppose that more than four times the
number of books are sold now than were sold twenty years since. The poorer sort
of farmers, and even the poor country people in general, who before that period
spent their winter evenings in relating stories of witches, ghosts, hobgoblins,
etc. now shorten the winter nights by hearing their sons and daughters read
tales, romances etc. In short all ranks and degrees now READ. But the most
rapid increase of the sale of books has been since the termination of the late
war.

A number of book-clubs are also formed in every part of England, where each
member subscribes a certain sum quarterly to purchase books; in some of these
clubs the books after they have been read by all the subscribers, are sold
among them to the highest bidders, and the money produced by such sale, is
expended in fresh purchases, by which prudent and judicious mode, each member
has it in his power to become possessed of the work of any particular author he
may judge deserving a superior degree of attention; and the members at large
enjoy the advantage of a continual succession of different publications,
instead of being restricted to a repeated perusal of the same authors; which
must have been the case with many if so rational a plan had not been adopted.

I am informed that when circulating libraries were first opened, the
booksellers were much alarmed, and their rapid increase added to their fears,
and led them to think that the sale of books would be much diminished by such
libraries. But experience has proved that the sale of books, so far from being
diminished by them, has been greatly promoted, as from those repositories, many
thousand families have been cheaply supplied with books, by which the taste for
reading has become much more general, and thousands of books are purchased
every year, by such as have first borrowed them at those libraries, and after
reading, approving of them, become purchasers.

The Sunday-Schools are spreading-very fast in most parts of England, which
will accelerate the dissusion of knowledge among the lower classes of the
community, and in a very few years exceedingly increase the sale of books. --
Here permit me earnestly to call on every honest bookseller (I trust my call
will not be in vain) as well as on every friend to the extention of knowledge,
to unite (as you I am confident will) in a hearty AMEN.

Let such as doubt whether the enlightening of the understandings of the lower
orders of society, makes them happier, or be of any utility to a state, read
the following lines (particularly the last twelve) by Dr. Goldsmith, taken from
his Traveller.

"These are the charms to barren states assigned,
"Their wants are few, their wishes all confined;
"Yet let them only share the praises due,
"If few their wants, their pleasures are but few;
"Since every want that stimulates the breast,
"Becomes a source of pleasure when redrest.
"Hence from such lands each pleasing scienceslies,
"That first excites desires and then supplies.
"Unknown to them, when sensual pleasures cloy,
"To sill the languid pause with finer joy;
"Unknown those powers that raise the soul to flame,
"Catch every nerve, and vibrates through the frame;
"Their level life is but a mouldering fire,
"Nor quenched by want nor fanned by strong desire;
"Unfit for raptures, or if raptures cheer,
"On some high festival of once a year,
"In wild excess the vulgar breast takes fire,
"Till buried in debauch the bliss expire.
"But not their joys alone thus coursely flow,
"Their morals like their p^^fures are but low;
"Nor as refinement stops, from sire to son,
"Unaltered, unimprov'd their manners run;
"And love's, and friendship's finely pointeddart
"Fall blunted from each indurated heart;
"Some sterner virtues, over the mountain'sbreast,
"May sit like falcons lowering on the nest,
"But all the gentler morals such as play
"Through lise's more cultivated walks, and charm our way;
"These far dispersed, on timorous pinions fly,
"To sport and flutter in a kinder sky."
It is worth remarking that the introducing histories, romances, stories,
poems, etc. into schools, has been a very great means of diffusing a general
taste for reading among all ranks of people, while in schools, the children
only read the Bible (which was the case in many schools a few years ago)
children then did not make so early a progress in reading as they have since,
they have been pleased and entertained as well as instructed; and this relish
for books, in many will last as long as life.

I pity from my soul many poor wretches which I observe bartering away their
constitutions, and what few liberal sentiments they may possess; rising early
and sitting up late, exerting all the powers of body and mind, to get what they
call a competency, no matter by what means this is effected; thousands actually
destroy themselves in accomplishing their grand design: others, live to obtain
the long wished for country retrea^. But, alas, the promised happiness is as
far from them as ever, often farther. The busy bustling scene of business being
over, a vacuity in the mind takes place, spleen and vapors succeed, which
increase bodily infirmities, death stares them in the face. The mean dirty ways
by which much of their wealth has been obtained make retrospect reflections
intolerable. Philosophy stands aloof, nor ever deigns to visit the sordid soul.
Gardens and pleasure grounds become dreary deserts; the miserable possessors
linger out a wretched existence, or put a period to it with a halter or pistol.

"Were this not common would it not be strange?
"That it is so common, this is stranger still."
I now sell more than one hundred thousand volumes annually. The profits of my
business the present year 1791 (as near as can be computed before the
expiration of it) will amount to FOUR THOUSAND POUNDS. What it will increase to
I know not; but if my health will permit me to carry it on a few years longer,
there is very great probability, considering the rapid increase which each
succeeding year has produced, that the profits will be double what they now are.

It is now above five years since I began to entertain serious thoughts of
going out of business on account of the bad state of health which both Mrs.
LACKINGTON and myself have labored under: but it was then suggested by several
of my friends, that as I had about fifty poor relations, a great number of whom
are children, others are old and nearly helpless, and that all had justly
formed some expectations from me; therefore to give up such a trade as I was in
possession of, before I was absolutely obliged to do it, would be a kind of
injustice to those whom by the ties of blood I was in some measure bound to
relieve and protect. These and other considerations induced me to wave the
thoughts of precipitating myself out of so extensive and lucrative a business;
and in the mean time I apply a part of the profits of it to maintain my good
old mother, who is alive at Wellington in Somersetshire, her native place. I
have two aged men and one aged woman, whom I support, and I have also four
children to maintain and educate, three of these children have lost their
sath^r, and also their mother (who was my sister) the other child has both his
parents living, but they are poor: many others of my relations are in the same
circumstances, and stand in need of my assistance.

"If ever I Have mourned my humble, lowly state,
"If ever I Have bowed my knee at fortune's shrine,
"If ever a wish escaped me to be great,
"The fervent prayer humanity was thine.
"Perish the man who hears the piteous tale
"Unmoved, to whom the heartfelt glows unknown;
"On whom the widow's plaints couldne'er prevail.
"Nor made the injured wretches cause his own,
"How little knows he the extatic joy,
"The thrilling bliss of cheering wan despair!
"How little knows the pleasing warm employ,
"That calls the gratesul tribute of a tear.
"The splendid dome, the vaulted rock to rear,
"The glare of pride and pomp, be, grandeur, thine!
"To wipe from misery's eye the wailing tear,
"And soothe the oppressed orphan's woe, be mine."
LETTER XXXVI.
-- This is a traveller, Sir; knows men and manners; and has plough'd up sea so
far, 'till both the poles have knocked; has seen the sun take coach, and can
distinguish the color of his horses, and their kinds, and had a Flanders mare
leaped there.

Beaumont and Fletcher's Scornful Lady. "Good seen expected, evil unforeseen,
"Appear by turns as fortune shifts the scene:
"Some raised aloft come tumbling down amain,
"Then sall so hard, they bound and rise again."
DRYDEN's Virgil.
DEAR FRIEND,
I Did not intend to trouble you or the public with an account of my wonderful
travels, but for want of other amusements, I thought that a short account of a
journey might afford you some entertainment.

My state of health being but indifferent, and Mrs. Lackington's still worse, I
was induced to try what effect a journey would produce; it being immaterial
what part I traveled to; and as I had not for a long time seen my native
place, and perhaps might not be furnished with another opportunity, we resolved
to visit it.

"And many a year elapsed, return to view
"Where once the cottage stood, the hawthorn grew.
"Remembrance wakes with all her busy train,
"Swells at my breast --
"I still had hopes, for pride attends us still,
"Amidst the swains to show my book learned skill.
"Yes, let the rich deride, with proud disdain
"The simple blessings of the lowly train,
"To me more dear, congenial to my heart,
"One native charm, than all the gloss of art;
"Spontaneous joys, where nature has its play, --
"The soul adopts, and owns their firstborn sway:
"Lightly they frolic over the vacant mind,
"Unenvied, unmolested, unconfined."
GOLDSMITH. Accordingly in July last, 1791, we set out from Merton, which I now
make my chief residence, taking Bath, Bristol, etc. in our way to my native
place Wellington.

In Bristol, Exbridge, Bridgewater, Taunton, Wellington, and other places, I
amused myself in calling on some of my masters, with whom I had about twenty
years before worked as a journeyman shoemaker. I addressed them with, "Pray
Sir, have you got any occasion?" which is the term made use of by journeymen in
that useful occupation, when seeking employment. Most of those honest men had
quite forgot my person, as many of them had not seen me since I worked for
them: so that it is not easy for you to conceive with what surprise and
astonishment they gazed on me. For you must know that I had the vanity (I call
it humor) to do this in my chariot, attended by my servants; and on telling
them who I was, all appeared to be very happy to see me. And I assure you, my
friend, it afforded me much real pleasure to see so many of my old
acquaintances alive and well, and tolerable happy. The following lines often
occurred to my mind:

"Far from the madding crowd's ignoble strise,
"Their sober wishes never learned to stray;
"Along the cool sequestered vale of life
"They keep the noiseless tenor of their way."
At Taunton and Wellington it seemed to be the unanimous determination of all
the poorer sort, that I should by no means be deficient in old acquaintance.
Some poor souls declared that they had known me for fifty years (that is, years
before I was born) others had danced me in their arms a thousand times; nay,
better still, some knew my grandmother; but, best of all, one old man claimed
acquaintance with me, for having seen me many times on the top of a
six-and-twenty round ladder, balanced on the chin of a merry Andrew! The old
man was however egregiously mistaken, as I never was so precariously exalted.
But that was of no consequence: all the old fellow wanted was a shilling -- and
I gave it him. No matter (as Stern says) from what motive. I never examine
into these things. This I observed, that none of them were common beggars, but
poor useful laboring people. Giving to common strollers is but encouraging
idleness and every other vice. And as small matters made many happy, I was
supremely so, to be the means of contributing to their comfort. And indeed who
would hesitate at being the means of diffusing happiness on such easy terms,
and with so little trouble?

But to proceed with my journey. I esteem myself peculiarly happy, on one
account in particular, that I undertook it; and have only to regret it did not
take place sooner, as it tended to undeceive me in a matter in which I had long
been in an error. The case was this: I had for seven years past suppoled that
the parents of my first wise were dead; and on enquiring after them of Mr. Cash
at Bridgewater, he confirmed the report. However as we passed through South
Petherton, being but a mile from the place where they formerly lived, I could
not help stopping to find out the time when they died, and what other
particulars I could learn relative to them, but to my very great surprise, I
was informed that they were both living at Newton, two miles distant. On this
information I gave the coachman orders to drive us there, but still could
scarcely credit that they really were alive. -- But, O my dear friend, it is
utterly impossible for me to describe the sensations of Mrs. Lackington and
myself on entering

-- "The cobweb'd cottage,
"With ragged wall of mo^^^'^ing mud," which contained them!
"Then Poverty, grim spectre, rose,
"And horror over the prospect threw."
There we found -- two

"Poor human ruins, tottering over the grave!"

The dim light on our entrance seemed a little to flash in the socket, and
every moment threatened to disappear forever! while their "pale withered hands
were stretched out toward me, trembling at once with eagerness and age.' Never
before did. I feel the full force of Shakespeare's description, " -- Last scene
of all
"That ends this strange even^ful history,
"Is second childishness; and mere oblivion:
"Sansteeth, sans eyes, sanstaste; sans every thing.


From such a state of poverty and wretchedness, Good God, deliverevery worthy
character.

The old man is ninety years of age, and the good old woman eighty. The old
man's intellects are much impaired; he for a moment knew me, and then his
recollection forsook him. The old woman retained her senses and knowledge
during the whole of the time we were with them. On inquiry I found, that what
little property they had possessed had been all expended for some years.

"How many once in fortune's lap high fed,
"Solicit the cold hand of Charity!
"To shock us more -- solicit it in vain!"
Dr. YOUNG. Amidst this dreary scene, it was some alleviation to learn that
their pious son had given them weekly as much as he could afford from his own
little family, and I have added enough to render them as comfortable as their
great age can possibly admit of. But for your sake and my own, I will drop this
gloomy subject; which to me proved one of the most affecting scenes that ever I
experienced in the whole course of my life.

During our continuance at Wellington, I one morning rode over to Black Down,
on purpose to inspect an immense heap of stones on the top of the hill, strait
before the town, which I remembered to have seen when a boy. The distance from
Wellington is about two miles. Those stones cover about an acre of ground, and
rise to a great height. The country people informed me with great gravity, that
"the Devil brought them therein one night in his leathern apron." But the name
of it, as well as the form, prove what it was. It is called Symmon's Borough or
Barrow; which, you know, signifies a burial-place. I should not have taken any
notice of it here, had I ever seen any Barrow of stones besides this, and five
other finaller Barrows, about half a mile from the large one. The country
people informed me that the devil brought the five heaps in his glove. I also
observed the remains of a large camp near the spot. Camden has taken notice of
a large camp at Roach Castle, three or four miles from hence; It is strange
that neither he nor Gough should take any notice of so singular a Barrow as
this certainly is.

I have now, sir, given you the most material circumstances of my life. And
should the fine air of Merton preserve my stock of health and spirits which I
have acquired in this last excursion, I intend during the summer to spend a few
hours in the middle of three or four days in every week in Chiswellstreet,
devoting the mornings and evenings to my rural retreat, "Where cheerfulness
triumphant fair,
"Dispels the painful cloud of care,
"O, sweet of language, mild of mein,
"O, virtue's friend, and pleasure's queen!
"By thee our board with flowers is crowned,
"By thee with songs our walks resound;
"By thee the sprightly mornings shine,
"And evening hours in peace decline."


During the winter I purpose spending most of my time in town; where I hope
again to enjoy the company of you, sir, and some others of our old
philosophical friends.

FINIS.

