The CONTRACT.


Adventures of a Porcupine; OR, THE VILLAIN UNMASKED: BEING THE GENUINE MEMOIRS
OF A NOTORIOUS ROGUE LATELY IN THE BRITISH ARMY, AND CI-DEVANT MEMBER OF AN
EXTENSIVE LIGHT-FINGERED ASSOCIATION IN ENGLAND. Containing a Narrative of the
most Extraordinary and Unexampled Depravity of Conduct perhaps Ever Exhibited
to the World. IN A LETTER TO A YOUNG GENTLEMAN IN NEW YORK.

"These things are strange, but not more strange than true". TO WHICH IS ADDED,
A POSTSCRIPT TO PETER PORCUPINE; BEING REMARKS On a pamphlet lately published
by him, entitled, his "Life and Adventures." BY DANIEL DETECTOR.

"I Will tell the bold faced villain, that he lies". EMBELLISHED WITH A LIKENESS
OF THE PORCUPINE

PHILADELPHIA, PRINTED FOR, AND SOLD BY A. and L. G. HENDERSON; Also, by the
different Booksellers. September 1796.

COPY-RIGHT SECURED ACCORDING TO LAW.

PREFACE.
THE remarkable change which has lately took place in the circumstances of a
noted defender of British enormities, occasioned the writing of the following
letter, and the reader will please observe, that it was wrote solely for the
information of a friend, and without the least expectation that it would ever
find its way into a printing-office.

The person whom we are led to suppose the writer means, has been four years in
this country. He came to it in a clandestine manner, without a farthing, and
has lived here, seemingly in the midst of plenty, without any known means of
procuring subsistence.

Lately, he has commenced business in a line which would require a considerable
capital: -- Whether British guineas or Tory dollars have, or have not, been the
reward of his scurrility -- his abuse of the immortal heroes of the American
revolution, and of the friends of liberty in Europe -- and his unwearied
attempts to involve the United States in war with their republican allies, is
worthy of examination by the friends of the happiness and prosperity of
America. Be that as it may, he deserves the reprobation of all good men, by his
profound devotion to that monster whose sattelites have, in the most barbarous
monster, ravaged the United States, end whom, every man possessed of the common
feelings of humanity must detest and abhor!

Much has been lately wrote in this city respecting the occupation of the
person alluded to, in Europe and America; and some have even hinted, that the
thefts, housse and shop-breakings, etc. which have been so numerous lately in
and about Philadelphia, has enabled him to emerge!

The editors, on seeing the letter, earnestly solicited permission to
transcribe it for the press, which its author could scarcely be prevailed on to
consent to. -- It is printed verbatim from the original.

The "Postscript to Peter Porcupine" exposes only the most glaring of the
falsehoods, absurdities, contradictions, and inconsistencies, with which the
pamphlet of his "Life and Adventures" abounds; but which must at once strip it
of every particle of credit for authenticity which it may have obtained from
the superficial reader.

THE Adventures of a Porcupine.
PHILADELPHIA, July, 1796. "O GOLD! thou guide to evil! -- bane of life!
"Thou spring of mischief, and thou source of strife!
"Happy for man if thou had never been!
"Thou pleasing mischief, pregnant cause of sin!
"Thy dire effects in bloody wars we see!
" Wrongs, rapines, murders, all proceed from thee!"

MY DEAR FRIEND,
AT your reiterated solicitations I have attempted to procure you a faithful
narrative of the life and transactions of that mercenary incendiary who for
some time past has been, by foreign assistance, forcing himself into notice, on
the theater of American politics. After a most vigilant search, I have
procured, besides other authentic documents, a rough sketch of his life, drawn
up by himself in a paroxysm of despair, when the gallows stared him in the
face; but, as he escaped punishment at that time, he has been as careful to
prevent its publication as " existing circumstances" would permit. The
gentleman from whom I have procured that manuscript, got possession of it at a
time when its wretched author had not wherewithal to procure him a hiding place
from the storm. He wished my friend to digest it for publication, expecting by
that means to procure a little money, but before it could be got ready for
press, its owner requested its suppression; nor would I at this time have
procured the loan of it, had not the brazen-faced Porcupine declared in my
friend's company, when he mentioned it in a jocular manner, that he never gave
it him, and that not a word contained therein was true, with respect to him:
The falsity of this declaration, I am convinced, will appear as obvious to you
as it did to my friend, when you are informed, that it was written and dated in
Ipswich jail; at a period when he could have no inducement for making his
crimes appear more hideous than they really were.

By the assistance of this, and other information, I have traced him through
the complicated vicissitudes of a life abandoned to every species of
wickedness, and recorded the principal actions of his life as accurately, as
considering my sources of information, and distance from the various scences,
could possibly be done, these considered, I will have no occasion to apologize
for the errors which may unavoidably have place in any part of this letters.

HE was born (whether above or below ground I know not) on the estate of that
celebrated English peer Lord Lansdale
whom Peter Pindar lately recommended to the Royal Academy of London, as a
suitable representation of the Devil, if they wished to procure a striking
likeness of the " Sovereign Lord and King" of the internal regions. This effigy
of his Satanic Majesty became the Porcupine's master; for by the law which at
that period existed in England, the children of miners became the property of
the person to whom their parents belonged. From this state of bondage, the
decease of the father before the 14th year of the child's existence could only
release it, for as the women on the death of their husband's were declared
free, immemorial custom had considered the offspring as the mother's property,
if it had not attained the abovementioned age. These children were generally
received into the parish workhouse, but starvation stared the mother in the
face, and she had no alternative but that of returning to her subterraneous
employment.

Unfortunately for the Porcupine, ere he had attained the eighth year of his
age his reputed father departed this life, in consequence of a bruise he
received by the falling of a huge rock of coal; and in the year 1774 the
Porcupine emerged from the coal-pit, which, for succeffive generations, had
contained the cradle and the deathbed of his ancestors -- Unfortunately for
the Porcupine, I say, was this premature death of his father, for had it not
happened, he might have passed from the womb to "that bourne from whence no
traveller returns," in oblivion; but for this fatal accident, the "political
pilots of America" would have been under the necessity of steering their vessel
without the aid and guidance of a " bloody buoy," and an English whipping-post
would not have been graced with the carcass of the Porcupine; but for it, the
Executive of the United States would never have been puffed with the flattering
panegyrics of this dishonest hypocritical wretch, nor would an English judge
have been under the necessity of passing on him a sentence of death; but for
it, the light-fingered tribe would have lacked a skilful associate, and his
Britannic Majesty an able agent.

The Porcupine, on his arrival above ground, was admitted into the parish
workhouse, through the influence of a very cha itable lady in the neighborhood;
and his mother having accepted the hand of another pit-mate, returned to her
former slavery. The Porcupine had not been long in the workhouse, until that
covetuous disposition, which has accompanied him in an eminent degree through
life, began to appear, but for a while it was confined to the toys, etc. of his
companions. During the first two years he was in the workhouse, he made a very
rapid progress in his education; but as he advanced in years, he advanced
likewise in roguery, he had been often convicted of petty thefts, yet his
insinuating address, and progress in learning counterbalanced his bad actions
with his too-credulous teachers, and he often escaped the punishment his crimes
deserved.

He had been nearly four years in the workhouse when he commenced his
depradations on its proyerty, and on that of its officers: Our hero has,
throughout his whole life, been possessed of an unconquerable propensity for
stealing, and drinking strong liquors -- Several small articles had from time
to time disappeared from the workhouse, and the Porcupine had frequently been
observed to be in liquor. Once, in particular, having found means to convey a
brass goblet from the governor's kitchen, by the assistance of one of those
monsters who are to be found in all the towns in England, whose whose business
is to purchase stolen goods, and to encourage youth to steal, he converted the
goblet into cash, and part of that into gin, with which he got drunk; and
returning to the workhouse, yet intoxicated, he went directly to the
governor's kitchen, and told the cook that he observed one of the boys on the
road to town with a goblet under his arm; inquiring if it belonged to the
workhouse. The goblet being, in consequence, immediately missed, and
information thereof given to the governor, he ordered the boy charged with the
crime to be brought before him, when low! it appeared that he had not been
without the gates of the gates of the workhouse that day: The Porcupine was
consequently caught in the snare he had laid for another -- the charge of theft
reverted to him, who was brought before the governor, but the gin having
commenced its operation, he was speechless, in a state of inebriation,
disgraceful at any age, but more so at his. Next day, the treble crimes of
theft, drunkenness, and lying, procured him a most severe chastisement: his
credit in the workhouse was at an end; and from that day he formed the design
of leaving it the first favorable opportunity.

Some time in the spring of 1780, the year in which he commenced
pocket-picking, he found means to extract from a countryman's pocket, who had
come to town to attend a fair, a few shillings. Conscious of detection if he
did not leave the workhouse immediately, and already sufficiently tired of its
confinement, he determined to depart as soon after supper as he conveniently
could, for, by so doing, he would have a night's traveling before his going
off would be known.

His memory was at this time pretty retentive -- his late severe flogging he
had not forgot -- he had likewise perfect remembrance of another recent
disgrace, which, though not so corporeally painful, got him the hootings,
hissings and contemptuous jeerings of all his companions; these, had he not
been possessed of a heart so naturally prone to thieving, might have
superinduced a reprisal, before his final leave on the body of the object of
his vengeance; but the property, rather than the body, of the person who, when
fulfilling his duty, he supposed had injured him, was his object; and as he had
neither clothes nor money to overburden him when traveling, a little addition
to the production of his first public essay, he was determined to attempt
procuring; with this view, he employed the evening in scheming, and while the
governor, teachers, etc. were suping, he put his schemes in execution; the
governess's chamber was the first object of his examination -- in it he could
discover nothing worth carrying off, save an antique repeating watch, which was
immediately secured -- the governor's was next in course, and after strict
examination, a solitary Queen Ann's halfguinea, which its owner had long kept
as an object of curiosity, was the only thing he could find worthy of capture:
-- The rooms of the teachers came next under review, but none of the precious
metals were to be found in them; however, he determined they should not fare
better for that: In one room he thought a change from the workhouse dress
would prevent his being stopped when traveling, and in the other, a
determination to destroy, as he could not carry off, entered his malicious
mind. The best suit belonging to the junior teacher he cut in pieces with a
penknife he found in the room, and from that of the senior he carried off a
black cloth coat, a pair of black satin breeches, and a three-cocked hat, with
these under his arm he sallied forth from the workhouse, and continued
walking, nor dared to look behind him, till he was at least a mile distant from
his late home. Here he stoped for the purpose of shifting -- you may easily
conceive what a ridiculous figure a youth of his years would make in such a
dress.

The teacher's posteriors were equal in size to those of any man in this city,
and his coat would have been too large for Mr. Sedgwick; not with standing
which, this offspring of a coal-pit union determined to change his dress, and
having thrown into an adjoining meadow-drain the principal part of his
workhouse uniform, he equipped himself in the clothes he had stole, and, in
that ridiculous dress, he set off for Birmingham. On the road he committed
several petty acts of theft; the people supposing he had escaped from some
mad-house, were not very watchful of their property when he entered their
dwellings.

He arrived at that town about eight o'clock in the morning, in the same
ludicrous dress, which arrested the attention of every eye: A huge
old-fashioned very fine cocked hat, and a pair of wooden-soaled workhouse
manufactured, shoes -- a superfine very large black cloth coat, and a coarse
gray cloth workhouse jacket -- a pair of very large and fine satin breeches,
and a pair of the coarsest gray workhouse stockings -- a very rich antique
watch-chain dangling on his thigh, and a great notty oak-branch in his hand,
were contrasts so truly striking, as to have a very visible effect on the
visible faculties of every beholder.

A member of a gang of thieves, who had for some time infested Birmingham,
accosted our young hero, and very soon discovered him to be of " the sort;" he
therefore carried him before their scheming committee, by the unanimous voice
of whom, he was admitted a member of their association, and from whom he
received a complete change of dress. What became of the repeater he never knew,
and its loss he has often lamented. Under the tuition of these light-fingered
gentlemen, however, he soon became a proficient in the art of picking locks and
every species of thieving. He continued in this place near twelve months;
during which he assisted them in robbing the stores, etc. of several capital
merchants, and always shared equal in the booty. Early in the year 1781, an end
was put to this association, by some of the gang being seized in the act of
breaking open the cellar of an inn, and the rogues not having confidence in one
another, for personal safety a retreat was unavoidable. He, therefore, with a
companion of the trade, left Birmingham the morning after said detection,
determining to carry on on their own account, and took the road to Oxford. Near
Coventry, they fell in with a chaise and four, containing a young lady and her
inamorato, on their way to Gretna Green, and having stopped the carriage, the
loving couple, alarmed at the appearance of a rusty pistol without a lock,
delivered to the robbers, all their cash, consisting of nearly 200 guineas; how
the lovers were to proceed, or whether the Caledonian horse-shoeing divine
would unite them in the holy bands of matrimony without the appearance of a
purse, were objects which never struck the minds of either of these
hard-hearted followers of Phorbas. They slept that night, and breakfasted next
morning, in the house of of a poor, but honest and industrious, countryman,
from which, not with standing, they took care not to depart without a prize.
The laborious man being up at the dawn of day to his work, when the
unsuspecting woman was empleyed preparing breakfast, a sit opportunity offered,
and the monsters, callous to every feeling of humanity, picked the locks of an
ancient bureau, and extracted therefrom one guinea and three half-crown pieces,
which were carefully wrapped up in rags, and deposited in a corner of one the
drawers, undoubtedly a part of the hard earnings which the industrious couple
had collected for the purposes of paying their rent and the teacher's quarterly
bills for the education of their children: they departed unsuspected, after
paying the good woman he moderate charge, and receiving her hearty thanks; this
day they dined at a tavern, from which they carried off a silver pot. They
arrived at Oxford that same night, in which city they resided some time: during
which they broke open, a variety of haberdashers, men's mercers, hardware and
jewelry shops, etc. the products of which they easily disposed of, as our
hero takes notice, in the manuscript already mentioned, that "he never was in
any town two days without discovering some place for the disposal of stolen
goods."

The accomplices in villainy had not been in partnership six months, when, in
consequence of a difference respecting the division of some booty, they
determined to separate, but not before each had solemnly swore never to become
volunteer evidence against the other. It was the Poroupine's lot to leave
Oxford; he therefore set off with the intention of going to London, but having
stopped a few days at Banbury fair, he picked several pockets, stole two or
three pieces of cloth, several pairs of gloves, stockings, etc. which
occasioned his return to Oxford to dispose of them. During his absence, a
reward of 50 guineas had been advertised for the discovery of the persons
guilty of a late daring robbery, and if one of the delinquents made the
discovery, he was to receive pardon as well as the reward. It was the last
robbery that the Porcupine and his companion had been jointly guilty of, and
the promise of pardon and reward induced him to break his solemn engagement by
making discovery of his companion in iniquity. As the the assizes were sitting
the trial speedily commenced, but, unfortunately for the Porcupine, he could
not restrain his hands even in the court; when retiring from giving his
evidence, he was caught in the act of picking a gentleman's pocket -- he was
accordingly committed to jail; his trial came on before the assize rose, and he
and his companion were found guilty; the latter, on account of the magnitude of
his crime, death -- and the former, on account of his youth, got off with a
sentence of imprisonment "for six months, and receiving on the first Friday of
the first, third, and fifth months, 100 lashes on his naked back, by the hands
of the common hangman." This punishment had no other effect on the Porcupine
than that of hardening him in iniquity. The period of his confinement had no
sooner expired, than he set off again for London; when he arrived there, he had
in possession, in addition to what he carried from Oxford, about 20 yards
printed calicoe, I piece book muslin, 4 large shawls, a quantity of ribbons,
gloves, stockings, etc. a silver watch, two silver table-spoons, one silver
porter-mug, besides some cash, all of which he picked up at the different
houses he halted at on the road. The goods he very soon disposed of, and he
continued, as usual, drunk and honest till his purse was reduced to its
original emptiness: He then recommenced his depradations on his neighbor's
property, and, being well known to all thieves in London and its vicinity, in
the course of a few months he assisted in the commission of many capital and
daring robberies. Shortly after his arrival in that city, he became, and
continued during his stay, the protector of one of the fair dames of St.
Giles's, who supplied him very liberally with drink and money; but he and a
companion being on a foot-pad expedition in the neighborhood of London, one
evening, they stoped a carriage, and demanded the money of a gentleman who was
in it, which he having refused, the companion of the Porcupine fired in at one
door, which missing the gentleman, wounded our hero at the other, who was
immediately apprehended and conducted to prison. Next court he was tried, and
received sentence to be slogged at the cart's tail, and imprisoned three months
in Tothilfields Bridewell. On his liberation he set off for Canterbury, on the
road to which picked up several small articles of value, and by his cunning
address, prevailed on the daughter of a farmer, at whose house he tarried one
night, to sleep with him, and in the morning carried off her father's watch and
two guineas, which had been carelessly left in the parlour over night. [In the
manuscript mentioned at the beginning of this letter, he says, he had a custom
of traveling cross-roads.]

Having arrived at Canterbury, he commenced his old trade, and was pretty
succesful, but a search being set on foot, his narrow escape from the officers
of justice, induced him to enter in the service of " The Defender of the
Faith," by inlisting in one of his regiments of infantry, which was shortly
after commanded to prepare for a voyage to America; before the time fixed for
their departure, however, the negociations for peace commenced, the order for
embarkation was countermanded, and the regiment ordered to Gloucestor, where he
continued some time; when being ordered to Leicestor on a recruiting party he
began again to steal. The day of their arrival, he and other two of the party
took a trunk from behind a carriage, in the vicinity of that town, which
contained several articles of great value. In this place they resided several
months, during which he married a daughter of the tavern-keeper on whom he was
billetted.

The party being ordered to join the regiment, on their return through
Birmingham, he selt in with some of his old acquaintances, in whose company the
night he was there was spent in the commission of several petty acts of theft.
He had no sooner joined the regiment than, by saying she was a w -- e who
followed him, he prevailed on the mistress of the house in which he was
billeted, to turn his wife out of doors, and on his fellow soldiers to mob her
out of town.

Shortly after this, having met one night in the streets with one of his
officers in a state of intoxication, he, being as usual disguised, attacked and
robbed him of his watch and money; he then left him, went for his uniform, and
returning to the officer led him home. This unfortunate man's property again
tempted the rapacious villain, and he took off a few shirts, etc. which he
found in the room. These he was careful to dispose of that night, but he
thought himself safe enough with the watch; he was however mistaken: the
officer had perfect recollection which soldier it was who saw him home, and
upon missing his shirts, he ordered a strict search to be made at the
Porcupine's lodging -- his shirts could not be found, but his watch
unexpectedly was: The unfortunate wretch was immediately took under guard, and
shortly after tried by a court martial, who sentenced him to receive, which he
actually did, 500 lashes. He deserted immediately after his recovery, and went
directly to Derby. The same night that he arrived there he stole from a shop a
vast number of silk handkerchiefs, and next night, from another shop he took
some bundles of stockings, some dozen pair of gloves, and other small articles;
with these he traveled the country as a hawker, and stealing whenever an
opportunity offered. In the course of this journey, he fell in with a fellow
rogue, who advised him to commence coiner; the two accordingly set to work, and
having finished a quantity of money they separated. The hero, of this letter
was soon after this apprehended at Notingham for passing bad money, but the
magistrates, not knowing he was a deserter, agreed not to prosecute him if he
would enlist in the army; this he consented to, and immediately joined a
regiment then in town. He had not been long in this regiment until he was sent
on a recruiting party into the county of Stafford; he had no sooner, however,
been separated from the main body than he determined to desert. He picked the
lock of a trunk belonging to the owner of the first house he was billeted in,
and exchanged his regimentals for a suit of his landlord's; this done, he set
off for Birmingham; when he arrived there, hearing of the fatal end of a number
of his companions, and recollecting his own hair-breadth escapes, he resolved
to follow thieving no longer: With this view he sought out for a footman's
place in some gentleman's family. He was of a good appearance, which by the
assistance of a forged certificate of good character, got him into the service
of a young gentleman who was going to make the tour of Europe, and they
ecordingly set off for France. His not knowing the French language was a great
inconvenience to his master, who, therefore determined to be at the expense of
teaching him. They spent a long time in visiting the different towns in the
north of France; but the wretch had no sooner acquired a knowledge of the
language, which was highly pleasing to his master, than he determined to return
to England. Since he had been in this gentleman's service, he conducted himself
honestly, or at least if he did steal, it was not discovered, this honest
disposition, however, did not long continue -- his master having gone out with
some companions on a party of pleasure for two days, he, being an unsuspicious
man, left him the charge of his clothes and money, but he had no sooner gone,
than having put the money and most valuable part of his master's wardrobe into
one trunk, he took it with him and set off immediately for Calais, from thence
to Dover, and from Dover to Bath, without stopping a a longer time than was
necessary at any place on the road. His going to Bath, he says in the
beforementioned manuscript, was for the purpose of making his fortune, by
marrying an heiress! Had this happened, he adds, he would really have lived
honest and sober ever after; but fortunately for the ladies, he could not
restrain his hands from stealing when there.

In consequence of a constant attendance at the card-room, a show of cash, a
vast stock of impudence, and a smattering of French, he got intimate with
several young gentlemen, one of whom having lost very considerably at play, was
enabled by a present of the Porcupine's to continue, and in the end came off
gainer; this generosity, as the young gentleman thought it, induced him to
invite our hero to his father's house next night to tea, which was complied
with, and the visits often repeated, in the conrse of which, he pretended to be
deeply smitten with the charms of the young gentleman's sister, and made her
several rich presents. His endeavors were successful -- ugly as he is, he says
he won her heart, and had he desisted from robbery for two weeks, he might have
been in possession of an amiable and accomplished lady with a handsome fortune;
but being apprehended attempting to rob the stage between Bath and Cricklade,
an end was put to the affair.

On examination, one of his accomplices served him just as he did his old
companion at Oxford, by turning evidence for the crown, in consequence of
which, three indictments for capital crimes were found against him. That for
robbing the stage was first tried, and the evidence being clear, he was found
guilty, and sentenced to be banged! but the disturbance between England and
Spain, respecting Nootka Sound, breaking out at this time, he received a pardon
on condition of joining one of the regiments ordered for Gibraltar; this he
gladly consented to. He was kept confined till they were ready to embark, at
which he and several others were marched under a strong guard for Portsmouth to
be put aboard the transports which were lying at that place; but on the way,
the Porcupine found means to escape from his guard, and went to London, from
whence fear of discovery made him take immediate shipping for Dublin. He
arrived in that city with an empty purse, but not having forgot his old trade,
he the evening of his arrival, picked a gentleman's pocket of about seventy
pounds in cash and bank-notes, and continued his depradations during his stay
in that town. By his attendance at the places of public amusement, he got
acquaint with several genteel families, in particular, he became intimate in
the family of a respectable citizen, the eldest daughter of whom he paid the
closeft attention, and soon prevailed upon her to consent to marriage, although
her father had refused his consent. He took lodgings for her in Parliament
street, and lived in the midst of plenty and pleasure for some time;
notwithstanding which, he was no less assiduous in his attention to another
young lady, in the out-skirts of the city, with whose parents he passed for the
son of an English gentleman of fortune. He made her several very valuable
presents, and she received him in a favorable manner; but, when the young lady
was on the point of yielding to his solicitations, her father having assented
to the plan, which was to set off on the morning of their marriage, to his
father's estate in England, an accident happened, which, though it stoped the
marriage, ruined the lady. In one of their walks in her father's garden, when
drawing out his handkerchief he dropped a letter from one of his old
companions, then under sentence of death in England. She took no notice of it,
and he not observing it, it lay till she had an opportunity of picking it up
and perusing its contents, which made her acquaint with his true character.

At his next interview she laid the letter before him -- in vain did he invent
a variety of excuses, such as finding it, etc. it was directed to him, she
remarked, and she concluded by telling him, she was determined never to see him
again -- it would have been well for her, if she had continued firm in her
determination. He now resolved to leave Ireland without the knowledge of his
wife; before which, however, he wished to see the young lady who had found the
letter, and that he might accomplish this, he wrote her a letter, requesting
her to meet him that evening at nine o'clock, near her father's gate (for he
durst not go within it now), that he might explain what had happened. This she
unfortunately complied with: he tied his horse to a tree, and they walked on a
little way; he endeavored to reconcile matters, but to no purpose. He then
threw her down, and having stuffed his handkerchief in her mouth, ravished, and
afterward robbed her -- left her almost senseless, and never saw her more.

He then made for his horse, which having mounted, he rode off directly for
Donaghadee, at which place he embarked for Port-Patrick, from whence he set off
for Carlisle, at which place he continued some time pursuing his old trade, and
continuing his old licentious way of life. He seduced a servant maid, and
afterward induced her to live with him; notwithstanding which, he paid his
addresses to a young lady in the neighborhood, but finding her father
prejudiced against his very appearance, and resolved to have no connection
whatever with him, he changed his design, and prevailed on the young lady to
submit to his lustful desires. Her father, irritated at her disobedience,
determined to put an effectual stop to any future interviews, and had her
confined to her chamber. She however contrived to correspond with him, by the
assistance of a female servant, and in her letters earnestly entreated him to
form some plan to convey her from her prison; but as he was not hasty in
discovering one, she requested him, by letter, as her window-shutters were
fastened, to come at midnight with a rope, mount to the top of the house, and
let the rope down the chimney of her chamber, to which she promised to tie her
clothes and money, after that was drawn up, and the rope again let down, she
was to fasten herself. He repaired to the house at the hour appointed, which he
very easily mounted by a peat-stack and a stable which were raised at one of
(...) gables; having hoisted her money and clothes, he let the rope down again,
not with intention of carrying off miss, for as he could not procure her
estate, she had no more charms for him; however, not suspecting his intention,
she fastened herself to the rope, and he having hoisted her about halfway up,
he fastened it round the chimney-top, and went off with her clothes and money,
leaving her in that sooty situation to reftect on her credulity. By this
treacherous nocturnal expedition, he acquired clothes, ornaments, a watch, etc.
of nearly 150l. value, and in cash about 53 guineas, with which, to avoid
another whipping-post exhibition, he took a moonlight leave of Carlisle; taking
care, however, to carry likewise with him, from his own lodgings, whatever
could conveniently be done, without giving his Cumberland dear " in possession"
cause to suspect his intention of elopement. At Brampton he dispofed of the
goods. He continued in this place about 10 days, stealing whenever an
opportunity occurred. Having entered the house of an aged widow woman one
night, he demanded of her where her money lay, the woman told him she had none;
however, he observed a watch, which when attempting to take, she laid hold of
him by the arm, beseeching him not to take it -- it had been her husband's
before she knew him, she said, and she had kept it with the greatest care since
his death -- it was an agreeable companion in her hours of solitude, she added,
and begged him to leave it. The callous monster irritated at her holding him,
struck her with a short bludgeon which he always carried with him, and laid her
lifeless at his seet. He then took the watch, and even riffled the unfortunate
woman's pockets. Having locked the door, he made off for Litchfield, where
falling in with a branch of the grand association, they carried on the business
on an extensive plan for three months; churches, dwelling-houses, shops,
cellars, etc. all were examined in turn by this band of russians. Their attack
on the country house of an extensive wholesale merchant is particularly worthy
of notice: it was situated about three miles from Litchfield, and as nobody was
left to take care of the house during winter, the rogues had an opportunity to
empty it of almost every thing it contained; they took a cart with them, and
having picked the locks, rumaged the house, and loaded their cart with the most
valuable articles they could find, which they immediately took to town. Next
day, while two of the gang were observing whether any of the family went to the
house, the others were employed disposing of what they had stole. At night they
paid the house another visit, and carried off another cart-load of the most
valuable and portable articles which it then contained. For three weeks this
extraordinary robbery remained undiscovered, and even then the perpetrators
were not known. In the mean time, these villains had broke into two of the
parish churches and a dissenting meeting house, from each of which the carried
off the communion-cups, etc. stripped the pulpits and covered pews, and took
from one of the churches a large folio bible full of notes, which they burnt.
The vest number of house and shop-breakings, and other daring robberies lately
committed in this town, occasioned a strict search to be set on foot,
particularly amongst strangers, in consequence of which, two of the gang were
apprehended, but our hero and the other escaped; he did not, however, leave
town, he was doomed to grace the Litchfield whipping-post. On the next market
day, observing a countryman with a purseful of guineas, he determined to
attempt procuring it, and following him till an opportunity occurred, he
decoyed the simple fellow into an alley, then knocked him down, and robbed him
of his all; but he had not left him long when the dreadful cries of the
unfortunate man alarmed some people in the adjoining houses; a purfuit was
accordingly made, and the Porcupine was seized and committed to jail; before he
was apprehended, however, he had disposed of the purse some way. He was soon
after tried, and found guilty -- he was sentenced to three months imprisonment,
and to receive 50 lashes under the gallows. It was a fortunate circumstance for
him, that nothing transpired in the course of the trial, respecting the late
robberies -- had he been convicted of them he would undoubtedly have met with
that sat he has so long deserved.

Afraid of a discovery which would put an effectual stop to his career, he
petitioned to be allowed to enlist, which being granted, he entered with a
company then in town, belonging to a regiment lying at Ipswich, to which he was
immediately sent with some other recruits. At a fair they halted one day trying
to procure more recruits, and our hero prevailed on his guard to take off his
hand cuffs, which being done, he went to the fair, at which he picked a
farmer's pocket of about 20 guineas, 6 of which he gave to his comrades. Having
arrived at Ipswich, and being restored to the liberty of a British soldier, he
began again to steal. It would require a volume to contain a particular account
of the crimes he committed during his stay in this town. Shortly after he
arrived, he married a servant girl; this wretch, who has been guilty of so many
enormities, made no seruple to break through the holy bands of matrimony
whenever it suited his purposes. At this time he had wives in various parts of
England, and one in Ireland; besides which, he had ruined a number of young
women, who never had the honor of being united to him by wedlock's sacred ties.

The Porcupine having with several of his fellow-foldiers, broke into the store
of an extensive wholesale merchant, and carried off a quantity of goods, cash,
bills, etc. to a very considerable amount. The Porcupine knew this could not
remain long undiscovered, and being more provident than his companions, he
arranged matters so as to procure his share in cash, and with the addition of a
watch, a few guineas, and a complete change of dress, belonging to the owner of
the house in which he was billeted, he made off directly for Newmarket, at
which place the races were to commence the next week.

This daring robbery was the occasion of a very strict search, and a few of the
Porcupine's companions were among those apprehended on suspicion. Some of the
goods being found in their possession, and one of their accomplices having
become king's evidence, a full disclosure was made. A reward was offered for
apprehending our hero, by the military as well as civil authority, and he was
arrested and dragged out of an assembly, at which he had promised himself the
best crops he had yet reaped, and sent to prison. He was soon after sent under
a military guard to Ipswich, and lodged in jail. It was while lying there,
under the horrors of a guilty conscience, and expecting the gallows as the
reward of his crimes, that he wrote the manuscript I mentioned at the begianing
of this letter.

He had not lain long there when he and his companions were tried by a
court martial, and he and another was sentenced to receive 1000 lashes each, to
be drummed out of the regiment, and to be delivered over to the civil law. They
stood 700 the first time, and as soon as they were able, they got the
remainder, were drummed out of the regiment, and again committed to jail; but
the humane gentlemen who fustained the principal loss wishing to decline any
further prosecution, they had their choice whether to stand trial, or to join
the Queen's Rangers, Botany Bay, or the Royal Americans, Nova Scotia, in either
of which latter cases, they were never to return to Great Britain. The
Porcupine made choice of Nova Scotia, and his companion of Botany Bay. After
our hero arrived at the place of his choice, he exerted his talents to procure
a little cash, with the intention of making off for the United States as soon
as possible. In them he arrived in the year 1792, and has lived ever since
without any visivle means of procuring an honest livelihood! it is evident,
that he must either have stole or been the secret agent of the king his master;
I am inclined to believe the latter is his employment, for the wretch hardened
in iniquity, who could go to the gallows with composure, shudders as the
thought of many year's confinement.

I am the more inclined to believe it, as he has suddenly emerged from his late
state of poverty and mise y, and has opened a shop in this city in one of his
names; this, however, I have been informed from the best authority, is only a
temporary scheme of the servants of our late " most excellent king," to try the
pulse of the American people!

The variety of names he went under, I have not taken notice of, and one-half
the innumberable quantity of crimes he committed, could not be enumerated in
the circumscribed bounds of a letter.

Having perused the preceding pages I know how you feel -- I know how every
honest man must seel at seeing this abandoned wretch, this outcast of society,
daring to intersere in the politics of your country, and a^^^ming a
dictatorship to your legislators. Let the national vengeance hurl the mercenary
into oblivion -- LIBERTY, VIRTUE, JUSTICE, REASON, and TRUTH, demand the
sacrifice -- If it is longer delayed, the error may not be discovered till too
late.

I am, etc.

A Postscript to Peter Porcupine.
PETER,
HAD the pamphlet which you call your "Life and Adventures," not contained such
a multiplicity of falsehoods, which might deceive those who know nothing. of
England, although they must be evident to those who have resided there, I would
have taken no notice of it. Should you explain the absurdities and reconcile
the contradictions hereafter noticed, you may yer redeem character.

After exposing the wretched hovel and the indigence in which your grandfather
dwelt, and saying, that all he left behind him was his scythe, his reap-hoop,
and his flail, you have the conscience to tell us that your father was a
farmer; and a very substantial one he must have been too, for you say that he
had dealings with the. London hop-merchants, and mentions his turnip crops, his
wheat, his barley, his peace, etc. moreover, your father was a very learned man
for his rank (a farmer); he was perfect in several branches of the mathematics;
he understood land surveying well, and possessed experience and understanding.
These stories will not do, Peter, for instead of raising you, as you wish, in
the estimation of the public, they must have an effect the very reverse,
because it is pretty well known, that farms are not so easily acquired in
England, and to stock such a one as you say he had would require several
hundred pounds sterling, consequently, you must have published a lie, unless
your father procured the cash sufficient to teach him what you say he knew, and
stock the farm which you say he had, by some means which you have thought
proper to hide from the public.

You say your father worked for twopence a day, when a boy; now supposing the
did so for 8 years, that is, from 8 to 16 years of age, and spent nothing
during that time, neither on eating nor drinking, clothing nor lodging, at the
end he would have had neatly 24l. 4s.

Having arrived at the age of 16 (which is at least two years before farmer's
servants receive full wages) I shall suppose he got man's wages, or 6d. a day,
and that he worked at that rate for 8 years more, or till he was aged 24,
which, if he lived as I have supposed he did the first 8 years, would amount to
72l. 16s. Thus your father, if he lived the 16 years he was at work without
eating, went naked, and slept without other covering than the canopy of Heaven,
would be in possession of the sum of 97l. sterling, not one quarter sufficient
to place him in the situation you say he was; besides you say he spent part of
his earnings at an evening school, when he attended it he must have had a few
rags on; to purchase them, pay the teacher's bills, buy books, etc. would
require almost all his earnings. Now, as your grandfather left nothing of value
behind him, how did your father get possession of this farm and stock; or if he
had them not, what did you mean by publishing here that he really had them? was
you foolith enough to think any one would believe that in England, however
cheap things are, a man could acquire such a considerable property honestly,
whose annual income never amounted, on an average, to twenty-seven dollars. No,
Peter, this is an age of excessive credulity, but not just so bad as you
imagine yet.

"How much better would it have been to have told the naked truth," you say
your father had property, but how he acquired it you do not mention; your best
friends must entertain suspicions, when they read that part of your history. If
your father, in the early part of his life made free with his neighbor's
property, till he procured sufficient to establish himself as a farmer, you
might have mentioned it, it would nor affect your character -- chieving is not
the sin which the Almighty threatens to visit the third and fourth generation
for; and there is little danger to be apprehended for your relations in
England, if you have any, seeing you have been so faithful to your sovereign
Lord and King.

You had three brothers you say; the eldest was a soop-keeper -- the second a
farmer, and the third a soldier in the East India company's service -- If you
really had a brother a shopkeeper, why did you not mention in what town or
county he resided, or what fort of a shop he kept. -- And your farming brother,
where did he reside; did he occupy your father's farm or not? Had you mentioned
these things, they would have at least given this story the appearance of truth.

But there is no end to your inconsistencies: You say your religion was that of
the Church of England, to which you have ever remained attached. Now, what is
attachment to religion? Is it only saying you are of that religion, or is it a
firm adherence to its creed; if it is the latter why do you say in another
place, that at a particular time you would not have listed your pen although
your salvation had depended on it! or why do you say the name it bears has
attached you to it; if it is the name it cannot be the religion, for if
Unitarianism, was to receive that name, by your own words we must believe you
would become of that religion, and remain firmly attached to it while it was
called by that name, although at present you affect to execrate its adherents.

You say your ancestors were never persecuted for their religious opinions, and
consequently had not an oportanity of giving such a singular proof of their
faith as Dr. Franklin's grandfather, and yet you tell us at the same time that
you never heard of any of your ancestors prior to your grandfather -- sure in
his day there was no persecution against people of his religious opinions in
England; but what reliance can we place on any thing you advance in your "Life
and Adventures," no man can suppose you have wrote the truth, when they read at
its beginning, that, had you been Dr. Franklin, you would not have mentioned
something that he has done, because it appears to you ridiculous.

I now come to that place where you mention your attempts to become sailor:
Here your falsehoods appear really evident; you say, that having gone aboard
the Pegasus, and applied to its captain for leave to remain in the fleet, then
lying at Spithead, you was denied; that you afterward applied to the
Port-Admiral, but could not prevail with him either. When you was writing this
account of your life, you ought to have recollected, that the time you mention
was near the conclusion of the American war, that it is pretty well known here,
that at that time the navy was in greater want of hands than they have been
this war; and yet we well know what shifts they have been put to to man their
fleets -- we well know that their press-gangs have invaded the peaceful
dwellings of many happy families, and carried off their husbands, fathers, and
supporters, leaving the mothers and their little ones to perish! -- who can
then suppose they would refuse an able-bodied volunteer. Have they not set
every snare which has been invented to catch the unwary? -- I myself have seen
bills which called upon youths who were tired of their teacher's or parents'
authority -- upon apprentices who were tired of their masters -- upon young
men, who, from whatever cause, were tired of their then situation -- upon
debtors who were dunned by their creditors -- or husbands who had scolding
wives, to appear at the rendezvous and they should receive great bounties. --
Has not every county in Great Britain been obliged to furnish a certain number
of men both for the army and navy -- Nay, have not these dregs of society, who
command the piratical vessels of Britain, dragged American sailors from aboard
American vessels to man these royal slaughter-houses, forcing them to fight
against men whom they love, and against principles which they adore -- Would
they then refuse an able-bodied English volunteer? -- No, Porcupine, had
Berkley or Evans, the officers you say you applied to, done so, they would no
longer have held commissions under the royal lunatic of England; and if you
inserted this, as an evidence of the humanity of British officers, you have
likewise missed your aim -- monuments of their humanity are to be seen
throughout the United States, and it is the theme of conversation from
New Hampshire to Georgia!

I shall pass over the time you say you was a lawyer, and meet you a second
time, through excess of loyalty, making an attempt to get into the service of
your king; and, indeed, it surprised me a good deal to read in your history,
that his Majesty's officers refused you admission into the service in the time
of war, and accepting you immediately on the arrival of peace; I declare it
struck me on reading the account, that you may have wished to be in your king's
service, though cowardice prevented your entering during the war! I am
justified in this supposition, for the pamphlet of your "Life and Adventures"
says, you entered into the army, immediately after peace was declared! and left
it on the appearance of a war with Spain!

You have, throughout the account of your life and adventures, many touches of
the marvelous -- the way you say you spent your time in Chatham barracks is not
the least so -- you acted differently from any British soldier I ever heard of.
Writing a fair hand, you say, procured you the honor of being copyest to
Colonel Debieg, but pray how came the commandant of the garrison to know you
wrote a fair hand, or that you could write at all -- What, not in all Chatham
barracks could be found one, from sergeant to fifer, but William Cobbet, who
could write a fair hand -- a pretty picture, indeed, of the British army -- the
commandant of Chatham was obliged to make a young man, whom nobody knew, who
had come to the place and enlisted, no one knowing for what reason, his
confident and his copyest. You might have escaped the gallows, you might have
been the greatest villain in England, for what Col. Debieg knew. No, my lad,
such stories will not do.

Talking of an affair between the Duke of Richmond and Col. Debieg, you say,
"it ended in the good and gallant colonel being stripped of the reward bestowed
on him for his long and meritorious services," and next page tells us, when
speaking of the British army, that "there is no situation where merit is so
sure to meet with reward." Happy situation, indeed, so, in the British' army,
merit is rewarded by raising the object to a higher situation than he could
expect, and immediately after stripping him of his reward!

Having gone with your regiment to Nova Scotia, continued there 7 years, and
returned without any adventure worth noticing, you say, at your own request,
you was discharged; but, good God, of all the wonderful wonders which appear in
the course of your life, there is none calculated to excite so hearty a laugh
as the concluding clause of a piece you have inserted in it as your discharge
from the army: it says, "he, in consideration of his good behahior and the
services he has rendered the regiment, is hereby discharged!!!" This is indeed
a strange reward for services rendered -- Why was you not promoted --
"promotion (you say) is the reward of merit in the British army." -- No man in
his sober senses would, for a moment, suppose that a discharge would be the
consequence of good behavior -- No, no, Peter, no man will believe that
discharge to be authentic, unless they see the original, with Lord Fitzgerald's
seal; I would therefore recommend to you, for the satisfaction of those who
doubt your veracity, but would be ashamed to be seen going into your shop, to
expose the original in your window.

How foolishly you triumph after producing what you call a copy of your
discharge -- you assert that your character was good, and hope it will be
looked upon as such, down to 1792, that you never was whipped for stealing! and
calls upon your readers to recollect that the Aurora has said you wast. Had you
possessed the least knowledge or penetration, you would have known, that to
deny an assertion will not prove the negative, and that man is prone to believe
an assertion the truth of which is barely denied. Not one rogue in a hundred
but pleads not guilty, yet his saying he is not guilty never acquits him. Your
readers will undoubtedly argue thus, that they know B. F. Bache, who is a
respectable citizen, and who has published that Peter Porcupine was fogged for
stealing -- that William Cobbet, a man of a very doubtful character, who fled
from England to France, and there took shipping for America, although he could
have got it more convenient and much cheaper in his native country, and who
says he is Peter Porcupine, has denied it -- now, which of the two are we to
believe, the runnaway serjeant-major, whom nobody knows, or Mr. Bache, whom we
well know -- undoubtedly the latter. But you, Peter, are possessed of more
incontestible proofs than Mr. Bache can be, if you have been flogged, your back
will bear witness against you, if not, against Mr. Bache. I would, therefore,
recommend to you, for your character's sake, to make public exhibition of your
naked back, for two market days, on the balcony at the Old Courthouse; after
which no one can doubt, as you will give every one an opportunity to have
occular demonstration of the truth or falsity of Mr. Bache's assertion.

But, having returned to Old England after seven year's absence, and having
left the army, such a dutiful child as you were, who has repented your first
disobedience from that moment to this, ought to have gone to see your aged
parents or your beloved brothers; but you had forgot them at that time I
suppose -- had your 8 year's service in the army really bereft you of every
filial feeling. What you said respecting your brothers, I supposed all along
was false, and that you only inserted it for the purpose of making your family
appear a little more respectable, therefore I am not surprised at their being
no mention of them on your return. However, being now from the army, where it
would be impossible to amass a single farthing, I would like to know how you
was able to procure a change from your regimentals, or to obtain a livelihood
-- these principal things you have omitted -- should you ever have occasion to
print a second edition of your life and adventures, but I am much afraid you
never will, do, for your own credit, pay a little attention to these remarks.

To free you from the imputations of garret-scribbling and night-work, you
appeal to the ladies if you had time, for in the course of these three months
you got married; sure that would not stop you, I have heard often of soldiers
procuring wives in one night's time.

After living three months in England on nothing, or rather procuring
subsistence for yourself and family during that time in an unknown manner, (for
you have not assurance to say you either saved money in the army, or married a
lady of forturne,) you went to France, and continued there upwards of six months
more without doing any thing, which you have thought proper to publish -- pray,
did the amiable she-porcupine accompany you?

You say that excepting those who were already blasted with the principles of
the accursed revolution, you found the people in in France honest, pious, and
kind to excess; but how can you reconcile this with what almost immediately
follows, where you say that your coming to this country was in consequence of
your having imbibed principles of republicanism, and an ambition to become a
citizen of these free states -- You had imbibed notions of republicanism so
early as 1791, yet you called the revolution in France accursed, which at that
period, had no other object in view, than securing to the people all the
liberty that can be expected under a limited monarch. At the period you was in
France, and could obseve the change that had took place among the people, in
consequence of their attachment to the principles of the accursea revolution,
the person of the purjured Louis was held more sacred, than that of your
beloved sove-George is at present by your beloved countrymen -- You left
England to come to America because the people here enjoyed more liberty than
those in Old England, and yet, since you have been here, those whose wisdom and
courage procured that liberty to America, and those who have attempted to
perpetuate it, have been the constant objects of your malice and your railery,
while the same men and same government, whose every effort was used to prevent
the independence of these states have been the subjects of your admiration.
Thus we must suppose either that you lied when you said you had imbibed
principles of republicanism, or that you do not write from principle but for
guineas: What, had the Scarecrow frightened you? Did you expect that a
deserved punishment was likely to fall on your guillotine worthy head, that you
hurried out a pamphlet to stop the axe, by publishing abroad that "you had
imbibed principled of republicanism."

Again you say, your determination to settle in the United States was formed
before you left the army, and as you left the army immediately on its arrival
in England, it must have been formed when in Nova Scotia: Now as you was
discharged, you say, at your own request, I should suppose it would have saved
you a good deal of money to have requested your discharge in America; it was a
curious road to go from Nova Scotia to the United States by England and France
-- Had you gone to England for the purpose of seeing your parents, brothers, or
other relations which you say you had there, it would have been praiseworthy;
but instead of that you make no more mention of them, in this part of your
account of your life than if you had never known them. Can I call it an
oversight? No, for you have been very careful to mention things which were not
of such moment; I must therefore suppose that the account at the beginning of
your life was false, and that you know not where you was brought up.

You lest England because you heard the king was dethroned -- a tyrant who had
been guilty of spilling the blood of thousands, and who had broke the most
solemn engagements; this is unacountable in one who, before that had imbibed
the principles of republicanism, but it is more unaccountable to hear you who
fied from your native country because it was not so free as this -- who fled
from under the protection of the " best of governments," from the limited
government of that sovereign madman whose mental "abilities would not fit him
for the office of parish conslable," because you was ambitious of becoming a
citizen of this republic, telling that another nation never can be happy but
under an absolute monarchical government.

Before I leave you, I would just wish to inquire what you did in France,
Holland, etc. for so long a time, and why you did not go to England to take
shipping, when you determined to leave Europe. Your native country was so near,
the passage so much cheaper, vessels for America always sailing from its
various ports, and to have the pleasure of spending a few days amongst ones
country men and friends, would be objects of the first magnitude with any one
who durst be seen in their native land. I therefore am of opinion, that your
leaving England was not a matter of chuce! but to prevent an interview with
certain Bow-street runners -- to return would consequently be imprudent.

In short, by your own account, you knew knothing of your ancestors prior to
your grandfather, who was a day-labonrer, and died as poor as he lived -- your
father was a very learned man, and possessed an extensive farm, yet you run off
from him to serve your king -- one of your brothers was a merchant, and one a
soldier in the East India Company's service! -- another a farmer, and you a
soldier in the British army! from whence you was discharged on account of your
services and good behavior! and then you became as fortunate as your fat^^^,
for you got plenty of money secretly. You yet repent your first disobedience,
but did not think proper to visit your honored aged parents (...) others,
after so long an absence from your native country! After being three months in
England, you went to France, continued there six months, and then came to
America, where you have been four years more, without being employed in any way
by which could acquire more than a daily subsisisience, and yet you have paid
1200 dollars in advance for house-rent, and furnished your house and shops,
which would at least amount to double that sum!

These are strange and unaccountable things, which every man who reads must
notice.

Yours, D.D.

ELEGANT AND COPIOUS HISTORY OF FRANCE.
THE FIRST SIX NUMBERS Of this very valuable and highly interesting work are
now ready for delivery, Embellished with Elegant Engravings, PRICE ONLY
THREE-SIXTEENTHS OF A DOLLAR EACH.

Subscriptions received by A. and J. G. Henderson, the publishers, at Messrs.
Bioren and Madan's printing-office, back of No. 77, Dock-street, and by the
principal booksellers.


