A POEM, ON READING President WASHINGTON'S Address, DECLINING A Re-Election to
the PRESIDENCY. [WRITTEN IN OCTOBER, 1796.]

By S. J. H. ESQUIRE, ONE OF THE FEDERAL ELECTORS of the STATE of NEW YORK,

ALBANY: Printed by CHARLES R. and GEORGE WEBSTER, AT THEIR BOOKSTORE, In the
White House, corner of State and Pearl-Streets.

A POEM.
AS the rude Zemblian views with anxious eyes
The sun fast rolling from his wintry skies,
While gathering clouds the shaded vaults deform,
And hollow winds announce the impending storm,
His anguish'd soul recoils with wild affright,
From the dread horrors of the tedious night;
Such fears alarmed -- such gloom overcast each mind,
When WASHINGTON his sacred trust resigned,
And opened to his much loved country's view,
The instructive page which bid the long adieu.
So erst Nunnides, of prophetic tongue,
Chief, victor, seer, to Juda's listening throng,
Gave his last blessings: So long ages since,
Mild Solon and the stern Laconian prince,
Those boasts of fame, their parting counsels gave,
When worn with toil they sought the peaceful grave.
COLUMBIANS! long preserve that peerless page,
Stamped with the precepts of your warrior-sage;
In all your archives be the gift enrolled,
Suspend it to your walls encas'd in gold;
Bid schools recite it, let the priestly train
Chant it on festal days, nor deem the task profane;
When round your knees your infant offspring throng,
To join the matin prayer or evening song,
Those rites performed, invite them to attend
The farewell counsels of their good old friend,
And say, he left you, as his last bequest,
These golden rules to make a nation blessed.
O land, thrice blessed, if to thy interest wise,
Thy Senates learn this precious boon to prize;
While guilty Europe's blood-stained empires fall,
While Heaven incensed, lets loose the infuriate Gaul,
Thy States in phalanx firm, a sacred band,
Safe from the mighty wreck, unmoved shall stand:
But if -- may Heaven avert that shameful day!
By base intrigues or factions led astray,
With servile fondness for some foreign state,
We join their quarrels and espouse their hate,
Thenceforth farewell to dignity and fame,
For Independence dwindles to a name.
Would those who counsel kings these rules attend,
Romantic wish! for kings have never a friend:
But were these rules on royal minds impressed,
Monarchs might reign, and subjects would be blessed;
Dantons and Robespierres had died unknown,
And the mild CAPET still had graced a throne,
Behold the man! ye crowned and ermin'd train,
And learn from him the royal art to reign:
No guards surround him, or his walks infest,
No cuirass meanly shields his noble breast;
His the defense which despots never can find,
The love, the prayers, the interests of mankind.
Ask ye what spoils his far famed arms have won,
What cities sacked, what hapless realms undone?
Though MONMOUTH'S field supports no vulgar fame,
Though captur'd YORK shall long preserve his name,
I quote not these -- a nobler scene behold,
Wide cultured plains, fast ripening into gold!
There, as his toil, the cheerful peasant plies,
New marts are opening, and new spires arise;
Here commerce smiles, and there en groupe are seen,
The useful arts, and those of sprightlier mein:
To cheer the whole, the Muses tune the lyre,
And INDEPENDENCE leads the white robbed choir.
Trophies like these, to vulgar minds unknown,
Were sought and prized by WASHINGTON alone.
From these, with all his country's honors crowned,
As sage in councils as in arms renowned;
All of a piece, and faithful to the last,
Great in this action as in all the past,
He turns -- and urges as his last request,
Remote from power, his weary head to rest.
ILLUSTRIOUS MAN, Adieu! -- yet ere we part,
Forgive our factions, which have wrung thy heart;
Still with indulgent eyes thy country see,
Whose ceaseless prayers ascend the Heavens for Thee,
Go, midst the shades of tranquil VERNON stray,
In vain attempt to shun the piercing ray
Of circumambient glory, till refined
All that could clog to earth the heaven-lent mind,
Then soar triumphant to the blessed abodes,
And join those Chiefs whom virtue raised to GODS.
YE who have fought in Freedom's sacred cause,
Who grace our Senates, or expound our laws,
Freemen, who deem your country's honors dear,
Indulge the Muse, and lend a patient ear:
Say, if on you the rights of suffrage wait,
Whom hail we next as FATHER of the STATE?
To each has Heaven peculiar gifts assigned,
And men, like stars, to certain spheres confined;
In paths excentric few allowed to stray,
Drawing a splendid train and bright'ning all the way.
Saturnine souls, who think and move by rule,
Excel in grave debate, and reasonings cool;
Impetuous minds, of more impassioned form,
"Ride in the whirlwind and direct the storm."
Hence these in councils, those in arms excel,
But few indeed are those who govern well;
For in his breast who sways the rod of state,
Must center every gift supremely great:
And as the stars which gild the vault of night,
Unnumber'd pour effulgence on the sight,
So Chiefs and Senators in crowds abound,
But rare as comets Washington's are found.
Is there a man through thrice ten years well tried,
Who never has crouch'd or meanly changed his side,
Ardent and foremost in his country's cause,
The friend of order and of equal laws,
Who views with stern contempt a clamorous throng?
Strife in their heart, and freedom on their tongue;
A whiffling tribe who at their leader's nod,
Would sell their souls, their country or their GOD;
Who, had they lived in Jove's impartial reign,
Had joined the giants, and enthroned a Pain.
Is there a man, in whose capacious mind,
A MURRAY, LOCK and CHATHAM live combined;
Who joins to all that men or books have taught,
The fire of genius and the force of thought?
Is there a man, who in these changeful days,
Unawed by censure, unallur'd by praise,
True to his aim, and obstinately good,
While factions raged, unmoved as Atlas stood?
Whose ancient virtues Stoics might revere,
And Rome revived, behold her Censor here;
Such, as ere Grecian spoils her temples graced,
And solid virtue sunk to attic taste.
Should such a man preside the land were blessed --
Advert your eyes, and ADAMS stands confessed.
Fired at the name, enraptured fancy flies,
Old time rolls back, and years long past arise;
To memory fresh unfolds the solemn scene,
Columbia's Sires in high Divan convene,
Of dread concerns, commissioned to consult,
And chains or empires wait the grand result:
Full in the front I see the Patriot stand,
All fire his eye, all energy his hand --
Such graceful majesty round Tully shone,
When Rome's proud master trembled on his throne.
"Ye guardian powers of eloquence divine,
"Prepare each soul to grasp the grand design!
"Inspire my tongue the glorious cause to plead,
"Impel each hand to sign the deathless deed" --
He ceased -- Assent remurmur'd through the throng,
"While INDEPENDENCE thundered from his tongue."
FINIS.

