SOLOMON AND ALMENA. AN ORIENTAL TALE.

BY DR. JOHN LANGHORNE.

-- LIBET PARTHO TORQUERE CYDONIA
CORNU SPICULA --
VIRG. WRENTHAM, (MASS.) PRINTED BY NATHANIEL HEATON, JUN.

No. I. SOLOMON AND ALMENA.
CHAP. I.
LET the sons and daughters of affliction receive comfort from hope. -- The
motion of the sunbeams on the wave, is not more uncertain than the condition of
human life: misery, therefore, has much to hope, and happiness much to fear;
but virtue has always a resource in Providence, which not only improves the
blessings, but mitigates the evils of life.

In a pleasant valley of Mesopotamia, on the banks of the Irwan lived Solomon,
the son of Ardavan the sage. He was early instructed in all the learning of the
east; but as his understanding opened he grew weary of the labors of study,
and thirsted only for the knowledge of mankind. With much importunity he
prevailed on his father to permit him to travel. "My son," said Ardavan, "let
not your curiosity interrupt your happiness: all that nature can give you is in
the valley of Irwan, here you are cherished by the eye of affection, and
indulged with all the bounties of the eternal sun. Travel is often dangerous,
and always inconvenient: your knowledge of men may be purchased by experiencing
their treachery, their cruelty and their pride; the unsuspecting innocence of
your heart will expose you to the designs of the selfish, and the insolence of
the vain; you will wander from place to place, only for amusement; as your
heart can have no connections that time or interest have rendered dear to you,
you will be little affected by any thing you see: and, what is more than all,
your virtue will be endangered; when you behold the universal prevalence of
vice, when your eye is attracted by the flowery paths in which she seems to
tread, you will find it difficult to withstand the force of example, and the
blandishments of pleasure." Solomon humbled himself, and replied -- "Prince of
the sages that dwell between the rivers, let your ear be patient to the words
of youth. Can Ardavan doubt the integrity of the heart, which his precepts have
formed to virtue; or fear that Solomon should become the slave of vice? I am
not a stranger to the manners of men, though I have mixed but little among
them; nor am I unacquainted with the temptations to which I shall be exposed,
nor unprepared to withstand them. Travel may be attended with some
inconvenience, but it has many advantages: next to the knowledge of ourselves,
most valuable is the knowledge of nature; and this is to be acquired only by
attending her through the variety of her works; the more we behold of these,
the more our ideas are enlarged and extended; and the nobler and more worthy
conceptions we must entertain of that Power who is the parent of universal
being."

"My son," said Ardavan, "if you are determined to travel, let your ear attend
to the instruction of age. Move not one pace from the valley of Irwan, if your
heart rely not on the Eternal Providence; it is that confidence alone which
must support you under all the possible contingencies of distress: O let it not
depart from you; it is the sovereign antidote to the evils of live! the day is
not lighted up in vain, let it not pass without the practice of virtue; dare
not to behold the everlasting sun go down, if thou have wasted his light in
idleness, or vanity: ignorance, misery, or want, will always afford thee the
means of benificence."

"May that Immortal Being, whose eye is over all his creatures, save thee from
folly and from vice! may his hand direct thee in the hour of negligence, and
his spirit guide thee through the maze of error! When thy mind shall be
enriched with the knowledge of his works, may he restore thee, more virtuous,
to the valley of Irwan, to the arms of thy aged father! and may he forgive this
tear, which proceeds not from a distrust of his Providence, but falls for the
loss of Solomon.

CHAP. II.
THE morning was spread upon the mountains, and Solomon prepared to depart: but
first prostrating himself toward the sun, he thus addressed that glorious
luminary -- "Incomparable, and everlasting! thou that lightest up a thousand
worlds, and extendest thy protecting power to the minutest parts of nature! let
thy universal eye look with favor upon Solomon. When I wander over the wastes
of desolation, may thy cheerful rays comfort and support me! when I go into the
cities of men, may thou still look upon me; teach me to discover the dark
designs of malignity, and to unfold the intricacies of fraud! so may thou
rise with sevenfold luster over the waves of Indus; so may thou be adorned
by those savage nations who experience thy goodness without acknowledgment!"
After this short address he sung the following hymn.

HYMN TO THE RISING SUN.
FROM the red wave rising bright,
Lift on high thy golden head;
Over the misty mountain, spread
Thy smiling rays of orient light;
See the Golden God appear!
Flies the fiend of darkness drear;
Flies, and in her gloomy train,
Sable grief, and care, and pain,
See the Golden God advance!
On Taurus' heights his coursers prance
With him haste the vernal hours,
Breathing sweets, and dropping flowers.
Laughing Summer at his side,
Waves her locks in rosy pride;
And autumn bland, with aspect kind,
Bears his golden sheaf behind.
O haste and spread the purple day
Over all the wide etherial way!
Nature mourns at thy delay!
God of glory, haste away!
From the red wave rising bright,
Lift on high thy golden head;
Over the misty-mountain, spread
Thy smiling rays of orient light!
When Solomon had finished his devotions, he passed over the Tigris into the
kingdom of Persia.

There is some secret attraction in the place where we have passed the cheerful
innocence of childhood, that holds our heart to it during the remaining part of
life. No sooner had Solomon ascended an eminence that gave him a retrospective
view of the valley of Irwan, than he turned his eye on his native fields, and
gazed for some time with a kind of pensive complacency. "Happy scenes," said
he, "where I have beheld the everlasting sun so often rise and set! yonder is
the grove where I reposed at noon; and that is the hill where I mused at eve.
In yon mansion, I first drew the breath of Heaven; and there perhaps Ardavan
may yet be weeping for my departure."

The gentle heart of Solomon thus indulged itself a while, till the declining
day called upon him to proceed.

CHAP. III.
WHEN he had reached the foot of Taurus, the shadows of evening fell from the
mountains; he, therefore, sought to repose himself in the village of Abdat: but
as he was advancing toward it, he was stopped by the exclamation of sorrow,
that proceeded from an adjacent wood. As he was in hopes of relieving some
distress, he scrupled not to draw near enough to listen; and soon discovered,
that the persons he heard speaking, were two lovers, who had stolen a secret
interview, before their final separation.

The heart of Solomon had never felt the passion of love; and he was therefore
the more curious to see the effects of it. But how great was his astonishment,
when, as he approached the place from whence the voices came he beheld the
lover lying in all the agonies of sorrow, at the feet of his weeping mistress!
"Immortal Power!" said he, "I have been told that love was the best of thy
gifts; is this miserable, this painful sight, a proof of it? Behold that
wretched youth, how his heart labors and struggles under its oppression; while
the amiable maiden, who seems to be the cause of his misery, hangs over him in
tears and silence, as if incapable of relieving him! Heavens, what agonies!
Reason will be driven from her seat. Ha! nature gives place; he faints!"

Solomon, perceiving his assistance was now become necessary, rushed into the
thicket, and raised the unhappy lover from the earth. At length his senses
returned; but his grief, which had before been so exquisitely violent, was
changed into gloomy stupidity. -- Solomon, however, by the soothing sounds of
pity, awoke his attention, and by gentle importunity drew from him the cause of
his distress.

"Stranger," said the youth, "whoever thou art thine appearance entitles thee
to regard, and the compassion thou have shown me merits my confidence. Thou now
beholdest the most unhappy of men. That lady, at whose feet I so lately lay
insensible, is the daughter of a mercenary wretch, who has sold her to the Khan
of Bukharia: and tomorrow she is to be conveyed to him without expostulation
or reprieve."

"What!" replied Solomon, "is it possible that any thing can induce a parent to
make his child miserable! I was not ignorant of the depravity of man; but I
thought the affections of nature could not have been overcome. Yet, if it is
so, can there be any obligation on the child to take the portion of misery that
her parent holds out to her? The obligation of children to parents, can only be
founded in gratitude; and where no favor is shown, no gratitude can be due. It
is impossible that, in any circumstances, you should be more miserable; but it
is very possible, that you may be happier. Fly, while the moments of liberty
remain: and let not those hearts which Heaven has formed for each other, be
separated by man. The roof of Ardavan has always been a refuge to innocence in
distress; I will myself conduct you to the valley of Irwan, where my father's
venerable character, and the retired situation of his abode, will secure you
from detection; and I shall rejoice to be the means of delivering you from
misery."

This offer was too interesting to be refused. The lovers put themselves under
the conduct of Solomon; and he now repassed the roads he had traveled by the
light of the sun, with superior pleasure, even in the gloom of night; so
delightful is beneficence to a virtuous mind!

When the morning began to appear they had reached the banks of the Tigris. "It
will not be necessary," said solomon, "that I should attend you farther: yonder
is the valley of Irwan, and the house of Ardavan. To know that you are unhappy,
will be a sufficient motive for him to receive you; and your story will procure
you his protection. I will now take leave of you, because I would not again
take leave of my father. Tell him that I recommend you to his care; he will
rejoice to hear that Solomon has been the means of your happiness; but tell him
not, that I returned to the banks of the Tigris." Having thus parted with the
lovers, he proceeded on his journey, and in five days arrived at Ispahan.

The beauty and magnificence of that extensive city engaged his attention for
many days: he was now astonished at the stupendous effects of industry, and now
delighted by the elegance of art. But by these he thought himself rather amused
than instructed: and he perceived that day after day departed from him, without
being distinguished either by the acquisition of knowledge or the practice of
virtue; he, therefore frequented the places of public resort, and endeavored to
form such connections as were most likely to promote both.

CHAP. IV.
AMONG those whose conversation he found most instructing and entertaining, he
was particularly fond of an English merchant, who had resided some time at
Ispahan, and spoke the language of the country: the merchant also perceiving in
Solomon a superior understanding, and a benevolent heart, was delighted with
his company, and cultivated his friendship. They frequently met; and their
conversation generally turning on the manners and pursuits of men, they
mutually gratified each other by accounts of their different countries.

"You," said Solomon, "have enjoyed the advantages which I am still to procure.
You have seen many different parts of the world, and can form a collective idea
of its inhabitants: your commercial engagements must have led you much into the
interests and designs of men; and you must consequently be well acquainted with
the prevailing propensities of the heart. But I should be particularly obliged
to you for an account of your own country, of which I have yet had but an
imperfect description."

"The difference of men," said the merchant, "lies only in their complexion and
manners: their principles are the same, in all ages, and in all climates; and
self-interest is the prevailing principle from Indus to the Thames. I am not
however such a school philosopher, as to think the whole human species should
come under this conclusion: I have experienced the delights of friendship, and
the consolations of benevolence, where interest was no motive; I have even
known many, who have contributed to remove the miseries of their fellow
creatures, though by the diminution of their own fortune. -- That excellent,
that truly useful spirit of munificence, in a particular manner characterizes
my countrymen. Were you, my friend, in the metropolis of Great Britain, you
would behold spacious edifices erected for helpless indigence; and find the
same skill and care employed for the health and the lives of the poor, that the
most affluent circumstances can procure for the rich."

"But munificence is not the only ornament that distinguishes my country:
there, too, dwell liberty and justice; liberty, that, however strange it may
seem to you, delights in the protection of a monarch; and justice, which he
causes to be administered without partiality. The greatest bassa in Great
Britain cannot invade either the life or the property of the meanest subject
with impunity; he is equally obnoxious to the laws, and would suffer
indiscriminately with the most obscure malefactor.

"This general security of property and life excites an unwearied spirit of
industry, and disperses the sons of commerce over the remotest regions of the
earth. Hence, my friend, we visit the towers of Ispahan, and the gulphs of
Bassora; our sails are stretched from the most distant islands of the Atlantic
to the shores of Japan: and London is supplied with all the luxuries of nature,
and all the labors of art."

"You give me," said Solomon, "a very magnificent, and a very pleasing idea of
your country. But will not commerce, as it enriches the people, corrupt their
manners. Will unbounded affluence produce neither riot nor debauchery, vanity
nor pride? The inhabitants of Great Britain may be more splendid and luxurious;
but the dwellers in Mesopotamia are, perhaps, happier, in proportion as they
are more innocent: for Ardavan my father, has frequently told me, that wealth
corrupts the heart of man."

"All the good things of life," answered the merchant, "are complicated with
evils. If wealth be not desirable because it may lead us into luxury, or
inflame us with pride; no more would the sanguine cheerfulness of health, lest
it should betray us into licentiousness. There are, it is to be feared, many
whose manners are depraved by riches, but, there are, likewise, many who employ
them in the diffusion of knowledge, or the relief of indigence.

"These," said Solomon, "are glorious ends, and would almost excite me to turn
merchant, for the acquisition of wealth. But give me some account of the
literature of your country."

"Of that," replied the merchant, "I am scarce a competent judge, the greatest
part of my time having been employed in commercial studies. I am not, however,
wholly unacquainted with it; for I have always thought, that a merchant should
not neglect the accomplishments of a gentleman. The present state of literature
in Great Britain will be seen best by considering the performances of the
learned in their respective classes. We have but few historians of real merit;
either their style is slovenly and unharmonious, or their matter undigested and
confused; they are either the tools of a faction, or the slaves of a
bookseller. But I have had the pleasure of hearing, since I came to Ispahan,
that the histories of England and Scotland, the two divisions of Great Britain,
have lately been written with considerable spirit, accuracy, and elegance. As
to the histories of other countries, which have been published in Great
Britian, they are such mere compilations that they deserve not to be called the
labors of art."

"From this account of your historians," said Solomon, "I cannot entertain any
great idea of them; but what are your orators?" -- "As to rhetorical writing,"
answered the merchant, we have many that are truly excellent; spirited and
elevated in sentiment, in language harmonious and correct: but the powers of
composition are rendered inefficacious by a spiritless pronunciation. The art
of public speaking, however important in itself, seems entirely to be
neglected; and the orator pronounces his discourse from the rostrum with as
little feeling himself, and as little influence upon his audience, as if he
were reading the newspaper of the day." -- "Then I suppose," said Solomon,
"that your orators speak on unaffecting, or uninteresting subjects." "That is
not the case," replied the merchant; "the subjects they treat are of the last
importance: the duties we owe the Supreme Being, the dispensations of his
providence, the eternal obligations of morality, the charms of virtue, and the
delightful exercises of justice, mercy, and charity." -- "Holy Mithra!"
interrupted Solomon, "can the speakers be unaffected while they are treating
these subjects? Do they then think them of that importance they really are; or
do your teachers disbelieve and disregard their own doctrines; or are they
unconcerned what effect they may have upon the people?" "It would be
uncharitable," said the merchant, "to admit generally any of these
suppositions. Their unanimated and unawakening manner of speaking may proceed
from innocent causes, which those you mention are not."

"I take it for granted," said Solomon, "that as you have orators, at least in
point of composition, you have also poets; for rhetoric and poetry are nearly
allied. Besides I have been informed that every country has its poets; and that
even on the frozen mountains of the north, the hardy inh^^^tants open their
mouths to sing." "The love of harmony," replied the merchant, "is in man a
natural passion. There is something metrical and numerous in his motions, his
actions, and his words, and he has always endeavored to reduce the last to a
kind of poetical measure, even where the art of writing was unknown or
unpractised. The art of poetry in Great Britain, has of late years been brought
to great perfection; the language of the country is both nervous and
harmonious, and calculated to express the tender and the sublime, in both which
species of writing we have poets that have never been excelled. Though the
English are, in general, of a less sprightly turn than their neighbors the
French; yet, in the active powers of imagination, in the flights of fancy, and
the strains of humor, their writings are by no means inferior. Hence the
English poetry is not only harmonious, but sentimental and picturesque,
abounding with strong images and lively descriptions. In short, my countrymen
have attempted every different species of poetry, and have excelled in each."

"The account you give me of your poetry," said Solomon, "makes me very
desirous to learn your language. There is no species of writing that gives me
equal pleasure: I caught the enthusiasm from nature, from the harmony and
symmetry of her works. If you who have so long been accustomed to the elegance
of the English, can bear a specimen of the Mesopotamian poetry, I will repeat
you a performance of my own."

A FAREWELL HYMN, TO THE VALLEY OF IRWAN
FAREWELL the fields of Irwan's vale,
My infant years where fancy led;
And soothed me with the western gale,
Her wild dreams waving round my head;
While the blithe blackbird told his tale.
Farewell, the fields of Irwan's vale.
The primrose on the valley's side,
The green thyme on the mountain's head;
The wanton rose, the daisy pied,
The wilding's blossom blushing red:
No longer I their sweets inhale.
Farewell, the fields of Irwan's vale.
How often, within you vacant shade,
Has evening closed my careless eye!
How often, along those banks I Have strayed,
And watched the wave that wandered by!
Full long their loss shall I bewail.
Farewell, the fields of Irwan's vale
Yet still within you vacant grove,
To mark the close of parting day;
Along you flowery banks to rove,
And watch the wave that winds away;
Fair fancy sure shall never fail.
Though far from these, and Irwan's vale!
CHAP V.
IN social intercourse the merchant passed many days with Solomon, and while he
gratified his curiosity, engaged his affection. Being suddenly called by
business to the court of Bassora, he came one morning to take a final leave;
but the traveller was too much attached to his friend, to suffer any thing but
necessity to part them. "Permit me," said he, "to attend you on your present
expedition. I have not appointed to myself any particular rout, but travel as
occasion or inclination leads me; I am sensible I shall gain more from your
experience and observation, than I can from my own." This offer was too
agreeable to the merchant, not to be eagerly embraced; and, after the necessary
preparations, they set out from Ispahan, and met the morning on the mountains
of Arvan.

The sun appeared above the horizon, and Solomon prostrated himself in the
profoundest adoration. When he arose from his devotions, he advanced toward
his fellow traveller, with a look of kindness mixed with pity and concern. The
merchant understood him: but as he was unwilling to controvert the principles
of his religion, he made no apology for his conduct during the devotions of
Solomon.

The mild morning light which was diffused over the valleys and streams, the
various beauty of the meadows, the regular disposition of blossomed hedgerows,
the soothing murmurs of bees at their early labor, and the full concert of the
feathered creation, drew their conversation on the universal beneficence of
nature. "I feel," said Solomon, a delight, which I can neither account for nor
describe. These mountains gilded with the rays of the orient sun, those painted
valleys that shame the rich carpets of Persia, yon distant waters which gleam
with the shifting effulgence of light, the general busy voice of joy and
activity in the animal creation, conspire to fill my heart with inexpressible
pleasure."

"That pleasure," replied the merchant, "I believe, proceeds from sympathy: it
is scarce possible, unless you have some peculiar cause of misery, not to be
pleased when you see every thing around you happy. On the contrary, if you go
into the mansions of sorrow, it will be impossible to withstand the infection
of it. The God of nature seems to have given us these sympathetic feelings, to
link our affections in the great chain of society: hence, social virtue is not
left to depend solely no the moral will, but is founded on the principles of
our nature.

But the object of your adoration is so profuse of his favors, that I should
now be glad to find some convenient shade. I think, I discover a cave on the
southern declivity of the mountain; let us retire to it during the heat of the
day."

As they were advancing toward the cave, they perceived a beaten path leading
directly from it to a distant rivulet: this made them apprehensive that it
might be the habitation of some wild beast, that had worn the path by
constantly going to drink at the stream: but their fears were soon removed upon
the appearance of an aged hermit, advancing slowly toward the rivulet with an
earthen pitcher. At sight of the travelers, he hasted to his abode with all
the feeble precipitancy of age; they agrees not to disturb him, and only took
advantage of the rock which projected over his cell to shelter themselves from
the sun; but they had not long continued in this situation, before the hermit,
perceiving them to be inoffensive travelers invited them into his cave.

"You will excuse," said the hoary sage, "the caution of years: these mountains
are not secure from the ravage of human ferocity; and these gray hairs would be
no defense from the wanton cruelty of man. I have suffered so much from my own
species, that I have at last forsaken their society: I thought it better to
give up the convenience of it, than to bear the evils; and I have long lived in
this solitary cave on nothing more than what uncultivated nature would afford
me." -- "Those sufferings," said Solomon, "must, indeed, have been
extraordinary, that could make you give up one of the greatest advantages of
life, the social intercourse of your fellow creatures." -- "The narratives of
age," replied the hermit, "are seldom agreeable to youth; but as instruction
can be gained only from experience, you will do wisely to learn it from the
misfortunes of Abbas.

I was born to a competent fortune in the province of Lurestan: but being early
left an orphan, my affairs came under the cognizance of a justiciary court,
which the members of it call the court of equity; but so equitable were they
with regard to me, that they claimed two parts of my little fortune for their
care of the third." -- "Would to God, that were never the case in Great
Britain!" interrupted the merchant. "But proceed." Though I had such in early
and convincing proof of the treachery and rapacity of mankind; yet, as I had
always exercised the benevolent virtues myself, I could not think others
totally devoid of them; and at my three and twentieth year being inclined to
travel, I without scruple entrusted the remains of my fortune with a person
whom I had long known and respected; a person, Holy Allah! who lifted his hands
to thee; but I had not been absent from Lurestan more than three moons, when he
pretended a commission to dispose of my effects, and immediately left the
place. Upon my return therefore to the province, I found neither friend nor
fortune; and being bred to no business, I was reduced to the most distressful
state of indigence. I applied, however, not without hopes of redress or relief,
to a person of power and eminence, whom I had often heard speak of his
friendship with my father. After long and frequent attendance, I was admitted
to an interview: I laid open my distress to him with that kind of eloquence
which the miseries we suffer from the treachery of others always suggests; and
which however unaffected it may be to indifferent persons, utters its
complaints with dignity and resentment. I was heard half way through my story,
and dismissed with the following reply: "It is not necessary, young man, to
proceed with your complaints; I perceive you have been abused, and I am sorry
for you; But that shall not be the only proof of my regard for you; I will give
you a little advice: you should never depend so much on the benevolence or
integrity of any human being, as to trust him with your fortune or your life."
Thus ended my hopes from the friend of my father; whose benevolence extended no
farther, than to instruct me how to secure the fortune that was stolen, and to
preserve the life which I wished to loose.

I had now no choice, but to enter as a common soldier, into the army of the
Sophia. I had always delighted in martial exercises, and was expert in the use
of arms; my dexterity and address drew upon me the attention of my officers;
and in a short time obtained a small commission. I had now almost forgotten my
miseries, and embraced my new situation with cheerfulness and hope; but
Fortune, who had for a while ceased to persecute me as below her notice, as if
she had been indignant at my satisfaction, and jealous of my prospects, now
renewed and redoubled her severity.

"My commanding officer had a daughter of extraordinary beauty, and an uncommon
capacity. Zara was the object of universal admiration: but she had set her
heart on the unfortunate Abbas. The first moment I beheld her, I discovered in
her looks the most tender and affectionate regard for me, which I imputed to
her compassion for my misfortunes; though at the same time I wished, not
knowing why, that it might proceed from another cause. -- She asked me for the
story of my life: I told it in the plainest and most pathetic manner; yet, when
I had finished she desired me to repeat it. From this moment I had done with
peace; her infectious tenderness had such an influence upon my heart, that I
could think of nothing but Zara; without Zara I was miserable. A thousand times
did I flatter myself, that there was something more than mere compassion in her
look and manner; and not many days had passed, before I was convinced of the
dear fatal truth from this letter --

TO ABBAS.
YOUR merit and your sufferings have a claim to something more than compassion:
to espouse the cause of Abbas, is to discharge a duty which virtue cannot
dispense with, meet me on the parade this evening, and you shall know more of
the sentiments of

ZARA.


"The emotions I felt on the receipt of this letter can only be conceived by
those who, in the midst of despairing love, have beheld a gleam of hope. The
tumult of my heart hurried me to the place appointed, long before the time: I
walked backward and forward in the utmost confusion, totally regardless of
every object about me; sometimes raising my hands and eyes in the sudden
effusions of transport, and sometimes smiling with the complacency of delight.

At length the day departed, and Zara came. My heart bounded at her sight: I
was unable to speak, and threw myself at her feet. She was alarmed at my
excessive earnestness and confusion; but commading me to rise," "Abbas" said
she, "if your confusion proceed from your modest gratitude, restrain it, till
you find whether I am able to serve you; if it arises from any other cause, I
must leave you this moment." I entreated she would tell me, to what I was
indebted for the happiness of this interview, and I would be calm and
attentive. "My regard for your merit, and my compassion for your sufferings,"
said she, "make me wish to serve you. Tell me, Abbas, can I assist you through
the interest of my father?" I faltered out my acknowledgments: telling her,
that to her I must owe all my hopes of future happiness.

She left me immediately without reply. The singularity of my behavior on the
parade before the coming of Zara, had drawn upon me the attention of an officer
who was secretly her admirer, and who, either through curiosity, or suspicion,
though unobserved by me, had waited at a convenient distance to watch my
motions. No sooner did he perceive the approach of Zara, than, as well to
gratify his revenge, as to ingratiate himself with her father, he immediately
told him of our interview.

CHAP. VI.
ZARA, ignorant of what had passed, with her usual freedom and good nature,
began to express her compassion for the misfortunes of Abbas, talked of his
merits, and wished to see him preferred. The old general, who was naturally
jealous and impetuous, exclaimed with a burst of indignation, "Yes, I shall
prefer him!" Early the next morning he sent my discharge; and while I was
gazing in stupid astonishment upon my general's letter, a youth, masked brought
me a small casket, with a letter from Zara, which to the best of my
remembrance, was as follows:"

TO ABBAS.
BY some unlucky circumstance, which I do not understand, instead of promoting
you, I have been the cause of your dismission. The bearer, who brings you a
small casket of jewels for your support, has my commands to conduct you the
shortest way over the mountains: follow him immediately, left the rage of
jealousy meditate new persecutions: He wears a mask that he may not be taken
notice of as one of the general's domestics: his attachment to me will make him
faithful to you. Time may bring about happier events.

Adieu! ZARA.


"In the anguish and confusion of my heart, I followed my guide without knowing
whither he was leading me, or what I was about to do. I vented my grief in
broken ejaculations, frequently calling upon the name of Zara, but not once
addressing myself to my attendant. By the evening of the second day, we had
advanced forty miles southward from the province of Lurestan; when -- how shall
I relate the last horrid scene of my miseries! -- pardon me! these aged eyes
have yet a tear left, yet a tear for the memory of Zara! -- we were attacked by
a band of robbers. My guide was Zara! in her fright she threw off her mask, and
cried "Zara!" Love, rage, fear and vengeance, gave me supernatural strength:
three of the villians fell by my sabre; a fourth disarmed me; and the rest of
the gang carried off Zara."

At this crisis of his story, the spirits of the aged hermit were exhausted by
their own violence; and it was some time before he could proceed.

"You have now" continued he, "heard the completion of my misfortunes. When I
was recovered of the wounds I had received, I spent some months in a fruitless
search of Zara: at last, despairing to gain any intelligence of her, I
transmitted an account of the affair to her father; not without hope, that his
Power, or his wealth, might be a means of finding her out, and redeeming her:
but I was deceived, and had soon the mortification to hear, that the unnatural
wretch exulted in our misfortunes, and uttered the most dreadful imprecations
on his only child.

Deprived of hope, and dejected with melancholy, I could no longer bear the
society of mankind: I therefore betook myself to these solitary mountains,
where this cell has been my habitation for years, that have passed away in
unvaried sorrow; and where you are the first of human beings that have heard me
tell my tale."

CHAP. VII.
SOLOMON expatiated on the sufferings of Abbas with the most tender
sensibility, and inveighed against the baseness of mankind with all the rage of
honest resentment. "Surely," said he to the merchant "man is the vilest of all
creatures! in proportion as he excels them in reason, he exceeds them in the
ability to do mischief; and being equally cruel, the mischief he does renders
him more detestable. Sacred Mithra! why do thou lend thy light to the villain
and the tyrant? Were it not for the enjoyment of your company, my friend, I
should have few inducements to go farther from the valley of Irwan; for
possibly to see more of human life, is only to know more of its crimes and
miseries."

"From the complicated distresses of one person," replied the merchant, "you
draw a partial image of the life of man. But the day declines: let us hasten
over these mountains, that we may repose at night in some village of the
valley." The travelers took leave of the hermit; and about the close of day
arrived at the village of Arden.

At their entrance they were met by a person of a plain dress, and a cheerful
countenance, who without ceremony, invited them, as travelers, to partake of
his house and table that night. They accepted his invitation; and the merchant,
addressing himself to Solomon, said, "From the family of this man, you shall
not only be convinced, that there is both happiness and virtue in human life;
but you shall see also, how much the former depends upon the latter, I have
been entertained by him, in traveling this way before: he is never more happy
than when he has an opportunity of gratifying his benevolence. His inheritance
being much lessened by the losses of his father, who was a merchant, he has but
little wealth, except what arises from the industrious cultivation of a farm,
which he purchased ten years ago with the chief part of his fortune; yet he is
as liberal to the poor and the stranger, as if he had large possessions; his
known hospitality and generosity make his house the resort of the traveller and
the indigent; and after he has finished the labors of the day, he is always
ready to entertain the one, and relieve the other; hence that serene and easy
cheerfulness which you see in his countenance. In his family you behold the
influence of a good example; his wife, whom he loves, and by whom he is beloved
with the most cordial sincerity, goes hand in hand with him, not only through
their mutual cares, but also in the exercises of benevolence. It is the
principle of her economy, that domestic frugality is the support of liberality;
and she dispenses her own, and her husbands bounties, with that propriety and
easy cheerfulness, which double their value to the receiver. The children
inherit the benevolence of their parents, and learn the exercise of it from
their example. By and by they will crowd about your sofa, solicitous to serve
you: you shall see them preventing your wants and watching your requests, with
a busy emulation which shall do you the most services."

Solomon listened with delight to his description of the villager's family; and
hasted, with the most ardent curiosity, to behold that virtue he so much
admired. When he found that every thing exceeded the merchant's account and his
own expectation, "it is enough," said he, "I am again reconciled to my own
species. Notwithstanding the impression I received from the story of the
unfortunate Abbas, virtue has yet her temples among men! but, surely, she is a
villager, and her votaries are the inhabitants of the field!" Full of these
thoughts, and delighted with the family of his host, he retired to his chamber,
and before he slept, composed the following ode --

THE HAPPY VILLAGER.
VIRTUE dwells in Arden's vale:
There her hollowed temples rise;
There her incense greets the skies,
Grateful as the morning gale!
There, with humble peace and her,
Lives the happy villager;
There the golden smiles of morn
Brighter every field adorn;
There the sun's declining ray
Fairer paints the parting day;
There the woodlark louder sings,
Zephyr moves on softer wings,
Groves in greener honors rise,
Purer azure spreads the skies;
There the fountains clearer flow,
Flowers in brighter beauty blow;
For, with peace and virtue, there
Lives the happy villager!
Distant still from Arden's vale
Are the woes the bad bewail;
Distant fell remorse and, pain
And phrenzy smiling over her chain!
Grief's quick pang, despair's dead groan,
Are in Arden's vale unknown:
For, with peace and virtue, there
Lives the happy villager!
In his hospitable cell,
Love and truth, and freedom dwell:
And, with aspect mild and free,
The graceful nymph, simplicity.
Hail, ye liberal graces, hail!
Natives all of Arden's vale:
For, with peace and virtue, there
Lives the happy villager!
CHAP. VIII.
WHEN the dawn of the morning broke, Solomon and the merchant, with the most
grateful acknowledgments of the hospitality with which they had been
entertained, left the village of Arden, followed by the kind wishes of their
host, and his amiable family. They traveled for some days through the southern
provinces of Persia, without any remarkable occurrences, or any other
entertainment, than such as could be found in the diversity of prospects, and
the different labors of men. Sometimes they amused themselves with the
contemplation of those places, which history had marked out as the scenes of
great events; and sometimes had occasion to reflect on the perishable monuments
of human magnificence.

The noble plain on which stood the once glorious Persepolis afforded them
inexhaustible matter of curiosity and meditation: this plain extending about
nineteen leagues, abounds every where with villages, and is watered by the
great river Araxes. Nature has been so industrious in the defense of it, that
she has raised before it mountains, that bear all the appearance, and might
answer the end of artificial fortifications. From hence the travelers were
amused with the ruinous remains of many noble edifices, that had once adorned
the range of mountains: but when they were come to that part of them which
covered the ancient palace of Persepolis, the stupendous ruin struck them with
silent astonishment. Porticoes, which had withstood the assaults of time more
than two thousand years; broken columns of different lengths, rising at
considerable distances within the limits of the same pile; sculptured portals,
through whose frowning arches the winds pass with a hollow murmuring;
numberless figures engraven on the pilasters of those portals; and multitudes
of hieroglyphics on the different parts of the spacious ruin; gave the
travelers a mournful and magnificent idea of the pristine grandeur of this
edifice,

The merchant observing Solomon to be totally absorbed in thought, would not
interrupt the melancholy pleasure of his contemplations; but waited, in
silence, till, with an air of unaffected concern, he thus expressed his
sentiments on Persepolis.

"I am at a loss, my friend, in the midst of these magnificent ruins, whether I
should think more highly or more meanly of mankind. Pride raised this lofty
edifice, and pride destroyed it. -- The vanity of a Cyrus, a Darius, or a
Xerxes, adorned those superb columns; and the vanity of an Alexander defaced
them. These domes were not reared solely for regal magnificence and security,
but to aid the appetites of poverty and luxury, and to secret the royal
pleasures from those that toiled to gratify them. Thus, as this noble structure
was possibly raised not only for vanity but for riot; so, probably, by vanity
inflamed by riot, it fell: probably at the request of a smiling harlot, the
towers of Persepolis blazed for her diversion; probably, because the conqueror
had taken too large a draught of wine, this palace, the glory of eastern art,
sunk to the ground: a striking instance of the vanity of human labors, and the
depravity of human nature! on the other hand, while I consider the work of the
artist; while I am delighted with the symmetry and proportion, which is yet to
be traced through these maimed ruins, and struck with the bold relief of the
ancient Persian achitecture; I forget the motives both of the erection and
demolition of Persepolis; and admire the industry and ingenuity of man, that
gave such grace and beauty to these massy structures."

"Your sentiments," said the merchant, "are much the same with my own, but give
me leave now to conduct you to a mountain, about two leagues distant from these
ruins, and situated between two of the most beautiful plains in the world. This
mountain consists of one entire rock, capable of the most exquisite polish: it
is reduced to form by art, and its sides are perpendicular; so that, at a
distance, it has the appearance of a wall. Upon this rock are several pieces of
bass relief, exquisitely performed; in one of which is represented a combat
between the king of Persia, and the king of the Indies; the latter of whom,
according to the tradition of the times, was subdued. There are besides many
other figures, of which, though you may not discover the design, you will be
pleased with the execution."

Solomon proceeded with his friend to the mountain, much delighted, as well
with the extraordinary appearance of the rock, as the uncommon beauty of the
plains that were spread on either hand beneath, interspersed with villas shaded
by trees* extensive meadows, and pastures filled with flocks. When they had
gratified their curiosity, and indulged their speculations, they proceeded on
their journey, and in a short time arrived at the Gulf of Bassora.

The merchant, having here found the vessel he expected, told Solomon, that if
his inclination led him to Europe, he could accommodate him with a convenient
passage; informing him, at the same time, that his own affairs would detain him
some years longer in Persia. Solomon, whose heart was firmly attached to the
merchant, long hesitated between friendship and curiosity: however, as he must
have parted with him had he continued his travels in Asia, and was not totally
without hopes of seeing him in what he called the new world, he determined to
accept his offer.

CHAP. IX.
AS the ship was to remain some time in the gulf, Solomon took the opportunity
to make the tour of India. In his way he visited the Isle of Ormus, than which
no part of nature wears a more dismal appearance. Excepting a few houses, which
make the capital of the place, the whole looks like a heath blasted by
lightning, or burnt up by design. Yet here, in this scene of dreary desolation,
Solomon had the mortification to meet with an exile from the city of Ispahan.

"Surely," said he to the unhappy man, "you must have been so unfortunate as to
commit some enormous crime, condemned as you are to this miserable abode?"

"Stranger," replied the exile, "I have been unfortunate, but not unjust. One
day, being at the Persian court, I told a gentleman who stood near me in a low
whisper, that I thought the Sultana Moratte extremely beautiful. -- This was my
crime! and it was the decree of imperial justice, that for this I should wear
out the remains of life in this dreary solitude,"

"Heavens!" said Solomon, "what madness must possess mankind, to lodge
unlimited power in the hands of any one human being! when the decrees of
justice must be issued by numbers united, there are many means of restraining
partial or illegal sentences: self-interest, revenge, envy, and every other
cause of perverting justice, would then operate feebly, when opposed by public
shame, divided interests, and the open appearance of equity. But what comfort
can you receive from useless declamation? I can help you to the means of
deliverance from this wretched prison; and I think that you are restrained by
no principle of duty from embracing them; for it is impossible, that Divine
Power should enforce obedience to the decrees of injustice. I am now about to
travel through India; at my return I will again visit Ormus and you; and if you
shall be inclined to exchange your prison for the spacious kingdoms of Europe,
I will procure you a passage thither."

The exile heard these words with inconceivable transport; he threw himself at
the feet of Solomon, and expressed his delight in one emphatical word crying
out -- "Liberty, liberty!" the pleasure of the traveller was scarce inferior to
that of the exile. "Surely," said he to himself, "the diffusion of happiness is
the highest bliss that the human heart is capable of! I feel more delight in
the hope of defeating the malice of injurious power, than in any thing I have
ever met with, either before or since the beginning of my travels.

CHAP. X.
SOLOMON now left Ormus, and proceeded toward the frontiers of India. Though
the country lies nearly in the same climate with the southern provinces of
Persia, yet the aspect of it is different; and it is furnished with other kinds
of plants and animals, as well as with people of a different complexion, and
different manners: indeed nature seems to have made the intercourse of
different nations necessary, by supplying each with some peculiar conveniences.

Solomon passed not through the provinces of the Mogul's empire without
instruction as well as amusement. He was skilled in the natural history of
plants and animals; and he sound here abundant opportunity to exercise that
kind of knowledge. He was often amused by observing, how nearly brutal sense
borders upon human reason, in the reflecting sagacity of the elephant, and the
adroit mischief of the baboon.

Small, however, in comparison, was the pleasure he received from the natural
rarities of India, to that which the excellent administration of justice in the
several provinces afforded him. -- The police of that country appeared to him
most wisely calculated for the preservation of peace and property; the
magistrates that were appointed to administer justice in their several
districts, being obliged to keep persons continually employed to watch the
dealings of commerce, and attend both to public and private transactions; for
the iniquity of which themselves were to be accountable, and the emperor might
always be appealed to.

But when he came to Delhi, the capital of the Mogal's empire, his opinion of
the Indian policy was much altered. He there had the mortification to find a
ministry of wives, and a court of concubines, at whose discretion the principle
posts in the civil and military establishments were usually disposed of; and he
who was most recommended by his person and address, was sure to obtain the
highest office in the legislature or the army. To find that the bands of music
at court consisted only of women, gave him no disgust: "There," said the
traveller, "the ladies are in their proper sphere. Let them cultivate all the
soft and engaging graces: let them employ themselves in the embellishments of
art and the excursions of fancy; but let them not interfere in the important
concerns of government; nor raise those to the places of power, whose
accomplishments are suited only to their taste."

As Solomon was displeased with the caballing arts of the Indian ladies, so he
was shocked at their inhuman and unnatural supestition. With horror and
amazement did he sometimes behold a woman, in the bloom of life and beauty,
rush into the flames to accompany the manes of her dead husband: and if nature
shuddered at the thought of this dreadful sacrifice, or female softness shrunk
into fear or irresolution, he beheld a number of diabolical priests, with
execrable screams, and faces of honor, pushing forward the poor trembling
reluctant woman to the burning pile. "Eternal Mithra!" said the afflicted
youth, "what havoc does superstition make among thy works! when once that fiend
enters the human heart, nature and reason are driven out; their sacred lights
are wholly extinguished; truth and humanity are trampled upon; and the detested
fury leads her infatuated votaries through the horrors of darkness, into the
arms of death!"

CHAP. XI.
SOLOMON was the more affected by this infernal custom, as he feared it might
one day be the fate of a lady, with whom he had contracted an intimate
friendship, and for whom he had the most tender regard. This amiable person was
a native of Delhi, and her name Almena. As the houses in which they lodged were
contiguous, she first drew his attention by her music, which was her favorite
employment, and in which she was greatly skilled. Solomon had a taste for all
the fine arts; and, after the inquiries and observations of the day, he felt an
irresistible pleasure, in listening, from his portico, to the evening music of
Almena. His heart soon became prejudiced in favor of a lady, who had afforded
him so much entertainment; and he wished for nothing more than an opportunity
of expressing his gratitude.

It was usual for Almena to take a morning walk in the suburbs of Delhi.
Solomon observed this; and introduced himself to her conversation, by paying
his acknowledgments. There is some secret attraction in congenial natures,
which draws them together, without the forms of a long acquaintance. Solomon
was soon convinced, that he discovered, in Almena, a disposition perfectly
suited to his own: her conversation was the picture of a mind enlarged by
virtue, and enlightened by learning: she had none of the trifling follies or
the insignificant levity of her sex; yet her manner was animated and cheerful:
she had no ebullitions of giddy wit; but her language was the clear and natural
image of polished sense, and unaffected knowledge. Solomon left no means
unattempted to cultivate a friendship that promised so much felicity. He
constantly attended Almena in her morning walk; and, at every interview,
entertained some new sentiments in her favor. Her heart was not less benevolent
than his own: "You have seen, my friend," said she, "almost every thing in
Delhi, that is worth the attention of a stranger; but I suppose you do not make
it your business, as a traveller, merely to attend to what is uncommon or
magnificent; not merely to explore the different operations of nature, and
manners of men. Travel must afford you many opportunities to relieve the
indigent, to comfort the afflicted, to inform the ignorant, or rescue the
oppressed. Within the compass of my morning walk, there is a village, the
inhabitants of which I call my people; they are all poor; to those that are
able to labor, I propose rewards for the greatest industry; and those who are
incapatiated by age or sickness I take under my own protection."

It is easy to conceive how much Solomon would be delighted with this account
of Almena. When he found, that, to all the elegant graces of female softness,
she added the virtues of benevolence, his friendship for her was heightened
into the most refined affection. On the other hand, her regard for Solomon
increased, as she became acquainted with his improved understanding, and
generous temper: for virtue loves her own image, wherever it is found.

CHAP. XII.
SOLOMON had now passed many days at Delhi, in this pleasing intercourse of
friendship; happy to assist his Almena in the diffusion of happiness, charmed
with her virtues, and delighted with her conversation. The time, however,
approached, when he was to think of his expedition into Europe; but the
friendship of Almena bound to his heart by stronger ties than that which he had
before contracted with the merchant, overbalanced at once every thought of his
voyage: he had, therefore, determined to remain at Delhi; when the poor exile
at Ormus came into his mind. He started at the thought, as he would have done
at the ghost of Ardavan. "It Is done!" said he: "Adieu to Almena; adieu to the
dear delights of her friendship, if they must be purchased at the expense of
virtue!"

There is no precept of human wisdom conceived to be of greater use, and
therefore none more frequently urged, than that we should learn to avoid the
evils of life, from the irregularities and misfortunes of others; yet important
as this precept may be, it is, like most others, universally neglected. We
observe, indeed, the events of life; and inquire into their causes with
infatiable curiosity; but we seldom draw any conclusions for the direction of
our own conduct: we hear or read only for amusement; and the story passes by,
without leaving any traces of instruction.

Solomon, who, from the first setting out on his travels, had received the
strongest convictions of the distresses of love, without the least caution or
resistance suffered that passion to make its inroads under the appearance of
friendship; and he now felt all the anguish, which he had before been a witness
to, near the village of Abdat. Not once, however, did he hesitate between love
and virtue: the torrent of his grief for the loss of Almena, violent as it was,
could not bear down his determined integrity.

With a heart full of the most piercing sorrow, he went to take leave of his
beloved friend: he resolved, nevertheless, to explain the cause of his
departure with the most serene indifference, determined not to affect his
Almena by the appearance of sorrow; he resolved, and threw himself at her feet
in speechless anguish.

Almena beheld his grief with united sorrow and surprise; and, with tears that
flowed from pity and friendship, entreated him to discover he cause of his
distress. "It is in vain Almena," said he, "it is in vain any longer to hide my
heart from you: nor, indeed, should I act the part of friendship, to dissemble
its feelings. I, who was yesterday the happiest of mankind in the enjoyment of
your conversation, am now the most miserable. By the indispensable laws of
honor and humanity, I am called from Delhi: but alas! by the love of Almena, I
am induced to stay. I know, my friend, there is no alternative: but that
knowledge is my misery I go, then, from you and from happiness; perhaps never
more to enjoy either; but when I am far from you, it will be some consolation
to believe that you will remember the love and the truth of Solomon."

Almena, as well as the emotions of her heart would give her leave, replied*
"Go my friend; go where your virtue leads you, and providence be your guide!
Your friendship while I have life, shall not be forgotten: no; Almena shall
always respect your memory, and love you with the same affection as she does
the dearest of her friends."

A flood of tears followed these words; and Solomon, unable any longer to
behold her sorrow, precipitately withdrew.

CHAP. XIII.
DEPRIVED of that serenity which ever waits on conscious virtue, when free from
the great calamities of life, the innocent the once happy Solomon, was now
become the child of affliction. He repassed the provinces of India in deep
melancholy, unaffected by every thing that might excite curiosity or exercise
speculation. But, behold the power of virtue! and be convinced, whoever thou
art that read this story, that there is nothing equally capable of
alleviating the afflictions which are incident to human life.

When he arrived at Ormus, and beheld the joy of the poor exile at the sight of
his deliverer, he felt a torrent of pleasure in his breast, overflowing all the
oppositions that grief had raised against it. "O that Almena," said he, "were
present! that I could communicate to her the happiness I feel in rescuing this
poor Persian from the oppression of tyranny! how would her gentle heart
rejoice, and indulge itself with Solomon in the delights of benevolence! Fate
has been severe in dividing those whose souls were made for each other: but it
has left me this happiness, and I enjoy it."

Solomon was now about to apply to his friend the merchant, who was still upon
the coast, to procure a passage for the exile, but he could not resist the
desire of writing immediately to Almena; and from Ormus he sent the following
letter:

TO ALMENA.
SHALL Solomon be pardoned, if he intrude once more on the quiet of Almena?
Dearest, best of women, I come not to wound thy gentle heart with my
complaints: you shall not be told what I have suffered since my departure: no
Almena! you shall only know what I have enjoyed, The poor exile whom I
mentioned to you at Delhi, is still in Ormus. When he perceived me from the
rocks on which he used to wander daily to watch my coming, he flew toward me
in an ecstacy of joy, crying out -- "Liberty! my deliverer! Liberty!" Here was
a scene, my friend, that might have overbalanced every thing but the loss of
your company. For that, Almena -- forgive me -- for that I must yet shed a tear.

Adieu! SOLOMON.


CHAP. XIV.
AFTER the dismission of this letter, he went immediately to visit the
merchant, who received him with the warmest expressions of friendship. --
"Welcome," said he "my valuable friend! whose uncommon virtues have made you
devote the pleasurable season of life, to the acquisition of knowledge, and the
distribution of happiness."

"For the latter of these purposes," said Solomon, "I now wait upon you. In the
isle of Ormus is an unhappy Persian, whom the capricious cruelty of his prince
has condemned to perpetual exile in that dismal prison. Were he a criminal,
justice should have its course; I might then have beheld him with pity, but
should not have meditated his deliverance; but he is innocent, my friend, he is
innocent, and suffers. Cannot you assist me to effect his escape? cannot he
have that passage to Europe, which you obligingly offered me?"

"To facilitate the escape of an exile," replied the merchant, "were as much as
my interest and safety are worth in Persia. I must not be concerned in it; but
I will introduce you to the captain of a ship, and engage him to serve you in
every thing you shall desire: after which if you can take the exile along with
you in disguise, or by any other means, as your friend or attendant, perhaps he
may escape without much difficulty or danger. I have dispatched my business on
the coast, and am obliged to return to Ispahan: let us now therefore, if you
please, wait upon the captain."

Solomon, as he had been in hopes of procuring the exile a passage without
going himself into Europe, from which the friendship of Almena had weaned his
inclinations, was somewhat embarrassed by this account. However, as he was
determined at all events to deliver the poor Persian, he went immediately to
the apartments of the captain, to whom the merchant recommended him as a
particular friend who wanted to make the tour of Europe. -- The captain
received them with the freedom and cheerfulness peculiar to his station, and
promised Solomon the best accommodation of his ship; but told him, that she
must remain there a few months before she could get out of the gulf.

Of this delay, though not answerable to his impatient wishes for the
deliverance of the exile, Solomon resolved to make use, in visiting his father
and the valley of Irwan. As soon therefore as he had acquainted the exile with
what he had to hope, and advised him to provide secretly for his voyage, and
his subsistence in a distant country, he sailed from the gulf up the Euphrates
as far as where the Tigris empties itself into that river, and from thence
proceeded by land to the valley of Irwan.

CHAP. XV.
THE venerable Ardavan had ascended an eminence near his house, to enjoy the
beauties of the summer evening, and to offer up a prayer to the departing sun
for Solomon, when Solomon appeared before him.

What language can paint the emotions of paternal affection? The feeble remains
of aged life twice fainted beneath the wait of joy. At length recovering he
cried -- "It is enough! Solomon lives! Heaven has regarded the virtues of my
son, and restored him to the arms of Ardavan."

Solomon was not less affected by this meeting; nor less delighted to find his
aged parent still enjoying health and reason in the decline of life. But his
happiness, was allayed with anxiety. -- He visited the favorite scenes of his
native valley in hopes of finding that delight which he thought to be connected
with the idea of them; but his imagination was still at Delhi. As love and
melancholy are of the sisterhood of poetry, he had not been long in the valley
before he wrote the following lines --

TO ALMENA, FROM THE BANKS OF THE IRWAN.
WHERE trembling poplars shade their parent vale,
And tune to melody the mountain gale;
Where Irwan murmurs musically slow,
And breathing breezes through his oziers blow;
Friend of my heart, behold thy poet laid
In the dear silence of his native shade!
Ye sacred vales, where often the Muse, unseen,
Led my light steps along the moonlight green;
Ye scenes, where peace and fancy held their reign,
Forever loved, and once enjoyed again!
Ah! where is, now, that nameless bliss refined;
That tranquil hour, that vacancy of mind?
As sweet, the wild rose bears its balmy breast;
As soon the breeze with murmurs soothes to rest;
As smooth, the stream of silver Irwan flows;
As fair, each flower along his border blows;
Yet dwells not here that nameless bliss refined,
That tranquil hour, that vacancy of mind.
Is it that knowledge is allied to woe;
And are we happy, only ere we know?
Is it that Hope withholds her golden ray,
That fancy's fairy visions fade away?
Or can I, distant far from all that is dear,
Be happy only when Almena's near?
That truth the feelings of my heart disclose:
Too dear the friendship for the friend's repose.
Thus mourned the muse, when, through his ofiers wild,
The hill-born Irwan raised his head, and smiled:
"Child of my hopes," he fondly cried, "forbear;
Nor let thy Irwan witness thy despair.
Has peace indeed forsook my flowery shore?
Shall Fame, and Hope, and Fancy, charm no more?
Though Fame and Hope in kindred air depart,
Yet Fancy still should hold thee to her heart:
For, at thy birth, the village hind has seen
Her light wings waving over the shadow'y green;
With rosy wreaths she crowned the newborn hours,
And rival fairies filled my bed with flowers:
In vain -- if grief shall waste thy blooming years,
And life dissolve in solitude and tears!"
Where are the delights of the valley of Irwan, where the flowery variety of
its pastures and meadows, its hills that rose gradually to meet the morning
sun, and its groves that spread their foilage to exclude the heats of midday?
Wrapped in the gloom, of pensive solitude, the son of Ardavan was now negligent
of these, and of all that once delighted or amused him. In vain did his father
desire a relation of his travels; and in vain did he begin it: when he
attempted to speak of Persepolis, he gave a description of Delhi; when he was
asked after some other place, he mentioned the village of Almena: instead of
describing the people of India, he described the person of Almena; and when an
account of their manners was requested -- "Her manners," he replied, "are such
as the immortal Mithra looks down upon with delight."

CHAP. XVI.
ARDAVAN was now no longer at a loss to account for the gloomy inconsistency of
his son's behavior: but willing to be still more convinced of what he suspected
to be the cause, he applied to his passions the story of those lovers whom he
had recommended to his care. At the mention of the lovers, Solomon was roused
from his melancholy negligence, into the most eager attention. "Tell me, my
father," said the impatient youth: "tell me, I entreat you, the fate of the
lovers?"

"I thank you," replied the sage, "for putting it in my power to assist the
unfortunate. From your compassion for the sufferings of these lovers, and your
attempt to alleviate them, you will feel more sensibly the power of the same
consolation, when your own heart becomes a prey to the distresses of love."

Solomon discovered, by his emotions, the effect which this short preface had
upon him.

"You know," continued Ardavan, "a small building which I erected some years
ago for a retreat in the summer months; you remember its situation, in the
depth of a spacious wood; which is only accessible by one narrow passage, to
which I have provided a door, so beset with evergreens, that it is impossible
for the most curious eye to perceive it: the canal of running water in the
middle of the wood, and the beautiful grass-plat I have extended, since you
left me, to the summer house. To this place I conducted the lovers as soon as I
had heard their story. There they continued for some time, attended by one of
my faithful domestics, who supplied them with every necessary; and they were
visited almost every day by myself. O, my son, how exquisite was the delight,
to behold the happiness of this innocent pair, and at the same time to consider
myself as in some measure contributing to it! Surely this was to partake of the
pleasure of the Deity, which we believe to consist in his universal power of
removing evil and dispensing good!

"After some time I was informed, that the khan of Bukharia, who had purchased
the maiden of her father, was deposed and banished by the Sophi. This gave us
new hopes; and it was agreed that the youth should return to Abdat, to learn
the disposition of the unnatural parent. He accordingly went; and told him,
that he would endeavor to find his daughter, upon condition that he would
consent to their marriage. The wretch, though he was no stranger to their
mutual passion, insisted that no man should ever have his daughter who would
not pay the same price for her which the khan of Bukharia had offered.

"As this price far exceeded the ability of the lover, he returned to Irwan,
fallen from those pleasing hopes, which he had so lately formed, of enjoying at
once his love and his liberty. The father, convinced that his daughter was in
the possession of the young man, and not now without hopes of recovering her,
and offering her again to sale, hired a set of ruffians to watch his return,
and to extort from him a confession of the place where she was secreted. Of
this design* however, he was timely apprised by an honest villager of Abdat, to
whom one of the ruffians had communicated their business; and he came off in
disguise, and escaped their notice.

"About two months after, it was reported that the father had died of vexation
for the disappointment of his avaricious views; I, therefore dispatched a
servant to inquire into the truth of this report; and finding it confirmed,
conducted the lovers to Abdat without farther apprehension. The maiden, who was
an only child, inherited her father's fortune, which was very considerable: but
as great part of it had been amassed by oppression, she made restitution to
those whom his avarice had injured, and she now enjoys the remainder with
happiness and her lover."

"What you tell me," said Solomon, "gives me inexpressible satisfaction: for
the lovers are possessed of eminent virtue; and to be instrumental to the
happiness of virtuous lovers, is the most delightful task within the province
of benevolence. Indeed, those hearts only that are generous and noble can be
capable of the tender sensibility of love: for the breast which harbors
malignity and envy, can never feel the sympathetic tenderness which is the very
essence of that gentle passion."

"Your observation," replied the sage, "may be very just; and it is therefore
the more necessary for those to whom nature and the principles of a virtuous
education have given the blessing of an open heart, to guard against the
inroads of that passion: if there is no probability of an uninterrupted
enjoyment of its object, they should look upon its advances, as of an evil that
will destroy their peace, The pleasures of real-love are, perhaps the most
refined, the most delicate and sensible, of any we are capable of enjoying: but
believe me, those are fortunate lovers, who are indemnified by these, for the
many uneasy hours, the restless anxieties, and the painful apprehensions they
undergo."

In these general terms did Ardavan deliver his instructions to his son, who
received them with a silent conviction of their truth and propriety; and
immediately after this conversation, retired to offer up the following prayer
to the Sun for Almena.

"Incomparable and Everlasting! whose universal eye sees nothing fairer,
nothing more virtuous, than Almena; O let that eye look upon her with the
vigilence of a parent. She most resembles these in the continual exercise of
beneficence; cherish, therefore, those virtues that are congenial with thy own;
and let the dear possessor, through thy benignant influence, enjoy the constant
blessings of health and cheerfulness: but if some portion of sorrow be the
birthright of every human being, immortal Mithra! may Almena only sigh for the
absence of her friend!"

CHAP. XVII.
IN such exercises did Solomon employ his retired hours, till the time
approached for his return to Ormus. As he was determined if possible, to avoid
going into Europe, he made no mention of that circumstance to his father: his
engagements to the exile were a sufficient reason for his departure* and, in a
short time, he arrived at the gulf, and waited upon the English captain, who
was preparing for his voyage. Solomon informed him, that upon some interesting
occasion he was obliged to relinquish his design of visiting Europe; but that
he would recommend a Persian lady to his care, who was bound for England; and
he begged that she might enjoy all the retirement her situation could afford.
As no objection was made to this proposal, he privately purchased the habit of
a Persian lady, which he concealed some days on the coast of Ormus; and, under
favor of the night, he found no difficulty to procure a boat to the English
vessel. In a few hours they got under sail; and having received repeated
assurances of the captain's ear, and engaged the good offices of his crew by a
handsome gratuity, he procured a passage by sea to the coast of India.

The state of his heart was now very different from what it had been a few days
before: he had discharged his engagements to the exile, with all the success
that he could wish; and his face was now set toward Delhi. On he traveled
with the eager pace of a lover, and in a few days reached the capital of the
Mogul's empire.

The evening he arrived, he flew to the house of Almena, who received him with
emotions of tenderness which she was scarcely able to conceal. When the first
salutations were passed, she asked him how he had disposed of the exile, and
why he did not accompany him to Europe as he had proposed. He informed her by
what means he had procured the exile's escape; adding, that from the letters he
had written, if she had received them, she might at once see the reason both of
his rejecting the European voyage, and his return to Delhi.

"What would it availed me," said he, "to have visited the distant regions of
the universe! What pleasure or amusement could I have expected to find in
Europe, when all my heart holds dear was still in Asia? Believe me, this place
is now more than the whole world to me; and the friendship of Almena is the
only pleasure I can enjoy."

"I have received your letters," said she; "and if they speak the language of
your heart, I am no stranger to its feelings. To deal ingenuously with you, I
am sensible of your merit, and admire your virtues: and were I not more happy
in my present condition, than I could hope to be in any other, I know not the
man, with whom I would rather divide the enjoyments of life, than with Solomon."

"Is it possible, then," said Solomon, "that you can think the condition of
celibacy happier than that of marriage? Undoubtedly, the principal happiness of
mankind depends on the intercourse of society, and the connections of
friendship; marriage is nothing else but a state of friendship, in which the
friends by uniting their interests, have a constant and uninterrupted enjoyment
of each other. Nature aids this union, and reason approves it: can any
condition bid fairer for happiness, than that in which the mutual delights of
friendship can only be torn from us by the hand of death?

"There may be some truth," answered she, "in what you observe; but there is an
inconstancy in human nature, that makes it dangerous even for two friends to
enter into any connection that cannot be broken; and an unaccountable caprice,
that makes us quarrel with our happiness, because we are sure of enjoying it."

"Were we deterred from every pursuit," said Solomon, "by the apprehension of
those inconveniences which the foibles and frailties of our nature might bring
upon us, we should never be either virtuous or happy; but might languish away
our lives in solitary and unsocial indolence. To avoid the inconveniences of
human inconstancy, marriage is, surely, the best institution in the world; for
what could be more likely to fix the inconstant, than the habitual intercourse
of kindness and good offices: than that gratitude, which is due to the long
exercise of affectionate tenderness; and those dear pledges, which must depend
for happiness and support on the unanimity of their parents?"

"There is, indeed, an insuperable objection to your being married in India: I
mean, that contempt, or the horrid alternative of torture, which is entailed on
the unhappy woman who survives her husband. But that objection shall vanish
immediately," continued the lover, with a look of passionate earnestness: "let
us go, my friend, let us go to love and happiness in the valley of Irwan. That
place, which so lately afforded a retreat to the lovers whose distresses I have
related to you, shall then become eternally sacred to love and friendship: that
place, whose beautiful scenes I so lately beheld with indifference, I shall
then visit with rapture. -- Extacy is in the thought! to enjoy, with Almena the
shades of Irwan; with her to walk in my native fields; with her to pluck down
on the banks of my favorite stream; for her to pluck the flower, whose beauty
may have drawn her attention: to lead her through these romantic scenes, that
delighted the innocent enthusiasm of my childhood: and to show her the more
solitary retreats, which I sought when her friendship had first taught me to
sigh!"

Thus Solomon poured out the natural and passionate sensations of love; and
Almena, whose heart was far from being indifferent to him, easily caught the
enthusiasm. "To your honor and your friendship," said she, "I can trust every
thing. I am ready to attend you to those scenes, of which you have given me so
lively a description; whether they may answer it or not, or whatever they may
be, the friendship of Solomon, will make them agreeable."

It is easier to conceive than to express the joy which, the lover felt upon
this declaration. Within a few, days they set forward from Delhi, on their
journey to the valley of Irwan; and for the greater expedition, and the less
fatigue, they determined to go by sea, and accordingly proceeded to the coast,
where they went on board a trading vessel bound for the Persian gulf.

CHAP. XVIII
AT that time there was a war between two petty princes of the higher peninsula
of India; and unfortunately, the ship in which they embarked belonged to one of
these powers. -- They had not proceeded above five leagues from the coast, when
they were pursued by the foe. After an obstinate and bloody engagement, they
were boarded; and their enemies, when they had stripped the vessel of every
thing valuable, dismissed it.

They dismissed the vessel; but they took Almena. What heart does not bleed,
what eye does not shed a tear, for the miserable Solomon; They dismissed the
vessel; but they took Almena! Prayers and tears, and agony and anguish were
vain. The lover saw his dear, trembling, fainting maid, dragged by the hands of
the unfeeling sailors into their own ship, after they had bound him, to prevent
the effects of his rage, "I ask not for your mercy," cried the wretched youth:
"only take me into your vessel along with that lady, and prepare your tortures,
your racks, and wheels: for me prepare them, and let me perish, before these
eyes lose sight of Almena!"

While Solomon was vainly uttering these pitiable exclamations, the enemy
steered away, and was in a short time out of sight. The men of the ship in
which he was, apprehensive of some bad consequences from the violence of his
rage, were prudent enough to let him continue bound; while he now loaded them
with the reproachful terms of slaves and cowards, and now excited them by
promises, or entreated them by prayers, to pursue the foe. -- The ship having
lost her freight, did not proceed on her intended voyage, but returned to the
coast of India

When they arrived, Solomon was informed that the vessel which had taken them
belonged to the king of Sundah, who at that time was at war with the king of
Kanara. Upon this information, as soon as he had received intelligence of the
situation of the kingdom of Sundah, he went immediately in quest of Almena.
Though almost worn to death with fatigue and sorrow, he traveled night and
day, till he reached the country. But, alas! when he was there, what could he
do? Stranger as he was to the people, and in a great measure to their language,
he had as much to hope from chance, as from application, for the discovery of
Almena.

He would now have sunk under the weight of his misfortunes, had he not availed
himself of the first advice of Ardavan, and firmly relied on the Eternal
Providence. "Immortal Mithra!" said the afflicted youth, "thou beholdest me
oppressed with misery: but thy beams still shine upon me; and while I enjoy thy
light, I will hope for thy favor!"

Thus comforting himself, he still continued his search: depending, for the
necessary supports of nature, on the precarious bounty of the villages through
which he passed; frequently making the mountain rocks the refuge of his night's
repose, when nature, exhausted with toil and sorrow, in her own defense
inclined him to sleep. He wandered incessantly from town to town, and from
province to province; often exposed to the attacks of savage beasts, and often
suffering the insults of the more savage people.

Having in vain gone over a large tract of the inland country, he now confined
his search to the coast, in hopes that he might again see the vessel which took
his Almena. Day by day he wandered on the beach, constantly casting his eyes on
the immense waste of waters, and watching the approach of every vessel he saw,
with the same impatience of expectation, as if he had been assured that it
contained Almena.

CHAP. XIX.
AS he was walking one evening by the castle of Sevasir, he heard a mournful
voice proceeding from a garden within the fort. Solomon never neglected the
voice of sorrow: he went nearer to the place from whence it seemed to proceed;
and looking through the iron palisadoes, with which the garden was encompassed,
he beheld a lady sitting in a melancholy posture on a flower-bank at a small
distance.

In the irresistible transport of his heart, he cried aloud -- "Almena!" The
lady rose; and as she came toward him, he perceived his mistake. -- "Pardon
me, Madam," said he; "I am an unhappy man who have lost every thing that is
dear to me, in a lady whom I have sought in vain for many months in this
province; where I have still reason to believe she is confined, if indeed she
yet lives; if she is not fallen a sarifice to her own miseries, or to the
barbarous cruelty of the villains who tore her from me.

"Stranger," said the lady, "it is long since I have known any comfort myself,
and I am afraid I can have little for you. Your miseries affect me much: the
same did my beloved husband once undergo, for whom I now mourn, and must
forever mourn in hopeless sorrow."

"Is your husband then dead?" said Solomon; "or is he only lost to you as
Almena is to me? if the latter is the case, you may yet have hope; the
all-seeing eye of Providence looks down upon all his creatures, and he will
assuredly redress the misfortunes of the virtuous.

"We were inhabitants," replied the lady, "of the kingdom of Kanara. The
Sundians, who made an incursion into our territories, amongst many other
wretched people, carried off my husband and me -- " "How, madam!" interrupted
Solomon: "they were merciful, if they suffered your husband to accompany you."
-- "Their mercy," said she, "did not extend so far: they presented me to the
governor of this castle; and my husband they imprisoned in a distant part of
the kingdom.

Ever since I came within these hated walls, their savage master has aggravated
my miseries, by the mortifying offers of his love; totally regardless of my
sorrow and distraction, a thousand times has the unfeeling wretch insulted my
torn heart with odious caresses, and still continues to persecute me in the
same manner, upbraiding me with ingratitude for what he calls his kindness in
permitting me to live. But I am not alone in my misfortunes; here are numbers
of unhappy women under the same confinement, whose sufferings too nearly
resemble my own. Some of them, like me, have still resisted the importunities
of the tyrant; while others, more, I hope through fear than inclination* have
unhappily submitted to his will."

At these words, terror and apprehension were again roused in the heart of
Solomon, and created a conflict which shook his frame. He stood aghast and
motionless for a moment: at last recollecting himself -- "Is there" said he,
"tell me, Madam, is there a lady within these walls, a native of Delhi, who was
taken some months ago from on board a Kanarian vessel by the Sundians?

"To that question," said the lady, "I can make no answer: we are all kept in
different apartments, and not allowed to converse with each other; we are not
even permitted, but alone, to walk in these gardens: and should I now be
observed to talk with you, though through these detested bars my future liberty
would probably be endangered. All that you can do to know, whether the lady you
have lost be in this place, is to attend at the different hours of the day near
these palisadoes; where you will be able to observe, in their respective turns,
the appearance of the women in the gardens. But you will incur great danger in
the experiment: and, after all, should you find that your lady is here, what
can it avail you? You will only have the mortification to know it, without
being able to rescue her.

CHAP. XX.
SOLOMON took his leave of the lady; and having formed his resolution, waited
with the utmost impatience for the light of morning. He happened, indeed, to be
so far secured from suspicion, as to be dressed in a Sundian habit, which
belonged to an officer of the ship that carried off Almena, who compelled him
to take it in exchange for his own. But insensible of danger, at the earliest
dawn he hasted to his post, and passed the day in alternate hope and despair:
he saw many women, but he saw not Almena. In the evening therefore, regretting
the disappointment even of those expectations which he dreaded to have
confirmed, he resolved to quit his station till the return of morning, when, by
the glimmering of the moon, he perceived another lady enter the garden.

As she came nearer, her image glanced through his heart more swiftly than the
lightning smites the traveller on the mountains of Hima. The lady was Almena.
In a burst of transport, he cried -- "Almena! Solomon!" Struck at once with the
voice, the name, and the figure of Solomon, surprise overcame her, and she fell
senseless upon the terrace.

Solomon, unable to enter the garden, in an agony of terror cried out -- "Save,
save my Almena; at the same time running round the walls in the utmost
distraction. His exclamations alarmed the guard, who immediately secured him;
though, from his cries and confusion, they concluded him to be mad, and made
their report of him as such to the governor of the castle, who ordered him to
be immediately brought before him.

Solomon, the moment he beheld the governor, fiercely cried out -- "I conjure
thee, if thou art a human being, let me instantly fly to the relief of a lady
in the garden." The governor was alarmed by an appearance of reason in this
request, and ordered him secured, while he went himself into the gardens to
know if there was any foundation for it. There he found Almena supporting
herself against the wall, not having perfectly recovered either her strength or
reason. "Art thou, indeed, my Solomon? said she: "if thou art my Solomon,
support me in thy arms." in his arms he took her, and bore her to a pavilion:
where he held her till her reason returned. She turned her eyes full upon him;
and, with a look of fear and sorrow, shrunk from his embrace.

"Tell me, Madam; I beseech you tell me," said the governor; "what is the cause
of this distraction? Why are those dear eyes so full of wildness and horror?
and why do you look upon your protector with such aversion? Is there then some
other person more happy in your favor and affection? and must I forever
languish at your feet in vain?"

"If thou have any other affection for me," said Almena, "than that which is
inspired by brutal instinct; if thou have more feeling than the walls that
surround thee, thou will surely pity me. The dear unhappy man, whom I fear ere
now thy guards have seized, is the friend for whose loss thou have known me
mourn ever since I came within thy power. Yes, thou will pity me for thou has
wept: when I related to thee my miseries the tears of compassion flowed from
thine eyes. Let us throw ourselves at thy feet; let us owe our happiness to
thee, and thou shall have all the affection which is not due to Solomon.

The weeping beauty, as she uttered these words, threw herself before him in
such an agony of sorrow, and such a posture of supplication, as would have
moved any heart in which vice had not extinguished every spark of humanity. Far
from being affected by it, the governor of Savasir made her the following
answer -- "Absurd and vain! to suppose that I should tamely yield that
happiness to another, which I could never obtain myself. Know, Madam, that both
you and your lover are now in my power; and that he has no indulgence to hope
for but what your kindness to me may procure him." With these words he
withdrew; rather less offended at the thought of having a rival in Almena's
affections than pleased with the hope that he might terrify her into compliance
by his menaces against her lover.

Almena remained in the most pitiful distress, sharpened by painful
apprehensions for her own honor, and the life of Solomon; and wandering alone
into the garden she added one night of sorrow more to the many she had suffered.

Great God! what misery may one villain, armed with power, bring upon thy
creatures! Were there not a state of existence, where vice shall be punished
and virtue rewarded, how would thy works seem to reproach their Almighty Maker!
But let the sons of men learn, that he who is infinitely wise, is also
perfectly just; and that he can as easily take cognizance of the moral conduct
of his creatures, as he could at first create this immense system of the
universe, in which the minutest creature declares the skill of the Architect.

CHAP. XXI.
THE i^^pous tyrant of Sevasir enjoyed the balm of sleep and the refreshment of
rest, while the virtuous Solomon and Almena suffered the most grievous
affliction.

When the morning appeared, Nagrakut, for that was the wretch's name, went at
the usual hour into the garden, Almena who was still there, overcome by the
weight of continual sorrow, had sunk into a transient slumber on a bench in the
pavilion. Nagrakut, approached and stood by her as she slumbered. There was a
sight that might have excited tenderness in the breast of a savage: but it
moved not the heart of Nagrakut, nor awakened any other passion in him but that
of a libidinous desire. In a dream, she waved her hand, and cried, with a voice
of mournful tenderness, "Do not murder him, Nagrakut! Let my Solomon live!"
then letting fall the hand she had raised, she sunk again into silent slumber.

Nagrakut yet felt no pity; but placing himself near her on the bench, enclosed
her in his arms. She awoke; and finding herself in the embraces of the tyrant,
shrieked out with the most distressful horror. Her cries pierced the cell where
Solomon was confined. With the united strength of rage and terror, he burst the
door of his prison; and running through the apartments of the castle with a
dagger in his hand, which he had fortunately snatched up in the way, he flew to
the Garden.

Almena was still shrieking and struggling in the arms of Nagrakut, who
endeavoring to sooth her to his embraces, had not observed the approach of
Solomon. "Villain," said Solomon, "remove thy execrable hands from the person
of that lady, and employ them in the defense of thy own!" Nagrakut, who was the
most abject coward, called aloud to his guards. "Coward! slave!" said Solomon;
"draw this instant, or my dagger shall pierce thy heart." Nagrakut then fell at
his feet; and begging for mercy, promised him Almena and liberty. "This moment
then," said Solomon, "dismiss us from thy cursed prison." No sooner had he
uttered these words than the guards appeared. Nagrakut immediately beckoned to
them to seize him: but Solomon, observing his motion, hastily ran up to him,
and plunging his dagger into his heart.

The tyrant fell. No way of escape, however, was lest for Solomon: he was
instantly seized by the soldiers, loaded with heavy chains, and shut up, with
Almena, in a strong apartment of the castle: with Almena he was shut up, for
jealousy now no longer parted them; and she was considered as an accomplice in
the murder of the governor.

This circumstance administered inexpressible consolation to them both. "At
last, my Almena," said the lover, "fortune has brought thee to my arms; but
after what miseries, good Heaven! and in what circumstances! Yet my Heart never
once doubted the justice or the care of Providence; we shall yet be happy in
the valley of Irwan."

The spirits of Almena were so exhausted by the successive ravages of terror,
sorrow and surprise, that she reclined for some time in the arms of Solomon,
unable to speak, and only venting her grief in broken and feeble sighs. The
officers of the castle of Sevasir had sent in the mean time to the king of
Sundah, to know in what manner he would have the muderers of the governor
executed.

The death of a villain is seldom regretted, even by those to whom his
villainies have been of service. The king of Sundah always hated the governor
of Sevasir; but he dared not depose him, because he had been established under
him by the mogul: he, therefore, sent no other commands to the officers of the
castle, but that the prisoners should remain there till farther orders.

Not long after this, a body of Kanarians entered the country of Sundah, and
laid seige to the castle of Sevasir. As the death of the governor had thrown
all into confusion, the fort was easily carried; and the Kanarians took
prisoners all that were within the castle. Solomon and Almena, though they
could not be displeased at this change of fortune had yet another to encounter,
which might prove as fatal to their happiness as any they had escaped could
have been.

It is a custom in the eastern nations, to present the women taken in war to
the kings, that they may select whom they like: and the rest are divided among
the officers, according to their several ranks. All the ladies that were taken
in the castle of Sevasir, had this fate to undergo; and as the governor had
been curious in his choice, these women were looked upon as a most valuable
capture.

CHAP. XXII.
THEY were immediately conveyed to the court of Kanara, and presented to the
king for his choice. They all stood before him at the same time; and he looked
upon each of them for some minutes: but his eye dwelt longer on Almena than the
rest. Unfortunately, she observed this; and her fear and confusion new animated
her features, and gave fresh beauties to her complexion. The king immediately
selected her, and the rest were dismissed.

Solomon was all this time kept with the garrison of Sevasir as a prisoner of
war: but at length having convinced the Kanarians, that he had no connections
with the king of Sundah, and that he was willing to enter into the service of
their prince, his liberty was restored him. This was the only means by which he
could attempt the recovery of Almena; who, as he was now informed, was retained
by the king. He immediately repaired to the capital of Kanaria; and signifying
to the officers of the court that he had some important intelligence relating
to the war, to communicate to his majesty, he gained an easy admittance to him.

When the king appeared he prostrated himself before him; and being commanded
to speak, he thus expressed himself: "Let the king of Kanaria live! for his ear
is open to the complaints of the unhappy, and he despises no man for the
miseries which chance has brought upon him." -- "I am a man," interposed the
king; "proceed." -- "It was my hand that put an end to the life of your enemy,
the governor of Sevasir. "In that, replied the prince, "you did me a signal
service: but let me know your motives; and I shall be better able to judge of
the action, as well as of my obligations to you for it."

"O Prince!" said Solomon, "I was possessed of a lady, more beautiful than the
star that overflows its urn in the evening, and dearer to me than the life
drops of my heart. We were on board a Kanarian vessel that was trading to the
Persian Gulf; and were bound to the valley of Irwan in Mesopotamia, the place
of my nativity: but alas! before we had proceeded many leagues from our coast,
we were boarded by a pirate of Sundah. We were plundered and dismissed; but the
dear partner of my heart was taken from me. After long search, I found that she
was in the possession of the governor of Sevasir; who regardless of her
miseries, or the prepossession of her heart, cruelly continued to insult her
with the offer of his love." -- "Inhuman wretch!" interrupted the king: "but
proceed." -- This ejaculation gave Solomon new hopes, and he continued his
relation.

"Walking one evening by the gardens of the fort, I discovered her on a terrace
at a small distance. She was so much surprised by the suddenness of my
appearance, that she fainted. Being unable to enter the gardens, in my distress
I cried for help; and my cries alarming the guard, I was seized. That night I
was confined in a dungeon of the castle; but early the next morning hearing the
shrieks of a female voice, which I either knew or fear imagined to be that of
my love, rage and terror gave me more than natural strength, and I burst open
the door of my prison. I was unarmed; but, fortunately, a dagger lying in my
way, I snatched it up, and flew to the garden from whence the voice proceeded.
There I beheld the dear object of my affections trembling in the embraces of
the tyrant: at the sight of me, he called aloud to his guards, cowardly
refusing the offer I gave him of defending himself against my dagger; nay, he
meanly begged his life, and offered me, on that condition liberty for myself
and the lady; but the guards immediately coming up, he beckoned to them to
seize me: I found time, however, to thrust my dagger into his base heart, thus
the villain perished." -- "And justice said the king directed your arm."

"O prince!" continued Solomon, I am still miserable. I have reason to believe,
that some of your officers will detain the lady, as a prize taken in the castle
of Sevasir." -- "No officer of mine," replied the king, "shall be suffered to
detain her: let me know her name, and she shall be immediately restored to
you." -- "Her name," said Solomon, "is Almena."

The king appeared disturbed, and walked backward and forward for some moments,
in the utmost confusion. He knew, that Almena was the lady whom he had selected
from the captives; and he had the most ardent affection for her. In a few
moments he withdrew, and commanded Solomon to attend him the following day.

CHAP. XXIII.
THE heart of the king was, in the mean time distracted by different passions;
urged by the most powerful love to detain Almena, and dissuaded from that by
truth, humanity, and shame. "Am I," said he, "possessed of a throne, and shall
I have no more power to indulge my wishes, than the peasant of the field! what
is the worth or the end of absolute power, if kings must tamely sacrafice their
inclinations, to the creatures they were born to command! Shall I give up such
beauty as that of Almena! a beauty that has smitten my heart, and inspired me
with such tenderness of affection as I never yet felt for woman! But Almena was
Solyman's! -- It might be so; but she is now mine. Possession goes from one to
another, according to the laws of nation; and, by those laws, Almena is mine."

"Why then do I feel these uneasy sensations, as much at the thoughts of
keeping, as of parting with her! the laws of nature and truth create them. The
laws of nations ought always to be founded on these; and these suggest to me,
that to keep Almena, would be most injurious and inhuman. Shall I, who have
condemned that in another, as a crime which deserved the punishment of death,
commit the very same myself! what a detestable hypocrite should I appear! Shall
I, who promised the lover that none of my officers should deprive him of
Almena; shall I degrade the king by doing what I would have punished in a
subject? I love Almena, and should be exquisitely happy in the enjoyment of
her; but shall I, therefore, make her miserable! How should I ever partake of
happiness, if the object of my affections lived with me in sullen discontent,
or inconsolable sorrow? Base and unworthy of the heart of man, must be that
love, which would purchase its gratification by the misery of its object! The
heart of Almena is Solyman's, and so shall be her person: painful is the
alternative; but truth, and honor, and virtue must prevail!"

Thus the generous king of Kanara overcame the efforts of importunate desire,
by the force of virtue and reason; and nobly scorned to avail himself of his
power against an unhappy man, who had been long persecuted by misfortune, and
distressed in his love.

The hour came at which he had ordered Solomon to attend him. The king received
him with a condescending smile; and without the least appearance of uneasiness
or dissatisfaction in his countenance, desired him not to be apprehensive about
Almena, for that he should shortly be put in possession of her.

Having thus spoken, he went immediately to her apartment, and gently taking
her hand, "Most beautiful of the daughters of India," said he, "cease your
sorrows! I am not come to offer you my love; but to recommend to you another
lover, who possibly may be happier in your favor than I could ever hope to be:
he is now in the palace; and if you will give me leave, I will in^^oduce him to
you." -- "My heart." said Almena, "has been so much accustomed to new
distresses, that it is not now shocked by their frequency: but if you have any
pity for me, suffer me to bewail my miseries in solitude. Not to be interrupted
in my sorrows, is all I ask; and that is not, surely, too much for you to
grant." The king answered with a smile, "If I am not to be happy in your love,
I am determined that none but the person whom I am about to introduce to you,
shall be so;" and hastily quitting the appartment, returned with Solomon. The
lovers flew to each others arms; "My Solomon!" -- "My Almena!" In a few moments
being recollected, they threw themselves at the feet of the king; and Solomon,
as well as the transports of his heart would give him leave, expressed his
gratitude: "Generous prince," said he, "the thanks of Solomon are not worth
your acceptance. But you will not be without a reward: yours shall be the
supreme pleasure of conscious goodness; yours shall be the care of Eternal
Providence, and the prayers and blessings of Solomon and Almena!"

In the gratitude of his heart, Solomon offered the king his assistance in the
prosecution of the war with the Sundians; but he humanely refused his offer;
telling him that love and war were no allies; that his sufferings had already
been too many and too great; and that neither he should be exposed to danger,
nor Almena to fear, on his account. He moreover told them, that if they were
inclined to return by sea to the valley of Irwan, they should be attended by an
armed vessel, to secure them from the assaults of an enemy. But this obliging
offer they declined; Solomon was unwilling any more to risque that which was
dearer than life; and Almena yet trembled at the thoughts of the Sundian
pirate. They, therefore, notwithstanding the length and tediousness of the way,
determined to go by land; and having taken leave of the king, who supplied them
with every necessary, and lent them his own beasts and attendants, they set
their faces toward Delhi.

CHAP. XXIV.
THEIR road was through a mountainous country, troublesome to the traveller;
little cultivated by the labors, or enlivened by the habitations of men. But
what are the difficulties which love and hope cannot surmount! they despise the
threats of danger, and the toils of labor; and proceed with resolution through
those perplexities, which by other eyes are beheld with despair. The travelers
thus animated, and looking forward to those delightful scenes of rest, those
days of rural ease and happiness which they should enjoy in the valley of
Irwan, passed over the rugged mountains that opposed their way, without the
least sense of weariness or fear.

After traveling many days, without any accident or delay, more than the
necessary refreshment of nature required, they arrived at Delhi. At the sight
of her native place, Almena shed a tear of joy, and the lovers embraced each
other with more than common tenderness: so much is there in the power of
external circumstances, to improve and exalt the pleasures of the mind. Almena
always loved her Solomon with the most tender affection; but she loved him at
Delhi, more than in any other place: delight is inseparable from the idea of
those scenes, where we have passed the happy hours of childhood; and though,
when in a maturity of life we revisit our native countries, we cannot enjoy
that innocent thoughtless cheerfulness, of which we still retain some notion;
yet we are delighted with the remembrance of it, and those scenes are always
dear to us.

Almena forgot not to visit her village, and the people whom she called her
own. The poor inhabitants, at the sight of their benefactress, wept with
pleasure; and she did not leave them without giving them new exhortations to
their duty, and new instances of her beneficence. Indeed, in all generous acts
she now doubled her assiduities: for she concluded, that, on account of her
great and singular obligations to Providence, she ought in gratitude to have a
superior portion of virtue.

After a short stay at Delhi, Solomon and Almena renewed their journey, and set
forward to Ispahan. This route was longer; but it was more easy, and less
exposed to robbers, than that which led to the Persian Gulf. When they arrived
at Ispahan, Solomon had the pleasure to find his friend the merchant, who was
still detained by business in that city. He easily made his apology for not
accepting, as he had proposed, his kind offer of a passage into Europe, by
introducing him to Almena. He related to him their various interesting
adventures, to which he listened with the eager curiosity and concern of a
friend, acknowledging all along the hand of Providence in their preservation.
For the amiable and accomplished Almena, he felt great esteem: her pathetic
descriptions, and her just and natural observations, were extremely
entertaining and affecting. But he was most charmed with the character of the
king of Kanara; and requested Almena to relate every particular of his behavior.

"When I first beheld him" said she "I perceived in his countenance a noble
affability and openness, which seemed to speak a great and generous mind. This
gave me some pleasure; as I might have hopes from his compassion, should it be
my fate to be selected by him: such you know it was. -- When I was conducted
into an apartment of the palace, he waited on me with the most affable
politeness; and seeing me in tears, he gently took my hand, and spoke to the
following effect. "Be not distressed, fair Almena! Though you are in the power
of a prince, you are not in the hands of a tyrant. If time and the assiduities
of tenderness may prevail on you to return my love, I shall be happy; if not,
you shall never be made miserable by cruelty or by violence." "Consistent with
this declaration, was his whole conduct to me, during the time I was in his
possession. How I regained my liberty, you have already heard."

"To the character which you have already received of the Kanarian prince,"
said Solomon to the merchant, "I will add a poetical portrait, which possibly
may not be disagreeable to you: my gratitude for his favors, and my admiration
of his virtues, induced me to attempt it."

THE AMIABLE KING.
THE freeborn muse her tribute rarely brings,
Or burns her incense to the power of kings:
But virtue ever shall her voice command,
Alike a spade or scepter in her hand.
Is there a prince untainted with a throne,
That makes the interest of mankind his own;
Whose bounty knows no bounds of time or place;
Who nobly feels for all the human race:
A prince, that acts in reason's steady sphere,
No slave to passion and no dupe to fear;
A breast where mild humanity resides,
Where virtue dictates, and where wisdom guides;
A mind, that stretched beyond the years of youth,
Explores the secret springs of taste and truth.
These, these are virtues, which the muse shall sing;
And plant, for these, her laurels round a king!
Kanara's monarch! this shall be thy praise:
For this be crowned with never-fading bays!
"Your verses," said the merchant, "are very agreeable to me; for they are
justly applicable to a prince whom every merchant in Great Britain has the
greatest reason to respect; and who is beloved by his subjects, as much as a
father by his children: He too is young, as is the king of Kanara. But I have
lately had the pleasure to hear of his marriage; and at the same time I
received, from a literary correspondent, an ode on the occasion; which as you
have a poetical taste, I shall make no scruple to offer you."

HYMENEAL.
I
AWAKE, thou everlasting lyre!
That once the mighty Pinder strung,
When, wrapped with more than mortal fire,
The gods of Greece he sung:
Awake;
Arrest the rapid foot of time again,
With liquid notes of joy, and pleasure's melting strain.
II.
Crowned with each beauteous flower that blows
On Acidalia's tuneful side;
With all Aonia's rosy pride,
Where numerous Aganippe flows;
From Thespain groves and fountains wild,
Come thou yellow-vested bay,
Redolent of youth and joy,
See Catullus.
Fair Urania's favorite child!
George to thee devotes the day:
In Hymen haste away!
III.
Daughters of the genial main!
Queen of youth and rosy smiles,
Queen of dimple-dwelling wiles;
Come, with all thy Paphian train!
O give the fair that blooms for Britain's throne,
Thy melting charms of love, thy soul-enchanting zone!
IV.
Daughter of the genial main!
Bring that heart-dissolving power,
Which once in Ida's sacred bower
The soul of Jove opposed in vain:
The fire of gods thy conquering charms confessed;
And vanquished sunk, sunk down on Juno's fostering breast.
V.
She comes! The conscious sea subsides;
Old ocean curbs his thundering tides!
Smooth the silken surface lies,
Where Venus' flowery chariot flies:
Paphian airs in ambush sleep;
On the still bosom of the deep;
Paphian maids around her move,
Keen eyed hope, and joy, and love;
Their rosy breasts a thousand Cupid's lave;
And dip their wanton wings, and beat the buxom wave.
VI.
But mark, of more than vulgar mien,
With regal grace, and radient eye,
A form in youthful majesty!
Britain, hail thy favored queen!
For her, the conscious sea subsides;
Old ocean curbs his thundering tides:
Over the glassy-bosom'd main,
Venus leads her laughing train;
The Paphian maids move graceful by her side;
And, over the buxom waves, the rosy cupids ride.
VII.
Fly, ye fairy-footed hours!
Fly, with aromatic flowers!
Such as bathed in orient dews,
Beauty's living glow diffuse;
Such as in Idalia's grove
Breathe the sweets, the soul of love!
VIII.
Come, genial god of chaste delight,
With wreaths of festive roses crowned,
And torch that burns with radiance bright,
And liberal robe that sweeps the ground!
Bring the days of golden joy,
Pleasures pure that never cloy!
Bring to Britain's happy pair,
All that is kind, and good, and fair!
George to thee devotes the day!
In Hymen! Haste away!
IX.
Daughters of Jove! ye virgins sage,
That wait on Camus' hoary age;
That often his winding vales along
Have smoothed your silver-woven song;
O wake once more those lays sublime,
That live beyond the wrecks of time!
To crown your Albion's boasted pair,
The never-fading wreath prepare;
While her rocks echo to this grateful strain,
"The friends of freedom and of Britain reign!"
"The ode you have obliged me with," said Solomon, "though I do not very well
understand it, gives me some idea of the enthusiasm and harmony of the English
poetry. But I am less pleased with the productions of art in your country, than
the affectionate duty which the people show to their king; for that is the
basis of civil happiness; and indeed every human prince, who has the interest
of his subjects at heart, will always reign in their affections.

But now, my friend, if you are not too much taken up with your concerns at
Ispahan, will you be prevailed on to visit the valley of Irwan? As you are a
lover of nature, and of the muses, you will there meet with much to entertain
you; at least, you will find a retreat from the fatigues of business, and the
plagues of popularity. Almena too joins in this request, and will be glad of so
entertaining a friend in the first stages of her retirement."

The merchant accepted the invitation, and they left Ispahan the following day.
He was desirous to hear from Almena the story of her captivity, and took the
first opportunity to request it: "I have heard," said he, "from Solomon, the
greatest part of your adventures; but I have not been informed how you passed
that unhappy period of time, from your being taken by the Sundians, to your
departure from the castle at Sevasir."

"You call back memory, Sir," said Almena, "to the days of misery: but as I
can, at this distance, look upon them without terror, I will endeavor to
describe them to you.

"When I was first taken by the Sundians, my distraction was so great, that I
retain no Idea of what passed, till the captain of the vessel conveyed me on
shore to the castle of Sevasir and presented me, terrified and almost frantic
as I was, to the detested governor; who as I have been since informed, received
such kind of acknowledgments from the seamen, for protecting them in their
illegal and piratical captures.

"The wretch, as well as I remember, seemed totally insensible to my misery;
and, with a smile upon his countenance, ordered his domestics to convey me to
my apartments. These, indeed, wanted neither elegance nor convenience; but I
despised the one, and neglected the other. The first evening I passed in the
most painful anguish for the loss of Solomon, and the most dreadful
apprehensions of injurious treatment from the governor. The women that were
about me, seemed the wretched remains of ruined innocence, who had first been
victims to the desires of the tyrant, and afterward made his slaves. Dreadful
was the scene I had before me! Some of these unhappy creatures seemed to pity
me, and to be concerned for my approaching misfortunes; while others, who with
their virtue had lost their humanity, looked upon me with a careless scorn;
pleased, I fear, with the though it, that they should see one woman more, as
miserable and as despicable as themselves.

"Early the next morning, the governor came into my apartment; and casting his
eyes upon the bed on which I had not reposed, "it seems, madam," said he, with
a scornful smile, "that you approve not of your lodgings; but a little time, it
is to be presumed, will reconcile you to us." These morning visits he
constantly paid me; and as he always found me in sullen sorrow, he behaved much
in the same manner. At last, he changed his address; seemed to pity me; asked
me for the story of my misfortunes; and I believe wept, when he heard it; but
as I was aware of the hypocrite, I was equally regardless of his pity, as I had
been of his scorn: and still continued to look upon him, with the same
forbidding aversion and disdain.

"Thus passed my days in this confinement: but they would have been more
intolerable, had I not found a harp in my apartments, which probably had been
left there by some unhappy lady, who had possessed them before me. With this
instrument I amused myself for many a melancholy hour, which must otherwise
have passed away in the most miserable languor, I also composed a song,
suitable to my state of mind and misfortune; which I adapted to my harp, and
which, I think, was as follows:

SONG.
I.
IT IS over -- the pleasing prospect's over,
My weary heart can hope no more;
Then welcome wan despair!
Approach with all thy dreadful train;
Wild anguish, discontent, and pain,
And thorny pillow'd care!
II.
Gay hope, and ease, and joy, and rest,
All, all that charms the peaceful breast,
Forever I resign:
Let pale anxiety, instead,
That has not where to lay her head,
And lasting woe be mine.
III.
It comes! I feel the painful woe;
My eyes, for Solomon will flow
In silent grief again;
Who wandering over some mountain drear,
Now happily sheds the pensive tear,
And calls on me in vain.
IV.
Perhaps along the lonely shores,
He now the sea's blue breast explores,
To watch the distant sail:
Perhaps on Sundah's hills forlorn,
He faints with aching toil o'erborn;
And life's last spirits sail.
V.
Ah! no -- the cruel thought forbear!
Avaunt, thou fiend of fell despair,
That only death can give!
While Heaven eternal rules above,
Almena yet may find her love,
And Solomon may live!
"Such, Sir, was my life in the castle of Sevasir; which passed like the waters
of Zenderoud, that in some pieces are tortured by rocks and precipices, and in
others languish in dull stagnation."

CHAP. XXV.
THE travelers had now proceeded on their way to the valley of Irwan, as far
as the village of Abdat; where Solomon proposed that they should visit the
lovers who owed their preservation to him. Of this he was the more desirous; as
he had never seen them, since he had first recommended them to the protection
of his father; but the pleasure he proposed to himself from this visit, arose
not from a desire of being flattered with their acknowledgments, but of
beholding and enjoying their happiness.

The lovers received their benefactor, with the greatest ardor of gratitude;
but at the same time with that delicacy, which proved it to be sincere: they
were not loud in their acknowledgments, nor officious in their compliments; but
yet their attention to their guest, showed how much they were delighted with
this opportunity of expressing their respect for Solomon. The travelers, in
the mean time, were not less pleased to behold the peculiar happiness of the
lovers, who seemed to have but one heart, and one inclination. Solomon and
Almena beheld, in them, a picture of themselves; and felt more sensibly their
own felicity, when they had before them so pleasing an image of it.

The merchant too was delighted with this scene of conjugal happiness. "Such,"
said he to Solomon, "are the genuine fruits of those alliances, which are made
by love. When I behold them, I blush for myself and for my countrymen; for
love, genuine love, as if it were no longer a passion essential to human
nature, is looked upon as an Utopian idea, existing only in the imagination of
poets and enthusiasts: hence, every tendency to it is ridiculed as romantic,
and modern marriages are only contracts of convenience. A British lady is
exposed to sale; and if she has a good person, as well as an ample fortune she
hopes by that addition only to fetch a higher price, and make a better market.
This, however, it must be owned, is not the foible of the women only, the men
are equally, if not more mercenary; and have if possible, more selfish views in
their marriages; so that, in this case, cunning is only opposed to cunning. All
this proceeds from that mischievous opinion, which measures happiness by the
possessions of fortune. Hence, that mutual coldness and indifference, which
both experience before the marriage torch is extinct: from new acquisitions of
wealth, each expects new degrees of felicity, and both are disappointed; when
they find themselves mistaken, destitute of that affectionate tenderness which
endears the married state, they look upon each other as the cause of
discontent, and disgust and aversion succeed. Thus they sacrifice to vanity,
and reap the fruits of it!"

From the village of Abdat, Solomon and Almena, with their friend the merchant,
proceeded to the valley of Irwan, where they found the aged Ardavan still
living, and enjoying all the faculties of nature. The benevolent sage rejoiced
to receive his son, not only safe from the dangers of travel, but happy in the
enjoyment of his love; and with a heart full of tenderness, he thus conferred
on both, his paternal benediction:

"Children of the heart, and comfort of the years of Ardavan! Solomon shall be
as the sun, when he comes from the chambers of the east, when he spreads his
glories over the waves of Ganges; my son shall be as the Euphrates, the river
of plenty, whose waves are the delight of a thousand meadows; he shall be like
the roe upon the mountains, that danceth in the vigor of his heart, and says
to the fence of the husbandman, "What art thou?" His head shall be crowned with
the rays of Mithra; because his heart melted with compassion, and because his
hand was stretched forth to relieve the children of affliction!

"Almena is fairer than the women of the east; she is more virtuous than the
daughters of men: love dwells in her heart, and benevolence sits in her
eye. She shall be like the tree that droppeth balm upon the flowers of Irwan;
as the star of the evening reflected from the river. Her countenance shall be
pleasant as the calm surface of the ocean, when the gilded clouds of evening
blaze upon its bosom: she shall be as the moon, when she lends her rays to
the traveller, and sheddeth a mild light over the groves and valleys. Her voice
shall be as the voice of the turtle, calling to her mate in the thickets of the
forest. Like the stars that surround the chariot of the moon, shall be the
children of Almena; beautiful as the plants of the cedar, and sprightly as the
fawns upon the mountains!"

Thus blessed by the voice of Ardavan, and happy in themselves, the virtuous
Solomon and Almena live in the valley of Irwan! Each day is endeared by the
delights of tender love; and the remembrance of past distresses is attended
only with the pleasing sensations of gratitude to that Being, whose providence
is over all his works.

HYMN TO THE ETERNAL PROVIDENCE.
LIFE of the world, immortal mind!
Father of all the human kind;
Whose boundless eye, that knows no rest,
Intent on nature's ample breast,
Explores the space of earth and skies,
And sees eternal incense rise!
To thee, my humble voice I raise:
Forgive, while I presume to praise.
Though short the life thy goodness gave,
And soon descending to the grave;
Yet 'twas my bounty, still, to give
A being that can think and live;
In all thy works thy wisdom see,
And stretch its towering mind to thee!
To thee my humble voice I raise:
Forgive, while I presume to praise.
And still this poor contracted span,
This life, that bears the name of man:
From thee derives its vital ray,
Eternal source of life and day!
Thy bounty still the sunshine pours,
That gilds its morn and evening hours.
To thee my humble voice I raise:
Forgive, while I presume to praise.
Through error's maze, through folly's night,
The lamp of Reason lends me light.
When stern affliction waves her rod,
My heart confides in thee my God!
When nature shrinks, oppressed with woes;
Even then she finds in thee repose.
To thee, my humble voice I raise:
Forgive, while I presume to praise.
Affliction flies, and Hope returns;
Her lamp with brighter splendour burns.
Gay Love, with all his smiling train,
And joy and peace are here again.
These, these, I know, 'twas thine to give:
I trusted; and behold! I live.
To thee, my humble voice I raise;
Forgive while I presume to praise.
O may I still thy favor prove!
Still grant me gratitude and love.
Let truth and virtue guide my heart;
Nor peace, nor hope, nor joy, depart.
But yet, whatever my life may be,
My heart shall still repose on thee!
To thee, my humble voice I raise:
Forgive, while I presume to praise!

