TOM PAINE's JESTS; BEING AN ENTIRELY NEW AND SELECT COLLECTION OF Patriotic
Bon Mots, Repartees, Anecdotes, Epigrams, Observations, etc.

ON POLITICAL SUBJECTS. By THOMAS PAIN, AND OTHER SUPPORTERS OF THE RIGHTS OF
MAN.

TO WHICH IS ADDED, A TRIBUTE to the SWINISH MULTITUDE, Being a choice
Collection of PATRIOTIC SONGS

Speak truth and shame the devil. Seria mixta jocis. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR
MATTHEW CAREY, NO. 118, MARKET-STREET. M.DCC.XCVI.

DEDICATION.
TO THE SWINISH MULTITUDE.
Friends and Fellow Citizens,
NOTWITHSTANDING the contempt in which you are held by Mr. Burke, and men like
Mr. Burke, yet, as the following publication is calculated principally for your
use and entertainment, I think it proper to dedicate it to you. Indeed, I
suppose, that those gentlemen, who, with their aristocracy of power, titles,
wealth, places, pensions, etc. conceive that they possess also an aristocracy
of understanding, and that you were born only for their use, will not deign to
cast their eyes on so vulgar a performance. For these great men I write not;
but if I can afford you any amusement or any instruction, I shall have
accomplished my end.

It may be objected to the title of this pamphlet, that Tom Pain is no Jester
-- that his works contain serious truths: but you, I am certain, will allow,
that they contain many good things; and even his enemies (both those formerly
in power, and those received into power and favor, for their opposition to his
doctrines, even Mr. Burke himself) must confess, that they contain smart
things; for if these gentlemen-placemen had not smarted under them, we should
not have seen the long list of prosecutions which have taken place against Mr.
Pain and the booksellers who sold his works. In some of these prosecutions the
juries have found the books to be libels, and in others, the juries have found
them not to be libels. This is what is called, in that equitable place,
Westminster Hall, the glorious uncertainty of the law.

In the following sheets I have endeavored to keep clear of any thing that may
be the cause of my being honored with the attention of that valuable officer
of the Crown, the King's Attorney General: but in these days, when lawyers
assert that truth is a libel our friend Tom Pain observes, that to say truth
is a libel is a libel on truth), even this innocent performance may, by the
rulers of the land, be considered as libellous, especially as it is avowedly
published for your use, and not for the use of those who call themselves
learned men or great men. Should it so happen, I have only to hope though
hardly to expect) that I may be tried by a jury indefinitely chosen from among
you, and not by a special jury of ESQUIRES, named by the Crown Office.

It only remains for me to express a wish, that the people, as the natural
sovereigns of this, as of every other country, may assert their unalienable
right to liberty; and to assure you, that for that great end, you have every
wish, and shall have every exertion of

The EDITOR.
LONDON, September 2 d, 1793.
JESTS, etc.
1. A DROLL blunder was made in the Daily Advertiser, in the month of May last.
It stated, that a bill was brought into parliament, to secure the rights of
potentates, instead of patentees.

2. The following notice was, for many months, advertised on a board, at the
Surry end of Westminster Bridge: -- " Rubbish may be shot by the direction of
Thomas Pain." It has been lately taken down, at the request, it is said, of a
Lord of the Bedchamber.

3. A gentleman (an enemy to anarchists) lately ordered a glass of brandy in a
coffee house, adding, "Take care there is none of your damned French stuff in
it." -- The waiter replied, " Genuine British, Sir, I assure you."

4. It was observed, some time ago, in a minesterial newspaper, that 5000
Hanoverians were on their march, to increase the number of British troops
quartered at Tournay.

5. When Lord How, in the month of August last, made the best of his way into
port after he had got sight of the French fleet, one of his officers, not
remarkably correct in his orthography, wrote to a correspondent, that he
expected they would soon go to SEE again.

6. A workman, lately dismissed from his employment at Manchester, was told at
the same time, that the war was not the cause of his misfortune. "Now, to me
(says the man bluffly) the case appears directly contrary; -- are we not at
this moment employed in shooting our customers?"

7. Some wags in Dublin lately gave information to a magistrate, that a Mr.
Scanlon had three mortars in his possession. The magistrate, attended by a
party of dragoons, surrounded the house, and demanded the mortars to be
delivered to him in the name of the King. Mr. Scanlon, who is a respectable
apothecary, immediately produced them, adding, that as they were useless
without the pestles, these were also at his Majesty's service.

8. At a late Kent assizes, an action was brought for slander, in which an
attorney was plaintiff, and an honest farmer defendant. The action was brought
to recover damages, for calling the attorney a rogue and a thief. The verdict
of the jury was, that as the plaintiff was an attorney, the action did not lie.

9. Soon after Mr. Dundas's late marriage, a person observed that he wondered
that gentleman held so many offices, for that he imagined it would be enough
for him to do the duties of the home department.

10. An Irish officer had the misfortune to be dreadfully wounded in one of the
battles in America last war. As he lay on the ground, an unfortunate soldier,
who was near him, and was allo severely wounded, made a terrible howling; when
the officer exclaimed, " Damn your eyes, what do you make such a noise for? Do
you think there is nobody killed but yourself?"

11. The First Lord of the Admiralty, out of compliment to his talents, is
commonly called in the office the late Lord Chatham.

12. In an old church history, we meet with the following curious article: "The
church of Witham Friary is a small structure supported by a nave."

13. His Grace of Richmond being asked, why he ordered a captain's guard to
mount in the kitchen? replied, that he wished to accustom the captains of
militia to stand fire.

14. Some time ago a gentleman in Devonshire thought he could not give a
greater proof of his loyalty, than by employing a number of persons to burn Tom
Pain in effigy. At the conclusion, one of the fellows waited on him, to know
if there was any other gemman among his friends, whom he would wish to have
burned, as they were ready to do it for the same quantity of beer.

15. A royal publican in Saint George's fields advertises his house by the
title of the Princess Royal's Tap.

16. During the riots in 1780, several persons, in order to save their houses,
wrote on their doors ' no popery.' Grimaldi, the dancer, to avoid all mistakes,
wrote on his, ' no religion.'

17. One of Mr. Reeves's men was lately haranguing the people, in a barn in the
country, on the blessings of our constitution, our paucity of taxes, etc. When
an ass, who had borne many heavy burdens, in the midst of the oration, put his
head in at the window and began a braying. The company seeming divided in their
attention between the two orators, a wag observed, only one at a time, if you
please, gentlemen.

HISTORICAL REMARKS, ANECDOTES, OBSERVATIONS, BON MOTS, etc.
18. The oath of allegiance (says Algernon Sidney) binds no private man to more
than the law directs; and has no influence upon the whole body of the nation.
Many princes are known to their subjects only by the injuries, losses, and
mischiefs they bring upon them. Rebellion itself is neither good nor bad more
than any other war; but is just or unjust, according to the manner of it.

19. Notwithstanding the stretches that have been lately made as to libels, it
is hardly credible, but it is certainly true, that a man was lately arrested in
Dublin as a libeller, for showing a print of Mr. Pain to some people around
him.

20. Dragonetti, in his Treatise on Virtues and Rewards, has a paragraph worthy
of being recorded in every country in the world: -- "The science (says he) of
the politician consists in fixing the true point of happiness and freedom:
Those men would deserve the gratitude of ages who should discover a mode of
government that contained the greatest sum of individual happiness, with the
least national expense."

21. "Put a country right (says Mr. Pain), and it will soon put government
right."

22. "For a nation to be free (say the French) it is sufficient that she wills
it."

23. Almost immediately after Dr. Johnson's tract, entitled Taxation no
Tyranny, appeared in America, it was answered by one, called Resistance no
Rebellion.

24. The first time that Mr. Pit went to Cambridge after his election for the
university, all the sophs were (as might be expected) gaping for lawn sleeves,
and the other good things in the gift of their representative. Dr. Paley
preached before the young minister, from the following text; There is a lad
here, which has five borley loaves and two small fishes, but what are they
among so many?

25. Tom Pain says, truth has this advantage over prejudice, that truth
cannot be unlearned.

26. The late Mr. Flood, once talking of the Irish pension list, said, it might
be compared to death, for it was the wages of sin.

27. Parliamentary Reform. -- On this subject it was mentioned that a noble
lord had got the reversion of a borough, at the end of twenty years. A great
lord, who was present pertinently asked, " What any borough would be worth
twenty years hence?"

28. Soon after the capture of the Spanish register ship, a recruiting sergeant
of marines at Manchester, after expatiating on the number of galleons, that
were taken, informed his audience, that besides the king's bounty, every two
men should be provided with a large chest, having a strong partition to hold
their prize money.

29. A printseller in Dublin, lately had the audacity to expose for sale, a
print of the --, with the following lines from Pope's Homer underneath:

"Cursed is the man, and void of law and right,
"Unworthy property, unworthy light,
"Unfit for public rule or private care,
"That wretch, that monster, who delights in war:
"Whose lust is murder, and whose horrid joy,
"To tear his country, and his kind destroy."
30. Henry the Seventh, on his deathbed said, "I have left my subjects a
legacy: I have left them, peace, the best legacy a prince can leave his
people." Some kings might parody this speech, using the word debt instead of
peace, and substituting worst for best.

31. It is an observation of a French author, that there is no example of an
English minister who began a war, continuing in office till its conclusion.

32. The observation of Mr. Pain, that England has no constitution, is not
new. Something very like it is contained in the following passage from the
courtly Hume's History of England. "Those (says he) who, from a pretended
respect to antiquity, appeal, at every turn, to an original plan of the
constitution, only cover their turbulent spirit, and their private ambition,
under the appearance of venerable forms; and whatever period, they pitch on for
their model, they may still be carried back to a more distant period, where
they will find the measures of power entirely different, and where every
circumstance, by reason of the greater barbarity of the times, will still
appear less worthy of imitation. Above all, a civilized nation, like the
English, ought to be cautious in appealing to the practice of their ancestors,
or regarding the maxims of uncultivated ages as certain rules for her present
conduct. An acquaintance with the ancient periods of their government is chiefly
useful by instructing them to cherish their present constitution, from a
comparison or contrast with the condition of these present times. And it is
also curious, by showing them the remote, and commonly faint and disfigured
originals, of the most finished and most noble institutions: and by instructing
them in the great mixture of accident, which commonly concurs with a small
ingredient of wisdom and foresight, in erecting the complicated fabric of the
most perfect government."

33. When the Duke of Clarence mentioned, in the House of Lords in the course
of the debate on the Slave Trade, that the condition of the slaves in the West
Indies was preferable to that of the poor people in Great Britain; it was
observed, that it would be a humane action in his Highness, to bring a bill
into parliament, to make the condition of the poor in this country as good as
that of the African slaves.

34. A man must serve a seven years apprenticeship to be a shoemaker; but all
our peers, and a great proportion of our commoners, are born legislators. Nor
is this all; if the shoemaker, after all his study does not make shoes to
please his customers, they will not employ him; but we are obliged to receive
all the manufactures of the other profession above mentioned, be they good or
bad.

35. Those who hold up to admiration the constitution of this country, on
account of the trial by jury, surely do not mean a special jury.

36. Comparisons of drunkenness. -- A man is said to be as drunk as an owl,
when he cannot see -- as drunk as a sow, when he wallows in the dirt -- as
drunk as a beggar, when he is very impudent -- as drunk as the devil, when he
is inclined to mischief -- and as drunk as a lord, when he is every thing that
is bad.

37. A successful resistance (says Mr. Wilkes) is a revolution, not a
rebellion. Rebellion indeed, appears on the back of a flying enemy; but
Revolution flames or the breast plate of the victorious warrior.

38. The following equally wise and loyal resolutions, were published in the
newspapers: -- "Petty France, new York-Street, Westminster.
"At a meeting of the inhabitants of the above place, it was unanimously agreed
to change the name of the street from Petty-France, to York-street, to
perpetuate to posterity the detestation, we, the said inhabitants, have to
French principles, politics, and all things that bear an affinity with the
disordered system, at present prevailing with that deluded people.

"And we, the said inhabitants, do agree to call it York-street to commemorate
the gallantry of his Royal Highness the Duke of York, who so nobly steps
forward to defeat the hostile designs of a people, whose dangerous and
destructive innovations, have reduced millions to beggary, and threatened the
liberties of this happy country.

"Therefore the public in general, and our friends and connexions in
particular, are requested to observe, that the said street, lately called
Petty-France, is, by the inhabitants at large, changed to York-street; and it
is earnestly desired of every person, having occasion to send or write to their
friends residing there (as likewise the postmen) will recollect the alteration,
and direct, or deliver accordingly.

July 25, 1793. MATTHEW DYER, Chairman."




39. A person present at the above meeting, observed, that it would be better
to call it Fetterlane.

40. A gentleman being told, that Mr. Dundas had received the freedom of a
certain Scotch burgh in a little gold box -- observed, that their freedom might
be contained in a very little box indeed.

41. Commissary Watson fidgets about so at the mess-rooms, and makes such a
thumping noise with his wooden-leg, that the young officers have given him the
nickname of dot and go on.

42. The following curious article appeared in a Treasury newspaper, in the
month of May last. -- "In the late engagement, Ensign Hamilton, of the 3d
regiment, had a very narrow escape -- a cannon ball was making directly for his
head, but a sergeant, who was near him, seeing it, held up his hand, and
altered the direction so much, that it only went through Mr. Hamilton's hat!!!

43. During the Coalition Ministry, when the late Lord North held the office of
one of the principal Secretaries of State, as he was one day going to his
office, in ascending the long stair that leads to it, he was obliged, being a
heavy man, to rest himself at the first floor, opposite the door leading into
the treasury; at last he proceeded, observing very feelingly, " Well, I see
that a man may go farther and fare worse."

44. Seneca was a Heathen: Hear his observation on war -- " Homo sacre res
homo, jam per lusum et jocum occiditur." -- "Man, that sacred creature man, is
sent to death as a matter of pleasure and diversion."

45. Notwithstanding the many severe examples made in our courts of justice, of
persons, for speaking seditiously, a man had the audacity to assert, in a
public coffee room, that two and two made four.

46. A Friend to the Constitution was preaching up the advantages of
aristocracy, and stating the justice, that a general or an admiral for his
merits in conquering the enemies of his King, should be ennobled, and that his
honors should descend to his posterity: A lady, who was present, observed,
that by the same rule, where a man is, for his merits, exalted to the gallows,
his descendants should also succeed to that honor.

47. In the time of Mr. Wilkes's patriotism, he observed, in a speech to
parliament, that, "The House of Commons meet like a consultation of physicians
where every one's business is to apply to his own advantage, and not to
consider the condition of his miserable patient."

48. On Mr. Pit being condemned for taking his relations into the cabinet to
prevent a division, a wag observed, that an improvement on this scheme would
be, to take all the offices into his own hands, as there would be still less
apprehension of his dividing against himself.

49. At the quarter sessions held at Cambridge, July 18, 1793, John Cook, a
baker, was tried for uttering the following seditious words: "I will always
have a calf's head for dinner, on the anniversary of the martyrdom, so long as
I have money to buy one; King George's head would look well served up in a
dish, there would be cut and come again; and what a wonderful discovery there
would be when you came to the brains! Damn the monarchy, I want none; I wish to
see all the churches down, and the roads mended with them, and the King's
chapel made a stable of." He was found guilty; and sentenced to be imprisoned
three months, to pay a fine of 40 s. and to find sureties for six years,
himself in 100 l. and two sureties in 50 l. each

50. If the Scotch Judges, instead of fourteen years transportation, had
adjudged Mr. Muir to be hanged, such a sentence would not have been without
precedents in their court: --

In the year 1600, Archibald Cornwall was indicted for ignominiously
dishonouring and defaming his Majesty, in making a portrait of him, and laying
it upon the posts of the gibbet, pressing to fix the same thereupon."

The Jury "convict Archibald Cornwall of the treasonable setting of his
Majesty's portrait to the posts of the gibbet, and putting of the same to be
hung forth on a nail infixed on the same gibbet."

The Court decreed him "to forfeit life, lands and goods; and to be taken to
the said gibbet, whereupon he pressed to hang his Majesty's portrait, and there
to be hanged until he be dead, and to hang thereupon for the space of
twenty-four hours, with a paper on his forehead, containing the vile crime
committed by him."

In the same year Francis Tenant was indicted for writing and despersing
slanderous letters, reproachful to the king, his progenitors and council, and
the Jury having found him guilty,

A royal warrant was produced by the Lord Advocate, commanding the Court to
pronounce the following sentence: -- "That the prisoner be taken to the cross
of Edinburgh, and his tongue cut out at the root; that a paper be fixed on his
brow, denoting him to be the author of wild and seditious pasquinades; and that
he be then taken to a gallows, and hanged till he be dead."

But as the king (James I.) affected clemency, a second royal warrant was
produced, in which his Majesty was graciously pleased to declare, that he was
content that the prisoner would only be hanged; which sentence was accordingly
pronounced and executed.

In 1615 John Fleming was hanged for uttering the following words: -- " Fiend
nor the King die or the morn (no matter if the King die by to morrow) that he
die of the falling sickness."

In 1618 Thomas Ross or Rois was condemned to have first his head struck off,
and then his hand and head affixed to different gates in Edinburgh, for having,
at Oxford, published a devilish, scandalous, and seditious writing, containing
reflections on his own countrymen; asserting that they should all be put from
court, excepting his Majesty (James I.) and his children and a few others, and
upbraiding the English for suffering themselves to be abused by such a
multitude of the offscouring of the people."

51. The following fable, a gross libel upon that best of all possible
goverments, called Monarchy, is taken from the ninth chapter of the Book of
Judges: --

"The trees met together to choose a king; but all the trees of worth declined
the office. The olive would not quit the care of its oil, the figtree of its
figs, the vine of its wine, nor the other trees of their fruit. Thus
disappointed, they applied to the bramble, as being good for nothing. and
because it bore thorns and could do mischief, The bramble, far from declining
the honor of reigning over the rest of the trees, showed itself of the true
blood royal, 'every inch a king,' by the following most gracions speech: -- If,
in truth, (said its majesty), you anoint me king, then come and put your trust
in my shadow; if not, the fire shall come out of the bramble and devour the
cedars of Lebanon."

52. The following might also be considered as a libel, at this particular
juncture, if it were not extracted from the Holy Bible: --

1 Samuel, chap. 8. -- "And Samuel told all the words of the Lord unto the
people that asked of him a king.

"And he said, this will be the manner of the king that shall reign over you:
he shall take your sons, and appoint them for himself, for his chariot, and to
be his horsemen; and some shall run before his chariots.

"And he will appoint him captains over thousands, and captains over fifties;
and will set them to ear his ground, and to reap his harvest, and to make his
instruments of war and instruments of his chariots.

"And he will take your daughters to be confectionaries, and to be cooks, and
to be bakers.

"And he will take your fields, and your vineyards, and your olive yards, even
the best of them, and give them to his servants.

"And he will take the tenth of your seed, and of your vineyards, and give to
his officers and servants.

"And he will take your menservants, and your maidservants, and your
goodliest young men, and your asses, and put them to his work.

"And he will take the tenth of your sheep; and ye shall be his servants.

"And ye shall cry out in that day, because of your king, which ye shall have
chosen you; and the Lord will not hear you that day.

53. Soon after the institution of the Royal Society, King Charles II. sent as
a question to them for their discussion, "What was the reason why a dead fish
was so much heavier than a living one?" Many wise treatises were accordingly
written, by the members of this learned body, to point out the physical reasons
for this difference. At last, after the point had undergone a complete
discussion, it occurred to them to try the fact, when they discovered, to their
no small mortification, that they were laughed at by the witty King, the living
fish and the dead one being exactly the same weight.

54. Those who find fault with our constitution, certainly do not believe the
two following maxims: I. "That the king can do no wrong, and II. That the act
of law never does wrong."

55. A gentleman haranguing on the perfection of our law, and that it was
equally open to the poor and the rich, was answered by another, "So is the
London Tavern."

56. Dean Swift observes, "that considering how many hopeful princes we have
had, it is perfectly astonishing, that we should have had so few tolerable
kings."

57. A man was lately tried at Aberdeen for obstructing a revenue officer; it
unfortunately came out on the trial, that the prisoner had been guilty of
planting the Tree of Liberty, where no tree had ever grown before, and where
Liberty was not in the most flourishing state. The consequence was, a judgment,
that he should be publicly whipped, and banished the kingdom for fourteen years.

58. A royal shoemaker in Bristol lately advertised, that he had the honor to
be an alarmist, and requested the custom of all his Majesty's loyal Subjects;
as he was resolved not to make shoes for a republican.

59. A gentleman once observed, that if he was obliged to accept a title, it
would be that of knighthood, as the infamy of it would not descend on his
family.

60. A country gentleman, on hearing that several persons were punished for
selling the Rights of Man, protessed, that he thought no punishment too great
for those, who dared to SELL the Rights of Man.

61. There is no bayonet so long as to reach opinion.

62. A modern writer say, "I shall never believe that men were born for
slavery, until I see kings produced with combs on their heads, like (...) to
strut and crow; and men with bunches on their backs, like camels, to denote
their capacity to carry burdens."

63. A countryman was lately seen loitering all the forenoon about Somerset
Place; a gentleman asked him his business; he said he had come up from
Yorkshire on purpose to see Mr. Dundas; that he himself, with great labor,
gained L. 50 a year, and he was desirous to see a man, who, from his merits and
labor, got from the nation above L. 30,000 a year. The gentleman told him,
that Mr. Dundas had, for a week past, been amusing himself at his country seat
at Wimbleton; but, says he, if you wish to see a man who gets a great deal
more, and does still less than Mr. Dundas, go to St. James's, and you will see
the King. The Yorkshireman answered, "The King is more than a man: he is God's
vicegerent it is our duty to give him a million a year, and it is his Majesty's
duty to receive it."

64. Mr. Forbes, in the Irish House of Commons, observed, in speaking of the
absentees, that he should have little objection to them as birds of passage, if
they did not prove to be birds of prey.

65. It was observed by Mr. Courtney, in the House of Commons, that "the Devil
was first Master General of the Ordnance."

66. We are apt to speak of the happiness of living under a mild government, as
if it were like the happiness of living under an indulgent climate: and when we
thank God for it, we rank it with the blessings of the air and of the soil;
whereas, we ought to thank God for the wisdom and virtue of living under a good
government: for a good government is the first of national duties.

ENGLISH LAWS.
67. A specimen of the perfection, wisdom, consistency, equality and
impartiality of the English Law.

"The common law is the absolute perfection of human reason; for nothing that
is contrary to reason is consonant with law."

"The act of law never does wrong."

COKE. I. Clergymen and peers are not punishable for crimes, for which severe
punishments are inflicted on all others; this is the case in all felonies
having what is called benefit of clergy.

II. Persons tried for felony are not allowed a copy of the indictments against
them, nor even to see the indictments. They are not permitted to have council
to argue their cases, even though they should be enabled to see them; yet the
most learned council are employed against them.

III. In cases at the suit of the Crown, the servant of the Crown names special
jurors.

IV. If the crown gains, the special jurors are allowed each two guineas, if it
loses, only one guinea.

V. A man who picks my pocket of an handkerchief shall be hanged; while another
who takes away an innocent man's life by perjury, shall be put upon the pillory.

VI. If a man owes ten pounds, he may be imprisoned for life; if he makes an
unnatural assault on another, he may be imprisoned for perhaps six months.

VII. It is the same crime to murder the king, or to plunge the country in a
civil war, as to coin a sixpence. To plunge the country in an unnecessary
foreign war is no crime whatever.

VIII. It is equally capital to set fire to a hayrick, and to burn a populous
town.

IX. To write a letter to a man, threatening to burn his house, is a capital
crime; -- to plunge a knife in another's bosom, where death does not ensue, is
(except in some particular circumstances) a misdemeanor punishable by fine and
imprisonment.

X. To burn a house, of which the criminal is a tenant at will, is capital; but
if he has a lease, it is only a misdemeanor.

XI. To wound cattle is a capital crime -- to wound a man only a misdemeanor.

XII. A comedian who performs in a theater royal is a reputable person; but if
the same man plays the same characters in a theater which wants the stamp of
Royalty, he is a rogue and a vagabond.

XIII. It is high treason to have a connection with the king's eldest daughter;
but a man may have a dozen children by each of the other daughters of the king
without committing any crime whatever.

XIV. "Almost in every case, the law for the king is not the law for the
subject," Wood's Institutes, page 21.

XV. A poor man is deprived of the means of recovering his right from a rich
man, on account of the expense of the law. -- For, if he should be able to
borrow 40 l. or 50 l. to carry on his action for 10 l. due to him by his rich
neighbor, and should by means of that money, procure a verdict of his country,
for his debt, the rich man can, by writs of error, arrests of judgment, bills
in chancery, etc. so harass the poor plaintiff, that he shall in the end be
obliged to give up, with the loss of perhaps ten times his debt.

XVI. The expenses of an action for two pounds are the same as for two thousand.

XVII. A gentleman of large property may hunt on the ground of a man of small
property; while the man of small property may not hunt on his own ground.

XVIII. Peers and Members of Parliament cannot be arrested for debt, but their
creditors may.

XIX. Peers and Members of Parliament pay no postage.

XX. Although every person in the kingdom pays taxes, a very small proportion
of the people elect representatives: yet every man is bound to obey the law,
from the fiction, that it is made either by himself or his representatives.

XXI. Every man is bound to know all the laws; although it will take fifteen
guineas to purchase them, and a professional education to understand them.

XXII. If a man is tried at the quarter sessions, for a petty assault, it will
cost him more if he is acquitted than if he shall be convicted.

XXIII. If a man's wife is unfaithful to him, he cannot procure a divorce,
unless he can afford to pay 3 or 400 l.

XXIV. A man who cries up king and constitution or church and state, or burns
Tom Pain in effigy, may with impunity create as great riots as he pleases; but
if a person attempts to show, by cool reasoning, that there are faults in the
constitution, he shall be imprisoned for years, and put on the pillory.

XXV. Monopolies are established in favor of towns and rich trading companies,
whereby all other persons are excluded from the natural right of exercising
their labor to the best advantage.

XXVI. If a man has chosen the profession of a seaman, he may, at a minister's
pleasure, be dragged from his home, his friends, his family and his country,
and devoted to slavery during his life; and if he endeavors to regain his
freedom, he shall be hanged.

XXVII. The law gives a man's eldest son all his estate, and leaves the rest of
his children beggars.

XXVIII. If, by industry, I make my land worth ten times its former value, I
must pay ten times as much as I did, to the priest.

XXIX. The king pays no costs.

XXX. The poor man is hanged for taking a loaf from a baker's shop to satisfy
the cravings of nature -- the baker who cheats a whole parish is fined a few
shillings -- and the great man, who plunders the nation of thousands, goes
unpunished.

68. The following is the progressive state of the taxes of England, from the
time of William the Conqueror, taken from Sir John Sinclair's History of the
Revenue: -- Annual amount of taxes levied by William the Conqueror, beginning
in the year 1066, L. 400,000 Annual amount, 1166, 200,000 Ditto, 1266, 150,000
Ditto, 1366, 130,000 Ditto, 1466, 100,000 Ditto, 1566, 500,000 Ditto, 1666,
1,800,000 Ditto, 1791, 17,000;000

EPIGRAMS, etc.
69. On the present war.
A glorious war, John Bull, where the whole gain
Is grinning honor, for the thousands slain.
"'It Is false," say our allies, "for John shall get
"One hundred millions sterling -- more in debt."
70. Epigram written by an Austrian after the affair of Lincelles.
With such example in our sight
How can we go astray;
The English teach us how to fight,
The Dutch to run away.
KINGS, WAR, PEACE, etc.
71. Kings' titles commonly begin by force,
Which time wears off and mellows into right;
And power, which in one age is tyranny,
Is softened in the next to true succession. DRYDEN.
72. From force the noblest title springs;
I hold by force which first made kings. SAME.
73. O! the sweet charms of independent sway!
Princes whose will pretended law restrains.
Are only royal slaves, and rule in chains.
But he is a king who triumphs, free from law,
Like the fierce monarchs who the desert awe;
Who uncontrol'd range the wide mountain over,
And shake the forest with their dreadful roar;
Whose haughty nod the trembling herd obey,
Nor are they subjects only but their prey. BLACKMORE.
74. They err who count it glorious to subdue
Large countries, and in field great battles win;
Great cities by assault -- what do these worthies,
But rob and spoil, burn, slaughter and enslave
Peaceable nations, neighboring or remote,
Made captive, yet deserving freedom more
Than those their conquerors, who leave behind
Nothing but ruin, wheresoe'er they rove,
And all the flourishing works of peace destroy;
Then swell with pride, and must be titled gods,
Great benefactors of mankind, deliverers;
Worshipped with temples, priests and sacrifice;
Till conqueror Death discovers them scarce men. MILTON.
75. Governments from heaven might first appear.
But governors came from the Lord knows where. God sends meat, but the devil
sends cooks.
DEFOE'S JURE DIVINO.
76. I know no meaner, abject, monstrous thing,
Than an exalted devil, made a king. SAME.
77. Perish those poets, and be damned the song,
Which with this nonsense charmed the world so long --
That he who does no right, can do no wrong. SAME.
78. Divine commission knew no class of things;
Despotic governments are self-made things;
'Twas all usurped 'twas all tyrannic power,
Which made great families the small devour:
The first wild huntsman beasts less wild pursued,
But quickly for a kingdom left the wood;
He formed the first banditti of the age,
And taught the men as well as beasts to engage:
Thus captains they commenced, and then grew kings;
And tyrants in the consequence of things:
For lawless power, by lawless power they toiled,
And mankind soon with mankind they embroiled;
Till he grew king that first subdued the rest,
As he that robbed the most could rule the best. SAME.
79. Unbounded power and height of greatness give
To kings that luster which we think divine.
The wise who know them, know they are but men;
Nay, often weak ones too, the crowd, indeed,
Who kneel before the image, not the God,
Worship the deity their hands have made. ROW.
80. He Is in possession; so diseases are:
Should not a lingering fever be removed
Because it long has raged within my blood?
Do I rebel when I would thrust it out!
What! shall I think the world was made for one,
That men were born for kings, as beasts for men,
Not for protection, but to be devoured?
Mark those that dote on arbitrary power,
And you shall find them either hot-brained youth
Or needy bankrupts, servile in their greatness
And slaves to some, to lord it over the rest.
O! baseness! to support a tyrant throne,
And crush your freeborn brethren of the world. DRYDEN.
81. Who conquers wears by brutal strength the prize,
But it is a glorious work to civilize. TICKELL.
82. If the successful troubles of mankind,
With laurel crowned, so great applause do find,
Shall the vexed worldless honor yield to those
That stop their progress and their rage expose
Next to that power which does the ocean awe,
Is to set bounds and give to ambition law. WALLER.
83. O! stretch thy reign fair peace from shore to shore,
Till conquest cease, and slavery be no more:
Till the freed Indians, in their native groves,
Reap their own fruits, and woo their sable loves;
Peru once more a race of kings behold,
And other Mexicos be roof'd with gold.
Exiled by thee from Earth to deepest Hell,
In brazen bonds shall barbarous Discord dwell;
Gigantic Pride, pale Terror, gloomy Care,
And mad Ambition shall attend her there:
There purple Vengeance, bathed in gore, retires,
Her weapons blunted and extinct her fires;
Here hateful Envy her own snakes shall feel,
And Persecution mourn her broken wheel;
There Faction roars, Rebellion bites her chain,
And gasping furies thirst for blood in vain. POPE.
84. What have the people done, the sheep of princes,
That they should perish for the shepherds' fault?
They bring their yearly wool to clothe their owners,
And yet when beared themselves are culled for slaughter. DRYDEN.
85. Titles and right 's an empty, formal word,
And all the jus divinum's in the sword;
The crown's a hieroglyphic to the steel,
Subjects may think of that, but this they feel.
It Is force supports the high tyrannic jest,
And men obey, because they cannot resist;
So heaven itself, as learned men have said,
Would have no subjects, if the devil were dead. JURE DIVINO.
86. They that resolve their liberty to lose,
Heaven is too just that freedom to refuse;
But lets them have the slavery which they choose. SAME.
STATESMEN.
87. Statesmen are always sick of one disease,
And a good pension gives them present ease.
Good patriots at court abuses rail,
And all the nation's grievances bewail:
But when the sovereign balsam's once applied
The zealot never fails to change his side;
And when he must the golden key resign,
The railing spirit comes about again. TRUE BORN ENGLISHMAN.
LAW.
88. Law bears the name but money has the power,
The cause is bad whenever the client's poor:
Those strict lived men that seem above the world,
Are often too modest to resist our gold.
So judgment, like our other wares, is sold:
And the grave Knight that nods upon the laws,
Waked by a fee, hems and approves the cause. DRYDEN.
PEDIGREE.
89. It was a question, whether he
Or's horse were of a family
More worshipful, till antiquaries
(After they had poured out almost their eyes)
Did very learnedly decide
The business on the horse's side;
And proved not only horse but cows,
Nay pigs, were of the elder house;
For beasts, when man was but a piece
Of earth himself, did the earth possess. HUDIERAS.
ODE to the DRUM.
I hate that drum's discordant sound,
Parading round, and round, and round;
To thoughtless youth it pleasure yields,
And lures from cities and from fields;
To sell their liberty for chains,
Of tawdry lace, and glittering arms,
And when ambition's voice commands,
To march and fight, and fall in foreign lands.
I hate that drum's discordant sound,
Parading round, and round, and round;
To me it talks of ravaged plains,
And burning towns and ruined swains,
And mangled limbs, and dying groans,
And widows' tears, and orphans' moans,
And all that misery's hand bestows,
To swell the catalogue of human woes*
A TRIBUTE TO THE SWINISH MULTITUDE: BEING A CHOICE COLLECTION OF PATRIOTIC
SONGS.

COLLECTED BY THE CELEBRATED R. THOMSON.

TO THE PUBLIC, ALIAS THE "SWINISH MULTITUDE."
O YE factious, seditious, and discontented crew! will you never believe that
you are happy, when no more than a bare belief is requisite to make you so? --
Infatuated mortals! are you determined, like Lovegold, to " feel, feel, feel,
and touch, touch, touch," before you will allow your happiness to be real?
Dreadful obstinacy! how unacquainted are you with the wonder-working powers of
imagination! -- Can you not believe that your hunger and thirst are gratified,
unless you eat and drink? Can you not believe that you are clothed and warm,
unless you are covered from the inclemency of the season? -- O what political
unbelief is this? -- To what then must your wise legislators have recourse?
They have bawled to you till their lungs are jaded; they have written to you
till words are exhausted, and ye still obstinately continue to be unhappy.
What! will you not believe the King himself, and all the Royal Family? Not
believe the Prime Minister, the Privy Council, and all the Bishops! the Judges,
Counselors, and Lawyers! the Borough-Mongers, the Placemen, and all the
Pensioners! the Dukes and the Earls, and Marquisses, the Barons, the Knights,
the Lords in Waiting of the Bedchamber, of the Stole, and of the Golden Stick!
the Commanders by Sea and Land; the Commissioners and Officers of all the Great
Houses! the Magistrates and Justices, the Lord Mayor of London, the Archbishop
of Canterbury, and Mrs. Jordan, the Duke of Brunswick, the Duke of Richmond,
and all the Vestrymen, and Parish Officers!! -- Deluded multitude! here is a
collection of the happiest creatures in the world, united together to persuade
you that you are extremely happy, and yet you give no credit to what they may
either say or swear! O shocking stupidity! they will then cure you of your
Malady, by a different process; the Tower shall be furnished with solid
argument, a Military system of Animal Magnetism shall be adopted -- you shall
be thrown into a Crisis, and kept there till you confess you are exceedingly
happy! -- Think, besotted creatures! how much money is now expending to
persuade you that you are happy! on Fortifications, on Proclamations, on
Newspapers, at Taverns and Committees, as much as would liberate all the
Insorvent Debtors in the four counties! Think, think, I say, and be persuaded
you are happy, for you must pay all the Reckoning!

Again, how will you be able to resist the irrefutable logic of Musqueiry and
Artillery? or how will you be able to deny you are HAPPY, when the sword is
pointed to your breast? recollect how successfully Mahomet argued this way, and
believe you are happy in this world, lest they silence your murmurs, by sending
you into another, to search for happiness! but alas you are a banditti of
incorrigible Heretics; I know you will not believe you are happy, although the
Holiest Man in Canterbury were to declare it to you on his marrow-bones!

But let me, for a few moments, direct your attention to the great source of
all your happiness, to the most glorious and happy Constitution! -- Take a view
of each well constructed system in each department of government; and you may
be astonished at the scene thrown open before you! The whole is a Paradise of
Delights!

Look into the STATE! -- It Is true it has corruptions and defects, as poor
Edmund says, and you must peep at them with due caution -- But see your
Liberties defended, your property protected, by men of the most unsullied
virtue. The great Treasury of the Nation, which is accumulated from your hard
labor and industry, is entrusted to integrity itself; and distributed with the
most scrupulous exactness, on the pure principles of the RIGHTS OF MAN. The
most favorite Persioners cannot finger a guinea till he has earnt it; nor has
the most exalted man in office a single shilling more than his merit entitles
him to. What is L.4000 per anmum to one great man, for introducing another
great man to kiss a Third Great Man's Hand? -- it is cheap as dirt. Nay it is
worth half the money to see them at work! -- in time of war you pay double
taxes, and is it not necessary the expenses of war should be defrayed? -- In
time of peace you also pay double taxes, to defray the expenses of Peace. Ye
senseless idiots! These, and such like things, constitute the chief glory of
the State!!

Look again into the Law; the scene still brighters before you! Englishmen! you
have the cheapest market for Justice in the whole universe! how happily
adjusted are the laws between debtor and creditor! no unnecessary delay attends
the action; no anxiety of mind between the contending parties; no neglect of
business; so extravagant expenses; -- O! what a glorious purchase of parchment
and stamps do you make here! with what composure do you look forward from term
to term! in the hands of Mercy and Justice, what can you fear! nothing in the
final decision of the court, to ruffle your spirits, or break the repose of
your family! like fat oysters ye are gently opened and separated, that the
happy stuff, which lies between, may be applied to enrich the glorious
Constitution.

And now take a view of the Church! and see the angelical life of the Holy
Priesthood; here is Paradise Regained! -- by divine permission, here is heaven
itself let down upon earth! an assemblage of all the graces and virtues which
dignify and adorn human nature -- how equally proportioned is the hire to the
labourer! No lazy Bishops, no sinecure places, no dissipated Priests, no
starving Curates -- O no, no! -- Justice, temperance, truth, and brotherly
love, animate and pervade the whole; here is a scourge for the wickedness of
men in high life, and a consolation for the miscries of the poor -- here is
religion taught by the best masters with able assistants, on the most
reasonable terms! a little entrance money only is required; marrying,
christening, confirming, visiting and burying, almost for an old song; and
tithes exactly according to circumstances! Thrice happy and glorious
Constitution!!! we are lost in the contemplation of thy manifold blessings.

Hear then, ye "SWINISH MULTITUDE!" the Statesmen at Whitehall, the Judges on
the Bench, all the Parish Officers in the nation, their dependants and
expectants, proclaim aloud that ye are HAPPY! and who so competent to judge of
your happiness? Beware of that fatal error of judging for yourselves. What!
think for yourselves! O let me entreat, nay let me insist upon it, that you
never think of thinking for yourselves; for the more you think, the more you
will differ from these wise and happy men in your way of thinking: Think also,
how many mild, happy and glorious Constitutions have been ruined by men
thinking for themselves! Let your betters, therefore, think for you; because it
stands to reason, they must think best; and if the phantom should again seize
your brain, and tempt you to conceive you are not happy, you must petition the
happy Constitution to furnish you with some patent engines, pullies and screws,
whereby you may at any time wind up your imagination to their pitch, dance to
their music, and be as happy as themselves. Creed quod habes, et habet, said
Erasmus; with this word of advice I take my leave; without flattering you,
courting your patronage, or saying a single word about the merit of the Songs.

R. THOMSON.

A TRIBUTE, etc. A NEW SONG, To an old Tune -- viz. " God save the king."
GOD save -- "THE RIGHTS OF MAN!"
Give him a heart to scan
Blessings so dear!
Let them be spread around,
Wherever Man is found,
And with the welcome sound,
Ravish his ear!
See, from the universe,
Darkness and clouds disperse;
Mankind awake!
Reason and Truth appear,
Freedom advances near,
Monarchs with terror hear --
See how they quake.
Sore have we felt the stroke;
Long have we borne the yoke;
Sluggish and tame:
But now the Lion roars,
And a loud note he pours;
Spreading from distant shores,
LIBERTY'S flame!
Let us with France agree,
And bid the WORLD BE FREE --
Leading the way.
Let Tyrants all conspire;
Fearless of sword and fire,
FREEDOM shall never retire,
FREEDOM shall sway!
Godlike, and great the strife,
Life will indeed be life,
When we prevail:
Death in so just a cause,
Crowns us with loud applause,
And from tyrannic laws,
Bids us -- ALL HAIL!
Over the Germanic powers,
Big indignation low'rs,
Ready to fall! This Song was composed before the Duke of Brunswick ran away.

Let the rude savage host,
In their long numbers boast,
Freedom's almighty trust,
Laughs at them all.
FAME! Let thy trumpet sound,
Tell all the world around,
Tell each degree!
Tell Ribands, Crowns, and Stars,
Kings, Traitors, Troops and Wars,
Plans, Councils, Plots and Jars,
FRENCHMEN are FREE!!
God save -- "THE RIGHTS OF MAN!"
Give him a heart to scan
Blessings so dear!
Let them be spread around,
Wherever Man is found,
And with a welcome sound
Ravish his ear!
SONG. BURKE's ADDRESS TO THE "SWINISH MULTITUDE."
Tune " Derrydown, down," etc.
YE vile SWINISH herd, in the sty of taxation,
What would ye be after -- disturbing the nation?
Give over your grunting -- be off -- to your sty!
Nor dare to look out, if a King passes by.
Get ye down, down -- down, keep ye down!
Do you know what a king is? By Patrick I Will tell ye;
He has power in his pocket to buy you and sell you;
To make you his soldiers, or keep you at work;
To hang you, and cure you, for ham or salt pork!
Get ye down!
Do you think that a KING is no more than a man?
Ye brutish, ye swinish, irrational clan!
I swear by his office, his right is divine,
To flog you, and feed you, and treat you like swine!
Get ye down!
To be sure, I have said -- but I spoke it abrupt --
That "the state is defective, and also corrupt:"
Yet, remember I told you with caution to peep,
For swine at a distance we prudently keep --
Get ye down!
Now the church and that state, to keep each other warm,
Are married together. And where is the harm?
How healthy and wealthy are husband and wife!
But swine are excluded the conjugal life --
Get ye down!
The state, it is true, has grown fat upon SWINE,
The church's weak stomach on TYTHE-PIG can dine;
But neither you know, as they roast by the fire,
Have a right to find fault with the cooks, or enquire,
Get ye down!
"What use do we make of your money?" you say;
Why, the first law of nature: -- We take our own pay --
And next on our friends a few pensions bestow,
And to you we apply when our treasure runs low.
Get ye down!
Consider our boroughs, ye grumbling swine!
At corruption and taxes, and never repine:
If we only proclaim, "YE ARE HAPPY!" -- They say,
" We ARE happy!" -- Believe and be happy as they!
Get ye down!
What know ye of Commons, of Kings, or of Lords,
But what the dim light of Taxation affords?
Be contented with that, and no more of your rout:
Or a now proclamation shall muzzle your spout!
Get ye down!
And now for the SUN -- or the LIGHT of the Day:
"It does not belong to a PIT," you will say --
I tell you be silent and hush all your jars,
Or he will charge you a farthing a piece for the Stars.
Get ye down!
Here Is myself, and his darkness, and Harry Dund-ass;
Scotch, English and Irish, with fronts made of brass;
A cord plated threefold will stand a good pull,
Against Sawney, and Patrick and old Johnny Bull!
Get ye down!
To conclude, then, no more about Man and his Rights,
Tom Pain, and a rabble of Liberty-lights;
That you are but our "SWINE," if ye ever forget,
We'll throw you alive to the HORRIBLE PIT!
Get ye down, down -- down, keep ye down!
SONG. [PART SECOND] The "SWINISH MULTITUDE's" REPLY TO BURKE's ADDRESS.
APOSTATE! give over your eloquence pray!
No more on the subject of Monarchy say;
Exalted in office, and fed by the Swine --
If we should desert you, you will catch a decline.
Tumble down, down -- down, come ye down!
But we cannot well brook to be called the Swine,
Let Man have his Rights, and the epithet's thine;
Apostate thou art -- and allured by the hire,
Return like a sow that was washed -- to the mire.
Tumble down, etc.
Our thanks we return -- you may think it a joke,
For the blessed enquiry your writings provoke;
We thank you for thwarting your own bad design;
The bacon and pork are restored to the swine.
Tumble down, etc.
No longer, like asses we tamely submit,
And tremble like fiends at the mouth of a Pit; --
You are but our servants, our delegate powers,
If we speak but the word, you must fade, and like flowers,
Tumble down, etc.
Too long, it is true, we resembled the swine,
And stood in the market all passive as kine;
But no longer the grunting of swine ye shall hear,
The voice of the Lion, now pierces your ear.
Tumble down, etc.
Apostate beware, and with caution advance;
The ground you are treading is fertile as France;
If you once overheat and inflame the Old Bull,
He Will toss the rich dogs from their soft packs of wool.
Tumble down, etc.
No longer, oppressor, insult the oppressed;
Our grievances may and they shall be redrest;
In the fable your picture -- behold in that glass --
"The Lion was roused by the heel of an ass!"
Tumble down, etc.
If the best Constitution that ever was known;
And the best of all monarchs is now on the throne;
If his peers, and his statesmen, and laws are the best,
They can be no worse -- to be brought to the test.
Tumble down, etc.
No longer thou sophist, attempt to deceive,
To plunder, and blind us, and laugh in your sleeve;
Apostate, thy payment, for pimping -- depends
On those you're insulting -- and with them it ends.
Tumble down, etc.
The faults of the people you freely make known;
Whilst the mantle of charity covers the throne;
But in France it is a doctrine the people know well,
That kings are as apt, as the mob, to rebel --
And come down, etc.
Proclamations we dread not -- but rather desire,
They say to the sleepers -- "Arise and Enquire!"
For the good of the nation no more do we seek,
Than a New Proclamation, at least once a week.
Tumble down, etc.
The power of enquiry no despot can bind,
For millions already have freedom of mind;
Let Reason be heard, and let Reason go round,
And so on the globe not a tyrant is found.
Tumbled down, down -- down, tumbled down!
SONG. SCOTCH NICK; OR OLD HARRY's PLAIN CONFESSION.
Tune -- " Vauxhall Watch."
FAREWELL to Scotland's barren ground;
A better country I have found,
Where wealth and customers abound,
For "Wha wants me?"
Was ever such a lucky Scot!
So snug a birth -- so rich a lot!
I Will fell the good things I have got,
Crying, "Wha wants me?"
No guilty thoughts disturb my mind,
I left my conscience safe behind!
And all my happiness I find,
In "Wha wants me?"
You envious Scotchmen all, behold!
You say I have my country sold;
Then see what heaps of shining gold,
For, "Wha wants me?"
The Test Act might have been repealed,
And all your wide divisions healed,
Had you but properly appealed
To "Wha wants me?"
To any measure I Will agree --
Let tyrants rule, or men be free;
Let this my happy freedom be,
Crying, "Wha wants me?"
If Pain were chose to rule the land,
And he should take me by the hand;
I would submit to his command,
Crying, "Wha wants me?"
Then once for all, I let you know,
Let kings or people rule below;
If I Am in office, round I Will go,
Crying, "Wha wants me?"
SONG
Tune -- " Sweet Willy O!"
THE pride of the nation is Sweet Willy O!
The pride of the nation is Sweet Willy O!
The people around
His virtue resound,
So great is the fame of the Sweet Willy O!
He would be a statesman, the deep Willy O!
He would be a statesman, the deep Willy O!
From our low abyss
To raise us to bliss,
Was the ambition of Sweet Willy O!
The king is delighted with Sweet Willy O!
The king is delighted with Sweet Willy O!
His WISHES to crown
He taxes us down,
G. R. is before us wherever we go!
The poor are enraptured with dear Billy O!
The poor are enraptured with dear Billy O!
If taxes are high,
And burdened they cry,
They find their relief in the PIT -- Billy O!
How free are the stars! O the kind Billy O!
Yet how tempting the sight to a PIT -- Billy O!
Though great the amount,
He takes no account,
Because computation would puzzle him so!
The SUN is shut up in a PIT -- Billy O!
The Ruler of Day in a PIT -- Billy O!
To buy Light and Air,
To the PIT we repair,
Our blessings are all in the PIT -- Billy O!
Long life, light, and health to the Sweet Billy O!
Thy foes let a darkness surround Billy O!
How should we get bread,
If Willy was dead!
Taxation would fall in thy PIT -- Billy O!
To see him interred in the PIT -- Willy O!
To see him interred in the PIT -- Willy O!
How would your thoughts run
Upon the free SUN!
When darkness encloses the PIT, BILLY O!
The staircase as dark as the Pit -- Willy O!
Where scarce the right step we can hit, Billy O!
Once more the broad day
Would clearly display,
And chase thy black relic away, Billy O!
An end to our darkness and Pit -- Billy O!
Our sun will arise when you set, Billy O!
The houses long blind,
Their eyes would soon find,
And shed a sweet tear on thy Pit, Billy O!
SONG FRENCH LIBERTY.
Tune " In the Garb of old Gaul."
WHEN first the great Senate of Frenchmen agreed,
From Corruption and Bondage -- to die or be freed --
By troops all surrounded -- defenseless -- unarmed,
Composed and collected, they sat unalarm'd!
CHORUS.
Such was their love of Liberty -- their ardour to be free,
And with the Gallic Heroes, let surrounding powers agree,
The tidings roll
From pole to pole,
Till Freedom crowns the day,
And round the Globe to all the race,
Her banners display --
Undaunted and firm as the Senate of Rome,
Unappall'd in their councils -- before them their doom --
"We'll die or be free!" -- to the people they cry!
"We'll die or be free!" -- Hark the people reply!
Such was their love for Liberty, etc.
Majestic they rose in a warlike array,
And drove from their stations the tyrants away;
The heads of the nation, confounded to see --
Surrendered, and glad to surrender or flee.
Such was their love of Liberty, etc
In vain all the crowns against the people combine,
The whole human race are now forming the line,
While Frenchmen the first in the field lead the way,
And call to the nations around, "Come away!"
Such is their love of Liberty, etc.
In battle triumphant see Freedom appear!
Over heaps of the dead -- rushing on with the spear!
Inspired with ambition a country to save,
And give the invaders a part of their grave.
Such was their love of Liberty, etc.
Exulting the news! let the trumpet of Fame,
Aloud to the Slave, and the Despot proclaim;
They boasted to slaughter, to waste, and reduce;
But soon Gallic power made them sue for a truce.
Such was their love of Liberty, etc.
Unshaken and firm -- let the Despots unite,
Let the Statesmen and Placemen get hirelings to write,
While armies from conquest to conquest pursue,
THE CAUSE OF THE PEOPLE shall flourish anew!
Such is their love of Liberty, etc.
Great Heroes of Freedom; when ages are gone,
When Kings are forgotten, and Tyrants unknown,
Your fame will be echoed from shore unto shore,
Till Nations, and People, and Time are no more.
CHORUS
Such is our love of Liberty -- our ardour to be free,
And with the Gallic Heroes let surrounding powers agree;
The tidings roll,
From pole to pole,
Till freedom crowns the day;
And round the Globe, to all the race
Her banners display! --
SONG. BURKE's LAMENTATION FOR THE LOST AGE OF CHIVALRY.
THE KEY.
SURELY (says he, speaking of the last Queen of France) never LIGHTED ON THIS
ORB, which she hardly seemed to TOUCH, a more delightful VISION! I saw her JUST
ABOVE THE HORISON, decorating and chearing the elevated sphere she just began
to move in -- glittering like the MORNING STAR! full of life and splendour, and
joy. I thought ten thousand swords must have leaped from their scabbards to
avenge (What!) even a LOOK that threatened her with an insult!!! -- But the Age
of Chivalry is gone! The GLORY of Europe is extinguished forever!!!

-- BURKE on the French Revolution, page 112. SURELY, Reader, if you possess
one grain of common sense, you will say that either this passage is not quoted
from BURKE'S celebrated Defense of Royalty, or that the author took leave of
his senses when he wrote it. -- I have looked into his book three times, that I
might not mistake, and I am willing to make affidavit before our sovereign lord
the king, that you may find it in page 112.

PLAINTIVE.
I SAW, but O I surely dreamed!
A vision dropped from heaven (it seemed);
The world a brighter luster wore,
Than ever Man beheld before.
Philosophers could not declare
Which power did most attraction share;
If to the vision, earth arose,
Or she descended -- no one knows.
I saw the angel skip around,
Her heavenly feet scarce touched the ground;
She lighted on a splendid throne,
The glory then of Europe shone.
Ten thousand Dons and Cavaliers
Around her stood with swords and spears,
To be her slaves was all they sought,
Thus was "the grace of life unbought."
Methought -- O! how my brains must reel!
Ten thousand swords of magic steel,
Would leap their scabbards to chastise
Those who had not elastic eyes!
But, O! how Time's revolving glass
Brings unexpected things to pass!
The Queen is driven from her throne,
The Age of Chivalry is gone!
Where are the Quixottes now, and where
The Sanchos to defend the fair? --
The Dulcinea's left to moan
-- The Age of Chivalry is gone!
Fly, Quixotte, through the air, like wind,
And Sancho, too, get up behind!
Alas! no Sancho here, nor Don,
-- The Age of Chivalry is gone!
O peerless Queen! thou art bereft
Of all thy friends, and with me left;
With WOEFUL FACES thus we moan,
-- The Age of Chivalry is gone.
Enchanters! O restore the knights,
That can so well assert her rights!
Alas! Enchanters are unknown!
-- The Age of Chivalry is gone!
Ten thousand swords why do ye sleep?
Your drousy scabbards quickly leap;
The crew with insult all look on,
-- The Age of Chivalry is gone!
Come kingly butchers, then, advance,
And desolate the plains of France;
Alas! ye move but slowly on!
-- The Age of Chivalry is gone!
Then bring my Rosinante, that I
My prowess in the field may try;
It would reward my toil and pain,
Could I restore the AGE again.
But, ah! -- No more -- I will not go,
REASON appears my potent foe;
It Is reason keeps her from the throne,
-- The Age of Chivalry is gone!
SONG.
Tune " Ye Gods, ye gave to me a Wife."
OUR fathers left a race of Kings,
And we were glad to find them;
O how we loved the pretty things!
And laughed and ran behind them.
We laid our necks beneath their feet,
So humble and so lowly;
And they rode over us as was meet,
Still pleased to see our folly.
But warmly now our hearts incline,
To rule the land without them;
The MOLDY PARCHMENTS we resign,
And from the globe we'll rout 'em.
SONG.
Tune " Chevy Chase."
THEY prosper best who have no king,
To rob them and enthral;
Then let our acclamations ring,
At every tyrant's fall.
To drive the despots from their throne,
And statesmen from their place:
A woeful fighting is begun,
Among the human race.
Now Edmund Burke, a rueful knight,
(Whose tender heart did ach,
To see the people gain their RIGHT)
A solemn vow did make,
That paper -- pen -- and eke ink-horn,
Should put them to the rout;
The child shall bless that is unborn,
The writings he sent out. That is, for the Enquiry they have provoked.

His thoughts with phrase theatric clad,
Were strong to melt the ear;
And metaphoric speech he had
To make his subject clear.
With LOYALTY his bosom glowed,
And as he loved the gold;
A little pension was bestowed,
To make him fight more bold.
The rules of errantry he knew,
And did to France repair;
To bid his peerless Queen, adieu!
And thus addressed the fair:
"Delightful vision! it is meet,
"Thy blessing ere I go!
"I Will soon return, and at thy feet,
"Lay all my conquests low."
She smiled -- When turning quickly round,
He vanished from her sight;
And like a hero took his ground,
Already for the fight --
These tidings came to Thomas Pain,
A man of courage bold;
Who could the "Rights of Man" explain,
And king-craft too unfold.
With heart and head both sound and clear,
The cause he undertook;
And now in battle both appear,
And Book appears to Book.
Loud vaunted Edmund in the field,
Like Quixotte amongst the sheep;
Who thought with such a sword and shield
To end them at a sweep!
The valor of Sir Knight was great,
For in his rear we find;
To cover, if he should retreat,
Were but a FEW inclined.
While Pain (the foe of kings) appears
Majestic on the plain;
The shout of ALL THE WORLD he hears,
And sees them in his train!
With courage did the Knight advance,
Discerning not his foe;
He challenged all the Knights of France,
And aimed the dreadful blow!
He gave them warning to retreat,
And wondered at their stay;
He little thought so soon to meet
Obstruction in his way!
A thousand paces back he ran,
At sight of warlike PAIN;
And soon were seen THE RIGHTS OF MAN,
Triumphant on the plain!
Base-born plebeian, said the Knight;
As he retired with speed;
It is not lawful we should fight,
With men of vulgar breed --
So saving, and all out of breath,
Quick out of sight he steals;
And thought each moment cruel death
Would seize his heavy heels.
These tidings came to George our king,
In Windsor where he lay --
What! what! what news, news! do you (...)
Has Edmund lost the day?
O heavy, heavy, news, he said!
England can witness be,
There Is none can give a Monarch aid,
Of such account as he.
The Courts in black may all be hung,
If they pursue the fight;
Our passing bell will soon be rung,
If men obtain their right.
The victory was soon proclaimed,
And eke the monarch's dread;
Forbidding books all left unnam'd,
Even to be sold or read.
At which the Presses aiming well,
Full charged, they all let fly;
Enough was found the books to sell,
Enough the books to buy.
And now the people all rejoice,
Such tidings heard they never;
They cry aloud with cheerful voice,
THE RIGHTS OF MAN FOREVER!!!
SONG. PAINE's WELCOME TO GREAT BRITAIN.
Tune, " He comes, he comes."
HE comes -- the GREAT REFORMER comes,
Cease, cease your trumpets, cease, cease, your drums;
Those warlike sounds offend the ear,
PEACE and FRIENDSHIP now appear,
Welcome, welcome, welcome, welcome,
Welcome, thou Reformer here.
Prepare, prepare, your songs prepare,
Freedom cheers the brow of care;
The joyful tidings, spread around,
Monarchs tremble at the sound!
Freedom, freedom, freedom, freedom,
RIGHTS OF MAN, AND PAIN RESOUND.
SONG.
Tune, " Highland Laddie."
PROUD Monarchs raised to wear a crow,
Forget the power by which they hold it*
They tread the passive subject down,
And thirst for vengeance when they are told it.
CHORUS.
But, no more with blind submission --
We'll read them over a new commission,
The People's voice
Shall be their choice,
And tread beneath their feet -- oppression.
And men forget that kings of old,
Depending on their free election,
Durst at their peril be so bold,
To rule but as they had direction.
But, no more, etc.
Or, if the king a SOT betrays,
Or, if humane his disposition:
Some minister assumes and sways,
And robs to feed his own ambition.
But, no more, etc.
Thus kings and ministers succeed,
In either still the tyrant reigning;
They suck the poor, and as they feed,
Forbid the sufferers' complaining.
CHORUS.
But, no more with blind submission;
We'll read them over a new commission --
The people's voice
Shall be their choice,
And tread beneath their feel -- oppression.
SONG. WHITEHALL ALARMED! AND A COUNCIL CALLED!!!
Tune, " Let us prepare, etc."
COME let us prepare,
We statesmen that are,
Assembled on this dread occasion;
Let the engines of state,
Before it is too late,
Repel the surrounding invasion.
While people were fools,
We made them our tools,
Our virtue was never suspected;
But now they arise,
And open their eyes!
And all our designs are detected.
It Is not the mere crew,
We have to subdue,
Nor armies nor fleets can assist us:
It Is REASON alone,
Besieges the throne,
And REASON is strong to resist us.
Nor can we by force,
Now alter the course,
INQUIRY and REASON are taking:
By land and at sea,
They cry, TO BE FREE!
The POWERS of the world are shaking.
How proudly in France,
Does Reason advance,
All nations behold it with wonder;
The state and the church
Are left in the LURCH,
And the partnership broken asunder.
Then while we deplore
The traffic no more!
The priests and their shops all forsaken,
Lest our holy ware,
A like fate should share,
Let speedy precautions be taken.
The boroughs in vain
Endeavored to gain,
Even thanks to the king for his kindness;
The people too wise.
Saw through the disguise,
And called it Corruption and Blindness.
No thanks could be due;
The people well knew,
To be told they are HAPPY, if not so;
For quickly they found,
In chains they were bound,
And also could see how they got so.
Then what now remains,
To lock them in chains,
To lead them on tamely in fetters,
How great is the loss!
Its almost a toss
Whether they will submit to their betters.
To darken the mind,
Let the press be confined,
A LAW against reading and speaking:
Such bondage might pass
Among the low class,
And let it be called their own seeking.
And next to secure
Your LOYALTY sure,
Let THINKING be deemed high-treson*
For still after all,
Our system must fall,
Unless we are LORDS of their REASON.
SONG. FRANCE's LAMENTATION ON THE APPROACH OF THE DUKE OF BRUNSWICK.
Tune, " Malbrook."
BREAK out in lamentation,
O Frenchmen for your nation,
A dreadful devastation,
Is now upon the road;
Alas! we may deplore,
Our Freedom soon no more!
The mighty combination,
Begins the desolation,
A frightful declaration,
The Duke has sent abroad.
He Will from his presence spurn us,
Or unto Louis turn us,
Or else he will cut and burn us,
If we refuse his sway;
O! how we quake with fear!
The Duke approaches near!
He thunders and he flashes!
Our castles down he dashes!
And lays our towns in ashes!
As they obstruct his way.
Now on full march to Paris,
O how report does scare us!
They say he will not spare us,
Nor age, nor sex, nor size;
A foe so strong, so nigh,
We cannot fight nor fly,
Alas, we need not strive -- O!
We never can survive -- O!
They Will eat us up alive -- O!
Or make us into pies.
Still nearer see him bearing!
His very lodgings airing,
The cooks are all preparing,
The splendid kingly feasts --
Lo now they seize the glass,
"Vive le Roi," they pass!
The queen no more deploring --
The court again restoring --
The people running roaring,
Are hunted down like beasts!
Did not report almost say as much? did not tyrants desire it? and did not the
ignorant dread it?

[PART SECOND.] DUKE BOBADIL's RETREAT.
WHAT meant our consternation?
'Twas all imagination,
'Twas for his recreation,
The Duke came into France;
He thought we were asleep,
And took a harmless peep;
But when he saw our forces,
Our cannon, foot and horses,
Our stores and wide resources,
He trembled to advance.
Thornville he surrounded,
But how was he confounded
And his proud feelings wounded,
The WOODEN HORSE to see!
His mouth was full of hay,
And to the Duke did say,
"You proud ambitious sinner,
"You never shall come in here,
"Till I eat up my dinner;
"So take yourself away."
But O! the manifesto,
Affords a pretty jest, O;
Just like the Juggler's presto,
It raised a short surprise;
Alas! duke Brobdignag,
Where is your empty bag,
Your military swaggers,
Your swords, and fires, and daggers?
Ye crew of silly beggars,
Go home and slaughter (...).
Now see the Duke retreating,
His pulse quick time in beating,
No thought he has of eating,
Or drinking, at Parie;
The sumptuous feast is done,
The court broke up and gone!
And Bobadil returning,
Chop-fall'n and in mourning,
With shame and anger burning,
Nor eat, nor fight could he!
Alas! in deep dejection,
He takes a new direction,
His heels are his protection,
And eke the Berlin train
And all the EMIGRANTS,
And Princes, Cowards and Cants,
Have changed the war to races,
With wry and ghastly faces,
Pursue the wild-goose chases,
With hunger, shame and pain.
Now France with freedom ringing,
And songs of triumph singing,
The tyrants noses ringing,
All in a doleful plight;
The RIGHTS OF MAN and France!
And Bobadil's dear dance!!
When he turned out his best toes,
And ceased his Manifestoes,
No longer to molest us,
He saved himself by flight.
SONG
Tune, " Hearts of Oak."
YE Britons no longer inactive remain,
Attend to the dictates of Reason and Pain;
It Is to Freedom they call you, no longer delay,
Your rights are at stake -- and are lost it you stay.
CHORUS.
Hark! the trumpet of Fame bids you rouse and oppose,
The tyrants unfiting
Whilst Frenchmen are fighting,
And Freedom inviting -- to conquer your foes.
Shall men as the heads of the nation preside,
Who cannot the test of inquiry abide?
Let them boast of their virtues and plead for the state,
So felons remonstrate, in view of their fate.
Hark, the trumpet of Fame, etc.
They flatter and fawn, and their friendship express,
To blind, while they plunder, and roll in excess;
And a pension bestow, for the Praises of those,
Who would, if not bribed, their corruptions expose.
Hark, the trumpet of Fame, etc.
While Apostates and Tyrants so boldly agree,
Let the powers of our reason, enlightened and free,
Unappall'd at their frowns -- with the object in view,
Through all its dark turnings, oppression pursue.
CHORUS
Hark, the trumpet of Fame, bids you rouse and oppose,
The tyrants uniting,
While Frenchmen are fighting,
And Freedom inviting -- to conquer your foes.
SONG. THE RIGHTS OF MAN. BY HIS LORDSHIP.
THE Rights of Man I will maintain,
Upon the old foundation;
And those who venture to complain,
Shall hear a proclamation.
CHORUS.
For kings and lords, the Rights of Man
Were first of all intended;
And since the reign of kings began,
The Rights of Man are ended.
Now take me right, as we proceed,
It Is needful I should mention,
I am a son of noble breed,
And hold a little pension.
For kings and lords, etc.
Kings have a right divine to be
Your Lords, and Gods, and masters;
And commons, peers, and priests agree,
To laugh at your disasters.
For kings and lords, etc.
You have a right to all the toil,
And while it never relaxes,
We eat the dainties of the soil,
And feed you well with taxes.
For kings and lords, etc.
You have a right to chain your tongue,
When sore you feel oppression;
Nor check nor call our measures wrong,
So wide is our commission.
For kings and lords, etc.
You have a right to live and breathe,
And answer your creation;
But mark -- your fathers did bequeath,
To us -- to rule the nation.
For kings and lords, etc.
You have a right to wear your rags,
And pay your debts in limbo,
While we, like Judas, keep your bags,
And boldly after him go.
For kings and lords, etc.
In fine, the nation is our own;
And let me further tell you,
The powerful right is in the throne,
By which we buy and sell you.
CHORUS.
For kings and lords, the Rights of Man
Were first of all intended;
And since the reign of kings began,
The Rights of Man are ended.
SONG. The MARSEILLES MARCH. SUNG by the MARSEILLOIS going to BATTLE, BY
GENERAL KELLELMAN'S ARMY, AND AT THE DIFFERENT THEATERS IN PARIS
YE sons of France, awake to glory,
Hark! hark! what myriads bid you rise!
Your children, wives, and grandsires hoary,
Behold their tears, and hear their cries!
Shall hateful tyrants, mischief breeding,
With hireling hosts, a ruffian band,
Affright and desolate the land,
While Peace and Liberty lie bleeding!
CHORUS.
To arms, to arms, ye brave!
The avenging sword unsheath,
March on, march on, all hearts resolved
On victory or death!
Now, now the dangerous storm is rolling,
Which treacherous kings, confederate, raise;
The dogs of war let loose are howling,
And lo! our fields and cities blaze;
And shall we basely view the ruin,
While lawless force, with guilty stride,
Spreads desolation far and wide,
With crimes and blood his hands embruing?
To arms, ye brave, etc.
With luxury and pride surrounded,
The vile insatiate despots dare,
Their thirst of power and gold unbounded,
To mete and vend the light and air;
Like beasts of burden would they load us,
Like gods, would bid their slaves adore;
But man is man -- and who is more?
-- Then shall I they longer lash and goad us?
To arms, ye brave, etc.
O Liberty! can man resign thee,
Once having felt thy generous flame?
Can dungeons, bolts, and bars confine thee,
Or whips thy noble spirit tame?
Too long the world has wept, bewailing
That falsehood's dagger tyrants wield;
But freedom is our sword and shield,
And all their arts are unavailing.
CHORUS.
To arms, to arms, ye brave!
The avenging sword unsheath,
March on, march on, all hearts resolved
On victory or death!
SONG. SUNG BY MR. DIGNUM, AT THE Anniversary of the Revolution of 1688. Held
at the London Tavern, Nov. 1792.
Tune, " The tear that bedews sensibility's shrine."
UNFOLD, Father Time, thy long records unfold,
Of noble achievements, accomplished of old;
When men, by the standard of Liberty led,
Undauntedly conquered, or cheerfully bled:
But now 'midst the triumphs these moments reveal,
Their glories all fade, and their luster turns pale:
While France rises up, and proclaims the decree,
That tears off their chains, and bids millions be free.
As spring to the fields, or as dew to the flowers.
To the earth parched with heat, as the soft dropping showers,
As health to the wretch that lies languid and wan,
Or rest to the weary -- is Freedom to man!
Where Freedom the light of her countenance gives,
There only he triumphs, there on^y he ^ives;
Then seize the glad moment, and hail the decree,
That tears off their chains, and bids millions be free.
Too long had oppression and terror entwined,
Those tyrant-form'd chains that enslaved the free mind;
While dark superstition and nature at strife,
For ages had locked up the fountain of life:
But the demon is fled, the delusion is past,
And reason and virtue have triumphed at last;
Then seize the glad moment, and hail the decree,
That tears off their chains and bids millions be free.
France, we share in the rapture thy bosom that fills,
While the Genius of Liberty bounds over thine hills:
Redundant henceforth may thy purple juice flow,
Prouder wave thy green woods, and thine olive trees grow!
While the hand of philosophy long shall entwine,
Blessed emblem, the laurel, the myrtle and vine;
And heaven through all ages confirms the decree,
That tears off their chains and bids millions be free
A NEW SONG. By T. PAIN, Author of the Rights of Man, etc. THE GREAT REPUBLIC;
Or, The Land of Love and Liberty.
Tune, " Rule Britannia."
HAIL! Great Republic of the world,
The rising empire of the West;
Where famed* Columbus, with a mighty mind inspired,
Gave tortured Europe scenes of rest.
Be thou for ever, for ever great and free,
The Land of Love and Liberty.
Beneath thy spreading mantling vine,
Beside thy flowery groves and springs;
And on thy lofty, thy lofty mountains' brow,
May all thy sons and fair ones sing.
Chorus, etc.
From thee may rudest nations learn,
To prize the cause thy sons began;
From thee may future, may future tyrants know,
That sacred are the Rights of Man.
Chorus, etc.
From thee may hated discord fly,
With all her dark, her gloomy train;
And over thy fertile, thy fertile wide domain,
May everlasting friendship reign.
Chorus, etc.
Of thee may lisping infancy,
The pleasing wondrous story tell;
And patriot sages in venerable mood,
Instruct the world to govern well.
Chorus, etc.
Ye guardian Angels watch around,
From harms protect the new born State;
And all ye friendly, ye friendly nations join,
And thus salute the Child of Fate.
Be thou for ever, for ever great and free
The Land of Love and Liberty.
FINIS.

