SELECT PLAYS: CONTAINING, 1. WILD OATS. By Mr. O'KEEFE. 2. LIONEL and
CLARISSA. By Mr. BICKERSTAFF. 3. LOVE IN A VILLAGE. By the same. 4. THE
SUSPICIOUS HUSBAND. By Dr. HOADLEY.


PHILADELPHIA: PUBLISHED BY MATTHEW CAREY, M, DCC, XCVI.

WILD OATS: OR, THE STROLLING GENTLEMEN. A COMEDY, IN FIVE ACTS, AS PERFORMED
AT THE THEATER ROYAL, Covent Garden.

BY JOHN O'KEEFE, ESQUIRE.

DUBLIN: PRINTED FOR THE BOOKSELLERS. M.DCC.LXCIII.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Sir George Thunder Mr. Quick Rover Mr. Lewis Harry Mr. Holman John Dory Mr.
Wilson Banks Mr. Hill Gammon Mr. Cubit Ephraim Smooth Mr. Munden Sim Mr.
Blanchard Twitch Mr. Rock Lamp Mr. C. Powel Trap Mr. Evatt Zachariah Mr. Rees
Three Sailors Messrs. Farley, Thompson, etc. Landlord Mr. Powel Waiter Master
Simmons Midg Mr. Macready Sheriff's Officer Mr. Cross Lady Amaranth Mrs. Pop^
Jane Mrs. Wells Amelia Miss Chapman.
WILD OATS: OR, THE STROLLING GENTLEMEN.
ACT I.
Scene a Parlour in LADY AMARANTH's. Enter SIR GEORGE THUNDER and JOHN DORY.
SIR GEORGE. I Don't know whose house we have got into here, John, but I think
when he knows me, we may hope for some refreshment. Zounds, I Am as dry as
touch-wood; and to sail at the rate of ten knots an hour, over stubble and
farrow, from my own house, but half a league on this side of Gosport, and not
to catch these deserters that received the King's bounty, and run from their
ships.


JOHN. You Have ill luck.


SIR GEO. Mine, you swab!


JOHN. Ah, you have money and gold; -- but grace and good fortune have shook
hands with you these nineteen years, for that rogue's trick you played Miss
Amelia, by deceiving her with a sham marriage, when you passed yourself for
Captain Seymor, then putting to sea, leaving her to break her heart, then
marrying another lady.


SIR GEO. But was I not forced to that by my father?


JOHN. Ay, because she had a great fortune -- her death was a judgment upon you,


SIR GEO. Why, you impudent dog-fish -- upbraid me for running into false bay,
when you was my pilot, was not you -- even got me the mock clergyman that
performed the sham marriage with Amelia?


JOHN. (Aside) You think so, but I took care to bring a real clergyman.


SIR GEO. But is this a time or place for your lectures? -- at home, abroad, at
sea and land, will you still badger me? Mention my Wild Oats again, and -- you
scoundrel, since the night my bed-curtains took fire, when you were my
boatswain aboard the Eagle, you have got me quite into leading strings -- you
snatched me up on deck, tossed me into the sea to save me from being burnt, and
I was almost drowned.


JOHN. You would, but for me.


SIR GEO. Yes, you dragged me out by the ear like a water dog. Last week,
because you saw the tenth bottle uncorked, you rushed in among my friends, and
ran away with me, and the next morning Captain O'Shanaghan sends me a
challenge, for quitting my chair when he was toast-master -- so to save me from
the head ach, you would like to have got my brains blown out.


JOHN. Oh, very well -- be burnt in your bed, and tumble into the water, like a
tight fellow as you are, and promise yourself with sloe juice, see if John
cares a piece of moldy biscuit about it. But I thought you had laid yourself
up in ordinary, retired to live quiet upon your estate, and had done with sea
affairs.


SIR GEO. John, a man should forget his own convenience for his country's good.


JOHN. But I wish you had not made me your valet-de-chambre -- no sooner wa^ I
got on shore, after five years dashing upon rocks, shoals, and breakers, then
you set me upon a hard trotting cart-horse, that tossed me up and down like an
old b^m-boat in the Bay of Biscay -- and here is nothing to drink at all.
Because at home you keep open house* you think every body else does the same.
Holloa! holloa! -- I Will never cease piping till it calls a drop to my whistle.
Exit.


SIR GEO. Yes, as John Dory remarks, I fear my trip through life will be
attended with heavy squalls and foul weathers -- When my conduct to poor Amelia
comes athwart my mind, it is a hurricane for all that day; and when I turn in at
night the ballad of William and Mary's ghost (sings) -- Oh, zounds, the dismals
are coming upon me, and I cannot get a cheering glass to -- Holloa!


Enter EPHRAIM SMOOTH. EPHESIANS. Friend, what would thou have?


SIR GEO. Have? why I would have grog.


EPHESIANS. Neither man nor woman of that name abides here.


SIR GEO. Ha, ha, ha! Man nor woman -- then if you will bring me Mr. Brandy and
Mrs. Water, we'll couple them, and the first child probably will be Master Grog.


EPHESIANS. Thou do^t speak in parables, which I understand not.


SIR GEO. Sheer off with your sanctified poop, and send the gentleman of the
house.


EPHESIANS. The owner of this mansion is a maiden, and she approaches.


Enter LADY AMARANTH. LADY A. Do I behold -- it is -- how do thou do, unc^e?


SIR GEO. Is it possible you can be my niece, Lady Amaranth Thunder?


LADY A. I Am the daughter of thy deceased brother Loftus, called Earl Thunder,
but no Lady -- my name is Mary.


SIR GEO. But zounds, how is all this? -- unexpectedly find you in a strange
house, of which old Sly tells me you're mistress, turned quaker, and disown
your title.


LADY A. Thou know the relation to whose care my father left me.


SIR GEO. Well, I know our cousin, old Dovehouse, was a quaker, but didn't
suspect he would have made you one.


LADY A. Being now gathered to his father's, he did bequeath unto me his
worldly goods, and amongst them this mansion, and the lands around it.


EPHESIANS. So thou becomest and continue one of the faithful. I Am executor of his
will, and by it cannot give thee possession of these goods but upon these
conditions.


SIR GEO. Tell me of your thee's and thou's, quaker's wills, and mansions -- I
say, girl, though on the death of your father, my eldest brother, Loftus Earl
Thunder, from your being a female, his title devolves to his next brother,
Robert; though as a woman you cannot be an Earl, nor as a woman you cannot make
laws for your sex nor for our sex; yet, as the daughter of a peer, you are, and
by heavens shall be called, Lady Amaranth Thunder.


EPHESIANS. Thou make too much noise, friend.


SIR GEO. Dam'me, call me friend, and I Will bump your block-head against the
capstern.


EPHESIANS. Yea, this is a man of danger -- I will leave Mary to abide it.


SIR GEO. S'fire my Lady.


LADY A. Title is vanity.


Enter ZACHARIAH. ZACH. Shall thy cook this day dress certain birds of the air
called woodcocks, and ribs of the oxen likewise?


LADY A. All -- my uncle sojourneth with me peradventure, and my meal shall be
a feast, friend Zachariah.


ZACH. My tongue shall say so, friend Mary.


SIR GEO. Sir George Thunder bids thee remember to call thy mistress Lady
Amaranth. (strikes him.)


ZACH, Verily, George.


SIR GEO. George, sirrah! -- Though a younger brother, the honor of Knighthood
was my reward for placing the glorious British flag over that of a daring enemy
-- therefore address me --


ZACH. Yea, good George.


SIR GEO. George and Mary -- here is levelling -- here is abolition of title with
a vengeance! S'blood, in this house they think no more of an English knight
than if he was a French duke.


LADY A. Kinsman, be patient; thou and thy son Henry, whom I have not beheld
these twelve years, shall be welcome to my dwelling. Where now abides you?


SIR GEO. At the Naval Academy at Portsmouth.


LADY A. May I see the young man?


SIR GEO. What, to make a quaker of him? No, no -- but hold -- as she is a
wealthy heiress, her marrying my son Harry will keep up and preserve the title
in our family (aside). Would thou be really glad to see him. Thou shall Mary --
John Dory -- Ah, here is my valet-de-chambre.


Enter JOHN DORY. JOHN. Sir!


SIR GEO. Avast, old man of war; you must instantly convoy my son from
Portsmouth.


JOHN. Then I must first convoy him to Portsmouth, for he happens to be out of
dock already.


SIR GEO. What wind now?


JOHN. You must know, on our quitting harbor --


SIR GEO. Damn your sea-jaw, you mavelous dolphin, give me the contents of
your log-book in plain English.


JOHN. Why then, the young 'Squire has cut and run.


SIR GEO. What?


JOHN. Got leave to come to you, and the master did not find out before
yesterday, that instead of making for home he had sheer'd off toward London,
directly sent notice to you, and Sam has traced us all the way here to bring
you the news.


SIR GEO. What a boy of mine quit his guns -- I Will grapple him -- come John.


LADY A. Order the carriage for mine uncle.


SIR GEO. No, thank'ye, my Lady, let your equipage keep up your own dignity --
I Have horses here, but will not knock them up -- next village is the channel for
the stage. My Lady, I Will bring the dog to you by the bowsprit, weigh anchor,
crowd sail, and after him.


Exit Sir Ge^. and John. Re-enter EPHRAIM SMOOTH. EPHESIANS. The man of noise does
not tarry -- then my spirit is glad.


LADY A. Let Sarah prepare chambers for my kinsman, and hire the maiden for me
that thou did mention.


EPHESIANS. I will, for this damsel is passing fair, and has found grace in mine
eyes. Mary, as thou art yet a stranger in this land, and just taken possession
of this estate, the law of society does command thee to be on terms of amity
with thy wealthy neighbors.


LADY A. Yea, but while I entertain the rich, the hearts of the poor shall also
rejoice. I myself will now go forth into the adjacent hamlet, and invite all
that comes to good cheer.


EPHESIANS. Yea; and I will distribute among the poor good books.


LADY A. And meat and drink too, friend Ephraim, in the fullness of plenty --
they shall join in thanksgiving for those gifts of which I Am unworthy. Exit.


SCENE. A ROAD. Enter HARRY and MIDG. MIDG. I say, Dick Buskin, harkee, my lad.


HARRY. What keeps Rover?


MIDG. I Am sure I don't know: as you desired I paid for our breakfast -- but
the devil's in that fellow, every inn we stop at he will always hang behind,
chattering with the bar-maid or the chambermaid.


HARRY. Or any, or no maid -- but he is a worthy lad, and I love him better, I
think, than my own brother, had I one.


MIDG. Oh, but Dick, mind my boy.


HARRY. Stop, Midg, though 'twas my orders, when I set out on this scamp with the
players, the better to conceal my quality, for you before people to treat me as
your companion, yet you at the same time should have had discretion enough to
remember when we are alone, that I am your master, and son to Sir George
Thunder.


MIDG. Sir, I ask your pardon; but by making yourself my equal, I Have got so
used to familiarity, that I find it cursed hard to shake it off.


HARRY. Well, Sir, pray mind that familiarity is all over, my frolic is out, I
now throw off the player, and shall return directly. My father must by this
time have heard of my departure from the academy at Portsmouth; and though I was
deluded away by my rage for acting, 'twas bad of me to give the gay old fellow
any cause of uneasiness.


MIDG. And, Sir, shall you and I never act another scene together? -- shall I
never again play Sir Harry Wildair, for my own benefit, nor ever again have the
pleasure of caneing your honor in the character of Alderman Smuggler?


HARRY. In future act the part of a smart coat and hat brusher, or I shall have
the pleasure of caneing you in the character of one that gives mighty blows.
You were a good servant, but sirrah, I find by letting you crack your jokes and
sit in my company, you're grown quite a rascal.


MIDG. Yes, Sir, I was a modest well-behaved lad, but evil communications
corrupt good manners.


HARRY. Run back, and tell Rover to make haste. To bring you down, I Will clap a
livery on you -- wear that, to find another master.


MIDG. Well, Sir, I don't mind wearing a livery, but when one has so long had a
halbert, its damned hard to be again put into the rank.


HARRY. Well, if my father but forgives me, this three months excursion with
the players has showed me some life, and a devilish deal of fun -- for one
circumstance I shall ever remember it with pleasure -- it is bringing me
acquainted with Jack Rover -- how long he stays -- Jack (calls). In this
forlorn stroller I have discovered qualities that honor human nature, and
accomplishments that might grace a prince. My poor friend has often lent me his
money, though he supposed me a poor needy devil, that could never be able to
repay him. He shall not know who I am till it is in my power to serve him; only the
rogue always marred the grand design of my frolic -- I had no chance among the
pretty women where he was; he had the knack of winning their hearts by his
gaiety. Though so devilish pleasant in his quotations, which on the moment he
dashes in a parody whimsically opposite to every occasion as it happens, I hope
he will not find the purse I Have hid in his pocket before we part. I dread the
moment -- but it is come.


ROVER. (without) The brisk lightning I!


HARRY. Aye, there is the rattle -- hurried on by the impetuous flow of his own
volatile spirits, his life is a rapid stream of extravagant whim; and while the
serious voice of humanity prompts his heart to the best actions, his features
shine in laugh and levity -- Enter ROVER. Studying Bays, Jack?


ROVER. I Am the bold Thunder.


HARRY. I Am -- if he knew but all (aside) -- keep one standing in the road.


ROVER. Beg your pardon, my dear Dick, all the fault of -- plague on it, that a
man cannot sleep and breakfast at an inn, then return to his bedchamber for his
gloves, but there he must find chamber-maids thumping feathers and knocking
pillows about, and keep one, when one has affairs and business -- upon my soul,
these girls' conduct to us is intolerable, the very thought brings blood into
my face, and when ever they attempt to serve and provoke me so -- Dam'me but I
will -- An't I right Dick?


HARRY. All in the wrong.


ROVER. No matter, that is the universal play all round the wrekin. But you're
so conceited, because, by this company we are going to join at Winchester,
you're engaged for high tragedy.


HARRY. And you for Ranger's plumes, and Foppington.


ROVER. Our first play is Lear -- I was devilish imperfect in Edgar the other
night at Lymington; I must look it over (takes a book) "Away! the foul fiend
follows me" -- Holloa! stop a moment, we shall have the whole country after us.


HARRY. What now?


ROVER. That rosy faced chambermaid put me in such a passion, that by heavens I
walked out of the house and forgot to pay the bill.


HARRY. Never mind, Rover, it is paid.


ROVER. Paid! why neither you nor Midg had money enough.


HARRY. I tell you it is paid.


ROVER. You paid -- oh, very well: every honest fellow should be a stock purse.
Let Us push on -- ten miles to Winchester -- we shall be there by eleven.


HARRY. Our trunks at the inn are book'd for the Winchester coach.


ROVER. Our hero, Tom Stately, stepped into the chaise with his tragedy-phiz, ha,
ha, ha! -- rides Bottikin between our Thalia and Melpomene -- but I prefer
walking to the car of Thespis. What do you wait for now?


HARRY. Which is the way?


ROVER. Here.


HARRY. Then I go there (points opposite.)


ROVER. Eh!


HARRY. My dear boy, on this spot, and at this moment, we must part --


ROVER. Part!


HARRY. Rover, you wish me well.


ROVER. Well, and suppose so -- part.


HARRY. Yes, part!


ROVER. What mystery and grand -- what are you at; do you forget, you, Midg,
and I, are engaged to Truncheon the manager, and that the bills are up with our
names to play to night at Winchester?


HARRY. Jack, you and I hope often to meet on the stage, in assumed characters,
if it is your wish we should ever meet again in our real ones of sincere
friends, without asking whither I go, or my reasons for leaving you, when I
walk up this road, do you turn down that.


ROVER. Joke.


HARRY. I Am serious -- good bye.


ROVER. If you repent your engagement with Truncheon, I Will break off too, and
go with you wherever --


HARRY. Attempt to follow me, and even our acquaintance ends.


ROVER. Eh!


HARRY. Don't think of my reasons, only that it must be.


ROVER. Have I done any thing to Dick Buskin? leave me.


HARRY. I Am as much concerned as you. -- Good bye.


ROVER I cannot even bid adieu! -- I will not either -- if any cause could be given
-- farewell.


HARRY. Bless my poor fellow. Adieu.


ROVER. Well good -- oh, damnation! --


Exit Rover and Harry. END OF ACT THE FIRST.
ACT II.
SCENE, a VILLAGE with a COTTAGE and GARDEN. Enter GAMMON and EPHRAIM. GAM.
WELL, Master Ephraim, I may depend on thee, as you quakers never break your
word.


EPHESIANS. I have spoken to Mary, and she, at my request, consents to take thy
daughter Jane for her handmaid.


GAM. That Is hearty -- I intended to make a present to the person that does me
such a piece of service, but I shall not afront you with it.


EPHESIANS. I am meek and humble, and must take affronts.


GAM. Then, here is a guinea, Master Ephraim.


EPHESIANS. I expected not this; but there is no harm in a guinea.


GAM. So, I shall get my children off my hands. My son Sim is robbing me day
and night, giving away my corn and what not among the poor; my daughter Jane --
when girls have naught to do, this mischief love creeps into their minds, and
then, hey, they are for kicking up their heels. -- Sim, son Sim!


Enter SIM. SIM. Yes, feyther.


GAM Call your sister?


SIM. Jane, feyther wants you.


Enter JANE. JANE. Did you call me?


GAM. I often told you both, but its now settled -- you must go into the world
and work for your bread.


SIM. Feyther, whatever you think right must be so; and I am content.


JANE. And I Am sure, feyther, I Am willing to do any thing you would have me.


GAM. There Is ingratitude for you! -- when my wife, your mother, died, I
brought you up from the shell, and now that you're fledged, you want to fly off
and forsake me.


SIM. Why, no, I Am willing to live with you all my days.


JANE. And I Am sure, feyther, if its your desire, I Will never part from you.


GAM. Here Is an unnatural pair -- what, you want to hang upon me like a couple
of leeches, aye, to strip my branches, and leave me a withered hawthorn. See
who is yonder? (Exit Sim.) Jane, Ephraim Smooth has hired you for Lady Amaranth.


JANE. La, then I shall live in the great house.


GAM. Her Ladyship has sent ^s all presents of good books, here, to read a
chapter in; it gives a man patience when he is in a passion. (gives her a book.)


JANE. Thank her good Ladyship.


GAM. My being incumbered with you both is the cause why old Banks here will not
give me his sister.


JANE. That Is a pity; if we must have a stepmother, madam Amelia would make us
a very good one -- but I wonder how she should refuse you, feyther, for I Am
sure she thinks you a very portly man, in your scarlet coat and new scratch.


Retires into the house. GAM. However, if Banks still refuses, I have him in my
power, I Will turn them out of their cottage yonder, and the bailiff shall
procure them a lodging. Here he comes. -- Enter BANKS from the Cottage. Well,
neighbor Banks, once for all, am I to marry your sister?


BANKS. That she best knows.


GAM. She says she will not.


BANKS. Then I dare say she will not; for though a woman, I never knew her to
prevaricate.


GAM. Then she will not have me. Fine things that you and she, who is little better
than paupers, dare to be damned saucy.


BANKS. Why, I confess we are poor, but while that is the worst our enemies can
say of us, we are content. Exit into Garden.


GAM. Damn it, I wish I had a fair occasion to quarrel with him, I Would make him
content with a devil to him -- I Would knock him down, send him to gaol, and -- but
-- I Will be up with him.


Enter SIM: SIM. Oh, feyther, here is one Mr. Lamp, a ringleader of the
shew-folks, came from Andover, to act in our villages -- he wants a barn to
play in, if you will hire him yours.


GAM. Surely, boy, I Will never refuse money; but least he should engage the
great room at the inn, run and tell him -- stop, I Will go myself, a short cut
through the garden --


BANKS. Why, you, or any neighbor is welcome to walk in it, or partake of any
thing it produces, but making it a common thoroughfare is --


GAM. Here, son, kick down that gate.


BANKS. What!


GAM. Does the lad hear?


SIM. Why, yes, yes.


GAM. Does the fool understand.


SIM. Dong't I Am but yet young, but if understanding teaches me how to wrong my
neighbors, I hope I may never live to years of discretion.


GAM. What, you cur, do you disobey your feyther? -- burst open the garden
gate, as I command you.


SIM. Feyther, he that made both you and the garden gate, commands me not to
injure the unfortunate.


GAM. Here Is an ungracious rogue -- then I must do it myself.


BANKS. Hold, neighbor -- small as the spot is, its now my only possession,
and the man shall first take my life, who sets its foot in it against my will.


GAM, I Am in such a passion --


Enter JANE from the House. JANE. Feyther, if you're in a passion, read the
book you gave me.


GAM. Plague on the wench -- but you hussy, I Will -- and you unlucky bud.


Exeunt Sim and Jane, Gammon goes and stands at the door of the house. A STORM
OF RAIN. Enter ROVER. ROV. Zounds, here is a pelting shower, and no shelter --
poor Tom's a cold, I Am wet through; here is a good promising house. Going to
Gammon's house, Gammon prevents his entrance.


GAM. Hold my lad, cannot let folks in till I know who they are: there is a
public house not above half a mile on.


BANKS. Step in here, young man, my fire is small, but it shall cheer you with
a hearty welcome.


ROV. The poor co^tager and the substantial farmer. (Kneels) Hear nature, dear
goddess, hear; if ever you design to make his corn-field fertile, change your
purpose: that from the blighted ears no grains may fall to fat his stubble
goose. And when to town he drives his hogs (so like himself) o^ let him feel
the soaking rain, then he may curse his crimes, to taste and know how sharper
than the serpent's tooth is his! -- Dam'me, but I Am spouting in the rain all
this time.


Rises and enters Bank's cottage. GAM. Ah, neighbor, you will soon scratch a
beggar's head, if you harbor every man vagrant; this may be one of the
footpads that it seems have got about the country, but I Will have an execution
and seize on thy goods this day, my honest neighbor. Eh -- the sun strikes out
-- quite cleared up.


Enter JANE. JANE. La! Feyther, if there is not coming down the village --


GAM. Oh thou hussy.


JANE. Bless me, Feyther, no time for anger now -- Here Is Lady Amaranth's
chariot -- la it stops!


GAM. Her Ladyship is coming out, and walks this way. She may wish to rest
herself in my house -- Jane we must always make rich folks welcome.


JANE. I Will run in and get all the things to rights; but Feyther your cravat
and wig is all --


Adjusts Gammon, and then exit into the house. Enter TWITCH. TWITCH. Well,
master Gammon, as you desired me, I am come to serve this copy of a writ, and
arrest Master Banks, Where is he?


GAM. Yes! now I Am determined on it -- waunts, stand aside, I Will speak to you
anon.


Enter LADY AMARANTH and ZACHARIAH. LADY A. Friend Jane, whom I have taken to
be my handmaid, is thy daughter.


GAM. So her mother said, arn't please your Ladyship.


LADY A. Ephraim Smooth acquainted me you are a wealthy ye^man. I am come to
thy hamlet, to behold with mine eyes the distresses of my poor tenants -- I
wish to relieve their wants.


GAM. Right, your Ladyship, for charity hides a deal of sin. How good of you to
think of the poor: that is so like me. I Am always contriving how to relieve my
neighbors -- you must lay Banks in prison to night. aside to Twitch.


Enter JANE. JANE. And if it please you, will your Ladyship enter our humble
dwelling, and rest your Ladyship?


GAM. Do my Lady -- to receive so great a Lady from her chariot is an honor I
dreamt not of -- for the hungry and weary foot travelers my doors are always
open, and my morsel ready. Knock, and when he comes out, touch him. aside to
Twitch.


LADY A. Thou art benevolent, and I will enter thy doors with satisfaction.


Exeunt all but Twitch into Gammon's house. TWITCH. Eh, where is the writ?
Knocks at Bank's door.


BANKS. Master Twich, what is your busimess with me?


TWITCH. Only a little business here against you.


BANKS. Me?


TWITCH. Farmer Gammon has brought a thirty pound bank note of hand of yours.


BANKS. I did not think his malice could have stretched so far. I thought the
love he possessed for my sister might -- Why, it is true, master Twitch -- to
lend our indigent cottagers small sums, when they were unable to pay their
rent, I got a lawyer Quick to procure me the money, and hoped their industry
would have put it in my power to take up the note before now: however I Will go
round and try what they can do, and call on you and settle it.


TWITCH. No, no, that will not do; you must go with me.


ROV. [From the cottage.] Old gentleman, come quick, or I Will draw another
bottle of your current wine.


TWITCH. You Would better not make no noise, and go with me.


Enter ROVER, ROV. Oh, you're here -- rain over -- quite fair. I Will take a
sniff of the open air too -- Eh! what is the matter?


TWITCH. What Is that to you?


ROV. What Is that to me! -- Why you're very unmannerly.


TWITCH. Here Is a rescue.


BANK. Nay, my dear Sir, I Would wish you not to bring yourself into trouble about
me.


TWITCH. Now, since you don't know what is civil, if the debt an't paid, to jail
you go.


ROV. My kind hospitable good old woman to jail -- what is the sum, you
scoundrel?


TWITCH. Better words, or I Will --


ROV. Stop -- after me, good or bad, except to tell what is your demand upon
this gentleman, and I Will give you the greatest beating, you ever had since you
commenced rascal.


TWITCH. Why, master, I don't want to quarrel with you, because --


ROV. You Will get nothing by it -- Do you know, you villain, that I am this
moment the greatest man living?


TWITCH. Who, pray?


ROV. I am the bold Thunder, Sirrah -- know that I carry my prize of gold in my
coat pocket, though dam' me if I know how it came there. (aside, takes the purse
out) There Is twenty pictures of his Majesty: therefore, in the King's name, I
free his legal subject, and now who am I?


TWITCH. Ten pieces short, my master: but if you're a housekeeper, I Will take
this and your bail.


ROV. Then for bail you must have a housekeeper -- what is to be done? Enter
GAMMON. Oh, here is old hospitality -- I know your a housekeeper, though your
fireside was too warm for me. Look here, some rapacious griping rascal has had
this worthy gentleman arrested -- now a certain good-for-nothing rattling
fellow has paid twenty guineas of the sum -- you pass your word for the other
nine, we'll run back into the old gentleman's house, and over his current wine
our first toast shall be, Liberty to the honest debtor, and confusion to the
hard-hearted creditor.


GAM. I shall not.


ROV. No -- what is your name?


GAM. Gammon.


ROV. Then dam'me, you're the Hampshire hog. -- God's Death, what shall we do to
extricate? -- Damn the money.


Ent^r LADY AMARANTH from the House. LADY A. What tumult's this?


ROV. A lady -- Ma'am, your most obedient humble servant -- a quaker too --
they are generally kind and humane, and that face is a prologue to a play of a
thousand good acts -- may-be she would help us here (aside) Ma'am, you must know
that I know this gentleman: -- I mean, he got a little behind hand, from bad
crops, as every honest well-principled man may, and from rain lodging in his
corn, and his cattle from murrain and rot -- rot the murrain, you understand --
and then in steps I with my -- in short, Madam, I Am one of the most out of the
way story-tellers in the world, when myself is the hero of the tale.


TWITCH. Mr. Banks has been arrested for thirty pounds, and this gentleman has
paid twenty guineas of the sum.


BANKS. My litigious neighbor to expose me thus!


LADY A. The young man and maiden within have pictured thee as a man of
irreproachable morals, though unfortunate.


ROV. Madam, he is an honest fellow, I Have known him above forty years -- he is
the best hand at stirring a fire -- if you was to taste his current wine.


BANKS. Madam, I never aspired to an invincible rank in life, yet hitherto
pride and prudence kept me above the reach of pity -- but obligation from a
stranger --


LADY A. He really a stranger, and attempt to free thee. Friend, thoa have
usurped a right which here alone belongs to me: as I enjoy the blessing which
these lands produce, I own also the heart-delighting privilege of dispensing
those blessings to the wretched. Thou made thyself my worldly banker, and no
cash of mine in thy hands, but here I balance my account (takes a ^^te from a
pocket book).


ROV. Madam, my master pays me, nor dare I take money from any other hand,
without injuring his honor, or disobeying his command.

Run, run, Orlando, carve on every tree,
The fair, the chaste, the inexpressive she. Exit

BANKS. ( to Twitch) But Sir, I insist you will return him his money -- Stop (
going).


TWICTH. Aye, stop ( ^olds Banks).


LADY A. Where dwells he?


BANKS. I fancy, Ma'am, where he can. I understand, from his discourse, that he
is on his way to join a company of actors in the next town,


LADY A. A profane stage player with such a gentle generous heart, yet so
whimsically wild, like the unconscious rose, modestly shrinking from the
recollection of its own grace and sweetness.


Enter JANE, from Gammon's house. JANE. Now, my Ladyship, I Am fit to attend
your Ladyship.


LADY A. This maiden may find out for me whither he go^th (aside). Call on my
steward, and thy legal demands shall be satisfied. To Twitch, who exits.


JANE. Here coachman, drive up my Lady's chariot nearer our door ( ^alling off).


LADY A. Friend, be cheerful, thine and thy sister's sorrows shall be but as an
April shower.


Exit. Banks into his house, Lady A. and Jane. SCENE, INSIDE OF AN INN. Enter
WAITER. ROV. Hilloa, friend, when does the coach set out for London?


WAIT. In about an hour, Sir.


ROV. Has the Winchester coach set out for London?


WAIT. No, Sir. Exit. Waiter.


ROV. That Is lucky, my trunk is here still -- then I will not, since I Have lost
the fellowship of my friend Dick Buckskin, I Will travel no more. I Will try a
London audience -- who knows but I may get an engagement. This celestial lady
quaker must be rich, and how ridiculous for such a poor dog as I am, even to
think of her^ how Dick would laugh at me if he knew -- I dare say by this she
has released my kind host from the gripe -- I should like to be certain though.


Enter LANDLORD. LAND. You Will dine here, Sir -- I Am honest Bob Johnson -- kept
the sun these twenty years -- excellent dinner on table at two.


ROV. Yet my love indeed is appetite; I Am as hungry as the sea, I can digest as
much.


LAND. Hungry as the sea -- then you will not do for my shilling ordinary. Sir,
there is a very good ordinary at the Saracen's Head at the end of the town.
Should'nt have thought indeed, of hungry foot-travellers to eat like -- Coming,
Sir! Exit.


ROV. Ill not join this company at Winchester -- no, I Will not stay in the
country, hopeless ever to expect a look, except of scorn, from this lady. I
wonder if she is sound out that I Am a player -- I Will take a touch at the London
theater, the public there are candid and g^nerous, and before my merit can have
time to raise enemies, I Will save money, and a fig for the sultan and sophy.


Enter JANE, SIM following. JANE. Aye, that is he.


ROV. But if I fail, by heavens I Will overwhelm the manager, his empire, and
himself, in one prodigious ruin.


JANE. Ruin! O Lord!


SIM. What can you expect else, when you follow the young men -- I Have dogged
you all the way^


JANE. Well, was'nt I sent?


SIM. O, yes, you were sent -- very likely -- who sent you?


JANE. I will not tell it is my lady, because she bid me not (aside).


SIM. I Will keep you from shame -- A find life I should have in the parish, rare
fleering, if a sister of mine should stand some Sunday at church in a white
sheet -- and to all their flouts what could I say?


ROV. Thus, I say -- My sister's wronged, my sister blows a bella born as high
and noble as the attorney; do her justice, or by the gods, I Will lay a scene of
blood shall make this hay^mow horrible to beadles. Say that, young Chamont.


SIM. Ecod, I believe it is full moon. You go home to your place, and mind your
business. To Jane.


JANE. My lady will be so glad I found him -- I don't wonder at it, he is a fine
spoken man.


SIM. Dang it, will you stand grinning here at the wild bucks.


JANE. Will you be quiet: the gentleman might wish to send her Ladyship a
compliment. Ar'n't please you, Sir, if it is even a kiss between you and me, it
shall go safe; for though you should give it to me, brother Sim can take it my
lady.


SIM. La, will you go? (puts her off).


ROV. To a nannery, go -- to a nunnery, go, go -- I Am cursedly out of spirits
-- but hang sorrow, I may as well divert myself -- it is meat and drink for me
to see a clown -- Shepherd, was it ever at court.


SIM. Not I.


ROV. Then thou art damned.


SIM. Eh!


ROV. Yes, like an ill-roasted egg, all on one side. Ah, little hospitality.


Enter GAMMON. GAM. Eh, where is the shewman that wants my barn? -- Ah, son Sim.


ROV. Is he your son, young Clodpole -- take him to your wheat-stacks, and
there teach him manners.


GAM. Oh, thou art the fellow that would boult out of the dirty roads into
people's houses -- Sim's schooling is mightily thrown away, if he has not more
manners than thou.


SIM. Why, feyther, it is one of the players: he acted Tom Fool in King Larry,
the other night at Lymington -- I thought, I know'd him, by the face, thof he had
a straw hat and a blanket about'n. -- Ha, how comical that was you said.


ROV. Pellicock sat upon Jellicock-hill -- pillo loc -- loc.


SIM. Why feyther, that is it, he is at it again -- feyther, laugh.


GAM. Hold your tongue, boy, I believe he is no better than he should be; the
moment I saw him, says I to myself, he is a rogue.


ROV. There thou spoke truth to thyself for once in thy life.


GAM. I Am glad you confess it; but her ladyship shall have all the vagrants
whipped out of the country.


ROV. Vagrants, wretch -- despite overwhelm thee! -- only squint, and by heaven
I Will beat thy blown-up body, 'till it rebound like a tennis ball.


SIM. Beat my feyther -- no, no -- thou must first beat me (pulls off his coat),


ROV. Though love cool, friendship fall off, brother's divide, subjects rebel;
oh, never let the sacred bond be cracked betwixt son and father. Thou art an
honest reptile (to Sim). I never a father's protection knew -- never had a
father to protect.


SIM. Ecod, he is not acting now.


Enter LANDLORD, with book, pen, and ink. GAM. Landlord, is this Mr. Lamp here?


LAND. I Have just opened a bottle for him in the other parlour. Exit. Gam.


SIM ( to Rover) Gis's thy hand -- I like thee, I don't know how it is, I think
I could lose my life for him -- but mus'nt let feyther be licked neither. Exit.


ROV. I Will make my entrance on the London stage boards in Bays: yes, I shall
have no competitor against me. Egad, it is very hard, that a gentleman and an
author, cannot come to teach them, but he must break his noise, and all that. So
the players are gone to dinner ( to Landlord).


Enter COACHMAN. COACH. Any passengers for the fly?


LAND. No such people frequent the sun, I assure you, Sir.


ROV. Sun, moon, and stars, now mind the eclipse, Mr. Johnson.


LAND. I heard nothing of it, Sir.


Enter WAITER, WAIT. Sir, two gentlemen in the parlour wish to speak with you (
to Rover).


ROV. I attend them with all respect and duty.


Exit. Waiter. LAND. Sir, you go in the stage; as we book the passengers, what
name?


ROV. I Am the bold Thunder. Exit.


LAND. ( writing) Mr. Thunder.


Enter JOHN DORY. JOHN. I want two places in the stage coach, because I and
another gentleman are going a journey.


LAND. Just two vacant -- what name?


JOHN. Avast, I go upon deck, but let me see who is my master's messmates in
the cabin. ( reads) Capt. M'Clallough, Counselor Flahergan, Miss Gos^ing, Mr.
Thunder -- what is this, speak man -- is there any person of that name going?


LAND. Book'd him this moment.


JOHN. If our voyage should be at an end before we begin; if this Mr. Thunder
should be my master's son -- what sort of a gentleman is he?


LAND. An odd sort of a gentleman -- I suspect he is one of the players.


JOHN. True, Sam said 'twas some of the player's people forced him from
Portsmouth school -- it most be the 'Squire -- show me where he is moored, my
old purser.


SCENE. A ROOM. LAMP and TRAP discovered. TRAP. This same old Gammon seems a
surly spark.


LAMP. No-matter, his barn will hold full thirty pounds, and if we can but
engage this young fellow, this Rover, he will cram it every night he plays --
he is certainly a very good actor. Now, Trap, you must enquire out a good
carpenter, and be brisk about the building. I think we shall have smart
business, as we stand so well for women too -- Oh, here he comes.


TRAP. Knap him on any terms.


Enter ROVER. ROV. Gentlemen, your most obedient -- the waiter told me --


LAMP. Pray sit down, good Sir. Sir, to our better acquaintance (drinks).


ROV. Hav'n't a doubt, Sir.


LAMP. Only suffer me to put up your name to play with us six nights, and
twelve guineas are yours.


ROV. I thank you: I must confess your offer is liberal, but my friends have
flattered me into a sort of opinion, that encourages me to take a touch at the
capital.


LAMP. Oh, my dear Sir, a London theater is very dangerous ground.


ROV. Why I may fail, and Gods may groan, and ladies cry, the awkward creature;
but should I top my part thus, shall not gods applaud, and ladies sigh, the
charming fellow, and managers take me by the hand, and treasurers smile upon
me, as they count the shining guineas.


LAMP. But suppose --


ROV. Aye, suppose the contrary, I have a certain friend here in my coat pocket
(f^^ls for it) -- Zounds, where is it -- Oh, the devil, I gave it to discharge
my kind host. Going to London, and not master of five shillings (aside). Well,
Sir, if you will make it twenty pounds.


LAMP. Well, be it so.


ROV. Sir, I engage with you; call a rehearsal when and where you please, and
I Will attend you.


LAMP. Sir, I Will step for the cast book, and you shall choose your characters.


TRAP. And I Will write the play-bill directly.


Exeunt Lamp and Trap. ROV. Since I must remain here some time, and hav'n't the
most distant hope of ever speaking to this goddess again, I wish I had enquired
her name, that I might know how to keep out of her way.


Enter LANDLORD and JOHN DORY. LAND. There Is the gentleman.


JOHN. Very well. ( Exit. Land.) What cheer, master 'Squire?


ROV. What cheer, eh, my hearty.


JOHN. The very face of his father -- And ar'n't you ashamed of yourself.


ROV. Why, yes, I am sometimes.


JOHN. Do you know, if I had you at the gang-way I Would give you a neater dozen
than ever you got from your schoolmaster's cat-o-nine-tails.


ROV. You woud'n't sure?


JOHN. I would sure.


ROV. Indeed, pleasant enough. Who is this genius?


JOHN. I Have dispatched a shallop to tell Lady Amaranth you're here.


ROV. You hav'n't?


JOHN. I have.


ROV. Now who the devil's this Lady Amaranth?


JOHN. I expect her chariot every moment, and when it comes, you will get into
it, and I Will set you down genteely at her house, then I Will have obeyed my
orders, and hope your father will be satisfied.


ROV. My father -- who is he, pray?


JOHN. P^ha, leave off your fun, and prepare to ask his pardon.


ROV. Ha, ha, ha! -- my worthy friend, you're quite wrong in this affair --
upon my word, I Am not the person you take me for (going).


JOHN. You don't go, though you have got your name down in the stage-coach book.


ROV. Mr. Thunder -- stage-coach book -- this must be some curious mistake --
ha, ha, ha!


JOHN. Oh, my lad, your father, Sir George, will soon change your note.


ROV. Will he? -- he must first give me one. Sir George -- then my father's a
Knight, it seems -- very good, faith -- ha, ha, ha. I Am not the gentleman you
think, upon my honor.


JOHN. I ought not to think you any gentleman, for giving your honor in a
false word.


Enter WAITER. WAIT. Her Ladyship's carriage is at the door, and I fancy, Sir,
it is you the coachman wants (to John).


JOHN. Yes, it is me. (Exit Waiter). I attend your honor.


ROVER. The choice is made, and I Have my Ranger's dress in my trunk, Cousin of
Buckingham, thou sage grave man.


JOHN. What!


ROVER. Since you will buckle fortune on my back, to bear the burden whether I
will or no, I must have patience to endure the load; but if black scandal, or
foul faced --


JOHN. Black, foul-fac'd -- dam'me, my face was as fair as yours before I went
to sea.


ROVER. Your mere enforcement shall acquaintance me.


JOHN. Man, don't stand preaching parson Palmer, come to the chariot.


ROVER. Aye, to the chariot bear me -- Bucephalus among the billows. Exeunt.


END OF ACT II.
ACT III
SCENE, LADY AMARANTH's HOUSE. Enter LADY AMARANTH and EPHRAIM. LADY A. THOUGH
thou have settled that distressed gentleman's debts, let his sister come unto
me, and remit a quarter's rent to all my tenants.


EPHESIANS. As thou biddest it, I have discharged from the pound, the widow's cattle;
but shall I let the lawsuit drop against the farmer's son, who did shoot the
pheasant?


LADY A. Yea; but instantly turn from my service the gamekeeper's man, that did
kill the fawn while it was eating from his hand -- we should hate guile, though
we love venison.


EPHESIANS. Since the death of old Dovehouse (who, though one of the faithful, was an
active man) this part of the country is infested with covetous men, called
robbers; and I have, in thy name, said unto the people, whoever apprehends
one of these I will reward, yea with thirty pieces of gold, ( knocking
without.) That beating of one brass against another at thy door, proclaims
the approach of vanity, whose heart swells at an empty sound. Exit.


LADY A. But my heart is possessed with the idea of that wandering youth, whose
benevolence induced him to part with, perhaps his all, to free the unhappy
debtor. His person is amiable, his addresses (according to the worldly modes)
formed to please and to delight -- but he is poor -- is that a crime? -- perhaps
meanly born -- but one good action is an ill^strious pedigree. I feel I love
him, and in that word are birth, same, and riches.


Enter JANE. JANE. Oh, Madam, my Lady, an't please you.


LADY A. Did thou find the young man, that I may return him the money he
paid for my tenant?


JANE. I found him, Ma'am, and I found him, and he talked of what he said.


LADY A. What did he say?


JANE. He said, Ma'am, and says he -- I Will be hanged, Ma'am, if he didn't talk
about ruin, now I think of that -- but if he had not gone to London in the stage
coach.


LADY A. Is he gone?


Enter JOHN DORY. JOHN. Oh, my Lady, mayhap John Dory is not the man to be sent
after young Gentlemen that scamper from school, and run about the country a
play acting. Pray walk up stairs, Master Thunder.


LADY A. Have thou brought my kinsman hither?


JOHN. Well then, I have not -- will you only walk up if you please, Master Harry?


JANE. Will you walk up, if you please, Master Harry?


LADY A. Friendship requires, yet I Am not disposed to communicate with company.


JANE. Oh, bless me, Ma'am, if it is not --


Enter ROVER dressed. ROV, It Is I, Hamlet the Dane -- thus far into the bowels
of the land we marched on -- John, the bloody devouring bear --


JOHN. He called me b^^l in the coach.


ROV. This Lady Amaranth -- by heavens, the very angel quaker.


LADY A. The generous youth, my cousin Harry.


JOHN. He Is for you, make the most of him.


JANE: Oh, how happy my Lady is -- he looks so charming now he is fine.


JOHN. Harkee -- she is as rich as an India-man, and I tell you, your father
wishes you would grapple her by the heart. There Is an engagement between these
two vessels, but little Cupid's the only man that is to take'em in tow, so come.
( to Jane.)


JANE. Ma'am, a'n't I to wait on you?


JOHN. No, my lass you're to wait on me.


JANE. Wait on you! -- lack-a-day, am I?


JOHN. By this, Sir George is come to the inn. Without letting the younker
know, I Will bring him here, and surprise both father and son with a joyful
meeting (aside). Now court her, you mad devil (to Rover). Come, now usher me
down like a lady, (to Jane).


JANE. Yes, there is love between them, I see it in their eyes -- bless the dear
couple -- this way, Mr. Sailor Gentleman. Exeunt Jane and John.


ROV. (aside) By heavens, a most delectable woman.


LADY A. Cousin, when I saw thee in the village free the sheep from the wolf,
why did not tell me thou were son to my uncle, Sir George?


ROV. Because, my Lady, I did not know it myself.


LADY A. Why wou'd'st thou vex thy father, and quit thy school?


ROV. A truant disposition -- good my Lady brought me from Whittemberg.


LADY A. Thy father designs thee for his dangerous profession -- but is thy
inclination turned to the voice of trumpets and sounds of mighty slaughter?


ROV. Why, Ma'am, as for old Boreas, my dad, when the blast of war blows in his
ears, he is a tiger in his fierce resentment; but for me I think it a pity -- so
it is -- that villainous saltpetre should be digg'd-out of the bowels of the
harmless earth, which many a good tall fellow has destroyed, with wound and
guns and drums -- Heaven save the mark.


LADY A. Indeed thou art tall, my cousin, and grown of comely stature -- our
families have long been separated.


ROVER. They have, since Adam I believe (aside) -- then Lady, let that sweet
bud of love now ripen to a beauteous flower.


LADY A. Love!


ROV. Excellent wench -- perdition catch my soul but I do love thee: and when I
love thee not -- Chaos is come again.


LADY A. Thou art of a happy disposition*


ROV. If I were now to die, it were to be happy! Let our senses dance in
concert to the joyful minutes; and this, and this, the only discord make (
embracing).


Enter JANE, with cake and wine. JANE. Ma'am, an't please you, Mr. Zachariah
bid me --


ROVER. Why you fancy yourself Cardinal Wolsey in this family


JANE. No, Sir, I Am not Cardinal Woolsey, I Am only my Lady's maid here.


ROVER. A bowl of cream for your Catholic Majesty.


JANE. Cream! no, Sir; -- that is wine and water.


ROV. You get no water -- take the wine, great potentate (Gives Lady A. a
glass, and drinks).


JANE. Madam, my father begs leave --


ROV. Go, go, thou s^allow Pomona. Exit. Jane.


Enter GAMMON and LAMP. ROV. Eh! zouns, my manager!


GAM. I hope her Ladyship hav'n't found out 'twas I had Banks arrested (
aside.) Would your Ladyship give leave for this honest man and comrades to act
a few plays in this town, 'cause I have let 'em my barn -- 'twill be some
little help to me, my Lady.


ROV. My Lady, I understand these affairs; leave me to settle them.


LADY A. True, these are delusions; as a woman I understand not -- but by my
cousin's advice I will abide -- ask his consent?


GAM. So, I must pay my respects to the young 'Squire ( aside). An't please
your honor, if a poor man like me ( bows) dare offer his humble duty.


ROV. Can thou bow to a vagrant, eh, little hospitality! Exit. Gam.


LAMP. Please your honor, if I may presume to hope, you will be graciously
pleased to take our little squadron under your honor's protection.


LADY A. What say thou, Henry?


ROV. Aye, where is Henry? -- true -- that is me -- strange I should always
forget my name, and not half an hour ago I was christened ( aside). Hark ye, do
you play yourself, fellow?


LAMP. Yes, Sir, and I Have just now engaged a new actor one Mr. Rover -- such an
actor!


ROV. If such is your best actor, you shall not have my permission -- my dear
Madam, the damndest fellow in the world -- get along out of the town, or
dam'me, I Will have you all, man, woman, and child, rag and fiddle-stick, clapped
into the whirligig.


LADY A. Good man, abide not here.


ROV. What, you scoundrel -- now if this new act^r you brag of, that crack of
your company, was any thing like a gentleman. --


LAMP. Why, since it is not --


ROV. It is, my dear friend, if I was really the poor strolling dog you thought
me, I should tread your four boards, and crow the cock of your barn-door fowl
-- but as Fate has ordained, I Am a gentleman, and son to Sir -- what the
devil's my father's name ( aside) You must be content to murder Shakespeare,
without making me an accomplice.


LAMP. But, my most gentle Sir, I and my treasurer Trap, have trumpeted your
fame ten miles round the country -- the bills are posted, the candles bought,
the stage built, the fiddlers engaged -- all on the tip-toe of expectation --
we should have tomorrow night an overflow -- ay, thirty pounds, dear worthy
Sir; you would not go to ruin a whole community and their fam^lies, that now
depend on the exertion of your brillant talents?


ROV. I never was uniform but in one maxim, that is, though I do but little
good, to hurt nobody but myself.


LADY A. Since thou have promised, much as I prize the adherence to the customs
in which I was brought up, thou shall not sully thy honor, by a breach of thy
word; for truth is more shining than beaten gold -- play, if it can bring good
to these people.


ROV. Shall I?


LADY A. This falls out well; for I have bidden all the gentry round unto my
house warming, and these pleasantries may afford them innocent and cheerful
entertainment.


ROV. True, my Lady, your guests an't Quakers, though you are; and when we ask
people to our house we study to please them, not ourselves; but if you do
furbish up a play or two, the Muses shall not honor that churlish fellow's barn.


LADY A. Barn! no, that gallery shall be thy theater; and inspite of the grave
doctrine of Ephraim Smooth, my friends and I will behold and rejoice in thy
pranks, my pleasant cousin.


ROV. My kind, my charming Lady! -- Hey! -- brighten up bully Lamp, carpenters,
tailors, managers, distribute your box tickets for my Lady's gallery -- come,
gentle cousin, the actors are at hand, and by their show you shall know all
that you are like to know. Exit Lamp. Exeunt Lady and Rover.


SCENE, AN APARTMENT IN AN INN. Enter HARRY and MIDG. HARRY. Though I went back
to Portsmouth Academy with a contrite heart to continue my studies, yet from my
father's angry letter, I dread the woeful storm at our first meeting. I fancy
the people at the inn don't recollect me: it reminds me of my pleasant friend
poor Jack Rover; I wonder where he is now.


MIDG. And brings to my mind a certain strolling acquaintance of mine, poor
Dick Buskin.


HARRY. Then I desire, Sir, you will turn Dick Buskin out of your head.


MIDG. Cannot Sir; the dear, good-natured, wicked son of -- I beg your honor's
pardon.


HARRY. Midg, you must, soon as I am dressed, st^p out and enquire whose house my
father is at -- I didn't think he had any acquaintance in this part of the
country; sound what humor he is in, and how the land lies, before I venture
into his presence.


Enter WAITER. WAIT. Sir, the room is ready for you to dress Exit.


HARRY. I shall only throw off my boots, and you will shake a little powder in my
hair,


MIDG. Then, hey puff, I shoulder my curling-irons.


Enter SIR GEORGE and LANDLORD. SIR GEO. I can hear nothing of these deserters
-- by my first intelligence, they will not venture up to London; they must be
still lurking about the country; Landlord, have any suspicious looking person
put in at your house?


LAND. Yes Sir, now and then.


SIR GEO. What did you do with them?


LAND. Why, Sir, when a man calls for liquor, that I think has got no money, I
make him pay beforehand.


SIR GEO. Damn your liquor, you self-interested porpoise, chattering about your
own private affairs, when public good, or fear of general calamity, should be
the only compass. These fellows I am in pursuit of, run from their ships; and
if our navy is unmanned, what becomes of you and your house, you dunghill
cormorant?


LAND. This is a very abusive sort of a gentleman, but he has a full pocket, or
he would not be so saucy (aside). Exit.


SIR GEO. This r^scal, I believe, does not know ^^m Sir George Thunder -- wind,
still variable, blows my affairs athwart each other -- Do not know what is
become of my runagate son Harry -- and when my Lady niece, squeezing up the
plumage of our illustrious family in her little mean Quaker's bonnet -- I must
to town after -- '^blood, when I catch my son Harry -- Oh, here is John Dory.

Enter JOHN. Have you taken the places in the London coach for me?


JOHN, Ha! -- Hey, your honor, is that yourself?


SIR GEO. No, I Am besides myself -- where is my son?


JOHN. What Is o'clock?


SIR GEO. Why do you talk of clocks or time-pieces? -- all glass's, reckoning
and log-line, are run wild with me.


JOHN. If it is two, your son is this moment walking with Lady Amaranth in her
garden.


SIR GEO. With Lady Amaranth?


JOHN. If half after, they are cast anchor, to ^est themselves among the pos^es;
if three, they are got up again; if four, they are picking a bit of crammed fowl;
and if half after, they are picking their teeth, and cracking walnuts over a
bottle of calcavella.


SIR GEO. My son! -- my dear friend, where did you find him?


JOHN. I found him where he was, and I left him where he is.


SIR GEO. What! -- and he come to Lady Amaranth's?


JOHN. No, I brought him there from this house in her carriage -- I will not tell
him Master Harry went among the players, or he would never forgive him (aside) --
Oh, such a merry, civil, crazy, crack-brain'd -- the very picture of your
honor.


SIR GEO. What, he is in high spirits -- ha, ha, ha! the dog -- I hope he had
discretion enough though, to throw a little gravity over his mad humor, before
his prudent cousin.


JOHN. He threw himself upon his knees before her, and that did quite as well.


SIR GEO. Made love to her already! -- ha, ha, ha! -- oh, the impudent, cunning
villain -- what, and may be he --


JOHN. Indeed he did give her a smack.


SIR GEO. Indeed, ha, ha, ha.


JOHN. Oh, he threw his arms about her as eager, as I would to catch a falling
decanter of Madeira.


SIR GEO. Huzza, victoria! -- here will be a juncture of two bouncing estates
-- but confound the money! -- John, you shall have a bowl for a jolly-boat to
swim in. Roll in a puncheon of rum, a hogshead of sugar, shake an orchard of
oranges, and let the landlord drain his fish pond yonder -- a bumper, a bumper,
etc. ( sings.)


JOHN. Then, my good master, Sir George, I Will order a bowl, since you're in the
humor for it.


Exit. SIR GEO. And so the wild rogue is this instant rattling up her prim
Ladyship? Eh? is'n't this he? Left her already.


Enter HARRY. HARRY. I must have left my cane in this room -- Eh, my father?


SIR GEO. ( Looking at his watch.) Just half after four: why Harry, you have made
great haste in cracking your walnuts.


HARRY. Yes; he has heard of my frolics with the players (aside). Dear father,
if you will but forgive me --


SIR GEO. Why indeed, you have acted very bad.


HARRY. Sir, it should be considered I was but a novice.


SIR GEO. However, I shall think of nothing now but your benefit.


HARRY. Very odd his approving of -- ( aside) I thank you, Sir; but if it is
agreeable to you, I have done with Benefits.


SIR GEO. If I was not the best of fathers, you might indeed hope none from me;
but no matter if you can but get the Fair Quaker.


HARRY. Or the Humors of the Navy, Sir.


SIR GEO. What! how dare you reflect on the Humors of the Navy? The Navy has
very good humors, or I Would never see your dog's face again, you villain. But I Am
cool -- eh, boy, a snug easy chariot.


HARRY. I Will order it; desire my father's carriage to draw up.


SIR GEO. Mine, you rogue, I Have none: I mean Lady Amaranth's.


HARRY. Yes, Sir, Lady Amaranth's chariot.


SIR GEO. What are you at? I meant that you left this house in.


HARRY. Sir, I left this house on foot.


SIR GEO. What, with John Dory?


HARRY. No, Sir, with Jack Rover.


SIR GEO. Why John has been a rover to be sure; but now he is settled: I Have made
him my valet-de-chambre.


HARRY. Made him your valet! why Sir, where did you meet with him?


SIR GEO. Zounds! I meet him abroad, and meet him on shore -- in the cabin and
steerage -- gallery and forecastle -- He sailed round the world with me.


HARRY. Strange this: I understood he had been in the East Indies, but he never
told me he knew you; but indeed, he only knew me by the name of Dick Buskin.


SIR GEO. Then how came he to bring you to Lady Amaranth's?


HARRY. Bring me where?


SIR GEO. Answer me: an't you now come from her Ladyship?


HARRY. Not I.


SIR GEO. Ha, this is a lie of John's to enhance his own services. Then you
have not been there.


HARRY. I don't know where you mean, Sir.


SIR GEO. Yes, it is all a brag of John's; but I Will --


Enter JOHN DORY. JOHN. The rum and sugar is ready; but as for the fish pond --


SIR GEO. I Will kick you into it, you thirsty old grampus.


JOHN. Will you? Then I Will make a comical roasted orange.


SIR GEO. How dare you say you brought my son to Lady Amaranth's.


JOHN. And who says I did'n't?


SIR GEO. He that best knows only, Dick Buskin here.


JOHN. Then Mr. Buckskin mus'n't shoot off great guns for his amusement.


SIR GEO. There, what do you say to that?


HARRY. I say, it is false.


JOHN. False! -- shiver my hulk, Mr. Buckskin, if you were a lyon's skin I Would
curry your hide for this. Exit.


SIR GEO. No, no -- John's honest -- I see through it now -- the puppy has seen
her; perhaps he has the impudence not to like her -- and so blow up this
confusion and perplexity only to break off a marriage.


HARRY. What does he mean -- I Will assure you --


SIR GEO. Damn your assurance, you ungrateful, disobedient -- but I Will not part
with you till I confront you with Lady Amaranth herself, face to face: and if I
prove you have been deceiving me, I Will launch you into the wide ocean of life,
without a rudder, compass, grog, or tobacco. Exeunt.


END OF ACT III.
ACT IV.
SCENE, LADY AMARANTH's HOUSE. Enter LADY AMARANTH reading. LADY A. THE
fanciful flights of my pleasant cousin enchant my senses; this book he gave me
to read contains good morals. The man Shakespeare, that did write it, they
call immortal; he must indeed have been filled with divine spirit. I
understand, from my cousin, the origin of plays were religious mysteries; that,
freed from the superstition of early, and grossness of latter times, the stage
is now become the vehicle of delight and morality; -- if so, to hear a good
play is taking the wholesome draught of precept from a golden cup, embossed with
gems: yet giving my countenance to have one in my house, and even to act in it
myself, prove the ascendancy my dear Harry has over my heart. Ephraim Smooth is
much scandalized at these doings.


Enter EPHRAIM SMOOTH. EPHESIANS. This mansion is now become the tabernacle of Baal.


LADY A. Then abide not in it.


EPHESIANS. It Is full of the wicked ones.


LADY A. Stay not among the wicked ones.


EPHESIANS. I must shut my ears ( loud laugh).


LADY A. And thy mouth also, good Ephraim: I have bidden my cousin Harry to my
house, and will not set bounds to thy mirth, to gratify thy spleen, and show my
own inhospitality.


EPHESIANS. Why do thou suffer him to put into the hands of thy servants books of
tragedies, and books of comedies, preludes, and interludes -- yea, all lu^es;
my spirit does wax wrath. I say unto thee, a playhouse is a school for the old
dragon, and a play-book the primer of Beelzebub.


LADY A. This is one; mark. ( reads) "Not the King's crown, nor the deputed
sword, the marshal's truncheon, nor the judge's robe, becomes them with one
half so good a grace as mercy does. Oh! think on that, and mercy then will
breathe within your lives like men new made." Does Beelzebub speak such words?


EPHESIANS. Thy kinsman has made all thy servants actors.


LADY A. To act well is good service.


EPHESIANS. Here comes the damsel for whom my heart yearneth.


Enter JANE, reading. JANE. Oh, Ma'am! his honor, the Sq^ire, says the play's
to be As You Like It.


EPHESIANS. I like it not.


JANE. He Is given me my character; I am to be Miss Audrey, and brother Sim's to
be William of the Forest, as it were; but how am I to get my part by heart?


LADY A. By often reading it.


JANE. Well, I don't know but that is as good as any other. -- I must study my
part -- the Gods give us joy. Exit.


EPHESIANS. Thy maidens skip like young kids.


LADY A. Then do thou go skip along with them.


EPHESIANS. Mary, thou should be obeyed in thine own house, and I will do thy
bidden.


LADY A. Ah, thou hypocrite, to obey is easy, when the heart commands.


Enter ROVER, ROVER. Oh, my charming cousin, how agree you and Rosalind? Are
you almost perfect? What, old Clytus! why you're like any angry fiend broke in
amongst the laughing gods; come, come, I Will have nothing here but quips, and
cranks, and wreathed smiles.


LADY A. He says we must not have this amusement.


ROVER. But I have a voice potential, double as the Duke's, and I say we must.


EPHESIANS. Nay.


ROVER. Yea, by Jupiter I swear -- Aye, (fiddle without)


EPHESIANS. The man of sin rubbeth the hair of the horse to the bowels of the cat.


Enter LAMP with a Violin. LAMP. Now, if agreeable to your Ladyship, we'll go
over your song.


LADY A. I Am content.


Lamp begins to play, Ephraim pushes his elbow, which puts him out of tune --
plays again -- Ephesians. joggs as before. LAMP. What, Sir, do you mean?


ROVER. Now do, my good friend, be quiet -- Come begin.


EPHESIANS. Friend, this is a land of liberty, and I Have as much right to move my
elbows, as thou have thine. ( Rover pushes him) Why do thou do so friend?


ROVER. Friend, this is a land of liberty, and I have as much right to move my
elbows as thou have to move thine ( pushes him off). A fanatical puppy.


LADY A. But, Harry, do you people of fashion act these follies themselves?


ROVER. Aye, and scramble for the top parts as eager as for stars, ribbands,
place, or pension: Lamp, decorate the seats out smart and theatrical, and drill
the servants that I have given the small parts Exit Lamp.


LADY A. I wished for some entertainment, in which people now take delight, to
please those I have invited, but will convert those follies into a charitable
purpose: tickets of this play shall be delivered to my friends gratis, but
money to their amount I will, from my own purse (after rewarding the
assistants) distribute among the indigent of the village; thus, while we amuse
our friends, and perhaps please ourselves, we shall make the poor happy.


ROVER. An angel! -- if Sir George does'n't soon arrive to blow me, I may, I
think, marry her angelic Ladyship -- but will that be honest? -- she is nobly
born -- though I suspect I had ancestors too, if I knew who they were. I entered
this house the poorest wight in England, and what must she imagine when I Am
discovered? That I Am a scoundrel; and consequently, though I should possess her
hand and fortune, instead of loving she will despise me (sits.) I want a friend
now to consult with -- deceive her I will not -- poor Dick Buskin wants money
more than myself, yet this is a measure I Am sure he would scorn. No no, I must not.


Enter HARRY. HARRY. Now I hope my passionate father will be convinced that
this is the first time I was ever under this roof, What beau is here? --
astonishing! my old strolling friend (sits down unperceived).


ROVER. I don't know what to do.


HARRY. Nor what to say.


ROV. Dick Buskin, ha, ha, ha, -- my dear fellow -- think of the devil, and --
I was just thinking of you, -- 'pon my soul, Dick, I am happy to see you.


HARRY. But, Jack, how the devil have you found me out?


ROV. Found you, I Am sure I wonder how the deuce you found me out -- oh, the
news of my intended play has brought you.


HARRY. He does not as yet know who I am, so I Will carry it on. ( aside.) Then
you have broke your engagement with Truncheon, at Winchester? -- figuring away
in your stage-cloaths too, really. -- Tell me what you are here, Jack?


ROV. Will you be quiet with your Jacking, I Am now 'Squire Harry.


HARRY. What!


ROV. I Have been pressed into this service by an old man of war, who found me at
the inn, and insisted I Am son to Sir George Thunder. In that character, I
flatter myself, I have won the heart of the charming lady of this house.


HARRY. Now the mystery is out -- ( aside) -- then it is my friend Jack has been
brought here for me. -- Do you know the young gentleman they take you for?


ROV. Not I; but I flatter myself he is honored in his representative.


HARRY. Upon my soul, Jack, you're a tight fellow.


ROV. Now I can put some pounds in your pocket -- you shall be employed --
we are getting up As You Like It -- let us see in the cast, have I a part for you
-- egad, I Will take Touchstone from Lamp, you shall have it, my boy -- I Would
resign Orlando to you, with any other Rosalind, but the lady of the mansion
plays it herself.


HARRY. The very lady my father intended for me. ( aside) Do you love her, Jack?


ROV. To distraction -- but I Will not have her.


HARRY. No -- why?


ROV. She thinks me a gentleman, and I Will not convince her I Am a rascal; I Will
go on with our play, as the produce is appropriated to a good purpose, then lay
down my 'Squireship, bid adieu to my heavenly Rosalind, and exit for ever from
her house, poor Jack Rover.


HARRY. The generous fellow I ever thought him, and he shall not lose by it -- if
I could make him believe ( aside) -- Well, this is the most whimsical affair --
you have anticipated me -- you will scarce believe that I Am come here purposely to
pass myself for this young Harry.


ROV. No.


HARRY. I am.


SIR GEO. ( without) Harry, where are you?


ROV. Who Is that?


HARRY. I Will try it -- my father will be cursedly vexed -- no matter. (aside)


ROV. Somebody called Harry -- zounds, if the real Simon Pure, that is, should
be arrived, I Am in a pure way.


HARRY. Be quiet, that is my confederate, he is to personate the father, Sir
George, he started the scheme -- having heard that an union was intended, and
Sir George immediately expected, our plan is, if I can, before his arrival,
flourish myself into the lady's good graces, and whip her up, as she is an
heiress.


ROV. So, you have turned fortune hunter. Then 't'was for this plan you parted
from me on the road, standing like a figure-post, you walk up this way, and
I Will walk down this -- why, Dick, I did not know you was so great a rogue.


HARRY. I did not know my fort lay that way, till convinced by this experienced
stranger.


ROV. He must be a damned impudent old scoundrel -- who is he, do I know him?


HARRY. Why, no, I hope not. (aside)


ROV. I Will step down stairs, and have the honor of kicking him.


HARRY. Stop, I wou'd'n't have him hurt, neither.


ROV. What Is his name?


HARRY. His name is Abrawang.


ROV. Abrawang, Abrawang -- I never heard of him -- but, Dick, why did you let
him persuade you into this affair?


HARRY. Why, faith, I would have been off it, but when once he takes a project
into his head, the devil cannot drive it out of him.


ROV. Yes, but the constables may drive him into Winchester goal.


HARRY. Your opinion of our intended exploit has made me ashamed of myself --
Harkee, Jack, do you punish and frighten my adviser, do you still keep up your
character of young 'Squire Thunder -- you can easily do that, as he, no more
than myself, has never seen the 'Squire.


ROV. But, by heavens, I Will not be such a damned rogue.


HARRY. Yes, but Jack, if you can marry her, her fortune is a snug thing;
besides, if you love each other, I tell you --


ROV. Hang her fortune -- my love's more noble than the world, prizes not
quantity of dirty lands -- Oh, Dick, she is the most lovely -- think of her
condescension -- why she consented to play in our play, and you shall see her,
you rogue, you shall.

Her worth being mounted on the wind,
Through all the world bears Rosalind. Exit.

HARRY. Ha, ha, ha, this is the drollest adventure -- Rover little suspects
that I am the identical 'Squire Thunder that he personates -- I Will lend him my
character a little longer -- yes, this offer is a most excellent opportunity of
making my poor friend's fortune, without injuring any body. If possible, he
shall have her, I cannot regret the loss of charms I never knew, and for an
estate, my father is competent to all my wishes. Lady Amaranth, by marrying
Jack Rover, will gain a man of honor, which she might lose in an Earl -- it
may teaze my father a little at first, but he is a good old fellow in the main,
and when I think he comes to know my motive! -- Eh, this must be she -- an
elegant woman, faith -- now for a spanking lie, to continue her in the belief
that Jack is the man she thinks him.


Enter LADY AMARANTH. LADY A. Who art thou, friend?


HARRY, Madam, I Have scarce time to warn you against the danger you're in, of
being imposed upon by your uncle, Sir George,


LADY A. How!


HARRY. He has heard of your Ladyship's partiality for his son, but is so
incensed at the irregularity of his conduct, he intends, if possible, to
disinherit him, and to present me hither, to pass me on you for him, designing
to treat the poor young gentleman himself as an impostor, in hopes you will
banish him from your heart and house.


LADY A. I thank thee, friend, for thy caution -- is Sir George such a parent
-- what is thy name?


HARRY. Richard Buskin, Ma'am, the stage is my profession -- in the 'Squire's
late excursion we contracted an intimacy, and I saw so many good qualites in
him, that I could not think of being the instrument of his ruin, nor deprive
your Ladyship of so good a husband as I am certain he will make you.


LADY A. Then Sir George intends to disown him.


HARRY Yes Ma'am, I Have this moment told the young gentleman of it; he is
determined, for a jest, to return the compliment, by seeming to treat Sir
George himself as an impostor.


LADY A. Ha, ha, ha, it will be a just retaliation, and indeed what my uncle
deserves, for his cruel intentions both to his son and me.


SIR GEO. ( without) What has he run away again?


LADY A. That Is mine uncle.


HARRY. Yes, here is my father, and my standing out that I Am not his son, will
raise him into the heat of a battle, ha, ha, ha, ( aside) Here he is, Madam,
now mind how he will dub me a 'Squire.


Enter SIR GEORGE. SIR GEO. Well my Lady, was'nt it as my wild rogue set you,
all though calcavell as capers, you have been cutting in the garden. You see here I
have brought him into line of battle again -- you villain, why do you drop a
stern there, throw a salute shot, buss her bob-stays, bring to, and come down
straight as a mast, you dog.


LADY A. Uncle, who is this?


SIR GEO. Who is he -- egad, that is an odd question, to the fellow that has
been cracking your walnuts.


LADY A. He Is bad at his lesson.


SIR GEO. Certainly, when he ran from school -- why don't you speak, you
lubber, you are cursed modest -- before I came, 'twas all down among the
posies; here, my Lady, take from a father's hand, Harry Thunder.


LADY A. That is what I may not.


SIR GEO. There, I thought you would disgust her, you flat fish.


Enter ROVER. LADY A. (Takes Rover's hand.) Here, take from my hand Harry
Thunder.


SIR GEO. Eh!


ROV. Oh, this is your sham Sir George, -- ( Apart to Harry)


HARRY. Yes, I Have been telling the Lady, and still seem to humor him.


ROV. I shall not though; how do you Abrawang?


SIR GEO. Abrawang!


ROV. You look like a good actor; aye, that is very well indeed. Never, never
lose sight of your character; you know Sir George is a noisy, turbulent, wicked
old knave; bravo! Pout your under lip, purse your brows: -- Very well; but damn
it, Abrawang, you should have put a little red on your nose -- mind a rule,
never play an old man without a red nose.


SIR GEO. I Am in such a fury.


ROV. Well we know that.


LADY A. Who is this?


SIR GEO. Some puppy unknown.


LADY A. And you don't know this gentleman?


ROV. Excellent well! he is a fishmonger.


SIR GEO. Ah, What!


LADY A. Yes; father and son are determined not to know each other.


ROV. Come, Dick, give the Lady a specimen of your talent, Motleys, your only
wear, ha, ha, ha, a fool I met, a fool in the forest. Here comes Audry.


Enter JANE. JANE. La! warrent, what features!


SIR GEO. 'Sblood! what is this?


HARRY. A homely thing, Sir, but she is my own.


SIR GEO. Yours, you most audacious! -- What this slut?


JANE. I thank the Gods for my slutishness.


LADY A. (To Rover,) You know this youth.


ROV. My friend, Horatio; I wear him in my heart, yea, in my heart of hearts,
as I do this -- (kisses her.)


SIR GEO. Such freedom with my niece, before my face. Do you know that Lady? Do
you know my son, Sir?


ROV. Be quiet; Jaffier has discovered the plot, and you cannot deceive the
senate.


HARRY. Yes, my conscience would not let me carry it through.


ROV. Aye, his conscience hanging about the neck of his heart, says good
Lancelot and good Gobbo, or as aforesaid good Lancelot Gobbo, take to thy
heels and run away.


SIR GEO. Why, my Lady, explain -- scoundrel and puppy unknown.


JANE. Ma'am, I forgot to tell you our old neighbor Banks and his sister wants
you.


LADY A. I come -- Uncle, I Have heard thy father was kind to theee; return that
kindness to thy child -- if the lamb in wanton play does fall amongst the
waters, the shepherd takes him out, instead of plunging him in deeper till he
dies -- though thy hairs now be gray, I Am told once was flaxen; in short, he is
too old in folly, who cannot excuse youth. Exit.


SIR GEO. I Am an old fool! well, that is damned civil of you, Madam Niece; and
I Am a gray shepherd, with his lambs in the ditch; but as for you, Mr. Goat,
I Will --


ROV. My dear Abrawang, give up the game; her Ladyship in seeming to take you
for her uncle, has been only humming you -- What, the devil, don't you think
the divine creature knows her own true-born uncle?


SIR GEO. Certainly, to be sure she knows me.


ROV. Will you have done? -- Zounds, man, my honored father was here himself
this day -- her ladyship knows his person.


SIR GEO. Your honored father, and who the devil's your honored self?


ROV. Now, by my father's son, that is myself it shall be sun, or moon, or
Cheshire-cheese -- I budge still crop and cropp'd.


SIR GEO. What do you bawl out to me about Cheshire-cheese.


ROV. And I say; as the saying is, your friend has told me all; but to convince
you of my forgiveness, in our play, as you're rough and tough, I cast your
character the Wrestler -- I Will do Orlando, kick up your heels before the whole
court.


SIR GEO. I Will -- why, dam'me, I Will -- and you, you undutiful chick of an old
pelican (Lifts up his cane.)


Enter JOHN DORY. JOHN. What are you at here, cudgelling people about? -- But,
Mr. Buckskin, I Have a word to say to you in private.


SIR GEO. Buckskin, take that (strikes him.)


ROV. Why dam'me, Mr. Abrawang, you're a most obstinate drum, and very --


Enter LAMP, TRAP, JANE, and SERVANT MAID. LAMP. All the world's a stage, and
all men and women --


SIR GEO. The men are rogues, and the women hussies. (Beats them off, and
strikes Rover)


Exit all but Rover. ROV. A blow, Essex, a blow, an old rascally impostor;
stigmatize me with a blow -- I must not put up with it. -- Zounds! I shall be
tweak'd by the nose all round the country. If I can get the country lad to
steal me a pair of pistols, strike me, so may this arm dash him to the earth
like a dead dog, despite, pride, shame, and the name of villain light on me, if
I don't bring you Mr. Abrawang. Exit.


SCENE CHANGES TO ANOTHER ROOM. Enter LADY AMARANTH and BANKS. BANKS. Madam, I
would have paid the rent of my little cottage; but I dare say it was without
your Ladyship's consent that your Steward has turned me out, and put my
neigbour in possession.


LADY A. My Steward oppress the poor! I did not know it indeed.


BANKS. The pangs of adversity I could bear; but the innocent partner of my
misfortunes, my unhappy sister --


LADY A. I did desire Ephraim to send for thy sister; did she dwell with thee,
and both now without a home? let her come to mine.


BANKS. The hand of misery has struck me beneath your notice.


LADY A. Thou do mistake; to need my assistance is the highest claim to my
attention -- let me see her. (Exit Banks.) I could chide myself that these
pastimes have turned mine eyes from the house of woe. Ah, think ye proud and
happy affluent, how many in your dancing moments pine in want, drink their salt
tears -- their morsel the bread of misery, and shrinking from the cold blast,
into their cheerless hovels! Enter BANKS introducing AMELIA. Thou art welcome:
I feel myself interested in thy concern.


AME. Madam --


LADY A. I judge thou were not always unhappy, tell me thy condition, then I
shall better know how to serve thee: is thy brother thy sole kindred?


AME. I had a husband and a son.


LADY A. Widow, if it is real, not images, thou would forget -- impart to me
thy story, it is rumored in the village thy brother was a clergyman, tell me.


AME. Madam, he was; but he has lost his early patron, and he is now poor and
unbeneficed.


LADY A. But thy husband.


AME. By this brother's advice now (twenty years since) I was prevailed on to
listen to the addresses of a young sea officer, for my brother had been
chaplain in the navy; but, to our surprise and mortification, we discovered, by
the honesty of a sailor, in whom we put confidence, that the Captain's design
was only to decoy me into a seeming marriage; our humble friend entreated of us
to put the deceit on his master, by concealing from him that my brother was not
in orders; he, flattered with the hopes of procuring me an establishment, gave
into supposed imposition, and performed the ceremony.


LADY A. Duplicity, even with a good intent, is ill.


AME. Madam, the event has justified your censure, for my husband, not knowing
himself really bound by any legal tie, abandoned me -- I followed him to the
Indies; distracted, till seeing him, I left my infant at one of our
settlements; but after a fruitless search, on my return, I found the friend, to
whose care I committed my child, was compelled to retire from the ravages of
war, but where I could not hear -- rent with agonizing pangs, without a child
or husband, I again saw England, and my brother, who wounded himself with
remorse for being the cause of my misfortunes, secluded himself from all joys
of social life, and invited me to partake the comforts of solitude in that
asylum, from whence we have both just now been driven.


LADY A. My pity can do thee no good, yet must I pity thee; but resignation to
what must be, may restore peace; if my means can procure thee comfort, they are
at thy pleasure -- come let thy griefs subside -- instead of thy cottage,
accept thou and thy brother every convenience that my mansion can afford.


AME. Madam, I can only thank you with (weeps)


LADY A. My thanks are here -- come thou shall be cheerfully -- I will
introduce thee to my sprightly cousin Harry, and his father, my humorous uncle
-- we have delights going forward that may amuse thee.


AME. Kind Lady.


LADY A. Come, uncle, though a quaker, thou see I Am merry -- the sweetest
joy of wealth and power is to cheer one another's drooping heart, and wipe from
the palid cheek the tear of sorrow!


ACT V.
SCENE, A ROAD. Enter three Men, dressed as Sailors. 1st SALOR. WELL, lads,
what is to be done?


2d SAIL. We Have long been upon our shifts, and after all our tricks, twists,
and turns, as London was too hot for us, a trip to Portsmouth was a hit.


1st SAIL. Aye, but since the cash we touched upon, pretending to be able
bodied seamen, is now come to the last shilling, and as we deserted, means of
fresh supply must be thought on to take us to London.


2d SAIL. Aye, now to recruit the pocket, without hazarding the neck.


1st SAIL. By an advertisement posted on the stocks yonder, there are
collectors on this road, thirty guineas offered by the quaker lady, owner of
the esta^^s round here -- I wish we could knap any straggler to bring before
her, a quaker will only require yea for an oath, we might pick up this thirty
guineas.


2d SAIL. Yes, but we must take care, if we fall into the hands of this
gentleman that is in pursuit of us -- 'Sdeath, is not that his man, the old
boatswain?


1st SAIL. Don't run, I think we three are a match for him.


2d SAIL. Let Us keep up our characters of sailors, we may get something out of
him; a pitiful story makes such an impression on the soft heart of a true tar,
that he will open his hard hand and drop you his last guinea -- if we can but
make him believe we were pressed, we have him, only mind me.


Enter JOHN DORY. JOHN. To rattle my lanthorn, Sir George's temper now always
blows a hurricane.


2d SAIL. What cheer?


JOHN. Ha, boy.


1st SAIL. Bob up with your speaking trumpet.


2d SAIL. Do You see, brother, this is the thing -- Enter SIR GEORGE behind,
unseen. We three hands, just come home after a long voyage, were pressed in the
river, and without letting us see our friends brought round to Portsmouth, and
then we entered freely -- 'cause why, we had no choice -- then we run -- we
hear some gentleman's in chase of us, and as the shots are all out, we'll
surrender.


JOHN. Surrender -- then you have no shots left, indeed -- let us see (feeling
his pocket) I hav'n't the loading of a gun about me now, and this same Monsieur
Poverty is a bitter enemy.


SIR GEO. (aside) It Is the deserters I Am after.


JOHN. Meet me in an hour's time in the little wood yonder, I Will raise the wind
to blow you into a safe lattitude -- Keep out to sea, my masters the rock
you will cetainly split upon.


2d SAIL. This is the first time we ever saw you, but we'll steer by your
chart, for I never knew one seaman betray another. Exit Men.


SIR GEO. Then they have been pressed -- I cannot blame them so much for running
away.


JOHN. Yes, Sir George would certainly hang them.


SIR GEO. You lie; they shall eat beef and drink the King's health -- run and
tell them so -- stop, I Will tell them myself.


JOHN. Now you are yourself, and a kind gentleman, as you used to be.


SIR GEO. Since these idle rogues are inclined to return to their duty, they
shall not want sea stores; take this money -- but I Will meet them myself, and
advise them as I would my own children. Exit.


SCENE, A WOOD. Enter ROVER, with pistols. ROV. Which way did this Mr. Abrawang
take? -- Dick Buskin, I think, has no suspicion of my intention, and since Sim
has, without making an alarm, procured these pistols, such a choleric spark
will fight. I dare say. If I fall, or even survive this affair, I Will leave the
field of love and the fair prize to the young gentleman I Have personated, for
I Am determined to see Lady Amaranth no more -- Oh, here comes Abrawang.


Enter SIR GEOEGE. SIR GEO. Now to relieve these sea gulls -- they must be
hovering about this place. -- Ha, puppy unknown!


ROV. You're the very man I was seeking for -- you're not ignorant, Mr.
Abrawang?


SIR GEO. Mr. What? --


ROV. You Will not resign your title -- oh, very well, I Will indulge you -- Sir
George Thunder, you honored me with a blow.


SIR GEO. Did'n't hurt you.


ROV. 'Sdeath, Sir, but let me proceed like a gentleman; as it is my pride to
reject even favors, no man shall offer me an injury.


SIR GEO. Eh!


ROV. In rank we are equal.


SIR GEO. Are we, faith? -- the English of all this is, we are to fight.


ROV. Sir, you have marked in me an indelible stain, only to be washed out by
my blood.


SIR GEO. Why I Have only one objection to fighting you.


ROV. What Is that, Sir?


SIR GEO. That you're too brave a lad to be killed.


ROV. Brave! no, Sir; at present I wear the stigma of a coward.


SIR GEO. Zounds, I like a bit of fighting -- hav'nt had a morsel a long time
-- don't know when I smelt gunpowder, but to bring down a woodcock.


ROV. Take your ground.


SIR GEO. I Am ready -- but are we to thrust with bull-rushes, like two frogs,
or like two squirrels, pelt one another with nut-shells, for I don't see any
other weapons here.


ROV. Oh, yes, Sir, here are the weapons.


SIR GEO. Well, this is bold work for a privateer to give battle to a King's
ship.


ROV. Try your charge, Sir, and take your ground.


SIR GEO. I woud'n't wish to sink, burn or destroy what I thought was built for
good service, but dam'me if I don't bring wing to you, to teach you better
manners; so take care, or I Will put some red on your nose.


Enter three Men, without seeing Rover. 1st SAIL. Ah, here is the honest fellow
has brought us some cash.


2d SAIL. We Are betrayed, it is the very gentleman that is in pursuit of of us,
and this promise was only a decoy to throw us into his power -- the pistol!
(aside)


SIR GEO. Good charge (trying the charge, the men rush forward, and one of them
smacks the pistols from him.)


SIR GEO. Ha, boys!


2nd SAIL. You Would have our lives, and we'll have yours. (Rover runs to his
assistance, and knocks the pistol out of his hand -- they run off.)


ROV. Rascals! (pursues them.)


SIR GEO. (takes up the pistol.) My brave lad I Will -- (going,)


Enter JOHN DORY. JOHN. No, you shall not. (stops him.)


SIR GEO. The rogues will --


JOHN. Never mind the rogues. ( a pistol fired without.)


SIR GEO. S'blood, must I see my preserver perish? struggling.


JOHN. I Am your preserver, and I will perish, but I Will bring you out of harm's
way,


SIR GEO. Though he would fight me himself --


JOHN. We all know you would fight the very devil.


SIR GEO. He saved my life.


JOHN. I Will save your life -- ( whips him up) -- hawl up, my noble little
jolly-boat.


Exit carrying Sir Geo. off. SCENE, BANKS's HOUSE. Enter GAMMON, BANKS, and
SIM. GAM. Boy, go on with the inventory.


SIM. How unlucky, feyther, to lay hold on me, when I wanted to practice my
part.


BANKS. This proceeding is too severe -- to lay an execution on my wretched
trifling goods, when I thought --


GAM. Aye, you have gone up to the big house with your complaint -- her
Ladyship's steward, to be sure, has made me give back your cottage and farm,
but your goods I seized for my rent.


BANKS. Leave me but a few necessaries; by my own labor, and the goodness of
my neighbors, I may soon redeem what the law has put in your hands.


GAM. The affair is now in my lawyer's hands, and plaintiff and defendant
chattering about it is all smoke.


SIM. Feyther, don't be so cruel to Mr. Banks.


GAM. I Will mark what I may want for myself -- stay you and see that not a pin's
point be removed. Exit.


SIM. ( tearing the paper) Dam'me, if I Will be a watch dog to bite the poor,
that I will not. Mr. Banks, as my feyther intends to put up your goods to auction,
if you could but get a friend to buy the choice of them for you again; sister
Jane has got steward to advance her a quarter's wages, and when I Have gone to
sell corn for feyther, I Have made a market penny now and then -- it is'n't much,
but every little helps. ( offers a leather purse)


BANKS. I thank you, my good natured boy, but keep your money.


SIM. I remember, about eight year ago you saved me from being drowned at Black
Poole -- if you will not take this, I Will fling it into Black Poole directly.


BANKS. My kind lad, I Will not hurt your feelings, by opposing your liberality.
( takes the purse)


SIM. He, he, he! -- He Is given my heart such pleasure, as I never felt, nor
I Am sure my feyther before me.


BANKS. But, Sim, whatever may be his opinion of worldly prudence, still
remember he is your parent.


Exit. SIM. I will -- One elbow chair, one claw table. ( crying out) Exit.


Enter AMELIA. AME. The confusion into which Lady Amaranth's family is thrown,
by the sudden departure and apprehended danger of her young cousin, must have
prevented her Ladyship from giving that attention to our affairs that I Am sure
was her inclination -- if I can but prevail on my brother to accept of her
protection -- Heavens, what is this?


Enter ROVER, fatigued and disordered. ROV. ( panting, as out of breath.) What
a race -- I Have got clear of those bloodhounds at last; if Abrawang had but
followed and backed me, we'd have tickled their catastrophe, but three to one
is odds, so safe's the word. Who Is house is this I Have run into -- the friendly
cottage of my hospitable old gentleman -- are you at home? (calls) I had a hard
struggle for it, murder was certainly their intent -- it was well for me I was
born without brains -- I Am quite weak and faint.


AME. ( comes forward.) Sir, a'n't you well?


ROV. Madam, I ask your pardon -- yes, Madam, very well, I thank you, now
exceedingly well -- got into a kind of rumpus with some worthy gentlemen -- not
gentlemen, but simple farmers, who mistook me, I fancy, for a sheath of barley,
for they had me down, and their flails flew merrily about my ears, but I got
up, and when I could no longer fight like a mastiff, I run like a greyhound --
but, dear Madam, pray excuse me -- this is very rude, faith.


AME. You seem disturbed, will you take any refreshment?


ROV. Madam, you're very good -- only a glass of some current wine, if you
please; I think it stands somewhere thereabouts. (Ame. fetches a bottle and
glass) Madam, I Have the honor of drinking your health.


AME. I hope you're not hurt, Sir.


ROV. A little better, but very faint still; I had a sample of this before, and
liked it so much that Ma'am will not you take another? (she declines.) Ma'am if
you would been fighting as I have, you would be glad of a drop ( drinks again.) Now I Am
as well as any man in Illyria -- got a few hard knocks, though.


AME. You Would better repose a little, you seemed much disordered coming in.


ROV. Why Madam you must know that it was --


Enter SHERIFF'S OFFICER. ( Catches Amelia's Chair, she retires, alarmed) OFF.
Come Ma'am, Mr. Gammon wants this chair to make up the half dozen above.


ROV. What Is all this?


OFF. Why, the furniture's seized on execution, and a man must do his duty.


ROV. Then scoundrel know, that a man's first duty is civility and tenderness
to a woman.


AME. Heaven's where is my brother, this gentleman will bring himself into
trouble.


OFF. Master, do you see, I Am representative for his honor the High Sheriff.


ROV. Every High Sheriff should be a gentleman, and when he is represented by a
rascal, he is dishonored; damn it, I might as well live about Covent Garden, and
every night get beating the watch, for here among groves and meadows, I Am
always squabling with constables.


OFF. Come, come, I must -- (sits down.)


ROV. As you say Sir, last Wednesday so it was, Sir, your most obedient humble
servant, pray, Sir, have you ever been astonished?


OFF. What?


ROV. Because Sir, I intend to astonish you, ( Takes a stick off a table and
heats him.) Now Sir, are you astonished?


OFF. Yes, but see if I don't suit you with an action.


ROV. Right -- suit the action to the word, and the word to the action. See if
the gentleman be not affrighted, damme, but I Will make thee an example.


OFF. A fine example when goods are seized by the law.


ROV. Thou worm and maggot of the law, hop me over every kennel house, or you
shall hop without my custom.


OFF. I don't value your custom.


ROV. I have astonished, now I Will amaze you.


OFF. No Sir, I will not be amazed, but see if I don't.


ROV. Hop! [Exit Officer threatening] Madam these sort of gentry, are but bad
company for a lady, so I Will just see him to the door -- Ma'am I Am your most
humble servant. Exit.


AME. I feel a strange kind of curiosity to know who this young gentleman is. I
find my hear interested, I cannot account for it; he must know the house by the
freedom he took: but then his gaiety, (without familiar rudeness) elegance of
manners and good breeding, seem to make him at home every where -- my brother I
think must know him.


Enter BANKS. BANKS. Amelia, did you see the young gentleman that was here? --
some ruffians have bound and dragged him from the door, on the allegation of
three men who means to swear he has robbed them, and have taken him to Lady
Amaranth's.


AME. How! he did enter in confusion as if pursued, but I Will stake my life on
his innocence, I Will speak to her Ladyship, and in spite of calumny he shall
have justice; he would not let me be insulted, because he saw me an unprotected
woman, without a husband or a son and shall he want an advocate brother? come
--


Exit. SCENE, LADY AMARANTH'S. Enter JANE. JANE. I believe there is no soul in
the house but myself; my Lady has sent all the folks round the country, to
search after the young 'Squire; she will certainly break her heart if any thing
happens to him. I don't wonder, for sure he is a dear sweet gentleman. His going
has spoiled our play, and I had almost got my part by heart, but must, must go
and do up the room for Mr. Banks's sister, whom my Lady has invited here --


Enter EPHRAIM. EPHESIANS. The man John Dory has carried the man George here in his
arms, and he locked him up; coming in they did look, like a blue lobster with a
shrimp in its claw. Here is the damsel I love alone.


JANE. They say when folks look in the glass, they see the black gentleman.
[Looks in a glass.] La, there he is!


EPHESIANS. Thou art employed in vanity. [Look's over her shoulder.]


JANE. Well, who are you?


EPHESIANS. It Is natural for woman to love man.


JANE. Yea, but not such ugly men as you are, why did you come in to frighten
me? when you know there is nobody here but ourselves.


EPHESIANS. I Am glad of that; I Am the elm, and you are the honey-suckle, let thine
arms entwine me.


JANE. What a rogue is here, but yonder comes my Lady. Ill show him off in his
true colors. Aside.


EHH. Cla^^ me round.


JANE. I will, if you will pull off your hat and make me a low bow.


EPHESIANS. I cannot bend my body, nor take off my beaver.


JANE. Then you're very impudent, go along.


EPHESIANS. To win thy favor. [moves his hat.]


JANE. Well, now read me a speech out of that fine play book.


EPHESIANS. Read a play book! abo-mi-nation! but will thou kiss me?


JANE. I Kiss a man! abomination, but you may take my hand.


EPHESIANS, Oh, it is a comfort to the lip of the faithful. [Kisses her hand.]


Enter LADY AMARANTH. LADY A. How! ( ^aps him on the shoulder) Ah, thou sly and
deceitful hypocrite!


EPHESIANS. Verily Mary I was buffetted by Satan in the shape of a damsel.


LADY A. Begone,


EPHESIANS. My spirit is sad though I move so nimbly,


Exit slowly. LADY A. But oh, heavens! no tidings of my dearest Harry, Jane,
let them renew their search.


JANE. Here Is Madam Amelia -- but I Will make brother Sim look for the young
'Squire. Exit.


Enter Enter AMELIA. AME, Oh, Madam might I implore your influence with --


LADY A. Thou art ill accomodated here, but I hope thou will excuse it, my mind
is a sea of trouble, my peace is shipwrecked! Oh, had thou seen my Cousin
Harry! all who know him must be anxious for his safety! how unlucky, this
servant to prevent Sir George from giving him that assistance, which paternal
cares and indeed gratitude demanded, for 'twas filial affection bade him to
pursue those wicked men, callous to every feeling of humanity -- they may --
yes my Henry in the opening bud of manliness is nipp'd!


JOHN. Heave ahead. [John without.]


Enter JOHN with SIR GEORGE. SIR GEO. Rascal, whip me up like a pound of tea,
dance about like a young bear! make me quit the preserver of my life, yes,
puppy unknown will think me a paltroon, and that I was afraid to follow and
second him.


JOHN. You may as well turn into your hammock, for out to night you shall not
go. ( Sees Amelia) Mercy of heaven is'n't it -- only look.


SIR GEO. It Is my Amelia.


JOHN. Reef your foresail first, you cracked her heart by sheering off, and now
you will overset her by bringing to.


AME. Are you at length returned to me, my Seymour?


LADY A. Seymour! -- her mind's disturbed -- this is mine uncle, Sir George
Thunder.


JOHN. No, no, my Lady, she knows what she is saying, well enough.


SIR GEO. Niece, I have been a villain to this lady, I confess; but, my dear
Amelia, providence has done you justice in part; for from the first month I
quitted you, I have never entered one happy hour on my journals -- hearing that
you foundered, and considering myself the cause, the worm of remorse has knaw'd
my timbers.


AME. You're not still offended with me.


SIR GEO. Me -- can you forgive me my offense, and condescend to take my hand
as an atonement?


AME. Your hand -- do you forget we are already married?


SIR GEO. Aye, there was my rascality.


JOHN. You may say that.


SIR GEO. That marriage, my dear, I Am ashamed to own it -- but it was --


JOHN. As good as if done by the chaplain of the Eagle.


SIR GEO. Hold your tongue, you impudent crimp, you^ pandar, you bad adviser --
I Will strike my false colors, I Will acknowledge the chaplain you provided was --


JOHN. A good man, and a greater honor to his black, than your honor has been
to your blue cloth; by the word of a seaman, here he is himself.


Enter BANKS. SIR GEO. Your brother!


BANKS. Capt. Seymour! have I found you, Sir?


SIR GEO. My dear Banks, I Will make every reparation -- Amelia shall really be
my wife.


BANKS. That, Sir, my sister is already; for when I performed the marriage
ceremony, which you took only as a cloak of your deception, I was actually in
orders.


JOHN,. Now who is the crimp and the pandar? -- I never told you this, because I
thought a man's own reflections were the best punishment for betraying an
innocent woman.


SIR GEO. ( to John.) You shall be a post captain for this, sink me, if you
shall not.


LADY A. Madam, my inmost soul partaketh of thy gladness and joy for thy
reformation: ( to Sir Geo.) but thy prior marriage to this lady annuls the
subsequent, and my cousin Harry is not now thine heir.


SIR GEO. So much the better, he is an unnatural cub -- but, Amelia, I flatter
myself I have an heir -- my infant boy.


AME. Ha, husband, you had, but --


SIR GEO. Gone -- well, well, I see I have been a miserable scoundrel -- I Will
adopt that brave kind lad, that wou'd'n't let any body kill me but himself, he
shall have my estate, that is my own acqusition -- my lady marrying him -- Puppy
Unknown's a fine fellow! Amelia, only for him, you would never have found your
husband. -- Captain Seymour is Sir George Thunder.


AME. What!


BANKS. Are you Sir George Thunder.


Enter LANDLORD and EPHRAIM. LAND. Please you, Madam, they have got a foot-pad
in custody.


EPHESIANS. I Am come to sit in judgment, for there is a bad man in thy house, Mary --
bring him before me.


SIR GEO. Before you, old Squintabus! perhaps you don't know I Am a magistrate.


EPHESIANS. I Will examine him.


SIR GEO. You be damned; I Will examine him myself -- tow him in here, I Will give
him a passport to Winchester bilbows.


AME. (kneels to Sir Geo.) Oh, Sir, as you hope for mercy, extend it to this
youth, and even should he be guilty, which from our knowledge of his benevolent
and noble nature, I think next to an impossibility, let the services he has
rendered us plead for him -- he protected your forsaken wife, and her unhappy
brother, in the hour of want and sorrow.


SIR GEO. What, Amelia plead for a robber! -- consider my love, Justice is
above bias or partiality; if my son violated the laws of his country. I Would
deliver him up as a public victim to disgrace and punishment.


LADY A. Oh, my impartial uncle! Had thy country any laws to punish him, who
instead of paltry gold, would rob the artless virgin of her dearest treasure,
in the rigid judge, I should now behold the trembling criminal.


Enter TWITCH, with two men, and ROVER bound. EPHESIANS. Speak thou --


SIR GEO. Hold thy clapper, thou -- you wretched person, who are the
prosecutors.


EPHESIANS. Call in --


SIR GEO. Will nobody stop his mouth (John carries him up the stage.) Where are
the prosecutors?


TWITCH, There, tell his worship the justice.


1st MAN. A justice -- oh, the devil! -- I thought we should have nothing but
quakers to deal with ( aside)


SIR GEO. Come, how did this fellow rob you?


1st MAN. Why, your honor, I swear --


SIR GEO. Oh, ho!


1st MAN. Zounds, we are in the wrong, this is the very --


SIR GEO. Clap down the hatches, secure these sharks.


ROV. I Am glad to find you here, Abrawang, as I believe you have some knowledge
of these gentlemen.


LADY A. Heaven's, my cousin Harry!


SIR GEO. The Devil! is'n't that my spear and shield?


JOHN. My young master, what have you been at ^ere, ( unbinds him,) this rope
may be wanted yet.


Enter HARRY. HARRY. My dear fellow are you safe?


ROV. Yes, Dick, I was brought here very safe, I assure you.


HARRY. A confederate in custody has made a confession of their villainy, that
they concerted this plan to accuse him of a robbery, first for revenge, then in
hopes to share the reward for apprehending him; he also owns they are not
sailors but depredators on the public.


SIR GEO. What, could you find no jacket to disgrace by your wearing than that
of an English Seamen -- a character, whose bravery is even the admiration of
his enemies, and genuine honesty of heart, the glory of human nature? Keep them
safe.


JOHN. Aye, I knew the rope would be wanted, ( drives them off.)


SIR GEO. Not knowing that the Justice of Peace whom they brought the lad
before, is the very man they attacked, ha, ha, ha! the rogues have fallen into
their own snare.


ROV. What now you're a Justice of Peace? -- well said, Abrawang.


AME. Then, Sir George you know him too?


SIR GEO. Know him! to be sure I do.


ROV. Still Sir George -- what then you will not resign your Knighthood! Madam,
I Am happy to see you again. Ah, how do you do, my kind host? ( to Banks)


LADY A. I rejoice at thy safety, be reconciled to him. ( To Sir George)


SIR GEO. Reconciled! if I don't love, respect and honor him, I should be
unworthy of the life he rescued -- but who is he?


HARRY. Sir, he is --


ROV. Dick, I thank you for your good wishes, but I Am still determined not to
impose on this Lady. Madam, as I first told that well-meaning tar, when he
forced me to your house, I Am not the son of Sir George Thunder.


JOHN. Then I wish you was the son of an Admiral, and I your father.


HARRY. You refuse the lady -- to punish you, I have a mind to take her myself,
my dear Cousin.


ROV. Stop Dick, if I who adore her will not, you shall not; no, no, Madam, never
mind what the fellow says, he is as poor as myself, is'n't he Abrawang?


HARRY. Then my dear Rover, since you are so obstinately interrested, I Will no
longer teize my father, whom you here see, and in your strolling friend, his
very truant Harry that ran from Portsmoth Academy, and joined you and fellow
Comedians.


ROV. Indeed!


HARRY. Dear cousin forgive me, if through my zeal for the happiness of my
friend, I endeavored to promote yours, by giving you a husband, more worthy
than myself.


ROV. Am I to believe, Madam, is your uncle Sir George Thunder in the room?


LADY A. He is.


ROV. It Is you in reality; what I Have had the impudence to assume, and have
perplexed your father with my ridiculous effrontery. I told you (to John) I was
not the person you took me for, but you must bring your damned chariot -- I am
ashamed and mortified -- Madam, I take my leave.


EPHESIANS. Thou art welcome to go.


ROV. Sir George, as the father of my friend, I cannot lift my hand against
you, but I hope, Sir, you will apoligize to me apart.


SIR GEO. Aye, with pleasure, my noble splinter. Now tell me from what dock you
were launched, my heart of oak?


ROV. I heard in England, Sir; but from my earliest knowledge, till within a
few years I Have been in the East Indies.


SIR GEO. Beyond seas -- well, and how?


ROV It seems I was committed an infant to the care of a lady, who was herself
obliged by the gentle Hyder Ally to strike her toilet, and decamp without beat
of drum, leaving me a chubby little fellow, squatted on a carpet; a serjant's
wife alone returned, and snatched me off triumphant, through fire, smoke, cannon,
cries, and carnage.


LADY A. ( To Amelia) Do thou mark?


AME. Sir, can you recollect the name of the town where --


ROV. Yes Madam, the town was Negapatam.


AME. I thank you, Sir.


ROV. An officer, who had much rather act Hotspur on the stage, than in the
field, brought me up behind the scenes at Calcutta theater; I was enrolled on
the boards, acted myself into the favor of a colonel, promised a pair of
colors; but impatient to find my parents, hid myself in the steerage of a
homewardbound ship, assumed the name of Rover, from the uncertainty of my sat,
and have murdered more Poets, than Rajahs, stopped on English ground
unincumbered with rupees or pagodas. -- Ha, ha, ha, wouldst'st thou have come
home so, little Ephraim?


EPHESIANS. I would bring myself home with some money.


AME. Excuse my curiosity, Sir -- what was the lady's name in whose care you
was left?


ROV. Oh, Madam, she was the lady of a Major Linstock, but I heard my mother's
name was Seymour.


SIR. GEO. Why, Amelia!


AME. My son!


ROV. Madam!


AME. It is my Charles. (embraces him)


JOHN. Tol de roll! -- ( dances a hornpipe step) -- Though I never heard it
before, my heart told me he was a chip of the old block. Your father ( to
Rover, and points to Sir Geo.)


ROV. Can it --


AME. Yes, my son, Sir George Thunder here is Captain Seymour, in search of
whom you may have heard I quitted England.


ROV. Heavens, then have I attempted to raise my hands against a parent's life.


SIR GEO. My brave boy -- then have I a son with spirit to fight me as a
sailor, yet defend me as a father.


LADY A. Uncle, you will recollect 'twas I first introduced this son to thee.


SIR GEO. And I hope you will next introduce a grandson to me, young Slyboots. --
Harry, you have lost your fortune.


HARRY. Yes, Sir -- but I Have gained a brother, whose friendship, before I knew
him to be such, I prized before the first fortune in England.


ROV. My dearest Rosalind.


AME. Then, you will take our Charles?


LADY A. Yea; but only on conditions, thou bestow thy fortune on his friend and
brother -- mine is sufficient for us both, is it not?


ROV. Angelic creature! to think of my generous friend. But now for As You Like
It; where is Lamp and Trap! I shall ever love a play; a spark from Shakespeare's
muse of fire, was the star that guided me through my desolate and bewildered
maze of life, and brought me to these unexpected blessings.

To merit friends so good, so sweet a wife,
The tender husband be my part for life.
My Wild Oats sown, let candid Thespian laws
Decree that glorious harvest -- your applause.

FINIS.
LIONEL and CLARISSA: OR, THE SCHOOL FOR FATHERS. A COMIC OPERA. WRITTEN BY MR.
BICKERSTAFF. MARKED WITH THE VARIATIONS IN THE MANAGER'S BOOK AT THE THEATER
ROYAL IN DRURY LANE.

PHILADELPHIA. PRINTED BY W. W. WOODWARD, FOR MATTHEW CAREY, No. ^^8,
Market-street. 1794.

*THE Reader is desired to observe, that the Passages omitted in the
representation at the Theater, are here preserved, and marked with inverted
commas; as in line 1 to 15, page 14.

Advertisement.
HAVING, for some years, ^et with very great success in my productions of the
musical kind; when I wrote the following Opera, it was with unusual care and
attention; and it was the general opinion of all my friends, some of whom rank
among the best judges, that of all my trifles, Lionel and Clarissa was the most
pardonable: a decision in its favor, which I was the prouder of, because, to
the best of my knowledge, through the whole, I had not borrowed an expression,
a sentiment, or a character, from any dramatic writer extant.

When Mr. GARRICK thought of performing this piece at Drury Lane theater, he
had a new singer to bring out, and every thing possible for her advantage was
to be done; this necessarily occasioned some new songs and airs to be
introduced; and other singers, with voices of a different compass from those
who originally acted the parts, occasioned still more; by which means the
greatest part of the music unavoidably became new. This is the chief, and
indeed the only alteration made in the Opera: and even to that, I should in
many places have been forced, much against my will, had it not given a fresh
opportunity to Mr. Dibden to display his admirable talents as a musical
composer. And I will be bold to say, that his airs, serious and comic, in this
Opera, will appear to no disadvantage by being heard with those of some of the
greatest masters.

The SCHOOL FOR FATHERS is added to the title, because the plot in evidently
double; and that of Lionel and Clarissa alluded to but one part of it, as the
readers and spectators will easily perceive.

ISAAC BICKERSTAFF.
P. S. The SONGS varying from those performed at Drury Lane, are inserted at
the end.



Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
DRURY LANE. COVENT GARDEN. Lionel Mr. Barrymore. Mr. Johnstone. Colonel
Oldboy, Mr. Parsons. Mr. Wilson. Sir John Flowerdale, Mr. Aickin. Mr. Hull.
Jessamy, Mr. Dodd. Signora Sestini. Jenkins, Mr. Bannister. Mr. Bannieter.
Harman, Mr. Williams. Mr. Davies. WOMEN.
Clarissa, Mrs. Crouch. Mrs. Bannisler. Lady Mary Oldboy, Mrs. Hopkins. Mrs.
Webb. Diana, Miss George. Mrs. Martyr. Jenny, Mrs. Wrighten. Mrs. Chalmers.

LIONEL AND CLARISSA.
ACT I.
SCENE, A Chamber in Colonel Oldboy's House: Colonel Oldboy at breakfast,
reading a newspaper; at a little distance sits Jenkins; and on the opposite
side, Diana, playing upon a harpsichord. A Girl attending. Diana. AH how
delightful the morning,
How sweet are the prospects it yields!
Summer luxuriant adorning
The gardens, the groves, and the fields.
Be grateful to the season,
Its pleasures let us employ;
Kind nature gives, and reason
Permits us to enjoy.

Col. Well said, Die; thank you, Die. This, master Jenkins, is the way I make my
daughter entertain me every morning at breakfast. Come here and kiss me, you
slut; come here and kiss me, you baggage.


Dian. Lord, papa, you call one such names --


Col. A fine girl, master Jenkins, a devilish fine girl! she has got my eye to
a twinkle. There Is fire for you! -- spirit! -- I design to marry her to a Duke;
how much money do you think a Duke would expect with such a wench?


Jen. Why, Colonel, with submission, I think there is no occasion to go out of
our own country here; we have never a Duke in it, I believe; but we have many
an honest gentleman, who, in my opinion, might deserve the young lady.


Col. So you would have me marry Die to a country Squire, eh! How say you to
this, Die? Would not you rather be married to a Duke?


Dian. So my husband's a rake, papa, I don't care what he is.


Col. A rake! you damned confounded little baggage; why, you would not wish to
marry a rake, would you? So her husband is a rake, she does not care what he
is! -- Ha, ha, ha, ha!


Dian. Well, but listen to me, papa -- When you go out with your gun, do you
take any pleasure in shooting the poor tame ducks and chickens in your yard?
No, the partridge, the pheasant, the woodcock, are the game; there is some
sport in bringing them down, because they are wild; and it is just the same
with an husband or a lover. I would not waste powder and shot to wound one of
your sober pretty behaved gentlemen; but to hit a libertine, extravagant,
madcap fellow, to take him upon the wing --


Col. Do you hear her, master Jenkins? Ha, ha, ha!


Jen. Well, but good Colonel, what do you say to my worthy and honorable patron
here, Sir John Flowerdale? He has an estate of eight thousand pounds a year as
well, paid rents as any in the kingdom, and but one only daughter to enjoy it;
and yet he is willing, you see, to give this daughter to your son.


Dian. Pray, Mr. Jenkins, how does Miss Clarissa and our university friend, Mr.
Lionel? That is the only grave young man I ever liked, and the only handsome
one I ever was acquainted with, that did not make love to me.


Col. Ay, master Jenkins, who is this Lionel? They say he is a damned witty,
knowing fellow; and egad I think him well enough for one brought up in a
college.


Jen. His father was a general officer, a particular friend of Sir John's, who,
like many more brave men that live and die in defending their country, left
little else than honor behind him* Sir John sent this young man, at his own
expense, to Oxford; where, while his son lived, they were upon the same
footing: and since our young gentleman's death, which you know unfortunately
happened about two years ago, he has continued him there. During the vacation
he is come to pay us a visit, and Sir John intends that he shall shortly take
orders for a very considerable benefice in the gift of the family, the present
incumbent of which is an aged man.


Dian. The last time I was at your house, he was teaching Miss Clarissa
mathematics and philosophy. Lord! what a strange brain I have! If I was to sit
down to distract myself with such studies --


Col. Go, hussy, let some of your brother's rascals inform their master that
he has been long enough at his toilet; here is a message from Sir John
Flowerdale -- You a brain for mathematics, indeed! we shall have women wanting
to head our regiments tomorrow or next day.


Dian. Well, papa, and suppose we did. I believe, in a battle of the sexes, you
men would hardly get the better of us.

To rob them of strength, when wise nature thought fit
By women to still do her duty,
Instead of a sword, she endues them with wit,
And gave them a shield in there beauty.
Sound, sound then the trumpet, both sexes to arms!
Our tyrants at once and protectors!
We quickly shall see, whether courage or charms
Decide for the Helens or Hectors. Exit.

Col. Well, master Jenkins! don't you think now that a nobleman, a Duke, an
Earl, or a Marquis, might be content to share his title -- I say, you
understand me -- with a sweetener of thirty or forty thousand pounds, to pay
off mortgages? Besides, there is a prospect of my whole estate; for, I dare
swear her brother will never have any children.


Jen. I should be concerned at that, Colonel, when there are two such fortunes
to descend to his heirs, as yours and Sir John Flowerdale's.


Col. Why, look you, master Jenkins, Sir John Flowerdale is an honest
gentleman; our families are nearly related; we have been neighbors time out of
mind; and if he and I have an odd dispute now and then, it is not for want of a
cordial esteem at bottom. He is going to marry his daughter to my son; she is a
beautiful girl, an elegant girl, a sensible girl, a worthy girl, and -- a word
in your ear -- damn me, it I an't very sorry for her.


Jen. Sorry! Colonel?


Col. Ay -- between ourselves, master Jenkins, my son will not do.


Jen. How do you mean?


Col. I tell you, master Jenkins, he will not do -- he is not the thing, a prig --
At sixteen years old, or thereabouts, he was a bold sprightly boy, as you
should see in a thousand; could drink his pint of port, or his bottle of claret
-- now he mixes all his wine with water.


Jen. Oh! if that be his only fault, Colonel, he will never make the worse
husband, I Will answer for it.


Col. You know my wife is a woman of quality -- I was prevailed upon to send
him to be brought up by her brother Lord J^^samy, who had no children of his
own, and promised to leave him an estate -- He has got the estate indeed, but
the fellow has taken his Lordship's name for it. Now, master Jenkins, I would
be glad to know how the name of Jessamy is better than that of Oldboy?


Jen. Well! but, Colonel, it is allowed on all hands, that his Lordship has
given your son an excellent education.


Col. Psha! he sent him to the university, and to travel, for sooth; but, what
of that? I was abroad, and at the university myself, and never a rush the
better for either. I quarrelled with his Lordship about six years before his
death, and so had not an opportunity of seeing how the youth went on; if I had,
master Jenkins, I would no more have suffered him to be made such a monkey of
-- He has been in my house but three days, and it is all turned topsey-turvey
by him and his rascally servants -- then his chamber is like a perfumer's shop,
with wash-balls, pastes, and pomatum -- and do you know he had the impudence to
tell me yesterday at my own table, that I did not know how to behave myself.


Jen. Pray, Colonel, how does my Lady Mary?


Col. What, my wife? In the old way, master Jenkins; always complaining; ever
something the matter with her head, or her back, or her legs -- but we have had
the devil to pay lately -- she and I did not speak to one another for three
weeks.


Jen. How so, sir?


Col. A little affair of jealousy -- You most know, my game-keeper's daughter
has had a child, and the plaguey baggage takes it into her head to lay it to me
-- Upon my soul, it is a fine fat chubby infant, as ever I set my eyes on; I
have sent it to nurse; and, between you and me, I believe I shall leave it a
fortune.


Jen. Ah, Colonel, you will never give over.


Col. You know my Lady has a pretty vein of poetry; she writ me an heroic
epistle upon it, where she calls me her dear false Damon; so I let her cry a
little, promised to do so no more, and now we are as good friends as ever.


Jen. Well, Colonel, I must take my leave; I have delivered my message, and Sir
John may expect the pleasure of your company to dinner.


Col. Ay, ay, we'll come -- pox of ceremony among friends. But will not you stay
to see my son; I have sent to him, and suppose he will be here as soon as his
valet-de-chambre will give him leave.


Jen. There Is no occasion, good sir; present my humble respects, that is all.


Col. Well, but, zounds, Jenkins, you must not go till you drink something --
let you and I have a bottle of hock --


Jen. Not for the world, Colonel; I never touch any thing strong in the morning.


Col. Never touch any thing strong! Why, one bottle will not hurt you, man -- this
is old, and as mild as milk.


Jen. Well, but, Colonel, pray excuse me.

To tell you the truth,
In the days of my youth,
As mirth and nature bid,
I liked a glass,
And I loved a lass.
And I did as younkers did.
But now I am old,
With grief be it told,
I must those freaks forbear;
At sixty-three,
'Twixt you and me,
A man grows worse for wear. Exit.

Enter Jessamy, and Lady Mary Oldboy. Lady M. Shut the door, why don't you shut
the door there? Have you a mind I should catch my death? -- This house is
absolutely the cave of Aeo^us; one had as good live on the eddystone, or in a
windmill.


Jes. I thought they told your Ladyship that there was a messenger here from
Sir John Flowerdale?


Col. Well, sir, and so there was; but he had not patience to wait upon your
curling-irons. Mr. Jenkins was here, Sir John Flowerdale's steward, who has
lived in the family these forty years.


Jes. And pray, sir, might not Sir John Flowerdale have come himself? If he had
been acquainted with the rules of good breeding, he would have known that I
ought to have been visited.


Lady M. Upon my word, Colonel, this is a solecism.


Col. 'Sblood, my Lady, its none. Sir John Flowerdale came but last night from
my sister's seat in the West, and is a little out of order. But I suppose he
thinks he ought to appear before him with his daughter in one hand, and his
rent-roll in the other, and cry, Sir, pray do me the favor to accept them.


Lady M. Nay, but, Mr. Oldboy, permit me to say --


Col. He need not give himself so many affected airs; I think it is very well if
he gets such a girl for going for -- she is one of the handsomest and richest in
this country, and more than he deserves.


Jes. That Is an exceeding fine china jar your Ladyship has got in the next
room; I saw the fellow of it the other day at Williams's, and will send to my
agent to purchase it; it is the true matchless old blue and white. Lady Betty
Barebones has a couple that she gave an hundred guineas for, on board an
Indiaman; but she reckons them at a hundred and twenty-five, on account of half
a dozen plates, four Nankin beakers, and a couple of shading mandarins, that
the custom-house officers took from under her petticoats.


Col. Did you ever hear the like of this! He Is chattering about old china,
while I am talking to him of a fine girl. I tell you what, Mr. Jessamy, since
that is the name you choose to be called by, I have a good mind to knock you
down.


Jes. Knock me down, Colonel! What do you mean? I must tell you, sir, this is a
language to which I have not been accustomed; and if you think proper to
continue to repeat it, I shall be under a necessity of quitting your house?


Col. Quitting my house?


Jes. Yes, sir, incontinently.


Col. Why, sir, am not I your father, sir? and have I not a right to talk to
you as I like? I will, sirrah. But, perhaps I may not be your father, and I hope
not.


Lady M. Heavens and earth, Mr. Oldboy!


Col. What Is the matter, madam! I mean, madam, that he might have been changed
at nurse, madam; and I believe he was.


Jes. Huh! huh! huh!


Col. Do you laugh at me, you saucy jackanapes!


Lady M. Who Is there -- somebody bring me a chair. Really, Mr. Oldboy, you
throw my weakly frame into such repeated convulsions -- but I see your aim; you
want to lay me in my grave, and you will very soon have that satisfaction.


Col. I cannot bear the sight of him.


Lady M. Open that window, give me air, or I shall faint.


Jes. Hold, hold, let me tie a handkerchief about my neck first. This cursed
sharp north wind -- Antoine, bring down my muff.


Col. Ay, do, and his great-coat.


Lady M. Margaret, some hartsharn. My dear Mr. Oldboy, why will you fly out in
this way, when you know how it shocks my tender nerves?


Col. 'Sblood, madam, its enough to make a man mad.


Lady M. Hartshorn! Hartshorn!


Jes. Colonel!


Col. Do you hear the puppy?


Jes. Will you give me leave to ask you one question?


Col. I don't know whether I will or not.


Jes. I should be glad to know, that is all, what single circumstance in my
conduct, carriage, or figure, you can possibly find fault with -- Perhaps I may
be brought to reform -- Pr'ythee, let me hear from your own mouth then,
seriously what it is you do like, and what it is you do not like.


Col. Hum!


Jes. Be ingenuous, speak and spare not.


Col. You would know?

Zounds, sir! then I Will tell you without any jest,
The thing of all things which I hate and detest;
A coxcomb, a fop,
A dainty milk-sop;
Who, essenc'd and dizen'd from bottom to top,
Looks just like a doll for a milliner's shop.
A thing full of prate,
And pride and conceit;
All fashion, no weight;
Who shrugs and takes snuff,
And carries a muff;
A minikin,
Finiking,
French powder puff:
And now, sir, I fancy I Have told you enough Exit.

Jes. What Is the matter with the Colonel, madam; does your Ladyship know?


Lady M. Heigho! don't be surprised, my dear; it was the same thing with my
late dear brother, Lord Jessamy; they never could agree: that good-natured,
friendly soul, knowing the delicacy of my constitution, has often said, sister
Mary, I pity you. Not but your father has good qualities, and, I assure you, I
remember him a very fine gentleman himself. In the year of the hard frost, one
thousand seven hundred and thirty-nine, when he first paid his addresses to me,
he was called agreeable J^ck O^dboy, though I married him without the consent
of your noble grandfather.


J^s. I think he ought to be proud of me: I believe there is many a Duke, nay
Prince, who would esteem themselves happy in having such a son --


Lady M. Yes, my dear; but your sister was always your father's favorite: He
intends to give her a prodigious fortune, and sets his heart upon seeing her a
woman of quality.


J^s. He should wish to see her look a little like a gentlewoman first. When
she was in London last winter, I am told she was taken notice of by a few men.
But she wants a^r, manner --


Lady M. And has not a bit of the genius of our family, and I never knew a
woman of it, but herself, without. I have tried her. About three years ago, I
set her to translate a little French song: I found she had not even an idea of
versification; and she put down love and joy for rhyme -- so I gave her over.


J^s. Why, indeed, she appears to have more of the ' T^atestris than the Sappho
about her.


Lady M. Well, my dear, I must go and dress myself, though I protest I am
fitter for my bed than my coach -- And condescend to the Colonel a little --
Do, my dear, if it be only to oblige your mamma. Exit.


J^s. Let me consider -- I am going to visit a country Baronet here, who would
fain prevail upon me to marry his daughter: the old gentleman has heard of my
parts and understanding; Miss, of my figure and address -- But, suppose I
should not like her when I see her? -- Why, positively, then I will not have
her; the treaty's at an end, and, sans compliment, we break up the congress.
But, will not that be cruel, after having suffered her to flatter herself with
hopes, and showing myself to her. She Is a strange dowdy, I dare believe:
however, she brings provision with her for a separate maintenance.

Antoine, appretez la toilette. I am going to spend a cursed day; that I
perceive already; I wish it was over, I dread it as much as a general election.

When a man of fashion condescends
To herd among his country friends,
They watch his looks, his motions:
One booby gapes, another stares,
And all he says, does, eats, drinks, wears,
Must suit their rustic notions.
But as for this brutish old clown here,
'Sdeath, why did I ever come down here!
The savage will now never quit me:
Then a consort to take,
For my family's sake,
Twix a fair jeopardy, sp^^^ me! Exit,

SCENE, a Study in Sir John Flowerdale 's House. -- Clarissa enters, followed
by Jenny. Clar. Immortal powers, protect me,
Assist, support, direct me;
Relieve a heart oppressed:
Ah! why this palpitation!
Cease, busy perturbation,
And let me, let me rest.

Jen. My dear lady, what ails you?


Clar. Nothing, Jenny; nothing.


Jen. Pardon me madam, there is something ails you, indeed. Lord! what
signifies all the grandeur and riches in this world, if they cannot procure one
content. I am sure it vexes me to the heart, so it does, to see such a dear,
sweet, worthy young lady, as you are, pining yourself to death.


Clar. Jenny, you are a good girl, and I am very much obliged to you for
feeling so much on my account; but in a little time, I hope, I shall be easier.


Jen. Why, now, here to day, madam -- for certain, you ought to be merry
today, when there is a fine gentleman coming to court you, but, if you like any
one else better, I am sure, I wish you had him, with all my soul.


Clar. Suppose, Jenny, I was so unfortunate as to like a man without my
father's approbation -- would you wish me to marry him?


Jen. I wish you married to any one, madam, that could make you happy.


Clar. Heigho!


Jen. Madam! madam! yonder is Sir John and Mr. Lionel on the terrace. I believe
they are coming up here. Poor, dear, Mr. Lionel, he does not seem to be in over
great spirits either. To be sure, madam, it is no business of mine; but, I
believe, if the truth was known, there are those in the house who would give
more than ever I shall be worth, or any the likes of me, to prevent the
marriage of a certain person that shall be nameless.


Clar. What do you mean? I don't understand you.


Jen. I hope you are not angry, madam?


Clar. Ah! Jenny --


Jen. Lauk, madam! do you think when Mr. Lionel's a clergyman, he will be obliged
to cut off his hair. I Am sure it will be a thousand pities, for it is the
sweetest color, and looks the nicest put up in a queue -- and your great
pudding-sleeves! Lord! they will quite spoil his shape, and the fall of his
shoulders. Well! madam, if I was a lady of large fortune, I Will be hanged if Mr.
Lionel should be a parson, if I could help it.


Clar. I Am going into my dressing room -- ^t seems then Mr. Lionel is a great
favorite of yours; but pray, Jenny* have a care how you talk in this manner to
any one else.


Jen. Me talk! madam -- I thought you knew me better; and, my dear lady, keep
up your spirits. I Am sure I have dressed you to day as nicely as hands and pins
can make you.

I Am but a poor servant, it is true, ma'am;
But was I a lady like you, ma'am,
In grief would I sit? The dickens a bit;
No, faith, I would search the world through, ma'am,
To find what my liking could hit.
Set in case a young man,
In my fancy there ran,
It might anger my friends and relations;
But if I had regard,
It should go very hard,
Or I Would follow my own inclinations. Exeunt.

Enter Sir John Flowerdale, and Lionel. Sir John. Indeed, Lionel, I will not
hear of it. What! to run from us all of a sudden, this way; and at such a time,
too; the eve of my daughters wedding, as I may call it, when your company must
be doubly agreeable, as well as necessary to us? I am sure you have no studies
at present that require your attendance at Oxford: I must therefore insist on
your putting such thoughts out of your head.


Lion. Upon my word, sir, I have been so long from the university, that it is
time for me to think of returning. It is true, I have no absolute studies; but
really, sir, I shall be obliged to you if you will give me leave to go.


Sir John. Come, come, my dear L^onel, I have for some time observed a more
than ordinary gravity growing upon you, and I am not to learn the reason of it:
I know, to minds serious and well inclined, like yours, the sacred functions
you are about to embrace --


Lion. Dear sir, your goodness to me, of every kind, is so great, so unremitted
-- Your condescension, your friendly attentions -- in short, sir, I want words
to express my sense of obligations --


Sir John. Fie, fie, no more of them. By my last letters, I find, that my old
friend the Rector still continues in good health, considering his advanced
years. You may imagine, I am far from desiring the death of so worthy and pious
a man; yet, I must own, at this time, I could wish you were in orders, as you
might then perform the ceremony of my daughter's marriage; which would give me
a secret satisfaction.


Lion. No doubt, sir, any office in my power that could be instrumental to the
happiness of any in your family, I should perform with pleasure.


Sir John. Why, really, Lionel, from the character of her intended husband, I
have no room to doubt, but this match will make Clarissa perfectly happy: to be
sure the alliance is the most eligible for both families.


Lion. If the gentleman is sensible of his happiness in the alliance, sir.


Sir John. The fondness of a father is always suspected of partiality; yet, I
believe, I may venture to say, that few young women will be found more
unexceptionable than my daughter: her person is agreeable, her temper sweet,
her understanding good; and, with the obligations she has to your instructions
--


Lion. You do my endeavors too much honor, sir; I have been able to add
nothing to Miss Flowerdale's accomplishments, but a little knowledge in matters
of small importance to a mind already so well improved.


Sir John. I don't think so; a little knowledge, even in those matters, is
necessary for a woman, in whom I am far from considering ignorance as a
desirable characteristic. When intelligence is not attended with impertinent
affectation, it teaches them to judge with precision, and gives them a degree
of solidity necessary for the companion of a sensible man.


Lion. Yonder Is Mr. Jenkins: I fancy he is looking for you, sir.


Sir John. I see him; he is come back from Colonel Oldboy's; I have a few words
to say to him, and will return to you again in a minute. Exit.


Lion. To be a burden to one's self, to wage continual war with one's own
passions; forced to combat, unable to overcome! But see, she appears, whose
presence turns all my sufferings into transport, and makes even misery itself
delightful.

Enter Clarissa. Perhaps, madam, you are not at leisure now; otherwise, if you
thought proper, we would resume the subject we were upon yesterday.


Clar. I am sure, sir, I give you a great deal of trouble.


Lion. Madam, you give me no trouble; I should think every hour of my life
happily employed in your service; and as this is probably the last time I shall
have the satisfaction of attending you upon the same occasion --


Clar. Upon my word, Mr. Lionel, I think myself extremely obliged to you; and
shall ever consider the enjoyment of your friendship --


Lion. My friendship, madam, can be of little moment to you; but if the most
perfect adoration, if the warmest wishes for your felicity, though I should
never be witness of it -- if these, madam, can have any merit to continue in
your remembrance, a man once honored with a share of your esteem --


Clar. Hold, sir -- I think I hear somebody.


Lion. If you please, madam, we will turn over this oelestial globe once more
-- Have you looked at the book I left you yesterday?


Clar. Really, sir, I have been so much disturbed in my thoughts for these two
or three days past, that I have not been able to look at any thing.


Lion. I am sorry to hear that, madam; I hope there was nothing particular to
disturb you. The care Sir John takes to dispose of your hand in a manner
suitable to your birth and fortune --


Clar. I don't know, sir -- I own I am disturbed; I own I am uneasy; there is
something weighs upon my heart, which I would fain disclose.


Lion. Upon your heart, madam! -- did you say your heart?


Clar. I did, sir -- I --


Enter Jenny. Jen. Madam! madam! Here Is a coach and six driving up the avenue:
It Is Colonel Oldboy's family; and, I believe, the gentleman is in it that is
coming to court you. Lord, I must run and have a peep at him out of the window.
Exit.


Lion. Madam, I Will take my leave.


Clar. Why so, sir? -- Bless me, Mr. Lionel, what is the matter! -- You turn
pale.


Lion. Madam!


Clar. Pray speak to me, sir -- You tremble -- Tell me the cause of this sudden
change. -- How are you? -- Where Is your disorder?


Lion. Oh fortune! fortune!

You ask me in vain.
Of what ills I complain,
Where harbors the torment I find;
In my head, in my heart,
It invades every part,
And subdues both my body and mind.
Each effort I try,
Every medicine apply,
The pangs of my soul to appease;
But, doomed to endure,
What I mean for a cure,
Turns poison, and feeds the disease. Exit.

Enter Diana. Dian. My dear Clarissa -- I Am glad I have found you alone. --
For Heaven's sake, don't let any one break in upon us -- and give me leave to
sit down with you a little -- I am in such a tremor, such a panic --


Clar. Mercy on us, what has happened?


Dian. You may remember, I told you, that when I was last winter in London, I
was followed by an odious fellow, one Ha^man: I cannot say but the wretch
pleased me, though he is but a young brother, and not worth sixpence; and -- in
short, when I was leaving town, I promised to correspond with him.


Clar. Do you think that was prudent?


Dian. Madness! But this is not the worst -- for, what do you think? -- the
creature had the assurance to write to me about three weeks ago, desiring
permission to come down and spend the summer at my father's.


Clar. At your father's!


Dian. Ay, who never saw him, knows nothing of him, and would as soon consent
to my marrying a horse jockey. He told me a long story of some tale he intended
to invent, to make my father receive him as an indifferent person; and some
gentlemen in London, he said, would procure him a letter that should give it a
face; and he longed to see me so, he said, he could not live without it; and if
he could be permitted but to spend a week with me --


Clar. Well, and what answer did you make?


Dian. Oh! abused him, and refused to listen to any such thing -- But -- I vow,
I tremble while I tell it you -- Just before we left our house, the impudent
monster arrived there, attended by a couple of servants, and is now actually
coming here with my father.


Clar. Upon my word this is a dreadful thing.


Dian. Dreadful my dear! -- I happened to be at the window as he came into the
court, and I declare I had like to have fainted away.


Clar. Is Not my Lady below?


Dian. Yes, and I must run down to her. You Will have my brother here presently
too; he would fain have come in the coach with my mother and me, but my father
insisted on his walking with him over the fields.


Clar. Well Diana, with regard to your affair -- I think you must find some
method of immediately informing this gentleman, that you consider the outrage
he has committed against you in the most heinous light, and insist upon his
going away directly.


Dian. Why, I believe that will be the best way -- but then he will be begging my
pardon, and asking to stay.


Clar. Why, then, you must tell him positively, you will not consent to it; and if
he persists in so extravagant a design, tell him you will never see him again as
long as you live.


Dian. Must I tell him so?

Ah! pr'ythee, spare me, dearest creature!
How can you prompt me to so much ill nature?
Kneeling before me,
Should I hear him implore me;
Could I accuse him,
Could I refuse him
The boon he should ask?
Set not a lover the cruel task.
No, believe me, my dear,
Was he now standing here,
In spite of my frights and alarms,
I might rate him, might scold him --
But should still strive to hold him --
And sink at last into his arms. Exit.

Clar. How easy to direct the conduct of others, how hard to regulate our own!
I can give my friend advice, while I am conscious of the same indiscretion in
myself. Yet is it criminal to know the most worthy, most amiable man in the
world, and not to be insensible to his merit? But my father, the kindest, best
of fathers, will he approve the choice I have made? Nay, has he not made
another choice for me? And, after all, how can I be sure that the man I love,
loves me again? He never told me so; but his looks, his actions, his present
anxiety, sufficiently declare, what his delicacy, his generosity, will not
suffer him to utter.

Hope and fear, alternate rising,
Strive for empire over my heart;
Every peril now despising,
Now at every breath I start.
Teach, ye learned sages, teach me,
How to stem this beating tide;
If you have any rules to reach me,
Haste and be the weak one's guide.
Thus, our trials at a distance,
Wisdom, science, promise aid;
But, in need of their assistance,
We attempt to grasp a shade. Exit.

SCENE, a Side View of Sir Sohn Flowerdale 's. Harman enters with Colonel
Oldboy. Col. Well, and how does my old friend, Dick Rantum, do? I have not seen
him these twelve years: he was an honest worthy fellow, as ever breathed; I
remember he kept a girl in London, and was cursedly plagued by his wife's
relations.


Har. Sir Richard was always a man of spirit, Colonel.


Col. But as to this business of yours, which he tells me of in his letter -- I
don't see much in it -- An affair with a citizen's daughter -- pinked her
brother in a duel -- is the fellow likely to die?


Har. Why, sir, we hope not; but as the matter is dubious, and will probably
make some noise, I thought it was better to be for a little time out of the
way; when hearing my case, Sir Richard Rantum mentioned you; he said, he was
sure you would permit me to remain at your house for a few days, and offered me
a recommendation.


Col. And there is likely to be a brat in the case -- And the girl's friends are
in business -- I Will tell you what will be the consequence then -- They will be
for going to law with you for a maintenance -- but, no matter; I Will take the
affair in hand for you -- make me your solicitor; and if you are obliged to pay
for a single spoonful of pap, I Will be content to father all the children in the
Foundling Hospital.


Har. You are very kind, sir.


Col. But hold -- hark you -- you say there is money to be had -- suppose you
were to marry the wench?


Har. Do you think, sir, that would be so right, after what has happened?
Besides, there is a stronger objection -- To tell you the truth, I am honorably
in love in another place.


Col. Oh! you are?


Har. Yes, sir, but there are obstacles -- A father -- In short, sir, the
mistress of my heart lives in this very county, which makes even my present
situation a little irksome.


Col. In this county! Zounds! Then I am sure I am acquainted with her; and the
first letter of her name is --


Har. Excuse me, sir, I have some particular reasons. --


Col. But, look -- who comes yonder? -- Ha! ha! ha! My son, picking his steps
like a dancing master. Pr'ythee, Harman, go into the house, and let my wife and
daughter know we are come, while I go and have some sport with him: they will
introduce you to Sir John Flowerdale.


Har. Then, sir, I Will take the liberty --


Col. But, do you hear? -- I must have a little more discourse with you about
this girl; perhaps she is a neighbor of mine, and I may be of service to you.


Har. Well, remember, Colonel, I shall try your friendship.

Indulgent powers, if ever
You marked a tender vow,
O bend in kind compassion,
And hear a lover now.
For titles, wealth and honors,
While others crowd your shrine;
I ask this only blessing,
Let her I love be mine.

Enter Jessamy, and several Servants. Col. Why, zounds! one would think you had
never put your feet to the ground before; you make as much work about walking a
quarter of a mile, as if you had gone a pilgrimage to Jerusalem.


Jes. Colonel, you have used me extremely ill, to drag me through the dirty
roads in this manner; you told me the way was all over a bowling-green; only
see what a condition I am in!


Col. Why, how did I know the roads were dirty? is that my fault? Besides, we
mistook the way. Zounds, man, your legs will never be the worse when they are
brushed a little.


Jes. Antoine! have you sent La Roque for the shoes and stockings? Give me the
glass out of your pocket: not a dust of powder left in my hair, and the
frissure as flat as the foretop of an attorney's clerk -- get your comb and
pomatum; you must borrow some powder; I suppose there is such a thing as a
dressing room in the house?


Col. Ay, and a cellar too, I hope; for I want a glass of wine, cursedly --
but, hold! hold! Frank, where are you going? Stay, and pay your devoirs here,
if you please; I see there is somebody coming out to welcome us.


Enter Lionel, Diana, and Clarissa. Lion. Colonel, your most obedient, Sir John
is walking with my Lady in the garden, and has commissioned me to receive you.


Col. Mr. Lionel, I am heartily glad to see you -- come here, Frank -- this is
my son, sir.


Lion. Sir, I am exceeding proud to --


Jes. Cannot you get the powder then?


Col. Miss Clary, my little Miss Clary -- give me a kiss, my dear -- as
handsome as an angel, by Heavens -- Frank, why don't you come here? This is
Miss Flowerdale.


Dian. Oh, Heavens, Clarissa! Just as I said, that impudent devil is come here
with my father. Aside.


Jes. Had Not we better go into the house?

To be made in such a pickle!
Will you please to lead the way, sir,

Col. No, but if you please, you may sir,
For precedence none will stickle.

Dian. Brother, no politeness? Bless me!
Will you not your hand bestow?
Lead the Lady.

Clar. -- Don't distress me;
Dear Diana, let him go.

Jes. Ma'am permit me.

Col. -- Smoke the beau.

A. 2. Cruel must I, can I bear --
Oh, adverse stars!
Oh, fate severe!
Beset, tormented,
Each hope prevented.

Col. None but the brave deserve the fair;
Come ma'am, let me lead you:
Now, sir, I precede you.

A. 5. Lovers must ill usage bear*
Oh, adverse stars! Oh fate severe!
None but the brave deserve the fair. Exeunt.

ACT II.
SCENE. A Hall in Sir John Flowerdale's House. Lionel enters, followed by
Jenny. Jen. WELL, but, Mr. Lionel, consider, pray consider, now, how can you be
so prodigious undiscreet as you are, walking about the hall here, while the
gentlefolks are within the parlour! Don't you think they will wonder at your
getting up so soon after dinner, and before any of the rest of the company?


Lion. For Heaven's sake, Jenny, don't speak to me: I neither know where I am,
nor what I am doing; I am the most wretched and miserable of mankind.


Jen. Poor dear soul, I pity you. Yes, yes, I believe you are miserable enough,
indeed; and, I assure you, I have pitied you a great while, and spoke many
words in your favor, when you little thought you had such a friend in a corner.


Lion. But, good Jenny, since, by some accident or other, you have been able to
discover what I would willingly hide from all the world, I conjure you, as you
regard my interest, as you value your Lady's peace and honor, never let the
most distant hint of it escape you; for it is a secret of that importance --


Jen. And, perhaps, you think, I cannot keep a secret. Ah! Mr. Lionel, it must
be hear, see, and say nothing in this world, or one has no business to live in
it: Besides, who would not be in love with my Lady? There Is never a man this
day alive, but might be proud of it: for she is the handsomest, sweetest
tempere'dest! -- And I am sure, one of the best mistresses ever a poor girl had.


Lion. Oh, Jenny, she is an angel.


Jen. And so she is, indeed -- Do you know that she gave me her blue and silver
sacque today, and it is every crum as good as new, and, go things as they
will, don't you be fretting and vexing yourself; for I am mortally certain, she
would lieverer see a toad than this J^my. Though I must say, to my thinking,
he is a very likely man; and a finer pair of eyebrows, and a more del^cate
nose, I never saw on a fa^e.


Lion. By Heavens I shall run mad.


Jen. And why so? It is not beauty that always takes the fancy: moreover, to
let you know, if it was, I don't think ^im any more to compare to you* than a
thistle is to a carnation: and so's a sign; for* mark my words, my Lady loves
you as much as she hates him.


Lion. What you tell me, Jenny* is a thing I neither merit nor expect* No, I am
unhappy, and let me continue so -- My most presumptuous thoughts shall never
carry me to a wish that may effect her quiet, or give her cause to repent.


Jen. That Is very honorable of you, I must needs say! but, for all that*
liking's liking, and one cannot help it; and if it should be my lady's case, it
is no fault of yours. I am sure, when she called me into her dressing room,
before she went down to dinner, there she stood, with her eyes brim full of
tears; and so I tell a crying, for company -- and then she said she could not
abide the chap in the parlour; and, at the same time, she bid me take an
opportunity to speak to you, and desire you to meet her in the garden this
evening, after tea; for she has something to say to you.


Lion. Jenny, I see you are my friend; for which I thank you, though I know it
is impossible to do me any service; take this ring, and wear it for my sake.


Jen. I am very much obliged to your Honor; I am your friend, indeed -- but, I
say, you will not forget to be in the garden now? -- and, in the mean time, keep
as little in the house as you can, for walls have eyes and ears; and I can tell
you, the servants take notice of your uneasiness, though I am always desiring
them to mind their own business.


Lion. Pray, have a care, Jenny; have a care, my dear girl -- a word may breed
suspicion.


Jen. Psha! have a care yourself; it is you that breeds suspicion, signing and
pining about: you look, for all the world, like a ghost; and if you don't pluck
up your spirits, you will be a ghost soon -- letting things get the better of
you. Though, to be sure, when I thinks with myself, being crossed in love is a
terrible thing -- There was a young man in the town where I was born, made away
with himself upon the account of it.


Lion. Things shall not get the better of me, Jenny.


Jen. No more they don't ought. And, once again, I say, 'Fortune is thrown in
your dish, and you are not to fling it out; my lady's estate will be better
than three bishoprics, if Sir John could give them to you. Think of that, Mr.
Lionel, think of that.


Lion. Think of what?

Oh, talk not to me of the wealth she possesses,
My hopes and my views to herself I confine:
The splendor of riches but slightly impresses
A heart that is fraught with a passion like mine.
By love, only love, should our souls be cemented;
No interest, no motive, but that I would own;
With her, in a cottage, be blessed and contented,
And wretched without her, though placed on a throne.

Enter Colonel Oldboy. Col. Very well, my Lady, I Will come again to you
presently, I Am only going into the garden for a mouthful of air. Aha! my little
Abigail! Here, Mo^ly, Jenny, Betty! what is your name? Why don't you answer me,
hussy, when I call you?


Jen. If you want any thing, Sir, I Will call one of the scotmen.


Col. The footman! the footman! Damn me, I never knew one of them in my life,
that would not prefer a rascal to a gentleman -- Come here, you slut, put your
hands about my neck and kiss me.


Jen. Who, I, Sir?


Col. Ay, here is money for you; what the devil are you afraid of? I Will take you
in keeping; you shall go and live at one of my tenant's houses.


Jen. I wonder you are not ashamed, Sir, to make an honest girl any such
proposal -- you that have a worthy gentlewoman* nay, a lady of your own. To be
sure, she is a little stricken in years; but why shou'dn't she grow elderly as
well as yourself?


Col. Burn a lady, I love a pretty girl.


Jen. Well, then, you may go look for one, Sir; I have no pretensions to the
title.


Col. Why, you pert baggage, you don't know me.


Jen. What do you pinch my fingers for? Yes, yes, I know you well enough, and
your character's well known all over the country, running after poor young
creatures as you do, to ruinate them.


Col. What, then people say --


Jen. Indeed, they talk very bad of you; and whatever you may think, Sir,
though I Am in a menial station, I Am come of people that would not see me put
upon -- there are those that would take my part against the proudest he in the
land, that should offer any thing uncivil.


Col. Well, come, let me know now, how does your young lady like my son?


Jen. You want to pump me, do you? I suppose you would know whether I can keep
my tongue within my teeth.


Col. She dosn't like him then?


Jen. I don't say so, Sir -- Is Not this a shame now? -- I suppose tomorrow or
next day it will be reported, that Jenny has been talking -- Jenny said that
and the other -- But here, Sir, I ax you, Did I tell you any such thing?


Col. Why, yes, you did.


Jen. I! -- Lord bless me, how can you --


Col. Ad, I Will mouzle you.


Jen. Ah! ah!


Col. What do you bawl for?


Jen. Ah! ah! ah!

Indeed, forsooth, a pretty youth,
To play the amorous fool;
At such an age, methink your rage
Might be a little cool.
Fie, let me go, sir.
Kiss me! -- No, no, sir.
You pull me and shake me;
For what do you take me,
This figure to make me?
I Would have you to know,
I Am not for your game, sir;
Nor will I be tame, sir,
Lord, have you no shame, sir,
To tumble me so?

Enter Lady Mary, Diana, and Harman. Lady M. Mr. Oldboy, will not you give me your
hand to lead me up stairs, my dear? -- Sir, I am prodigiously obliged to you; I
protest I have not been so well, I don't know when: I have had no return of my
bilious complaint after dinner today; and eat so voraciously! Did you observe,
Miss -- 'The whole wing of a partridge!' -- Doctor Arsenic will be quite
astonished when he hears it; surely his new-invented medicine has done me a
prodigious deal of service.


Col. Ah! you will always be taking one stop or other till you poison yourself.


Lady M. It brought Sir Barnaby Drug from death's door, after having tried the
Spa and Bristol waters without effect -- It is good for several things, in many
sovereign, as in colds and consumptions, and lowness of spirits; it corrects
the humors, rectifies the juices, regulates the nervous system; creates an
appetite, prevents flushings and sickness after meals; as also vain fears and
head-achs; it is the finest thing in the world for an asthma; and no body that
takes it is ever troubled with hysterics.


Col. Give me a pinch of your Ladyship's snuff.


Lady M. This is a mighty pretty sort of man, Colonel, who is he?


Col. A young fellow, my Lady, recommended to me.


Lady M. I protest he has the sweetest taste for poetry! -- He has repeated to
me two or three of his own things; and I have been telling him of the poem my
late brother, Lord Jessamy, made on the mouse that was drowned.


Col. Ay, a fine subject for a poem; a mouse that was drowned in a --


Lady M. Hush, my dear Colonel, don't mention it -- to be sure, the
circumstance was vastly indelicate; but for the number of lines, the poem was
as charming a morsel -- I heard the Earl of Punley say, who understood Latin,
that it was equal to any thing in Catullus.


Col. Well, how did you like your son's behavior at dinner, madam? I thought
the girl looked a little askew at him -- Why, he found fault with every thing,
and contradicted every body.


Lady M. Softly -- Miss Flowerdale, I understand, has desired a private
conference with him.


Col. What, Harman, have you got entertaining my daughter there? Come hither,
Die; has he been giving you a history of the accident that brought him down here?


Dian. No, papa, the gentleman has been telling me --


Lady M. No matter what, Miss -- it is not polite to repeat what has been said.


Col. Well, well, my Lady, you know the compact we made; the boy is yours, the
girl mine -- Give me your hand, Die.


Lady M. Colonel, I have done. -- Pray, sir, was there any news when you left
London -- any thing about the East Indies, the ministry, or politics of any
kind? I am strangely fond of politics; but I hear nothing since my Lord
Jessamy's death -- He used to write to me all the affairs of the nation, for he
w^^ a very great politician himself. I have a manuscript speech of his in my
cabinet -- he never spoke it; but it is as fine a thing as ever came from man.


Col. What is that crawling on your ladyship's petticoat?


Lady M. Where! where!


Col. Zounds, a spider! with legs as long as my arm!


Lady M. Oh, heavens! Ah, don't let me look at it -- I shall faint, I shall
faint! A spider! a spider! a spider!


Runs off. Col. Hold; zounds, let her go; I knew the spider would set her a
galloping, with her damned fuss about her brother, my Lord Jessamy. Harman,
come here* -- How do you like my daughter? Is the girl you are in lose with as
handsome as this?


Har. In my opinion, sir.


Col. What, as handsome as Die? I Will lay you twenty pounds she has not such a
pair of eyes. He tells me he is in love, Die -- raging mad for love; and, by his
talk, I begin to believe him.


Dian. Now, for my part, papa, I doubt it very much; though, by what I heard
the gentleman say just now within, I find he imagines the lady has a violent
partiality for him; and yet he may be mistaken there too.


Col. For shame, Die; what the mischief do you mean? How can you talk so tartly
to a poor young fellow under misfortunes? Give him your hand, and ask his
pardon. Don't mind her, Harman. For all this, she is as good-natured a little
devil as ever was born.


Har. You may remember, sir, I told you before dinner, that I had for some time
carried on a private correspondence with my lovely girl; and that her father,
whose consent we despair of obtaining, is the great obstacle to our happiness.


Col. Why don't you carry her off in spite of him, then? I ran away with my
wife -- ask my lady Mary -- she will tell you the thing herself. Her old
conceited lord of a father thought I was not good enough; but I mounted a
garden wall, notwithstanding their chevaux-de-frize of broken glass bottles --
took her out of a three pair of stairs window, and bro't her down a ladder in
my arms. By the way, she would have squeezed through a cat-hole to get at me:
And I would have taken her out of the tower of London, damme, if it had been
surrounded with three regiments of guards.


Dian. But surely, papa, you would not persuade the gentleman to such a
proceeding as this is; consider the noise it will make in the country; and if
you are known to be the adviser and abettor --


Col. Why, what do I care? I say, if he takes my advice, he will run away with
her; and I Will give him all the assistance I can.


Har. I am sure, sir, you are very kind: and to tell you the truth, I have more
than once had the very scheme in my head, if I thought it was feasible, and
knew how to go about it.


Col. Feasible! and knew how to go about it! The thing's feasible enough, if
the girl's willing to go off with you, and you have spirits sufficient to
undertake it.


Har. O, as for that, sir, I can answer.


Dian. What, sir! that the lady will be willing to go off with you?


Har. No, ma'am, that I have spirit enough to take her, if she is willing to
go: and thus far I dare venture to promise, that between this and tomorrow
morning, I will find out whether she is or not.


Col. So he may; she lives but in this county; and tell her, Harman, you have
met with a friend who is inclined to serve you. You shall have my post-chaise
at a minute's warning; and if an hundred pieces will be of any use to you, you
may command 'em.


Har. And you are really serious, sir?


Col. Serious! damme, if I an't. I have put twenty young fellows in the way of
getting girls that they never would have thought of -- And bring her to my
house. -- Whenever you come, you shall have a supper and a bed; but you must
marry her first, because my Lady will be squeamish.


Dian. Well, but, my dear papa, upon my word, you have a great deal to answer
for -- Suppose it was your own case to have a daughter in such circumstances,
would you be obliged to any one --


Col. Hold your tongue, hussy, who bid you put in your oar? However, Harman, I
don't want to set you upon any thing; it is no affair of mine, to be sure; I
only give you advice, and tell you how I would act if I was in your place.


Har. I assure you, sir, I am quite charmed with the advice; and since you are
ready to stand my friend, I am determined to follow it.


Col. You are? --


Har. Positively.


Col. Say no more then; here is my hand -- You understand me -- No occasion to
talk any further of it at present -- When we are alone, -- Die, take Mr. Harman
into the drawing room, and give him some tea. -- I say, Harman, mum --


Har. O, Sir.


Col. What do you mean by your grave looks, mistress?

How cursedly vexed the old fellow will be,
When he finds you have snapt up his daughter;
But shift as he will, leave the matter to me,
And I warrant you soon shall have caught her.
What a plague and a pox,
Shall an ill-natured fox,
Prevent youth and beauty
From doing their duty?
He ought to be set in the slocks.
He merits the law;
And if we cannot bite him,
By gad we'll indite him.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha. Exit.

Dian. Sir, I desire to know, what gross acts of imprudence you have ever
discovered in me, to authorize you in this license, or make you imagine I
should not show such marks of my resentment as your monstrous treatment of me
deserves?


Har. Nay, my dear Diana, I confess I have been rather too bold -- but
consider, I languished to see you; and when an opportunity offered to give me
that pleasure, without running any risk either of your quiet, or reputation,
how hard was it to be resisted It Is true, I little thought my visit would be
attende^ with such happy consequences as it now seems to promise.


Dian. What do you mean?


Har. Why, don't you see your father has an inclination I should run away with
you, and is contriving the means himself?


Dian. And do you think me capable of concurring? Do you think I have no more
duty?


Har. I don't know that, madam; I am sure, your refusing to seize such an
opportunity to make me happy, gives evident proofs that you have very little
love.


Dian. If there is no way to convince you of my love, but by my indiscretion,
you are welcome to consider it in what light you please.


Har. Was ever so unfortunate a dog!


Dian. Very pretty this, upon my word; but is it 'possible you can be in
earnest?


Har. It is a matter of too much consequence to jest 'about.


Dian. And you seriously think I ought --


Har. You are sensible there are no hopes of your father's coolly and wittingly
consenting to our marriage, chance has thrown into our way a whimsical method
of surprising him into a compliance -- and why should not we avail ourselves of
it?


Dian. And so you would have me --


Har. I shall say no more, ma'am.


Dian. Nay, but, for Heaven's sake --


Har. No madam, no; I have done.


Dian. And are you positively in this violent fuss about the matter, or only
giving yourself airs?


Har. You may suppose what you think proper, madam.


Dian. Well, come; let us go into the drawing room and drink tea, and
afterward, we'll talk of matters.


Har. I will not drink any tea.


Dian. Why se?


Har. Because I don't like it.


Dian. Not like it! ridiculous!


Har. I wish you would let me alone.


Dian. Nay, pr'y thee --


Har. I will not.


Dian. Well, will you, if I consent to act as you 'please.


Har. I don't know whether I will or not.


Dian. Ha, ha, ha! poor Harman!'


Har. Say thou so, my girl! Then Love renounce me, if I drive not old
Truepenny's humor to the uttermost. Let me consider -- What ill consequence
can possibly attend it? -- The design is his own, as in part will be the
execution. He may perhaps be angry when he finds out the deceit. -- Well -- he
deceives himself; and faults we commit ourselves, we seldom find much
difficulty in pardoning.

Hence with caution, hence with fear,
Beauty prompts, and naught shall stay me;
Boldly for that prize I steer;
Rocks, nor winds, nor waves dismay me.
Yet, rash lover, look behind,
Think what evils may betide you;
Love and Fortune both are blind,
And you have none e^se to guide you. Exit.

SCENE, Clarissa's Dressing Room. Diana enters before Jessamy. Dian. Come,
brother, I undertake to be mistress of the ceremony upon this occasion, and
introduce you to your first audience. -- Miss Flowerdale is not here, I
perceive; but no matter. --


Jes. Upon my word, a pretty elegant dressing room this; but, confound our
builders, or architects, as they call themselves, they are all errant
stone-masons; not one of them know the situation of doors, windows or chimnies;
which are as essential to a room as eyes, nose, and mouth, to a countenance.
Now, if the eyes are where the mouth should be, and the nose out of proportion
and its place, quelle horrible phisiognomie!


Dian. My dear brother, you are not come here as a virtuoso, to admire the
temple; but as a votary, to address the deity to whom it belongs. Show, I
beseech you, a little more devotion, and tell me, how do you like Miss
Flowerdale? -- don't you think her very handsome?


Jes. Pale -- but that I am determined she shall remedy; for as soon as we are
married, I will make her put on rouge -- Let me see -- has she got any in her
boxes here -- ^eretable toilette a l'Angloise. Nothing but a bottle of
Hungary-water, two or three rows of pins, a paper of patches, and a little
bole-armoniac, by way of tooth powder.


Dian. Brother, I would fain give you some advice upon this occasion, which may
be of service to you. You are now going to entertain a young lady -- Let me
prevail upon you to lay aside those airs, on account of which some people are
impertinent enough to call you a coxcomb; for, I am afraid, she may be apt to
think you a coxcomb too, as, I assure you, she is very capable of
distinguishing.


Jes. So much the worse for me. -- If she is capable of distinguishing, I shall
meet with a terrible repulse. -- I don't believe she will have me.


Dian. I don't believe she will, indeed.


Jes. Go on, sister -- Ha, ha, ha!


Dian. I protest, I am serious -- Though, I perceive, you have more faith in
the counselor before you there, the looking-glass. But give me leave to tell
(...), it is not a powdered head, a laced coat, a grimace, a shrug, a bow, or a
few p^rt phrases, learnt by rote, that constitute the power of pleasing all
women.


Jes. You had better return to the gentleman, and give him his tea, my dear.


Dian. These qualifications we find in our parrots and monkies. I would
undertake to teach For in three weeks the fashionable jargon of half the fine
men about town; and, I am sure, it must be allowed, that pug, in a scarlet
coat, is a gentleman as degage and alluring as most of them.


Jes. Upon my honor, that is a charming India cabinet -- But Miss Flowerdale
will be here presently -- You had better return to give the gentleman his tea,
and it is ten to one but we shall agree, though I should not profit by your
sage advice.


Dian. Well! I will leave you.

Ladies, pray admire a figure,
Faite selon ^a derniere gout.
First, his hat, in size no bigger
Than a Chinese woman's shoe;
Six yards of ribbon bind
His hair en ba^on behind;
While his foretop's so high,
That in crown he may vie
With the tufted cuckatoo.
Then his waist so long and taper,
It Is an absolute thread-paper:
Maids, resist him, you that can;
Odd's life, if this is all the affair,
I Will clap a hat on, club my hair,
And call myself a Man. Exit.

Enter Clarissa. Clar. Sir, I took the liberty to desire a few moments private
conversation with you -- I hope you will excuse it -- I am really greatly
embarrassed. But, in an affair of such immediate consequence to us both --


Jes. My dear creature, don't be embarrassed before me; I should be extremely
sorry to strike you with any awe; but this is a species of mauvaise honte,
which the company I shall introduce you to, will soon cure you of.


Clar. Upon my word, sir, I don't understand you.


Jes. Perhaps you may be under some uneasiness, lest I should not be quite so
warm in the prosecution of this affair, as you could wish. It is true, with
regard to quality, I might do better; and, with regard to fortune, full as
well; but, you please me -- Upon my soul, I have not met with any think more
agreeable to me a great while.


Clar. Pray, sir, keep your seat.


Jes. Manvaise honte, again. My dear, there is nothing in these little
familiarities between you and me -- When we are married, I shall do every thing
to render your life happy.


Clar. Ah! sir, pardon me. The happiness of my life depends upon a circumstance
--


Jes. Oh! I understand you -- You have been told, I suppose, of the Italian
Opera girl -- Rat people's tongues. However, it is true, I had an affair with
her at Naples, and she is now here. But, be satisfied -- I Will give her a
thousand pounds, and set her about her business.


Clar. Me, sir! I protest nobody told me -- Lord! I never heard any such thing,
or enquired about it.


Jes. Nor have they been chattering to you of my affair at Pisa, with the
Principessa del --


Clar. No, indeed, sir.


Jes. Well, I was afraid they might; because, in this rude country -- But, why
silent on a sudden? Don't be afraid to speak.


Clara. No, sir -- I will come to the subject, on which I took the liberty to
trouble you -- Indeed, I have great reliance on your generosity.


Jes. You Will find me generous as a prince, depend on it.


Clara. I am blessed, sir, with one of the best of fathers: I never yet disobeyed
him: In which I have had little merit; for his commands hitherto have only been
to secure my own felicity.


Jes. Well, my dear, don't imagine I will prevent your being dutiful to your
father: no, no; continue to love him; I than't be jealous. -- Apres ma chere.


Clara. But now, sir, I am under the shocking necessity of disobeying him, or
being wretched for ever.


Jes. Hem!


Clar. Our union is impossible -- therefore, sir, since I cannot be your wife,
let me entreat you to make you my friend.

'Poor panting heart, ah! will thou ever
'Throb within my troubled breast;
'Shall I see the moment never
'That is doomed to give thee rest?
'Cruel stars! that thus torment me,
'Still I seek for ease in vain;
'All my efforts but present me
'With variety of pain.' Exit.

Jes. Who Is there?


Enter Jenkins. Jen. Do you call, sir?


Jes. Hark you, old gentleman; who are you?


Jen. Sir, my name is Jenkins.


Jes. Oh! you are Sir John Flowerdale's steward; a servant he puts confidence
in.


Jen. Sir, I have served Sir John Flowerdale many years: he is the best of
masters; and, I believe, he has some dependence on my attachment and fidelity.


Jes. Then, Mr. Jenkins, I shall condescend to speak to you. Does your master
know who I am? Does he know, sir, that I am likely to be a Peer of Great
Britain? That I have ten thousand pounds a year? That I have passed through all
Europe with distinguished eclat? That I refused the daughter of Mynheer Van
Slokenfolk, the great Dutch burgomaster? And that, if I had not had the
misfortune of being bred a Protestant, I might have married the neice of his
present Holiness the Pope, with a fortune of two hundred thousand piasters?


Jen. I am sure, sir, my master has all the respect imaginable --


Jes. Then, sir, how comes he, after my showing an inclination to be allied to
his family -- how comes he, I say, to bring me to his house to be affronted? I
have let his daughter go; but, I think, I was in the wrong; for a woman that
insults me, is no more safe than a man. I have brought a lady to reason before
now, for giving me saucy language; and left her male friends to revenge it.


Jen. Pray, good sir, what is the matter?


Jes. Why, sir, this is the matter, sir -- your master's daughter, sir, has
behaved to me with damned insolence, and impertinence; and you may tell Sir
John Flowerdale, first, with regard to her, that I think she is a silly,
ignorant, awkward, ill-bred country puss.


Jen. Oh! sir, for Heaven's sake --


Jes. And that, with regard to himself, he is, in my opinion, an old doting,
ridiculous country squire; with out the knowledge either of men or things; and
that he is below my notice, if it were not to despise him.


Jen. Good Lord! good Lord!


Jes. And advise him and his daughter to keep out of my way; for, by gad, I
will affront them in the first place I meet them -- And if your master is for
carrying things further, tell him I fence better than any man in Europe.

In Italy, Germany, France, have I been,
Where princes I Have lived with, where monarchs I Have seen:
The great have caressed me,
The fair have addressed me,
Nay, smiles I have had from a queen.
And now shall a pert,
Insignificant flirt,
With insolence use me,
Presume to refuse me!
She fancies my pride will be hurt.
But tout an contraire,
I Am pleased, I declare,
Quite happy to think I escape from the snare:
Serviteur, mam'felle; my claim I withdraw.
Hey! where are my people? Fall, lal, lal, lal, la. Exit.

Jen. I must go and inform Sir John of what has happened; but I will not tell
him of the outrageous behavior of this young spark; for he is a man of spirit,
and would resent it. Egad, my own fingers itched to be at him, once or twice;
and, as stout as he is, I fancy these old fists would give him a bellyful. He
complains of Miss Clarissa; but she is incapable of treating him in the manner
he says. Perhaps, she may have behaved with some coldness toward him; and yet,
that is a mystery to me too -- for she has seen him before; and I have heard
Sir John say a thousand times, that she expressed no repugnance to the match.

We all say the man was exceedingly knowing,
And knowing most surely was he,
Who found out the cause of the ebbing and flowing,
The flux and reflux of the sea.
Nor was he in knowledge far from it,
Who first marked the course of a comet;
To what it was owing,
Its coming and going,
Its wanderings hither and thither:
But the man that divines
A lady's designs,
Their cause or effect,
In any respect,
Is wiser than both put together.

SCENE, Sir John Flowerdale 's Garden. -- Lionel enters, leading Clarissa.
Lion. Hist -- methought I heard a noise -- should we be surprised together, at
a juncture so critical, what might be the consequence! -- I know not how it is;
but at this, the happiest moment of my life, I feel a damp, a tremor, at my
heart --


Clar. Then, what should I do? If you tremble, I ought to be terrified indeed,
who have discovered sentiments, which perhaps I should have hid, with a
frankness that, by a man less generous, less noble minded than yourself, might
be construed to my disadvantage.


Lion. Oh? wound me not with so cruel an expression -- You love me, and have
condescended to confess it -- You have seen my torments, and been kind enough
to pity them -- The world, indeed, may blame you --


Clar. And yet, was it proclaimed to the world, what could the most malicious
suggest? They could but say, that truth and sincerity got the better of forms;
that the tongue dared to speak the honest sensations of the mind; that, while
you aimed at improving my understanding, you engaged and conquered my heart.


Lion. And is it -- is it possible!


Clar. Be calm, and listen to me -- What I have done has not been lightly
imagined, nor rashly undertaken: it is the work of reflection, of conviction;
my love is not a sacrifice to my own fancy, but a tribute to your worth; did I
think there was a more deserving man in the world --


Lion. If, to dote on you more than life, be to deserve you, so far I have
merit; if, to have no wish, no hope, no thought, but you, can entitle me to the
envied distinction of a moment's regard, so far I dare pretend.


Clar. That I have this day refused a man, with whom I could not be happy, I
make no merit; born for quiet and simplicity, the crowds of the world, the
noise attending pomp and distinction, have no charms for me: I wish to pass my
life in rational tranquillity, with a friend, whose virtues I can respect, whose
talents I can admire; who will make my esteem the basis of my affection.


Lion. O charming creature! yes, let me indulge the flattering idea; formed
with the same sentiments, the same feelings, the same tender passion for each
other; Nature designed us to compose that sacred union, which nothing but death
can annul.


Clar. One only thing remember. -- Secure in each other's affections, here we
must rest; I would not give my father a moment's pain, to purchase the empire
of the world.


Lion. Command, dispose of me as you please; angels take cognizance of the vows
of innocence and virtue; and, I will believe that ours are already registered
in Heaven.


Clar. I will believe so too.

Go, and on my truth relying,
Comfort to your cares applying,
Bid each doubt and sorrow f^ying,
Leave to peace and love your breast.
Go, and may the powers that hear us,
Still, as kind protectors near us,
Through our troubles safely steer us
To a port of joy and rest. Exit.

Enter Sir John Flowerdale. Sir John. Who Is there? -- Lionel!


Lion. Heavens! it is Sir John Flowerdale.


Sir John. Who Is there?


Lion. It Is I, sir -- I am here -- Lionel.


Sir John. My dear lad, I have been searching for you this half hour, and was
at last told you had come into the garden. I have a piece of news, which, I
dare swear will shock and surprise you -- My daughter has refused Colonel
Oldboy's son, who is this minute departed the house in violent resentment of
her ill-treatment.


Lion. Is he gone, sir?


Sir John. Yes, and the family are preparing to follow him. Oh, Lionel!
Clarissa has deceived me -- In this affair she has suffered me to deceive
myself. The measures which I have been so long preparing, are broken in a
moment; my hopes frustrated; and both parties, in the eye of the world,
rendered light and ridiculous.


Lion. I am sorry to see you so much moved: pray, sir, recover yourself.


Sir John. I am sorry, Lionel, she has profited no better by your lessons of
philosophy, than to impose upon and distress so kind a father.


Lion. Have juster thoughts of her, sir: she has not imposed on you; she is
incapable -- Have but a little patience, and things may yet be brought about.


Sir John. No, Lionel, no; the matter is past, and there is an end to it; yet I
would conjecture to what such an unexpected turn in her conduct can be owing, I
would fain be satisfied of the motive that could urge her to so extraordinary a
proceeding, without the least intimation, the least warning to me, or any of
her friends.


Lion. Perhaps, sir, the gentleman may have been too impetuous, and offended
Miss Flowerdale's delicacy -- certainly nothing else could occasion --


Sir John. Heaven only knows -- I think, indeed, there can be no settled
aversion; and surely her affections are not engaged elsewhere?


Lion. Engaged, sir! No, sir.


Sir John. I think not, Lionel.


Lion. You may be positive, sir, I am sure --


Sir John. O worthy young man, whose integrity, openness, and every good
quality, has rendered dear to me as my own child -- I see this affair troubles
you as much as it does me.


Lion. It troubles me indeed, sir.


Sir John. However, my particular disappointment ought not to be detrimental to
you, nor shall it: I well know how irksome it is to a generous mind to live in
a state of dependence, and have long had it in my thoughts to make you easy for
life.


Lion. Sir John, the situation of my mind is at present a little disturbed --
spare me -- I beseech you, spare me -- Why will you persist in a goodness that
makes me ashamed of myself?


Sir John. There is an estate in this county, which I purchased some years ago.
By me it will never be missed, and whoever marries my daughter, will have
little reason to complain of my disposing of such a trifle for my own
gratification. On the present marriage, I intended to perfect a deed of gift in
your favor, which has been for some time prepared: my lawyer has this day
completed it, and it is yours, my dear Lionel, with every good wish that the
warmest friend can bestow.


Lion. Sir, if you presented a pistol with a design to shoot me, I would submit
to it: but you must excuse me -- I cannot lay myself under more obligations.


Sir John. Your delicacy carries you too far. In this I confer a favor on
myself: however, we'll talk no more on the subject at present -- Let us walk
toward the house; our friends will depart else without my bidding them adieu.
Exeunt.


Enter Diana and Clarissa. Dian. So the^, my dear Clarissa, you really give
credit to the ravings of the French wretch, with regard to a plurality of
worlds?


Clar. I don't make it an absolute article of belief; but I think it an
ingenious conjecture, with great probability on its side.


Dian. And we are a moon to the moon! Nay, child, I know something of
astronomy, but that -- that little shining thing there, which seems not much
larger than a silver plate, should, perhaps, contain great cities like London;
and who can tell but they may have kings there, and parliaments, and plays and
operas, and people of fashion! Lord, the people of fashion in the moon must be
strange creatures.


Clar. Methinks, Venus shines very bright in yonder corner.


Dian. Venus! O pray, let me look at Venus -- I suppose, if there are any
inhabitants there, they must be all lovers.


Enter Lionel. Lion. Was ever such a wretch! -- I cannot stay a moment in a
place -- where is my repose? -- fled with my virtue. Was I then born for
falsehood and dissimulation? I was, I was, and I live to be conscious of it; to
impose upon my friend; to betray my benefactor, and lie to hide my ingratitude
-- a monster in a moment -- No, I may be the most unfortunate of men, but I
will not be the most odious; while my heart is yet capable of dictating what is
honest, I will obey its voice. Aside.


Enter Colonel Oldboy, and Harman. Col. Die, where are you? What the mischief,
is this a time to be walking in the garden? The coach has been ready this half
hour, and your mamma is waiting for you.


Dian. I am learning astronomy, sir; do you know, papa, that the moon is
inhabited?


Col. Hussy; you are half a lunatic yourself; come here; things have just gone
as I imagined they would -- the girl has refused your brother; I knew he must
disgust her.


Dian. Women will want taste now and then, sir.


Col. But I must talk to the young lady a little.


Har. Well, I have had a long conference with your father about the elopement,
and he continues firm in his opinion that I ought to attempt it: in short, all
the necessary operations are settled between us, and I am to leave his house
tomorrow morning, if I can but persuade the young lady --


Dian. Ay, but I hope the young lady will have more sense -- Lord, how can you
teaze me with your nonsense? Come, sir, is not it time for us to go in? Her
Ladyship will be impatient.


Col. Friend Lionel, good night to you; Miss Clarissa, my dear, though I am
father to the puppy who has displeased you, give me a kiss; you served him
right, and I thank you for it.


Col. O what a night is here for love!
Cynthia brightly shining above;
Among the trees,
To the sighing breeze,
Fountains tinkling,
Stars a twinkling:

Dian. O what a night is here for love!
So may the morn propitious prove;

Har. And so it will, if right I guess;
For sometimes light,
As well as night,
A lover's hopes may bless.

A 2. Farewell, my friend,
May gentle rest
Calm each tumult in your breast;
Every pa^n and fear remove.

Lion. What have I done?
Where shall I run,
With grief and shame at once oppressed?
How my own upbraiding shun,
Or meet my friend distressed?

A. 3. Hark to Philomel, how sweet
From yonder elm.

Col. Tweet, tweet, tweet, tweet.

A. 5. O what a night is here for love!
But vainly nature strives to move.
Nor nightingales among the trees,
Nor twinkling stars, nor sighing breeze,
Nor murmuring streams,
Nor Phoebe 's beams,
C^^ charm, unless the heart's at ease. Exeunt.

ACT III.
SCENE, A Room in Colonel Oldboy's House. Harman enters, with his hat, boots,
and whip, followed by Diana. Dian. PR'YTHEE, hear me.


Har. My dear, what would you say?


Dian. I am afraid of the step we are going to take; indeed, I am -- It Is true
my father is the contriver of it; but, really, on consideration, I think I
should appear less culpable if he was not so; I am at once criminal myself, and
rendering him ridiculous.


Har. Do you love me?


Dian. Suppose I do, you give me a very ill proof of your love for me, when you
would take advantage of my tenderness, to blind my reason. How can you have so
little regard for my honor, as to sacrifice it to a vain triumph? For it is in
that light I see the rash action you are forcing me to commit; nay, methinks my
consenting to it should injure me in your own esteem. When a woman forgets what
she owes herself, a lover should set little value upon any thing she gives to
him.


Har. Can you suppose then, can you imagine, that my passion will ever make me
forget the veneration -- And, an elopement is nothing, when it is on the road
to matrimony.


Dian. At best, I shall incur the censure of disobedience and indiscretion;
and, is it nothing to a young woman what the world says of her? Ah! my good
friend, be assured, such a disregard of the world is the first step toward
deserving its reproaches.


Har. But the necessity we are under -- Mankind has too much good sense, too
much good nature --


Dian. Every one has good sense enough to see other people's faults, and good
nature enough to overlook their own. Besides, the most sacred things may be
made an ill use of; and even marriage itself, if indecently and improperly --


Har. Come, get yourself ready: where is your bandbox, hat, and cloak? Slip
into the garden; be there at the iron-gate, which you showed me just now; and,
as the post-chaise comes round, I will stop and take you in.


Dian. Dear Harman, let me beg of you to desist.


Har. Dear Diana, let me beg of you to go on.


Dian. I shall never have resolution to carry me through it.


Har. We shall have four horses, my dear, and they will assist us.


Dian. In short -- I -- cannot go with you.


Har. But before me -- Into the garden -- Wont you?


Dian. Ha, ha, ha.

Come then, pining, peevish lover,
Tell me what to do and say;
From your doleful dumps recover,
Smile, and it shall have its way.
With their humors thus to teaze us,
Men are sure the strangest elves!
Silly creatures, would you please us,
You should still seem pleased yourselves. Exit.

Enter Colonel Oldboy. Col. Hey-day! what is the meaning of this? Who is it went
out of the room there? Have you and my daughter been in conference, Mr. Harman?


Har. Yes, faith, sir, she has been taking me to task h^^e very severely, with
regard to this affair; and she has said so much against it, and put it into
such a stra^^e light --


Col. A busy, impertinant baggage; egad, I wish ^ had caught her meddling, and
after I ordered her no^^ but you have sent to the girl, and you say she is
(...) go with you; you must not disa^^oint her ^ow.


Har. No, no, Colonel; I always have politeness enough to hear a lady's
reasons, but constancy enough to keep a will of my own.


Col. Very well -- now let me ask you -- Don't you think it would be proper on
this occasion, to have a letter ready writ for the father, to let him know who
has got his daughter, and so forth?


Har. Certainly, sir; and I Will write it directly.


Col. You write it! You be damned? I will not trust you with it; I tell you,
Harman, you will commit some cursed blunder, if you don't leave the management of
this whole affair to me: I have writ the letter for you myself.


Har. Have you, sir?


Col. Ay -- Here, read it; I think it is the thing; however, you are welcome to
make any alteration.


Har. SIR, I have loved your daughter a great while secretly; she assures me
there are no hopes of your consenting to our marriage; I therefore take her
without it. I am a gentleman, who will use her well; and, when you consider the
matter, I dare swear you will be willing to give her a fortune. If not, you
shall find I dare behave myself like a man -- A word to the wis^ -- You must
expect to hear from me in another style.


Col. Now, sir, I will tell you what you must do with this letter: as soon as
you have got off with the girl, sir, send your servant back to leave it at the
house, with orders to have it delivered to the old gentleman.


Har. Upon my honor I will, Colonel.


Col. But upon my honor, I don't believe you will get the girl -- Come, Harman,
I Will bet you a buck and six dozen of burgundy, that you will not have spirit
enough to bring this affair to a crisis.


Har. And I say done first, Colonel.


Col. Then look into the court there, sir; a chaise, with four of the prettiest
bay geldings in England, with two boys in scarlet and silver jackets, that will
whisk you along.


Har. Boys! Colonel? Little cupids, to transport me to t^^ ^ummit of my desires.


Col. Ay, but for all th^^ it may not be amiss for me to talk to them a little
out of the window for you. Dick, come hither; you are to go with this
gentleman, and do whatever he bids you; and take into the chaise whoever he
pleases; and drive like devils, do you hear? -- but be kind to the dumb beasts.


Har. Leave me to that, sir -- And so, my dear Colonel, bon voyage!

'To fear a stranger,
'Behold the soldier arm;
'He knows no danger,
'When honor sounds the alarm;
'But dauntless goes,
'Among his foes.
'In Cupid's militia,
'So fearless I issue;
'And, as you see,
'Arm'd cap-a-pie,
'Resolve on death or victory.' Exit.

Enter Lady Mary, and then Jenny. Lady M. Mr. Oldboy, here is a note from Sir
John Flowerdale; it is addressed to me, entreating my son to come over there
again this morning. A maid brought it: she is in the antichamber -- We had
better speak to her -- Child, child, why don't you come in?


Jen. I choose to stay where I am, if your Ladyship pleases.


Lady M. Stay where you are! -- why so?


Jen. I am afraid of the old gentleman there.


Col. Afraid of me, hussy


Lady M. Pray, Colonel, have patience -- Afraid? -- Here is something at the
bottom of this, -- What did you mean by that expression, child?


Jen. Why, the Colonel knows very well, madam, he wanted to be rude with me
yesterday.


Lady M. Oh, Mr. Oldboy!


Col. Lady Mary, don't provoke me, but let me talk to the girl about her
business. How came you to bring this note here?


Jen. Why, Sir John gave it to me, to deliver it to my uncle Jenkins, and I
took it down to his house; but while we were talking together, he remembered
that he had some business with Sir John, so he desired me to bring it, because
he said it was not proper to be sent by any of the common servants.


Lady M. Colonel, look in my face, and help blushing, if you can.


Col. What the plague's the matter, my Lady! I have not been wronging you now,
as you call it.


Jen. Indeed, madam, he offered to make me his kept madam -- I am sure, his
usage of me put me into such a twitter, that I did not know what I was doing
all the day after.


Lady M. I don't doubt it, though I so lately forgave him; but as the poet
says, his sex is all deceit. Read Pamela, child, and resist temptation.


Jen. Yes, madam, I will.


.Col. Why, I tell you, my Lady, it was all a joke.


Jen. No, sir, it was no joke; you made me a proffer of money -- so you did --
whereby I told you, you had a lady of your own; and that though she was old,
you had no right to despise her.


Lady M. And how dare you, mistress, make use of my name? Is it for such
trollops as you to talk of persons of distinction behind their backs?


Jen. Why, madam, I only said you was in years.


Lady M. Sir John Flowerdale shall be informed of your impertinence, and you
shall be turned out of the family; I see you are a confident creature, and I
believe you are no better than you should be.


Jen. I scorn your words, madam.


Lady M. Get out of the room; how dare you stay in this room to talk impudently
to me.


Jen. Very well, madam, I shall let my Lady know how you have used me; but I
shall not be turned out of my place, madam; nor at a loss, if I am -- and if you
are angry with every one that will not say you are young, I believe there is very
few you will keep friends with.

I wonder I Am sure, why this fuss should be made;
For my part I Am neither ashamed nor afraid
Of what I have done, nor of what I have said.
A servant, I hope, i^ no slave;
And though, to their shames,
Some ladies call names,
I know better how to behave.
Times are not so bad,
If occasion I had,
Nor my character such I need slarpe on it;
And for going away,
I don't want to stay,
And so I Am your Ladyship's servant. Exit.

Enter Jessamy. Jes. What is the matter here?


Lady M. I will have a separate maintenance -- I will, indeed. Only a new
instance of your father's infidelity, my dear. Then with such low wretches,
farmers daughters, and servant wenches: but any thing with a cap on, it is all
the same to him.


Jes. Upon my word, sir, I am sorry to tell you, that those practices very ill
suit the character which you ought to endeavor to support in the world.


Lady M. Is this a recompense for my love and regard; I, who have been tender
and faithful as a turtle-dove?


Jes. A man of your birth and distinction, should methinks have views of a
higher nature, than such low, such vulgar libertinism.


Lady M. Consider my birth and family too -- Lady Mary Jessamy might have had
the best matches in England.


Jes. Then, sir, your gray hairs --


Lady M. I, that have brought you so many lovely, sweet babes --


Jes. Nay, sir, it is a reflection on me.


Lady M. The henious sin, too. --


Jes. Indeed, sir, I blush for you.


Col. 'Sdeath and fire! you little effeminate puppy, do you know who you talk
to? -- And you, madam, do you know who I am? -- Get up to your chamber, or,
zounds, I Will make such a --


Lady M. Ah! my dear, come away from him. Exit.


Enter a Servant. Col. Am I to be tutored, and called to an account? -- How
now, you scoundrel, what do you want?


Serve. A letter, sir.


Col. A letter -- from whom, sirrah?


Serve. The gentleman's servant, an't please your honor, that left this just
now in the post-chaise -- the gentleman my young lady went away with.


Col. Your young lady, sirrah! Your young lady went away with no gentleman, you
dog! What gentleman? What young lady, sirrah?


Jes. There is some mystery in this -- With your leave, sir, I Will open the
letter: I believe it contains no secrets.


Col. What are you going to do, you jackanapes? You shall not open a letter of
mine. Die -- Diana -- Somebody call my daughter to me there -- To John Oldboy,
Esquire. -- SIR, I have loved your daughter a great while secretly.... Consenting
to our marriage --


J^s. So, so.


Col. You villain! you dog! what is it you have bro't me here?


Serve. Please your honor, if you will have patience, I Will tell your honor. As I
told your honor before, the gentleman's servant, that went off just now in the
post-chaise, came to the gate, and left it after his master was gone. I saw my
young lady go into the chaise with the gentleman.


J^s. A very fine joke, indeed. Pray, Colonel, do you generally write letters
to yourself? Why, this is your own hand.


Col. Call all the servants in the house -- Let horses be saddled directly --
Every one take a different road.


Serve. Why, your honor, Dick said it was by your own orders.


Col. My orders, you rascal? I thought he was going to run away with another
gentleman's daughter. Die -- Diana Oldboy!


Jes. Don't waste your lungs to no purpose, sir; your daughter is half a dozen
miles off by this time.


Col. Sirrah, you have been bribed to further the scheme of a pick-pocket here.


Jes. Besides, the matter is entirely of your own contriving, as well as the
letter and spirit of this elegant epistle.


Col. You are a coxcomb, and I Will disinherit you; the letter is none of my
writing; it was writ by the devil, and the devil contrived it. Diana, Margaret,
my Lady Mary, William, John! -- Exit.


Jes. I am very glad of this -- prodigiously glad of it, upon my honor -- He!
he! he! It will be a jest this hundred years. But, what shall I do with myself?
I cannot think of staying here any longer. Rot the country; I wish I had never
returned to it, with their vulgar trade and liberty. What Is the matter now? --
(bells ring violently on both sides.) O! her ladyship has heard of it, and is
at her bell; and the Colonel answers her. A pretty duet! but a little too much
upon the forte, methinks. It would be a diverting thing now to stand unseen at
the old gentleman's elbow.

'Hist! soft! let us hear how matters go;
'I'll creep, and listen -- so, so, so.
'They're altogether by the ears --
'Oh, horrid! how the savage swears!
'There, too, again; ay, you may ring;
'Sound out the alarm bell -- ding, ding, ding.
'Dispatch your scouts, it is all in vain,
'Stray maids are seldom sound again.
'But hark, the uproar hither sounds;
'The Colonel comes with all his hounds;
'I'll wisely leave them open way.
'To hunt with what success they may.' Exit.

Colonel Oldboy reenters, with one boot, a great coat on his arm, etc.
followed by several Servants. Col. She Is gone, by the Lord; fairly stole away,
with that poaching, coney^catching rascal! However, I will not follow her, no,
damme. Take my whip, and my cap, and my coat, and order my groom to unsaddle
the horses: I will not follow her the length of a spur-leather. -- Come here, you
sir, and pull off my boots -- [whistles.] She has made a fool of me once; she
shall not do it a second time -- not but I Will be revenged, too; for I Will never
give her sixpence: the disappointment will put the scoundrel out of temper, and
he will thrash her a dozen times a day. The thought plases me -- I hope he will do
it. -- Zounds, who would ever have dependence on any thing female? She that
seemed so well contented in my house, and in the very moment when I was best
contented with her, and contriving to make her fortune -- But why should I vex
myself? I am no worse off than every father may be, if an opportunity offers.

What do you stand gaping and staring at, you impudent dogs? Are you laughing
at me? I Will teach you to be merry at my expense. --

A rascal, a hussy -- zounds! she that I counted
In temper so mild, so unpractised in evil:
I set her on horseback, and, no sooner mounted,
Than crack, whip and spur, she rides post to the devil.
But there let her run,
Be ruined, undone;
If I go to catch her,
Or back again fetch her,
I Am worse than the son of a gun.
A mischief possessed me to marry,
And further my folly to carry,
To be s^ill more a sot,
Sons and daughters I got,
And pretty ones, by the Lord Harry. Exeunt.

SCENE, Clarissa 's Dressing Room; Clarissa enters melancholy, with a book in
her hand, followed by Jenny. Clar. Jenny, set my work here.


Jen. Yes, ma'am, and my own, too. I Am sure I Have been very idle this week, and
I am in no very good working humor, at present.


Clar. Where have you been, Jenny? I was enquiring for you. Why will you go
out, without letting me know?


Jen. Dear ma'am, never any thing happened so unlucky: I am sorry you wanted me
-- But I was sent to Colonel Oldboy's with a letter, where I have been so used
-- Lord have mercy upon me! -- quality, indeed! I say, quality! -- Pray, madam,
do you think that I looks any ways like an immodest person? To be sure, I have
a gay air, and I cannot help it -- and I loves to appear a little genteelish,
that is what I do.


Clar. Jenny, take away this book.


Jen. Heaven preserve me, madam, you are crying


Clar. O, my dear Jenny!


Jen. My dear mistress, what is the matter?


Clar. I am undone.


Jen. No, madam, no; Lord forbid!


Clar. I am, indeed -- I have been rash enough to discover my weakness for a
man, who treats me with contempt.


Jen. Is Mr. Lionel ungrateful, then?


Clar. I have lost his esteem forever, Jenny. Since last night, that I fatally
confessed what I should have kept a secret from all the world, he has scarce
condescended to cast a look at me, nor given me an answer when I spoke to him,
but with coldness and reserve.


J^n. Then he is a nasty, barbarous, unhuman brute.


Clar. Hold, J^nny, hold; it is all my fault.


Jen. Your fault, madam! I wish I was to hear such a a word come out of his
mouth; if he was a minister tomorrow, and to say such a thing from his pulpit,
and I by, I Would tell him it was false, upon the spot.


Clar. Somebody's at the door; see who it is.


Jen. You in fault, indeed! -- that I know to be the most virtuousest, nicest,
most delicatest --


Clar. How now?


Jen. Madam, it is a message from Mr. Lionel. If you are alone, and at leisure,
he would be glad to wait upon you: I Will tell him, madam, that you are busy.


Clar. Where is he, Jenny?


Jen. In the study, the man says.


Clar. Then go to him, and tell him I should be glad to see him -- But do not
bring him up immediately, because I will stand in the balcony a few minutes for
a little air.


Jen. Do so, dear madam, for your eyes are as red as ferrets: you are ready to
faint, too -- Mercy on us! -- for what do you grieve and vex yourself? -- If I
was as you -- Exit.


Clar. Oh!

Why with sighs my heart is swelling,
Why with tears my eyes overflow;
Ask me not, it is past the telling,
Mute involuntary woe.
Who to winds and waves a stranger,
Venurous tempts the inconstant seas,
In each billow fancies danger,
Shrinks at every rising breeze. Exit.

Enter Sir John Flowerdale, and Jenkins. Sir John. So then the mystery is
discovered -- but is it possible that my daughter's refusal of Colonel Oldboy's
son should proceed from a clandestine engagement, and that engagement with
Lionel?


Jen. My niece, sir, is in her young lady's secrets, and, Lord knows, she had
little design to betray them; but having remarked some odd expressions of here is
yesterday, when she came down to me this morning with the letter, I questioned
her; and, in short, drew the whole affair out: upon which I feigned a
recollection of some business with you* and desired her to carry the letter to
Colonel Ol^boy's herself, while I came up hither.


Sir J^^n And they are mutually promised to each other, and that promise was
exchanged yesterday?


J^n. Yes, sir, and it is my duty to tell you; else I would rather die than be
the means of wounding the heart of my dear young lady; for if there is one upon
earth of truly delicate sentiments --


Sir John. I thought so once, J^nkins.


Jen. And think so still: O, good Sir John, now is the time for you to exert
that character of worth and gentleness, which the world so deservedly has given
you. You have indeed cause to be offended; but consider, sir, your daughter is
young* beautiful, and amiable; the poor youth unexperienced, sensible, and at a
time of life when such temptations are hard to be resisted -- Their
opportunities were many, their cast of thinking the same. --


Sir John. Jenkins, I can allow for all these things; but the young hypocrites
-- there is the thing, Jenkins -- their hypocrisy, their hypocrisy wounds me.


Jen. Call it by a gentler name, sir -- modesty on her part, apprehension on
his.


Sir John. Then what opportunity have they had? -- they never were together but
when my sister or myself made one of the company; besides, I had so firm a
reliance on Lionel's honor and gratitude --


Jen. Sir, I can never think that Nature stamped that gracious countenance of
his, to mask a corrupt heart.


Sir John. How! at the very time that he was conscious of being himself the
cause of it, did he not show more concern at this a Fair than I did? Nay, don't
I tell you that last night, of his own accord, he offered to be a mediator in
the a^fair, and desired my leave to speak to my daughter? I thought myself
obliged to him* consented; and, in consequence of his assurance of success,
wrote that letter to Colonel Oldboy, to desire the family would come here again
today.


Jen. Sir, as we were standing in the next room, I heard a message delivered
from Mr. Lionel, desiring leave to wait upon your daughter -- dare swear they
will be here presently: suppose we were to step into that closet and overhear
their conversation?


Sir John. What, J^ns, after having lived so many years in confidence with my
child, shall I become an e^es-dropper, to detect her?


Jen. It is necessary at present -- Come in my dear master -- ^et us only
consider that we were once young, like them; subject to the same passions, the
same indiscretions; and it is the duty of every man to pardon errors incident
to his kind.

When love gets into a youthful brain,
Ins^ruction is fru^tless, and c^u^on ^ain:
Prudence may cry, do so;
But if Love says No,
Poor Prudence may go,
With her preaching,
And teaching,
To Jericho.
Dear sir, in old age,
It Is not hard to be sage,
And it is easy to point the way;
But do or say,
What we may,
Love and youth will have their day. Exeunt.

Enter Clarissa and Lionel. Clar. Sir, you desired to speak to me -- I need not
tell you the present situation of my heart -- it is full. Whatever you have to
say, I beg you will explain yourself; and if possible, rid me of the anxiety
under which I have labored for some hours.


L^on Madam, your anxiety cannot be greater than mine -- come indeed, to speak
to you; and yet, ^ know not how, I come to advise you -- shall I say, as a
friend? Yes! as a friend to your glory, your felicity -- dearer to me than my
life.


Clar. Go on, sir.


Lion. Sir John Flowerdale, madam, is such a father as few are blessed with.
His care, his prudence, has provided for you a match -- Your refusal renders
him inconsolable. Listen to no suggestions that would pervert you from your
duty; but make the worthiest of men happy, by submitting to his will.


Clar. How, sir, after what passed between us yesterday evening, can you advise
me to marry Mr. Jessamy?


Lion. I would advise you to marry any one, madam, rather than a villain.


Clar. A villain, sir?


Lion. I should be the worst of villains, madam, was I to talk to you in any
other strain: nay, am I not a villain, at once treacherous and ungrateful?
Received into this house as an asylum -- what have I done? Betrayed the
confidence of the friend that trusted me! endeavored to sacrifice his peace,
and the honor of his family, to my own unwarrantable desires.


Clar. Say no more, sir; say no more. I see my error too late; I have parted
from the rules prescribed to my sex: I have mistaken indecorum for a laudable
sincerity; and it is just I should meet with the treatment my imprudence
deserves.


Lion. It Is I, and only I, am to blame. While I took advantage of the father's
security, I practiced upon the tenderness and ingenuity of the daughter; my own
imagination gone astray, I artfully labored to lead yours after it: But here,
madam, I give you back those vows which I insidiously extorted from you; keep
them for some happier man, who may receive them without wounding his honor, or
his peace.


Clar. For heaven's sake --


Lion. Why do you weep?


Clar. Don't speak to me.


Lion. Oh! my Clarissa, my heart is broke; I am hateful to myself for loving
you: yet, before I leave you for ever, I will once more touch that lovely hand.
Indulge my fondness with a last look -- Pray for your health and prosperity.


Clar. Can you forsake me? -- Have I then given my affections to a man who
rejects and disregards them? -- Let me throw myself at my father's feet: he is
generous and compassionate -- He knows your worth --


Lion. Mention it not: were you stripped of fortune, reduced to the meanest
station, and I monarch of the globe, I should glory in raising you to universal
empire; but as it is --


Clar. Yet hear me --


Lion. Farewell, farewell!

O dry those tears! like melted oar,
Fast dropping on my heart they fall:
Think, think no more of me; no more
The memory of past scenes recall.
On a wild sea of passion tossed,
I split upon the fatal shelf;
Friendship and love at once are lost,
And now I wish to lose myself. Exit.

Enter Jenny. Jen. O Madam! I have betrayed you. I have gone and said something
I should not have said, to my uncle Jenkins; and, as sure as day, he has gone
and told it all to Sir John.


Clar. My father!


Enter Sir John Flowerdale. Sir John. Go, Jenkins, and desire that young
gentleman to come back -- tay, where are you? -- But what have I done to my
child? How have I deserved that you should treat me like an enemy? Has there
been any undesigned rigor in my conduct, or terror in my looks?


Enter Jenkins, and Lionel. Clar. Oh, sir!


Jenk. Here is Mr. Lionel.


Sir John. Come in -- When I tell you that I am instructed in all your
proceedings, and that I have been ear-witness to your conversation in this
place, you will, pe^haps, imagine what my thoughts are of you, and the measures
which justice prescribes me to follow.


Lion. Sir, I have nothing to say in my own defense; I stand before you
self-convicted, self-condemned, and shall submit without murmuring to the
sentence of my judge.


Sir John. As for you, Clarissa, since your earliest infancy, you have known no
parent but me; I have been to you, at once, both father and mother; and that I
might the better fulfill those united duties, though left a widower in the prime
of my days, I would never enter into a second marriage -- I loved you for your
likeness to your dear mother; but that mother never deceived me -- and there
the likeness fails -- you have repaid my affection with dissimulation --
Clarissa, you should have trusted me.


Jen. O, my dear sweet Lady --


Sir John. As for you, Mr. Lionel, what terms can I find strong enough to paint
the excess of my friendship! -- I loved, I esteemed, I honored your father: he
was a brave, a generous, and a sincere man; I thought you inherited his good
qualities -- you were left an orphan, I adopted you, put you upon the footing
of my own son; educated you like a gentleman, and designed you for a
profession, to which, I thought, your virtues would have been an ornament.


Jen. Dear me, dear me!


Jenk. Hold your tongue.


Sir John. What return you have made me, you seem to be acquainted with
yourself: and, therefore, I shall not repeat it -- Yet, remember, as an
aggravation of your guilt, that the last mark of my bounty was conferred upon
you in the very instant when you were undermining my designs. Now, sir, I have
but one thing more to say to you -- Take my daughter: was she worth a million,
she is at your service.


Lion. To me, sir! -- your daughter* -- do you give her to me? -- Without
fortune -- without friends! -- without --


Sir John. You have them all in your heart? him whom virtue raises, fortune
cannot abase.


Clar. O, sir, let me on my knees kiss that dear hand -- acknowledge my error,
and entreat forgiveness and blessing.


Sir John. You have not erred, my dear daughter; you have distinguished. It is
I should ask pardon for this little trial of you; for I am happier in the
son-in-law you have given me, than if you had married a prince --


Lion. My patron -- my friend -- my father -- I would fain say something; but
as your goodness exceeds all bounds --


Sir John. I think I hear a coach drive into the court -- it is Colonel
Oldboy's family; I will go and receive them. Don't make yourself uneasy at
this; we must endeavor to pacify them as well as we can. My dear Lionel, if I
have made you happy, you have made me so. Heaven bless you, my children, and
make you deserving of one another. Exeunt Sir John and Jenkins.


Jen. O, dear madam, upon my knees I humbly beg your forgiveness -- Dear Mr.
Lionel, forgive me -- I did not design to discover it, indeed; and you will not
turn me off, madam, will you? I Will serve you for nothing.


Clar. Get up, my good Jenny -- I freely forgive you, if there is any thing to
be forgiven. I know you love me; and, I am sure, here is one who will join with
me in rewarding your services.


Jen. Well, if I did not know, as sure as could be, that some good would
happen, by my left eye itching this morning.


Lion. O bliss unexpected! my joys overpower me!
My love, my Clarissa, what words shall I find!
Remorse, desperation, no longer devour me;
He blessed us, and peace is restored to my mind.

Clar. He blessed us! O rapture! Like one I recover
Whom death had appalled, without hope, without aid;
A moment deprived me of father and lover,
A moment restores, and my pangs are repaid.

Lion. Forsaken, abandoned.

Clar. -- What folly! what blindness!

Lion. We (...) accused,

Clar. -- and the sates that decreed:

A. 3. But pain was inflicted by Heaven, out of kindness,
To heighten the joys that were doomed to succeed.
Our day was overcast;
But brighter the scene is,
The sky more serene is,
And softer the calm for the hurricane past. Exeunt.

Enter Lady Mary Oldboy, lea^ing on a Servant, Jessamy leading her; and
afterward Sir John Flowerdale, with Colon^l Oldboy. Lady M. It Is all in vain,
my dear; set me down any where; I cannot go a step further. -- I knew, when Mr.
Oldboy insisted upon my coming, that I should be seized with a meagrim by the
way; and it is well I did not die in the coach.


Jes. But, pr'ythee, why will you let yourself be affected with such trifles?
Nothing more common than for young women of fashion to go off with low fellows.


Lady M. Only feel, my dear, how I tremble! Not a nerve but what is in
agitation; and my blood runs cold, cold!


Jes. Well, but Lady Mary, don't let us expose ourselves to those people; I see
there is not one of the rascals about us, that has not a grin upon his
countenance.


Lady M. Expose ourselves my dear! Your father will be as ridiculous as
Hu^ibras, or Don Quixotte.


Jes. Yes, he will be very ridiculous, indeed.


Sir John. I give you my word, my good friend and neighbor, the joy I feel on
this occasion, is greatly allayed by the disappointment of an alliance with
your family; but I have explained to you how things have happened. You see my
situation; and as you are kind enough to consider it yourself, I hope you will
excuse it to your son.


Lady M. Sir John Flowerdale, how do you do? You see we have obeyed your
summons; and I have the pleasure to assure you, that my son yielded to my
entreaties with very little disagreement: in short, if I may speak
metaphorically, he is content to stand candidate again, notwithstanding his
late repulse, when he hopes for an unanimous election.


Col. Well, but, my Lady, you may save your rhetoric; for the borough is
disposed of, to a worthier member.


Jes. What do you say, sir?


Enter Lionel, and Clarissa. Sir John. Here are my son and daughter.


Lady M. Is this pretty, Sir John?


Sir John. Believe me, madam, it is not for want of a just sense of Mr.
Jessamy's merit, that this affair has gone off on any side; but the heart is a
delicate thing; and after it has once felt, if the object is meritorious, the
impression is not easily effaced -- It would, therefore, have been an injury to
him, to have given him in appearance, what another in reality possessed.


Jes. Upon my honor, upon my soul, Sir John, I am not in the least offended at
this contretemps. -- Pray, Lady Mary, say no more about it.


Col. Tol, lol, lol, lol.


Sir John. But, my dear Colonel, I am afraid, after all, this affair is taken
amiss by you; yes, I see you are angry on your son's account; but, let me
repeat it, I have a very high opinion of his merit.


Col. Ay! that is more than I have. Taken amiss! I don't take any thing amiss; I
never was in better spirits or more pleased, in my life.


Sir John. Come, you are uneasy at something, Colonel?


Col. Me! Gad, I am not uneasy. -- Are you a justice of peace? Then you could
give me a warrant, could not you? You must know, Sir John, a little accident has
happened in my family since I saw you last; you and I may shake hands --
Daughters, sir, daughters! Yours has snapt at a young fellow without your
approbation -- and how do you think mine has served me this morning? -- only
run away with the scoundrel I brought to dinner here yesterday.


Sir John. I am excessively concerned.


Col. Now I Am not a bit concerned -- No, damn me, I am glad it has happened;
yet, thus far I Will confess, I should be sorry that either of them would come in
my way, because a man's temper may sometimes get the better of him; and I
believe I should be tempted to break her neck, and blow his brains out.


Clar. But pray, sir, explain this affair.


Col. I can explain it no farther -- Die, my daughter Die, has run away from us.


Enter Diana, and Harman. Dian. No, my dear papa, I am not run away; and, upon
my knees I entreat your pardon for the folly I have committed; but let it be
some alleviation, that duty and affection were too strong to suffer me to carry
it to extremity: and, if you knew the agony I have been in, since I saw you
last --


Lady M. How Is this?


Har. Sir, I restore your daughter to you, whose fault, as far as it goes, I
must also take upon myself; we have been known to each other for some time; as
Lady Richly, your sister, in London, can acquaint you --


Col. Die, come here -- Now, you rascal, where is your sword; if you are a
gentleman, you shall fight me; if you are a scrub, I Will horse whip you -- Draw,
sirrah -- Shut the door there, don't let him escape.


Har. Sir, don't imagine I want to escape; I am extremely sorry for what has
happened, but am ready to give you any satisfaction you think proper.


Col. Follow me into the garden, then -- Zounds! I have no sword about me --
Sir John Flowerdale -- lend us a case of pistols, or a couple of guns, and come
and see fair play.


Clar. My dear papa!


Dian. Sir John Flowerdale -- O my indiscretion! -- we came here, sir, to beg
your mediation in our favor.


Lady M. Mr. Oldboy, if you attempt to fight, I shall expire.


Sir John. Pray, Colonel, let me speak a word to you in private.


Col. Slugs and a saw-pit --


Jes. Why, Miss Die, you are a perfect heroine for a romance -- And, pray, who
is this courteous knight?


Lady M. O sir, you that I thought such a pretty behaved gentleman! --


Jes. What business are you of, friend?


Har. My chief trade, sir, is plain dealing; and as that is a commodity you
have no reason to be very fond of, I would not advise you to purchase any of
it, by impertinence.


Col. And is this what you would advise me to?


Sir John. It is, indeed, my dear old friend: as things are situated, there is,
in my opinion, no other prudent method of proceeding; and it is the method I
would adopt myself, was I in your case.


Col. Why, I believe you are in the right of it -- say what you will for me
then.


Sir John. Well, young people, I have been able to use a few arguments, which
have softened my neighbor here, and in some measure pacified his resentment. I
find, sir, you are a gentleman by your connections?


Har. Sir, till it is found that my character and family will bear the
strictest scrutiny, I desire no favor -- And for fortune --


Col. Oh! rot your fortune, I don't mind that -- I know you are a gentleman, or
Dick Rantum would not have recommended you: and so, Die, kiss and friends.


Jes. What, sir, have you no more to say to the man who has used you so ill?


Col. Used me ill! That Is as I take it. He has done a mettled thing; and,
perhaps, I like him the better for it. It Is long before you would have spirit
enough to run away with a wench -- Harman, give me your hand; let us hear no
more of this now -- Sir John Flowerdale, what say you? shall we spend the day
together, and dedicate it to love and harmony?


Sir John. With all my heart.


Col. Then take off my great coat.


Lion. Come then, all ye social powers,
Shed your influence over us;
Crown with bliss the present hours,
And lighten those before us.
May the just, the generous kind,
Still see that you regard 'em;
And Lionels forever find
Clarissas to reward 'em.

Clar. Love, thy godhead I adore,
Source of sacred passion:
But will never come before
Those idols, wealth or fashion.
May, like me, each maidens wise,
From the fop defend her;
Learning, sense, and virtue prize,
And scern the vain pretender.

Har. Why the plague should men be sad,
While in time we moulder?
Grave, or gay, or vexed, or glad,
We every day grow older.
Bring the flask, the music bring,
Joy will quickly find us;
Drink, and laugh, and dance, and sing,
And cast our cares behind us.

Dian. How shall I escape -- so naught,
On filial laws to trample;
I Will even courtsey, own my fault,
And plead papa's example.
Parents, it is a hint to you;
Children often are shameless --
Often transgress -- the thing's too true --
But are you always blameless?

Col. One word more before we go;
Girls and boys have patience;
You to friends must something owe,
As well as to relations.
These kind gentlemen address --
What though we forgive 'em?
Still they must be lost, unless
You lend a hand to save 'em.

Exeunt omnes END OF THE OPERA.
SONGS, SOMETIMES SUBSTITUTED FOR THE ORIGINAL ONES.
Instead of the Song at p. 21, beginning Hope and fear --
YE gloomy thoughts, ye fears perverse,
Like sullen vapors, all disperse,
And scatter in the wind:
Delusive phantoms, brood of night,
No more my sickly fau^y fright,
No more my reason blind.
It Is done; I feel my soul released;
The visions fly, the mists are chased,
Nor leave a cloud behind.
Instead of the Song at p. 37 --
I WONDER, I swear,
How a woman can bear
A fop, that himself admires:
Mere puppets for play,
Of papier mache,
Without either soul or desires.
One's posed in one's aim
To give them a name --
Things of such equivocal growth;
Nor master, nor miss,
But 'twixt that and this,
Ridiculous copies of both.
Instead of the Song at p. 39 --
AH! how weak is inclination,
Fain I would yet more explain;
But you see my agitation,
And will spare my tongue the pain.
Help and force, at once forsake me,
On your kindness I depend.
Since your wife you cannot make me,
Make, O make me, sir, your friend.
Instead of the Song at p. 41 --
OH! Ladies, lovely creatures!
Your wit, your shape, your features,
Are all divine:
But still changing, feigning;
The man who seeks your meaning,
Goes out the sea to fathom,
Without lead or line.
Your charms are formed to please us;
You spread the lure to seize us;
And when we get
Into the net,
Why, then, you vex and teaze us.
The two following Songs, instead of that at p. 48.
I.]
AH! how cruel the reflection!
Woman once to error led,
Every eye wakes for detection,
Every tongue the tale to spread.
Vainly is her fault lamented
By the poor, misguided fair;
That which Caution had prevented,
Penitence can never repair.
II.]
HOW can you, inhuman! persist to distress me?
My danger, my fears, it is in vain to disguise:
You know them, yet still to destruction you press me,
And force that from passion which prudence denies.
I fain would oppose a perverse inclination;
The visions of fancy from reason divide;
With fortitude baffle the wiles of temptation,
And let Love no longer make Folly its guide.
Instead of the Song at page 54 --
BEAR, Oh, bear me, of a sudden,
Some kind stroke of smiling chance,
From this land of beef and pudding,
To dear Italy, or France.
I Am sick to the soul;
Politics and sea-coal,
Have given me the vapors;
Their cursed newspapers,
Their robbing,
Stock-jobbing,
Are horrors to me:
I wish the whole island was sunk in the sea.
Instead of the Song at page 55 --
GIRLS, like squirrels, often appear
In their cages, pleased with slavery;
But, in fact, it is all but knavery;
Less through love, than out of fear:
Only on thin tricks relying,
Let them out, their bonds antying,
And you will see the matter plain.
Once, there is naught their flight to hamper,
Presto -- whisk -- away they scamper,
Never to return again.
Would you manage ^asses rightly,
You must watch them daily, nightly,
Shut them close, and hold them tightly,
Never lose an inch of chain:
Freedom run-aways will make 'em,
And the devil cannot overtake 'em.
FINIS.
LOVE IN A VILLAGE. A COMIC OPERA. WRITTEN BY MR. BICKERSTAFF. AS PERFORMED AT
THE NEW THEATER, IN PHILADELPHIA.

FROM THE PRESS OF M. CAREY, MARCH 1, M.DCC.XCIV.

TABLE OF THE SONGS, with the Names of the several Composers. A New Overture by
Mr. Abel.
ACT I.
1 Hope, thou nurse of young desire Mr. Weldon 2 Whence can you inherit Abos 3
My heart's my own, my will is free Arne 4 When once love's subtle poison gains
Arne 5 Oh! had I been by fate decreed Howard 6 Gentle youth, ah tell me why
Arne 7 Still in hopes to get the better Arne 8 There was a jolly miller once 9
Let gay ones and great Baildon 10 The honest heart whose thoughts are free
Festing 11 Well, well, say no more LARRY GROGAN 12 Cupid, god of soft
persuasion Giardini 13 How happy were my days till now Arne 14 A medley
ACT II.
15 We women, like weak Indians, trade Paradies 16 Think, my fairest, how delay
Arne 17 Believe me, dear aunt Arne 18 When I followed a lass that was froward
and shy 19 Let rakes and libertines resigned Handel 20 How blessed the maid,
whose bosom Gallupi 21 In vain I every art essay Arne 22 Begone -- I agree Arne
23 Oh! how shall I in language weak Carry 24 Young I am, and sore afraid Gallupi
25 Oons, neighbor, never blush Arne 26 My Dolly was the fairest thing Handel
27 Was ever poor fellow Argus 28 Cease, gay seducers, pride to take Arne 29
Since Hodge proves ungrateful Arne 30 In love should there meet a fond pair
Bernard 31 Well, come, let us hear
ACT III.
32 The world is a well-furnished table Arne 33 It is not wealth, it is not
birth Giardini 34 The traveller benighted Arne 35 If ever a fond inclination
Geminiani 36 A plague of these wenches, etc. ST. PATRICK'S DAY 37 How much
superior beauty awes Howard 38 When we see a lover languish Arne 39 All I wish
in her obtaining Arne 40 If ever I Am caught in those regions Boyce 41 Go,
naughty man, I cannot abide you Arne 42 Hence with cares Boyce
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Sir William Meadows, Mr. Warrell. Young Meadows, Mr. Marshall. Justice
Woodcock, Mr. Bates. Hawthorn, Mr. Darley. Eustace, Mr. Darley, jun. Hodge, Mr.
Francis.
WOMEN.
Rosetta, Mrs. Marshall. Lucinda* Mrs. Warrell. Mrs. Deborah Woodcock, Mrs.
Shaw. Margery, Miss Williams.
LOVE IN A VILLAGE.
ACT I.
SCENE, a garden with statues, fountains, and flower-pots. Several arbours
appear in the side-scenes: Rosetta and Lucinda are discovered at work, seated
upon two garden-chairs. AIR.
Rosetta. HOPE! thou nurse of young desire,
Fairy promiser of joy;
Painted vapor, glowworm fire,
Temperate sweet, that never can cloy:

Lucinda, Hope! thou earnest of delight,
Softest soother of the mind;
Balmy cordial, prospect bright,
Surest friend the wretched find:

Both. Kind deceiver, flatter still,
Deal out pleasures unpossest;
With thy dreams my fancy fill,
And in wishes make me blessed.

Lucin. Heigho -- Rosetta!


Ros. Well, child, what do you say?


Lucin. It Is a devilish thing to live in a village an hundred miles from the
capital, with a preposterous gouty father, and a superannu^^ed maiden aunt. --
I am heartily sick of my situation.


Ros. And with reason -- But it is in a great measure your own fault: here is
this Mr. Eustace, a man of character and family; he likes you, you like him;
you know one another's minds, and yet you will not resolve to make yourself
happy with him.

AIR.
Whence can you inherit
So slavish a spirit?
Confined thus and chained to a log?
Now fondl'd, now chid,
Permitted, forbid:
It Is leading the life of a dog.
For shame, you a lover!
More firmness discover;
Take courage, nor here longer mope;
Resist and be free,
Run, riot, like me,
And to perfect the picture, elope.

Lucin. And this is your advice?


Ros. Positively.


Lucin. Here Is my hand; positively I Will follow it -- I have already sent to my
gentleman, who is now in the country, to let him know he may come hither this
day; we will make use of the opportunity to settle all preliminaries -- And
then -- But take notice, whenever we decamp, you march off along with us.


Ros. Oh! madam, your servant; I have no inclination to be left behind, I
assure you -- But you say yo^ got acquainted with this spark, while you were
with your mother, during her last illness, at Bath, so that your father has
never seen him.


Lucin. Never in his life, my dear; and I am confident he entertains not the
least suspicion of my having any such connection: my aunt, indeed, has her
doubts and surmises; but, besides that my father will not allow any one to be
wiser than himself, it is an established maxim between these affectionate
relations, never to agree in any thing.


Ros. Except being absurd; you must allow they sympathize perfectly in that --
But now we are on the subject, I desire to know what I am to do with this
wicked old justice of peace, this libidinous father of yours? He follows me
about the house like a tame goat.


Lucin. Nay, I Will assure you he has been a wag in his time -- you must have a
care of yourself.


Ros. Wretched me! to fall into such hands, who have been just forced to run
away from my parents to avoid an odious marriage -- You smile at that now; and
I know you think me whimfical, "as you have often told me;" but you must excuse
my being a little over delicate in this particular.

AIR.
My heart's my own, my will is free,
And so shall be my voice;
No mortal man shall wed with me,
'Till first he is made my choice.
Let parents rule, ery nature's laws,
And children still obey;
And is there, then, no saving clause,
Against tyrannic sway?

Lucin. Well, but my dear mad girl --


Ros. Lucinda, don't talk to me -- Was your father to go to London, meet there
by accident with an old fellow as wrong-headed as himself, and in a fit of
absurd friendship, agree to marry you to that old fellow's soil, whom you had
never seen, without consulting your inclinations, or allowing you a negative,
in case he should not prove agreeable --


Lucin. Why, I should think it a little hard, I confess -- yet when I see you
in the character of a chambermaid --


Ros. It is the only character, my dear, in which I could hope to lie
concealed: and I can tell you, I was reduced to the last extremity, when, in
consequence of our old boarding-school friendship, I applied to you to receive
me in this capacity; for we expected the parties the very next week.


Lucin. But had not you a message from your intended spouse, to let you know he
was as little inclined to such ill concerted nuptials as you were?


Ros. More than so; he wrote to advise me, by all means, to contrive some
method of breaking them off, for he had rather return to his dear studies at
Oxford: and after that, what hopes could I have of being happy with him?


Lucin. Then you are not at all uneasy at the strange rout you must have
occasioned at home, I warrant, durring this month you have been absent? --


Ros. Oh! don't mention it, my dear; I have had so many admirers since I
commenced Abigail, that I am quite charmed with my situation -- but hold, who
stalks yonder into the yard, that the dogs are so glad to see?


Lucin. Daddy Hawthorn, as I live! He is come to pay my father a visit; and
never more luckily, for he always forces him abroad. By the way, what will you
do with yourself, while I step into the house to see after my trusty messenger
Hodge?


Ros. No matter, I Will sit down in that arbor, and listen to the singing of the
birds: you know I am fond of melancholy amusements.


Lucin. So it seems indeed: sure, Rosetta, none of your admirers had power to
touch your heart; you are not in love, I hope?


Ros. In love! that is pleasant: who do you suppose I should be in love with,
pray?


Lucin. Why, let me see -- What do you think of Thomas our gardener? There he
is at the other end of the walk -- He Is a pretty young man, and the servants
say he is always writing verses on you.


Ros. Indeed, Lucinda you are very silly.


Lucin. Indeed, Rosetta, that blush makes you look very handsome.


Ros. Blush! I am sure I don't blush.


Lucin. Ha, ha, ha!


Ros. Psha, Lucinda, how can you be so ridiculous?


Lucin. Well don't be angry, and I have done -- But suppose you did like him,
how could you help yourself?

AIR.
When once love's subtle poison gains
A passage to the female breast;
Rushing like lightning through the veins,
Each wish, and every thought's possessed.
To heal the pangs our minds endure,
Reason in vain its skill applies:
Naught can afford the heart a cure,
But what is pleasing to the eyes. Exeunt.

Enter Young Meadows. Y. Meadows. Let me see -- [taking out a pocketbook.] on
the fifteenth of June, at half an hour past five in the morning, I left my
father's house, unknown to any one, having made free with a coat and jacket of
our gardener's which fitted me, by way of disguise; [put's up the book.] so
says my pocketbook; and chance directing me to this village, on the twentieth
of the same month, I procured a recommendation to the worshipful Justice
Woodcock, to be the superintendant of his pumpkins and cabbages, because I
would let my father see I chose to run any lengths, rather than submit to what
his obstinacy would have forced me, a marriage against my inclinations, with a
woman I never saw. Here I have been three weeks, and in that time I am as much
altered as if I changed my nature with my habit. 'Sdeath, to fall in love with
a chambermaid! And yet, if I could forget that I am the son and heir of Sir
William Meadows -- But that is impossible. AIR.
O! had I been by fate decreed
Some humble cottage swain,
In fair Rosetta's sight to feed
My sheep upon the plain;
What joys had I been born to taste,
Which now I never must know?
Ye envious powers! why have ye placed
My fair one's lot so low?
Ha! who was it I had a glimpse of as I past by that arbor? Was it not she sat
reading there? The trembling of my heart tells me my eyes were not mistaken --
Here she comes.


Enter Rosetta. Ros. Lucinda was certainly in the right of it, and yet I blush
to own my weakness even to myself -- Marry, hang the fellow, for not being a
gentleman. Aside.


Y. Meadows. I am determined I will not speak to her, [turning to a rosetree and
plucking the flowers.] Now or never is the time to conquer myself: besides, I
have some reason to believe the girl has no aversion to me: and, as I wish not
to do her an injury, it would be cruel to fill her head with notions of what
can never happen. [bums a tune.] "Psha! rot those roses, how they prick one's
fingers?" Aside.


Ros. He takes no notice of me; but so much the better. I Will be as indifferent
as he is. I am sure the poor lad likes me; and if I was to give him any
encouragement, I suppose the next thing he talked of would be buying a ring,
and being asked in church -- Oh, dear pride! I thank you for that thought.
Aside and going.


Y. Meadows. Hah, going without a word! a look! -- I cannot bear that [aside.]
Mrs. Rosetta, I am gathering a few roses here, if you please to take them in
with you.


Ros. Thank you, Mr. Thomas, but all my ladies flowerpots are full.


Y. Meadows. Will you accept of them for yourself, then? [catching hold of
her.] What Is the matter? you look as if you were angry with me.


Ros. Pray let go my hand.


Y. Meadows. Nay, pr'y thee, why is this? you shall not go, I have something to
say to you.


Ros. Well, but I must go, I will go: I desire, Mr. Thomas -- AIR.
Gentle youth, ah, tell me why
Still you force me thus to fly?
Cease, oh, cease to persevere,
Speak not what I must not hear;
To my heart its cease restore:
Go, and never see me more. Exit.



Y. Meadows. This girl is a riddle -- That she loves me, I think there is no
room to doubt; she takes a thousand opportunities to let me see it; and yet,
when I speak to her, she will hardly give me an answer; and, if I attempt the
smallest familiarity, is gone in an instant -- I feel my passion for her grow
every day more and more violent -- Well, would I marry her? would I make a
mistress of her if I could? Two things, called prudence and honor forbid
either. What am I pursuing, then? A shadow, Sure my evil genius laid this snare
in my way. However, there is one comfort -- it is in my power to fly from it;
if so, why do I hesitate? I am distracted, unable to determine any thing.

AIR.
Still in hopes to get the better
Of my stubborn flame I try;
Swear this moment to forget her,
And the next my oath deny.
Now prepared with scorn to treat her,
Every charm in thought I brave;
Boast my freedom, fly to meet her,
And confess myself a slave. Exit.

SCENE, a Hall in Justice Wooodcock's house. Enter Hawthorn with a fowling
piece in his hands, and a net with birds at his girdle. There was a jolly
miller once
Lived on the river Dee;
He worked and sung from morn to night;
No lark more blythe than he.
And this the burden of his song,
For ever used to be,
I care for nobody, not I,
If no one cares for me.
House, here, house! what all gadding, all abroad! house I say, hilli ho ho!


J. Woodcock. Here Is a noise, here is a racket! William, Robert, Hodge! why does
not somebody answer? Odds, my life, I believe the fellows have lost their
hearing! [Entering.] Oh master Hawthorn! I guessed it was some such mad-cap --
Are you there?


Hawth. Am I here? Yes: and if you had been where I was three hours ago, you
would find the good effects of it by this time: but you have got the lazy
unwholesome London fashion, of lying a^bed in a morning, and there is gout for
you -- Why, sir, I have not been in bed five minutes after sunrise these
thirty years, am generally up before it; and I never took a dose of physic but
once in my life, and that was in compliment to a cousin of mine, an apothecary,
that had just set up business.


J. Woodcock. Well, but master Hawthorn, let me tell you, you know nothing of
the matter; for I say sleep is necessary for a man; ay, and I Will maintain it.


Hawth. What, when I maintain to the contrary? -- Look you, neighbor Woodcock,
you are a rich man, a man of worship, a justice of peace, and all that; but
learn to know the respect that is due to the sound from the infirm; and allow
me that superiority a good constitution gives me over you -- Health is the
greatest of all possessions; and it is a maxim with me that ^n hale cobbler is a
better man than a sick king.


J. Woodcock. Well, well, you are a sportsman.


Hawth. And so would you too, if you would take my advice. A sportsman! why
there is nothing like it: I would not exchange the satisfaction I feel while I
am beating the lawns and thickets about my little farm, for all the
entertainments and pageantry in christendom.

AIR.
Let gay ones and great
Make the most of their fate;
From pleasure to pleasure they run:
Well, who cares a jot,
I envy them not,
While I have my dog and my gun,
For exercise, air,
To the fields I repair,
With spirits unclouded and light*
The blisses I find
No stings leave behind,
But health and diversion unite,

Enter Hodge. Hodge. Did your worship call, sir?


J. Woodcock. Call, sir; where have you and the rest of these rascals been? But
I suppose I need not ask -- You must know there is a statute, a fair for hiring
servants, held upon my green today* we have it usually at this season of the
year, and it never fails to put all the folks hereabouts out of their senses.


Hodge. Lord, your honor, look out, and see what a nice show they make yonder;
they had go pipers and fiddlers, and were dancing as I came along, for dear
life. -- I never saw such a mortal throng in our village in all my born days
again.


Hawth. Why, I like this now: this is as it should be.


J. Woodcock. No, no, it is a very foolish piece of business; good for nothing
but to promote idleness and the getting of bastards: but I shall take measures
for preventing it another year, and I doubt whether I am not sufficiently
authorized already; for, by an act passed Anno undecimo Caroli primi, which
impowers a justice of peace, who is lord of the manor --


Hawth. Come, come, never mind the act; let me tell you this a very proper, a
very useful meeting; I want a servant or two myself; I must go see what your
market affords; -- and you shall go, and the girls, my little Lucy, and the
other young rogue, and we'll make a day on it as well as the rest,


J. Woodcock. I wish, master Hawthorn, I could teach you to be a little more
sedate; why will not you take pattern by me, and consider your dignity! -- Odds,
heart, I don't wonder you are not a rich man; you laugh too much ever to be
rich.


Hawth. Right, neighbor Woodcock! health, good humor, and competence, is my
motto: and if my executors have a mind, they are welcome to make it my epitaph.

AIR.
The honest heart, whose thoughts are clear
From fraud, disguise, or guile,
Need neither fortune's frowning fear,
Nor court the harlot's smile.
The greatness that would make us grave,
Is but an empty thing;
What more than mirth would mortals have?
The cheerful man's a king.

Exeunt J. Woodcock and Hawthorn. Enter Lucinda. Lucin. Hist, hist, Hodge!


Hodge. Who calls? here am I.


Lucin. Well, have you been?


Hodge. Been, ay, I have been far enough, an that be all: you never knew any
thing fall out so crossly in your born days,


Lucin. Why, what is the matter?


Hodge. Why, you know, I dare not take a horse out of his worship's stables
this morning, for fear it should be missed, and breed questions: and our old
nag at home was so cruelly beat i'th'hoofs, that, poor beast, it had not a foot
to set to ground; so I was fain to go to farmer Ploughshare's, at the Grange,
to borrow the loan of his bald filly: and, would you think it? after walking
all that way -- de'el from me, if the cross-grained toad did not deny me the
favor.


Lucin. Unlucky!


Hodge. Well, then I went my ways to the King's-head in the village, but all
their cattle were at plough: and I was as far to seek below at the turnpike: so
at last, for want of a better, I was forced to take up with dame Quickset's
blind mare.


Lucin. Oh, then you have been?


Hodge. Yes, yes, I have been.


Lucin. Psha! why did not you say so at once?


Hodge. Aye, but I have had a main tiresome jaunt on it, for she is a sorry jade
at best.


Lucin. Well, well, did you see Mr. Eustace, and what did he say to you? --
Come, quick -- have you ever a letter?


Hodge. Yes, he gave me a letter, if I have na lost it.


Lucin. Lost it, man!


Hodg. Nay, nay, have a bit of patience: adwauns, you are always in such a
hurry. [rummaging his pockets.] I put it somewhere into this waistcoat pocket.
Oh here it is.


Lucin. So, give it me. reads the letter to herself.


Hodge. Lord-a-mercy! how my arms ache with heating that plaguey beast; I Will be
hanged if I won'na rather ha'thrash'd half a day, than have ridden her.


Lucin. Well, Hodge, you have done your business very well.


Hodge. Well, have not I, now?


Lucin. Yes -- Mr. Eustace tells me in this letter, that he will be in the
green lane, at the other end of the village, by twelve o'clock -- You know
where he came before.


Hodge. Ay, ay.


Lucin. Well, you must go there; and wait till he arrives, and watch your
opportunity to introduce him across the fields, into the little summer house,
on the left side of the garden.


Hodge. That Is enough.


Lucin. But take particular care that no body sees you.


Hodge. I warrant you.


Lucin. Nor for your life drop a word of it to any mortal.


Hodge. Never fear me.


Lucin. And Hodge -- AIR.
Hodge. Well, well, say no more;
Sure you told me before;
I see the full length of my tether;
Do you think I Am a fool,
That I need go to school*
I can spell you and put you together.
A word to the wise
Will always suffice;
Addsniggers, go talk to your parrot;
I Am not such an elf,
Though I say it myself,
But I know a sheep's head from a carrot. Exit.




Lucin. How severe is my case! Here I Am obliged to carry on a claudestine
correspondence with a man in all respects my equal, because the oddity of my
father's temper is such, that I dare not tell him I have ever yet seen the
person I should like to marry -- But perhaps he has quality in his eye, and
hopes, one day or other, as I am his only child, to match me with a title: vain
imagination!

Cupid, god of soft persuasion,
Take a helpless lover's part!
Seize, oh, seize some kind occasion,
To reward a faithful heart!
Justly those we tyrants call,
Who the body would enthral;
Tyrants of more cruel kind,
Those who would enslave the mind.
What is grandeur? foe to rest;
Childish mummery at best;
Happy I in humble state;
Catch, ye fools, the glittering bait. Exit.

SCENE, a field with a style. Enter Hodge, followed by Marge^y; and in some
time after, enter Young Meadows. Hodge. What does the wench follow me for? Odds
flesh, folk may well talk, to see you dangling after me every where, like a
tantony pig: find some other road, cannot you; and don't keep wherreting me with
your nonsense.


Marg. Nay, pray you, Hodge, stay, and let me speak to you a bit.


Hodge. Well; what sayn you?


Marg. Dear heart, how can you be so barbarous? and is this the way you serve
me after all; and will not you keep your word, Hodge?


Hodge. Why no, I will not, I tell you: I have changed my mind.


Marg. Nay, but surely, surely -- Consider, Hodge, you are obligated in
conscience to make me an honest woman.


Hodge. Obligated in conscience! How am I obligated?


Marg. Because you are; and none but the basest of rogues would bring a poor
girl to shame, and afterward leave her to the wide world.


Hodge. Bring you to shame! Don't make me speak, Madge, don't make me speak.


Marg. Yes, do speak your worst.


Hodge. Why then, if you go to that, you were fain to leave your own village
down in the West, for a bastard you had by the clerk of the parish, and I Will
bring the man shall say it to your face.


Marg. No, no, Hodge, it is no such thing, it is a base lie of farmer
Ploughshare's -- But I know what makes you false-hearted to me, that you may
keep company with young madam's waiting woman, and I am sure she is no fit body
for a poor man's wife.


Hodge. How should you know what she is fit for? She Is fit for as much as you,
mayhap; don't find fault with your betters, Madge. [ Seeing Young Meadows.] Oh!
Master Thomas, I have a word or two to say to you. Pray did not you go down the
village one day last week with a basket of something upon your shoulder?


Y. Meadows. Well, and what then?


Hodge. Nay, not much, only the hostler at the Green-Man was saying as how
there was a passenger at their house as see'd you go by, and said he know'd
you; and axt a mort of questions -- So I thought I Would tell you.


Y. Meadows. The devil! ask questions about me! I know no body in this part of
the country; there must be some mistake in it -- Come hither, Hodge.


Exeunt Y. Meadows and Hodge. Marg. A nasty, ungrateful fellow, to use me at
this rate, after being to him as I have. -- Well, well, I wish all poor girls
would take warning by my mishap, and never have nothing to say to none of them.

AIR.
How happy were my days, till now!
I never did sorrow feel;
I rose with joy to milk my cow,
Or take my spinning^wheel.
My heart was lighter than a fly,
Like any bird I sung,
Till he pretended love, and I
Believed his flattering tongue.
Oh the fool, the silly, silly fool,
Who trusts what man may be;
I wish I was a maid again,
And in my own country. Exit.

SCENE, a green with the prospect of a village, and the representation of a
statute or fair. Enter Justice Woodcock, Hawthorn, Mrs. Deborah Woodcock,
Lucinda, Rosetta, Young Meadows, Hodge, and several country people. Hodge. This
way, your worship; this way. Why don't you stand aside there! Here Is his
worship a-coming.


Countrymen. His worship!


J. Woodcock. Fie, fie, what a crowd's this! Odd, I Will put some of them in the
stocks. [Striking a fellow.] Stand out of the way, sirrah.


Hawth. For shame, neighbor! Well, my lad, are you willing to serve the king?


Countryman. Why, can you list ma? Serve the king, master! no, no, I pay the
king, that is enough for me. Ho, ho, ho?


Hawth. Well said, Sturdy-boots.


J. Woodcock. Nay, if you talk to them, they will answer you.


Hawth. I would have them do so. I like they should. -- Well, madam, is not
this a fine sight? I did not know my neighbor's estate had been so well
peopled. -- Are all these his own tenants?


Mrs. Deb. More than are good of them, Mr. Hawthorn. I don't like to see such a
parcel of young huffies fleering with the fellows.


Hawth. There Is a lass. [Beckoning to a country girl.] Come hither, my pretty
maid. What brings you here? [Chucking her under the chin.] Do you come to look
for a service?


C. Girl. Yes, an't please you.


Hawth. Well, and what place are you for?


C Girl. All work, an't please you.


J. Woodcock. Ay, ay, I don't doubt it: any work you will put her to.


Mrs. Deb. She looks like a brazen one -- Go, hussy.


Hawth. Here Is another. [Catching a girl that goes by.] What health, what
bloom! -- This is nature's work; no art, no daubing. Don't be ashamed, child;
those cheeks of thine are enough to put a whole drawing room out of countenance.


Hodge. Now, your honor, now the sport will come. The gut-scrapers are here,
and some among them are going to sing and dance. Why there is not the like of
our statute, mon, in five counties; others are but fools to it.


Footman. Come, good people, make a ring; and stand out, fellow servants, as
many of you as are willing, and able to bear a bob. We'll let my master and
mistress see we can do something at least; if they will not hire us, it shall not be
our fault. Strike up the Servants' Medley.


AIR.
HOUSE-MAID. I pray ye, gentles, list to me,
I Am young, and strong, and clean, you see;
I Will not turn tail to any she,
For work, that is in the county.
Of all your house the charge I take,
I wash, I scrub, I brew, I bake;
And more can do than here I Will speak,
Depending on your bounty.

FOOTMAN. Behold a blade, who knows his trade
In chamber, hall, and entry;
And what though here I now appear,
I Have served the best of gentry.
A footman would ye have,
I can dress, and comb, and shave,
For I a handy lad am;
On a message I can go,
And slip a billet-doux,
With your humble servant, madam.

COOK-MAID. Who wants a good cook, my hand they must cross;
For plain wholesome dishes I Am never at a loss;
And what are your soups, your ragouts, and your sauce,
Compared to old English roast-beef?

CARTER. If you want a young man with a true honest heart,
Who knows how to manage a plough and a cart,
Here Is one for your purpose; come take me and try;
You Will say you never met with a better nor I.
Ge ho, Dobbin, etc.

CHORUS. My masters and mistresses, hither repair;
What servants you want you will find in our fair;
Men and maids fit for all sorts of stations there be;
And as for the wages, we shall not disagree.

A Dance. Exeunt omnes. END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE, a parlour in Justice Woodcock's house. Enter Lucinda and Eustace.
Lucin. WELL, am not I a bold adventurer, to bring you into my father's house at
noonday? Though, to say the truth, we are safer here than in the garden; for
there is not a human creature under the roof besides ourselves.


Eust. Then why not put our scheme into execution this moment? I have a
post-chaise ready.


Lucin. Fie: how can you talk so lightly? I protest I am afraid to have any
thing to do with you: your passion seems too much ^ounded on appetite; and my
^unt Deborah says --


Eust. What! by all the rapture my heart now feels --


Lucin. Oh, to be sure, promise and vow; it sounds prettily, and never fails to
impose on a fond female.

AIR.
We women, like weak Indians, trade,
Whose judgment tinsel show decoys;
Dupes to our folly we are made,
While artful man the gain enjoys:
We give our treasure to be paid,
A paltry, poor return! in toys.

Eust. Well, I see you have a mind to divert yourself with me; but I wish I could
prevail on you to be a little serious.


Lucin. Seriously then, what would you desire me to say? I have promised to run
away with you; which is as great a concession as any reasonable lover can
expect from his mistress.


Eust. Yes; but, you dear provoking angel, you have not told me when you will
run away with me.


Lucin. Why that, I confess, requires some consideration.


Eust. Yet remember, while you are deliberating, the season, now so favorable
to us, may elapse, never to return.

AIR.
Think, my fairest, how delay
Danger every moment brings:
Time flies swift, and will away,
Time, that is ever on its wings,
Doubting and suspense, at best,
Lovers late repentance cost;
Let us, eager to be blessed,
Seize occasion ere it is lost.

Enter Justice Woodcock, and Mrs. Deborah Woodcock. J. Woodcock. Why, here is
nothing in the world in this house but caterwauling from morning till night,
nothing but caterwauling. Hoity, toity, who have we here?


Lucin. My father and my aunt!


Eust. The devil! what shall we do?


Lucin. Take no notice of them, only observe me. [ Speaks aloud to Eustace.]
Upon my word, sir, I don't know what to say to it, unless the justice was at
home; he has just stepped into the village with some company; but, if you will
sit down a moment, I dare swear he will return -- [Pretends to see the
justice.] Oh! sir, here is my papa!


J. Woodcock. Here is your papa, hussy! Who Is this you have got with you? Hark
you, sirrah, who are you, ye dog? and what is your business here?


Eust. Sir, this is a language I am not used to.


J. Woodcock. Don't answer me, you rascal -- I am a justice of the peace; and
if I hear a word out of your mouth, I Will send you to jail, for all your laced
hat.


Mrs. Deb. Send him to jail, brother, that is right.


J. Woodcock. And how do you know it is right? How should you know any thing's
right. -- Sister Deborah, you are never in the right.


Mrs. Deb. Brother, this is the man I have been telling you about so long.


J. Woodcock. What man, goody Wiseacre?


Mrs. Deb. Why, the man, your daughter has an intrigue with; but I hope you
will believe it now, though you see it with your own eyes -- Come, hussy,
confess, and don't let your father make a fool of himself any longer.


Lucin. Confess what, aunt? This gentleman is a music-master: he goes about the
country teaching ladies to play and sing, and has been recommended to instruct
me; I could not turn him out when he came to offer his service, and did not
know what answer to give him till I saw my papa.


J. Woodcock. A music master!


Eust. Yes, sir, that is my profession.


Mrs. Deb. It Is a lie, young man, it is a lie. Brother, he is no more a
music-master, than I am a music-master.


J. Woodcock. What, then, you know better than the fellow himself, do you? and
you will be wiser than all the world?


Mrs. Deb. Brother, he does not look like a music-master.


J. Woodcock. He does not look! ha! ha! ha! Was ever such a poor stupe! Well,
and what does he look like then? But I suppose you mean, he is not dressed like
a music-master, because of his ruffles, and this bit of garnishing about his
waistcoat -- which seems to be copper too -- Why, you silly wretch, these
whippersnappers set up for gentlemen, nowadays, and give themselves as many
airs as if they were people of quality -- Hark you, friend, I suppose you don't
come within the vagrant act? You have some settled habitation? -- Where do you
live?


Mrs. Deb. It is an easy matter for him to tell you a wrong place.


J. Woodcock. Sister Deborah, don't provoke me.


Mrs. Deb. I wish, brother, you would let me examine him a little.


J. Woodcock. You shall not say a word to him, you shall not say a word to him.


Mrs. Deb. She says he was recommended here, brother; ask him by whom.


J. Woodcock. No, I will not now, because you desire it.


Lucin. If my papa did ask the question, aunt, it would be very easily resolved.


Mrs. Deb. Who bid you speak, Mrs. Nimble-chop^! I suppose the man has a tongue
in his head, to answer for himself.


J. Woodcock. Will nobody stop that prating old woman's mouth for me? Get out
of the room.


Mrs. Deb. Well, so I can, brother, I don't want to stay; but remember, I tell
you, you will make yourself ridiculous in this affair; for through your own
obstinacy, you will have your daughter run away with before your face.


J. Woodcock. My daughter! who will run away with my daughter?


Mrs. Deb. That fellow will.


J. Woodcock. Go, go, you are a wicked censorious old woman.


Lucin. Why, sure, madam, you must think me very coming, indeed.


J. Woodcock. Ay, she judges others by herself; I remember when she was a girl,
her mother dared not trust her the length of her apron-string; she was
clambering upon every fellow's back.


Mrs. Deb. I was not.


J. Woodcock. You were.


Lucin. Well, but why so violent?

AIR.
Believe me, dear aunt,
If you rave thus and rant,
You Will never a lover persuade;
The men will all fly,
And leave you to die,
Oh, terrible chance! an old maid,
How happy the lass,
Must she come to this pass,
Who ancient virginity escapes!
'Twere better on earth
Have five brats at a birth,
Than in hell be a leader of apes.

Exit Mrs. Deb. J. Woodcock. Well done Lucy, send her about her business; a
troublesome, foolish creature, does she think I want to be directed by her --
Come hither, my lad; yo^ look tolerable honest.


Eust. I hope, sir, I shall never give you cause to alter your opinion.


J. Woodcock. No, no, I am not easily deceived; I am generally pretty right in
my conjectures. -- You must know, I had once a little notion of music myself,
and learned upon the fiddle; I could play the Trumpet Minuet, and Buttered
Peace, and two or three tunes. I remember when I was in London, about thirty
years ago, there was a song, a great favorite at our club at Nando's
coffee-house; Jack Pickle used to sing it for us; a droll fish: but it is an old
thing, I dare swear you have heard of it often.

AIR.
When I followed a lass that was froward and shy,
Oh! I stuck to her stuff, till I made her comply;
Oh! I took her so lovingly round the waist,
And I smack'd her lips, and I held her fast:
When hugged and haul'd,
She squeal'd and squal'd;
But though she vowed all I did was in vain,
Yet I pleased her so well that she ^ore it again:
Then hoity, toity,
Whisking, frisking,
Green was her gown upon the grass;
Oh! such were the joys of our dancing days.

Eust. Very well, Sir, upon my word.


J. Woodcock. No, no, I forget all those things now; but I could do a little at
them once: -- Well, stay and eat your dinner, and we'll talk about your
teaching the girl. -- Lucy, take your master to your spinnet, and show him what
you can do -- I must go and give some orders; Then hoity-toity, etc. Exit.


Lucin. My sweet, pretty papa, your most obedient humble srvant; hah, hah, hah!
was ever so whimsical an accident! Well, sir, what do you think of this?


Eust. Think of it! I am in amaze.


Lucin. O, your aukwardness! I was frightened out of my wits, lest you should
not take the hint; and if I had not turned matters so cleverly, we should have
been utterly undone.


Eust. 'Sdeath! why would you bring me into the house? we could expect nothing
else: besides, since they did surprise us, it would have been better to have
discovered the truth.


Lucin. Yes, and never have seen one another afterward. I know my father
better than you do; he has taken it into his head, I have no inclination for a
husband; and let me tell you, that is our best security: for, if once he has
said a thing, he will not be easily persuaded to the contrary.


Eust. And pray what am I to do now?


Lucin. Why, as I think all danger is pretty well over, since he has invited
you to dinner with him, stay; only be cautious of your behavior; and, in the
mean time, I will consider what is next to be done.


Eust. Had not I better go to your father?


Lucin. Do so, while I endeavor to recover myself a little out of the flurry
this affair has put me in.


Eust. Well, but what sort of a parting is this, without so much as your
servant, or good bye to you? No ceremony at all? Can you afford me no token to
keep up my spirits till I see you again?


Lucin. Ah, childish!


Eust. My angel!


AIR.
Eust. Let rakes and libertines, resigned
To sensual pleasures, range!
Here all the sex's charms I find,
And never can cool or change.

Lucin. Let vain coquets and prudes conceal
What most their hearts desire;
With pride my passion I reveal,
Oh! may it never expire.

Both. The sun shall cease to spread his light,
The stars their orbits leave;
And fair creation sink in night,
When I my dear deceive. Exeunt.

SCENE, a Garden. Enter Rosetta, musing. Ros. If ever poor creature was in a
pitiable condition, surely, I am. The devil take this fellow, I cannot get him
out of my head, and yet I would fain persuade myself I don't care for him:
well, but surely I am not in love: let me examine my heart a little: I saw him
kissing one of the maids the other day; I could have boxed his ears for it, and
have done nothing but find fault and quarrel with the girl ever since. Why was
I uneasy at his toying with another woman? what was it to me? -- Then I dream
of him almost every night -- but that may proceed from his being generally
uppermost in my thoughts all day; Oh! worse and worse! -- Well, he is certainly
a pretty lad; 'he has something uncommon 'about him, considering his rank:' --
And now let me only put the case, if he was not a servant -- In short, I Will ask
no more questions, for the further I examine, the less reason I shall have to
be satisfied.

AIR.
How blessed the maid, whose bosom
No headstrong passion knows;
Her days in joy she passes,
Her nights in calm repose.
Wherever her fancy leads her,
No pain, no fear invades her;
But pleasure,
Without measure,
From every object flows.

Enter Young Meadows. Y. Meadows. Do you come into the garden, Mrs. Rosetta, to
put my lillies and roses out of countenance; or to save me the trouble of
watering my flowers, by reviving them? The sun seems to have hid himself a
little, to give you an opportunity of supplying his place.


Ros. Where could he get that, now? he never read it in the Academy of
Compliments.


Y. Meadows. Come, don't affect to treat me with contempt; I can suffer any
thing better than that; in short, I love you; there is no more to be said: I am
angry with myself for it, and strive all I can against it: but in spite of
myself I love you.

AIR.
In vain I every art assay
To pluck the venomed shaft away,
That rankles in my heart;
Deep in the center fixed and bound,
My efforts but enlarge the wound,
And fiercer make the smart.

Ros. Really, Mr. Thomas, this is very improper language; it is what I don't
understand; I cannot suffer it; and, in short, I don't like it.


Y. Meadows. Perhaps you don't like me.


Ros. Well, perhaps I don't.


Y. Meadows. Nay, but it is not so; come, confess you love me.


Ros. Confess! indeed I shall confess no such thing: besides, to what purpose
should I confess it?


Y. Meadows. Why, as you say, I don't know to what purpose; only it would be a
satisfaction to me to hear you say so, that is all.


Ros. Why, if I did love you, I can assure you, you would never be the better
for it -- Women are apt enough to be weak; we cannot always answer for our
inclinations, but it is in our power not to give way to them; and, If I was so
silly -- I say, if I was so indiscreet, which I hope I am not, as to entertain
an improper regard, when people's circumstances are quite unsuitable, and there
are obstacles in the way that cannot be surmounted --


Y. Meadows. Oh! to be sure, Mrs. Rosetta, to be sure; you are entirely in the
right of it -- I know very well, you and I can never come together.


Ros. Well, then, since that is the case, as I assure you it is, I think we had
better behave accordingly.


Y. Meadows. Suppose we make a bargain, then, never to speak to one another any
more?


Ros. With all my heart.


Y. Meadows. Nor look at, nor, if possible, think of one another.


Ros. I am very willing.


Y. Meadows. And, as long as we stay in the house together, never to take any
notice?


Ros. It is the best way.


Y. Meadows. Why, I believe it is -- Well, Mrs. Rosetta --


AIR.
Ros. Be gone -- I agree,
From this moment we are free;
Already the matter I Have sworn:

Y. Mead. Yet let me complain
Of the fates that ordain
A trial so hard to be borne.

Ros. When things are not fit,
We should calmly submit,
No cure in reluctance we find:

Y. Mead. Then thus I obey,
Tear your image away,
And banish you quite from my mind.

Both. Then thus I obey, etc.

Ros. Well, now I think I am somewhat easier; I am glad I have come to this
explanation with him, because it puts an end to things at once.


Y. Meadows. 'Hold, Mrs. Rosetta, pray stay a moment' -- The airs this girl
gives herself are intolerable: I find now the cause of her behavior; she
despises the meanness of my condition, thinking a gardener below the notice of
a lady's waiting woman: 'sdeath, I have a good mind to discover myself to her.
Aside.


Ros. Poor wretch! he does not know what to make of it: I believe he is
heartily mortified, but I must not pity him. Aside.


Y. Meadows. It shall be so; I will discover myself to her, and leave the house
directly -- Mrs. Rosetta -- [starting back] -- Pox on it, yonder is the Justice
come into the garden!


Ros. O Lord! 'he will walk round this way;' pray go about your business; I
would not for the world he should see us together.


Y. Meadows. The devil take him: -- he is gone across the parterre, and cannot
hobble here this half hour: I must and will have a little conversation with you.


Ros. Some other time.


Y. Meadows. This evening, in the green-house, at the lower end of the canal; I
have something to communicate to you of importance. Will you meet me there?


Ros. Meet you!


Y. Meadows. Ay; I have a secret to tell you; and I swear, from that moment,
there shall be an end of every thing betwixt us.


Ros. Well, well, pray leave me now.


Y. Meadows. You Will come, then?


Ros. I don't know, perhaps I may.


Y. Meadows. Nay, but promise.


Ros. What signifies promising; I may break my promise -- but I tell you I will.


Y. Meadows. Enough -- yet before I leave you, let me desire you to believe I
love you more than ever man loved woman; and that, when I relinquish you, I
give up all that can make my life supportable.

AIR.
Oh! how shall I, in language weak,
My ardent passion tell;
Or form my falt'ring tongue to speak
That cruel word, Farewell?
Farewell -- but know, though thus we part,
My thoughts can never stray:
Go where I will, my constant heart
Must with my charmer stay. Exit

Enter Justice Woodcock. Ros. What can this be that he wants to tell me? I have
a great curiosity to hear it, methinks -- well --


J. Woodcock. Hem: hem: Rosetta!


Ros. So, I thought the devil would throw him in my way; now for a courtship of
a different kind; but I Will give him a surfeit -- Did you call me, sir?


J. Woodcock. Ay, where are you running so fast?


Ros. I was only going into the house, sir.


J. Woodcock. Well, but come here: come here, I say. [Looking about.] How do
you do, Rosetta!


Ros. Thank you, sir, pretty well.


J. Woodcock. Why you look as fresh and blooming today -- Adad, you little
slut, I believe you are painted.


Ros. O! sir, you are pleased to compliment.


J. Woodcock. Adad, I believe you are -- let me try --


Ros. Lord, sir!


J. Woodcock. What brings you into this garden so often, Rosetta? I hope you
don't get eating green fruit and trash; or have you a hankering after some
lover in dowlas, who spoils my trees by engraving true-lovers knots on them,
with your horn and buck-handled knives? I see your name written on the ceiling
of the servants hall, with the smoke of a candle; and I suspect --


Ros. Not me, I hope sir, -- No, sir; I am of another guess mind, I assure you;
for, I have heard say, men are false and fickle --


J. Woodcock. Ay, that is your flaunting, idle young fellows; so they are; and
they are so damned impudent, I wonder a woman will have any thing to say to
them; besides, all they want is something to brag of, and tell again.


Ros. Why, I own, sir, if ever I was to make a slip, it should be with an
elderly gentleman -- about seventy, or seventy-five years of age.


J. Woodcock. No, child, that is out of reason; though I have known many a man
turned of threescore with a hale constitution.


Ros. Then, sir, he should be troubled with the gout, have a good, strong,
substantial, winter cough -- and I should not like him the worse -- if he had a
small touch of the rheumatism.


J. Woodcock. Pho, pho, Rosetta, this is jesting.


Ros. No, sir, every body has a taste, and I have mine.


J. Woodcock. Well, but Rosetta, have you thought of what I was saying to you?


Ros. What was it, sir,


J. Woodcock. Ah! you know, you know, well enough, hussy.


Ros. Dear sir, consider, my soul; would you have me endanger my soul?


J. Woodcock. No, no -- Repent.


Ros. Besides, sir, consider what has a poor servant to depend on but her
character? And, I have heard, you gentlemen will talk one thing before, and
another after.


J. Woodcock. I tell you again, these are the idle, flashy young dogs; but when
you have to do with a staid, sober man --


Ros. And a magistrate, sir!


J. Woodcock. Right; it is quite a different thing -- Well, shall we, Rosetta,
shall we?


Ros. Really sir, I don't know what to say to it.

AIR.
Young I am, and sore afraid:
Would you hurt a harmless maid?
Lead an innocent astray?
Tempt me not, kind sir, I pray.
Men too often we believe;
And should you my faith deceive,
Ruin first and then forsake,
Sure my tender heart would break.

J. Woodcock. Why, you silly girl, I will not do you any harm.


Ros. Will Not you, sir?


J. Woodcock. Not I.


Ros. But will not you indeed sir?


J. Woodcock. Why, I tell you I will not.


Ros. Ha, ha, ha!


J. Woodcock. Hussy, hussy.


Ros. Ha, ha, ha! -- Your servant, sir, -- your servant.


Exit. J. Woodcock. Why, you impudent, audacious --


Enter Hawthorn. Hawth. So, so, justice at odds with gravity! his worship
playing at romps! Your servant, sir.


J. Woodcock. Hah! friend Hathorn!


Hawth. I hope I don't spoil sport, neighbor: I thought I had the glimpse of a
petticoat as I came in here.


J. Woodcock. Oh! the maid. Ay, she has been gathering a sallad -- But come
hither, master Hawthorn, and I Will show you some alterations I intend to make in
my garden.


Hawth. No, no, I am no judge of it; besides, I want to talk to you a little
more about this -- Tell me, Sir Justice, were you helping your maid to gather a
fallad here, or consulting her taste in your improvements, oh? Ha, ha, ha! Let
me see, all among the ro^es: egad, I like your notion; but you look a little
blank upon it; -- you are ashamed of the business, then, are you?

AIR.
Oons? neighbor, never blush for a trifle like this;
What harm with a fair one to toy and to kiss?
The greatest, the gravest, a truce with grimace --
Would do the same thing, were they in the same place.
No age, no profession, no station is free;
To sovereign beauty mankind bends the knee:
That power, resistless, no strength can oppose,
We all love a pretty girl -- under the rose.

J. Woodcock. I profess, master Hawthorn, this is all Indian, all Cherok^e
language to me; I don't understand a word of it.


Hawth. No, may be not; well, sir, will you read this letter, and try whether
you can understand that? it is just brought by a servant, who stays for an
answer.


J. Woodcock. A letter, and to me! [taking the letter.] Yes, it is to me; and
yet I am sure it comes from no correspondent that I know of. Where are my
spectacles? not but I can see very well without them, master Hawthorn; but this
seems to be a sort of a crabbed hand.

SIR, I am ashamed of giving you this trouble; but I am informed there is an
unthinking boy, a son of mine, now disguised and in your service, in the
capacity of a gardener: Tom is a little wild, but an honest lad, and no fool
either, though I am his father that say it. Tom -- oh, this is Thomas, our
gardener; I always thought that he was a better man's child than he appeared to
be, though I never mentioned it.


Hawth. Well, well, sir; pray let us hear the rest of the letter.


J. Woodcock. Stay where is the place? Oh here: I am come in quest of my
runaway, and write this at an inn in your village, while I am swallowing a
morsel of dinner; because, not having the pleasure of your acquaintance, I did
not care to intrude without giving you notice. (Whoever this person is, he
understands good manners). I beg leave to wait on you, sir; but desire you will
keep my arrival a secret, particularly from the young man. WILLIAM MEADOWS.

I assure you, a very well worded, civil letter. Do you know any thing of the
person who writes it; neighbor?


Hawth. 'Let me consider' -- Meadows -- by dad, I believe it is Sir William
Meadows, of Northamptonshire; and now I remember, I heard, some time ago, that
the heir of that family had absconded, on account of a marriage which was
disagreeable to him. It is a good many years since I have seen Sir William, but
we were once well acquainted; and if you please, sir, I will go and conduct him
to the house.


J. Woodcock. Do so, master Hawthorn, do so -- But, pray what sort of a man is
this Sir William Meadows? Is he a wise man?


Hawth. There is no occasion for a man that has five thousand pounds a year, to
be a conjuror; but I suppose you ask that question because of this story about
his son; taking it for granted, that wise parents make wise children.


J. Woodcock. No doubt of it, master Hawthorn, no doubt of it -- I warrant we
shall find now, that this young rascal has fallen in love with some mynx,
against his father's consent -- Why, sir, if I had as many children as king
Priam had, that we read of at school in the destruction of Troy, not one of
them should serve me so.


Hawth. Well, well, neighbor, perhaps not; but we should remember when we were
young ourselves; and I was as likely to play an old don such a trick in my day,
as ever a spark in the hundred; nay, between you and me, I had done it once,
had the wench been as willing as I.

AIR.
'My Dolly was the fairest thing!
'Her breath disclosed the sweets of spring;
'And if for summer you would seek,
''Twas painted in her eye, her cheek;
'Her swelling bosom, tempting ripe,
'Of fruitful autumn was the type:
'But when my tender tale I told,
'I found her heart was winter cold.'

J. Woodcock. Ah, you were always a scape-grace rattle cap.


Hawth. Odds heart, neighbor Woodcock, don't tell me, young fellows will be
young fellows, though we preach till we are hoarse again; and so there is an end
on it. Exeunt.


SCENE, Justice Woodcock 's Hall. Enter Hodge and Margery. Hodge. So, mistress,
who let you in?


Marg. Why, I let myself in?


Hodge. Indeed! Marry -- come -- up! why, then pray let yourself out again.
Times are come to a pretty pass; I think you might have had the manners to
knock at the door first -- What does the wench stand for?


Marg. I want to know if his worship's at home.


Hodge. Well, what is your business with his worship?


Marg. Perhaps you will hear that -- Look ye, Hodge, it does not signify
talking, I am come, once for all, to know what you intends to do; for I will not
be made a fool of any longer.


Hodge. You will not!


Marg. No, that is what I will not, by the best man that ever wore a head; I am the
make-game of the whole village upon your account; and I Will try whether your
master gives you toleration in your doings.


Hodge. You will!


Marg. Yes, that is what I will; his worship shall be acquainted with all your
pranks, and see how you will like to be sent for a soldier.


Hodge. There Is the door; take a friend's advice, and go about your business.


Marg. My business is with his worship; and I will not go till I sees him.


Hodge. Look you, Madge, if you make any of your orations here, never stir, if
I don't set the dogs at you -- Will you be gone?


Marg. I will not.


Hodge. Here, Towzer, [whistling.] whu, whu, whu.

AIR.
Was ever poor fellow so plagued with a vixen?
Zawns! Madge, don't provoke me, but mind what I say;
You Have chose a wrong parson for playing your tricks on,
So pack up your alls and be trudging away:
You Would better be quiet,
And not breed a riot:
'Sblood, must I stand prating with you here all day?
I Have got other matters to mind:
Mayhap you may think me an ass;
But to the contrary you will find:
A fine piece of work by the Mass!

Enter Rosetta. Ros. Sure I heard the voice of discord here -- as I live, an
admirer of mine, and, if I mistake not, a rival -- I Will have some sport with
them -- how now, fellow servant, what is the matter?


Hodge. Nothing, Mrs. Rosetta, only this young woman wants to speak with his
worship -- Madge, follow me.


Marg. No, Hodge, this is your fine madam; but I am as good flesh and blood as
she, and have as clear a skin too, tho's I may not go so gay; and now she is
here, I Will tell her a piece of my mind.


Hodge. Hold your tongue, will you?


Marg. No, I Will speak if I die for it.


Ros. What Is the matter, I say?


Hodge. Why, nothing, I tell you: -- Madge --


Marg. Yes, but it is something; it is all along of she, and she may be ashamed
of herself.


Ros. Bless me, child, do you direct your discourse to me?


Marg. Yes, I do, and to nobody else; there was not a kinder soul breathing
than he was till of late; I had never a cross word from him till he kept you
company; but all the girls about say, there is no such thing as keeping a
sweetheart for you.


Ros. Do you hear this, friend Hodge?


Hodge. Why, you don't mind she, I hope; but if that vexes her, I do like you,
I do; my mind runs upon nothing else: and if so be as you was agreeable to it,
I would marry you tonight, before tomorrow.


Marg. You're a nasty monkey, you are perjured, you know you are, and you
deserve to have your eyes tore out.


Hodge. Let me, come at her -- I Will teach you to call names, and abuse folk.


Marg. Do strike me; -- you a man!


Ros. Hold, hold -- we shall have a battle here presently, and I may chance to
get my cap tore off -- [aside] Never exasperate a jealous woman, it is taking a
mad bull by the horns -- Leave me to manage her.


Hodge. You manage her! -- I Will kick her.


Ros. No, no, it will be more for my credit, to get the better of her by fair
means -- I warrant I Will bring her to reason.


Hodge. 'Well, do so then' -- But may I depend upon you? -- when shall I speak
to the parson?


Ros. We'll talk of that another time -- Go.


Hodge. Madge, good bye. Exit.


Ros. The brutality of this fellow shocks me! -- Oh man, man -- you are all
alike -- A bumkin here, bred at the barn-door! had he been brought up in a
court, could he have been more fashionably vicious? show me the lord, 'squire,
colonel, or captain of them all, can outdo him. Aside.

'AIR.
'Cease, gay seducer, pride to take,
'In triumphs over the fair;
'Since clowns as well can act the rake,
'As those in higher sphere.
'Where then to shun a shameful fate,
'Shall hapless beauty go!
'In every rank, in every state,
'Poor woman finds a foe.'

Marg. I am ready to burst, I cannot stay in the place any longer.


Ros. Hold, child, come hither.


Marg. Don't speak to me, don't you.


Ros. Well, but I have something to say to you of consequence, and that will be
for your good; I suppose this fellow promised you marriage.


Marg. Ay, or he should never have prevailed upon me.


Ros. Well, now you see the ill consequence of trusting to such promises: when
once a man has cheated a woman of her virtue, she has no longer hold of him;
he despises her for wanting that which he has robbed her of; and, like a
lawless conqueror, triumphs in the ruin he has occasioned.


Marg. Anan!


Ros. However, I hope the experience you have got, though somewhat dearly
purchased, will be of use to you for the future; and as to any designs I have
upon the heart of your lover, you may make yourself easy, for I assure you, I
shall be no dangerous rival: so go your ways, and be a good girl. Exit.


Marg. Yes -- I don't very well understand her talk, but I suppose that is as
much as to say she will keep him to herself; well, let her, who cares? I don't
fear getting better nor he is any day of the year, for the matter of that: and
I have a thought come into my head that may be will be more to my advantage.

AIR.
Since Hodge proves ungrateful, no further I Will seek,
But go up to town in the wagon next week;
A servant in London is no such disgrace,
And Register's office will get me a place:
Bet Blossom went there, and soon met with a friend;
Folks say in her silks she is now standing an end!
Then why should not I the same maxim pursue,
And better my fortune as other girls do? Exit.

Enter Rosetta and Lucinda. Ros. Ha! ha! ha! Oh admirable, most delectably
ridiculous. And so your father is content he should be a music-master, and will
have him such, in spite of all your aunt can say to the contrary.


Lucin. My father and he, child, are the best companions you ever saw; and have
been singing together the most hideous duets! Bobbing Joan, and Old Sir Simon
the King: Heaven knows where Eustace could pick them up; but he has gone
through half the contents of Pills to pu^ge Melancholy with him.


Ros. And have you resolved to take wing tonight?


Lucin. This very night, my dear: my swain will go from hence this evening, but
no farther than the inn, where he has left his horses; and at twelve precisely,
he will be with a post-chaise at the little gate that opens from the lawn into
the road, where I have promised to meet him.


Ros. Then depend upon it, I Will bear you company.


Lucin. We shall flip out when the family are asleep, and I have prepared Hodge
already. Well, I hope we shall be happy.


Ros. Never doubt it.

AIR.
In love there should meet a fond pair,
Untutored by fashion or art;
Whose wishes are warm and sincere,
Whose words are the excess of the heart:
If aught of substantial delight,
On this side the stars can be found,
It Is sure when that couple unite,
And Cupid by Hyme^ is crowned.

Enter Hawthorn. Hawth. Lucy, where are you?


Lucin. Your pleasure, sir?


Ros. Mr. Hawthorn, your servant.


Hawth. What, my little water-wagtail! The very couple I wished to meet: come
hither, both of you.


Ros. Now, sir, what would you say to both of us?


Hawth. Why, let me look at you a little -- have you got on your best gowns,
and your best faces? If not, go and trick yourselves out directly; for I Will
tell you a secret -- there will be a young bachelor in the house, within these
three hours, that may fall to the share of one of you, if you look sharp -- but
whether mistress or maid --


Ros. Ay, marry, this is something; but how do you know whether either mistress
or maid will think him worth acceptance?


Hawth. 'Follow me, follow me;' I warrant you.


Lucin. I can assure you, Mr. Hawthorn, I am very difficult to please.


Ros. And so am I, sir.


Hawth. Indeed!

AIR.
Well, come, let us hear what the swain must possess,
Who may hope at your feet to implore with success?

Ros. He must be, first of all,
Straight, comely, and tall:

Lucin. Neither awkward,

Ros. Nor foolish,

Lucin. Nor apish,

Ros. Nor mulish;

Lucin. Ros. Nor yet should his fortune be small.

Hawth. What think of a captain?

Lucin. All bluster and wounds!

Hawth. What think of a 'squire?

Ros. To be left for his hounds.

Lucin. Ros. The youth that is formed to my mind,
Must be gentle, obliging, and kind;
Of all things in nature love me:
Have sense both to speak and to see --
Yet sometimes be silent and blind.

Hawth. Ros. Lucin. Before George, a most matrimonial receipt!
Observe it, ye fair, in the choice of a mate;
Remember, it is wedlock determines your fate.

Exeunt. END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE, a Parlour in Justice Woodcock 's House. Enter Sir William Meadows,
followed by Hawthorn. Sir Will. WELL, this is excellent, this is mighty good,
this is mighty merry, faith; ha! ha! ha! was ever the like heard of? that my
boy Tom, should run away from me, for fear of being forced to marry a girl he
never saw! that she should scamper from her father for fear of being forced to
marry him! and that they should run into one another's arms this way in
disguise, by mere accident; against their consents, and without knowing it, as
a body may say; master Hawthorn, may I never do an ill turn, if it is not one
of the oddest adventures, partly --


Hawth. Why, Sir William, it is a romance, a novel, a pleasanter history, by
half, than the loves of Dorastus and Faunia; we shall have bellads made of it
within these two months, setting forth, how a young 'squire became a serving
man of low degree; and it will be stuck up with Margaret's Ghost and the
Spanish Lady, against the walls of every cottage in the country.


Sir Will. But what pleases me best of all, master Hawthorn, is the ingenuity
of the girl. May I never do an ill turn, when I was called out of the room, and
the servant said she wanted to speak with me, if I knew what to make on it: but
when the little gipsey took me aside, and told me her name, and how matters
stood, I was quite astonished, as a body may say: and could not believe it,
partly; till her young friend, that she is with here assured me of the truth
on it: Indeed, at last, I began to recollect her face, though I have not set my
eyes on her before since she was the height of a full-grown greyhound.


Hawth. Well, Sir William, your son as yet knows nothing of what has happened,
nor of your being come hither: and, if you will follow my counsel, we'll have
some sport with him. -- He and his mistress were to meet in the garden this
evening by appointment; she is gone to dress herself in all her airs: will you
let me direct your proceedings in this affair?


Sir Will. With all my heart, master Hawthorn, with all my heart, do what you
will with me, say what you please for me; I am so overjoyed, and so happy --
And may I never do an ill turn, but I am very glad to see you too: ay, and
partly as much pleased at that as any thing else, for we have been merry
together before now, when we were some years younger: well, and how has the
world gone with you, master Hawthorn, since we saw one another last?


Hawth. Why, pretty well, Sir William, I have no reason to complain: every one
has a mixture of sour with his sweets; but, in the main, I believe, I have done
in a degree as tolerably as my neighbors.

AIR.
The world is a well furnished table,
Where guests are promiscously set;
We all fare as well as we are able,
And scramble for what we can get.
My simile holds to a tittle,
Some gorge, while some scarce have a taste;
But if I Am content with a little,
Enough is good as a feast.

Enter Rosetta. Ros. Sir William, I beg pardon for detaining you, but I have
had so much difficulty in adjusting my borrowed plumes --


Sir Will. May I never do an ill turn, but they fit you to a T, and you look
very well, so you do: Cocksbones, how your father will cuckle when he comes to
hear this! -- Her father, master Hawthorn, is as worthy a man as lives by
bread, and has been almost out of his senses for the loss of her -- But tell
me, hussy, has not this been all a scheme, a piece of conjuration between you
and my son? Faith, I am half persuaded it has, it looks so like hocus-pocus, as
a body may say.


Ros. Upon my word, Sir William, what has happened has been the mere effect of
chance; I came hither unknown to your son, and he unknown to me: I never in the
least suspected that Thomas the gardener was other than his appearance spoke
him; and least of all, that he was a person with whom I had so close a
connection. Mr. Hawthorn can testify the astonishment I was in when he first
informed me of it; but I thought it was my duty to come to an immediate
explanation with you.


Sir Will. Is not she a neat wench, master Hawthorn? May I never do an ill
turn, but she is. -- But, you little plaguey devil, how came this love affair
between you?


Ros. I have told you the whole truth very ingenuously, sir: since your son and
I have been fellow servants, as I may call it, in this house, I have had more
than reason to suspect he had taken a liking to me; and I will own with equal
frankness, had I not looked upon him as a person so much below me, I should
have had no objection to receiving his courtship.


Hawth. Well said, by the lord Harry, all above board, fair and open.


Ros. Perhaps I may be censured by some for this candid declaration; but I love
to speak my sentiments; and I assure you, Sir William, in my opinion, I should
prefer a gardener with your son's good qualities, to a knight of the shire
without them.

AIR.
It Is not wealth, it is not birth,
Can value to the soul convey;
Minds possess superior worth,
Which chance nor gives, nor takes away.
Like the sun true merit shows;
By nature warm, by nature bright;
With inbred flames, he nobly glows,
Nor needs the aid of borrowed light.

Hawth. Well, but, sir, we lose time -- is not this about the hour you
appointed to meet in the garden?


Ros. Pretty near it.


Hawth. Oons, then, what do we stay for? Come, my old friend, come along, and
by the way we will consult how to manage our interview.


Sir Will. Ay, but I must speak a word or two to my man about the horses first.


Exeunt Sir William and Hawthorn. Enter Hodge. Ros. Well -- What Is the business?


Hodge. Madam -- Mercy on us, I crave pardon!


Ros. Why, Hodge, don't you know me?


Hodge. Mrs. Rosetta!


Ros. Ay.


Hodge. Know you! ecod I don't know whether I do or not: never stir, if I did
not think it was some lady belonging to the strange gentlefolks: why, you ben't
dizen'd this way to go to the statute-dance presently, be you?


Ros. Have patience, and you will see; -- but is there any thing amiss, that you
came in so abruptly?


Hodge. Amiss! why there is ruination.


Ros. How! where!


Hodge. Why, with Miss Lucinda; her aunt has caught she and the gentleman
above stairs, and overheard all their love discourse.


Ros. You don't say so!


Hodge. Ecod, I had like to have popped in among them this instant; but, by
good luck, I heard Mrs. Deborah's voice, and run down again, as fast as ever my
legs could carry me.


Ros. Is your master in the house?


Hodge. What, his worship? no, no, he is gone into the fields, to talk with the
reapers and people.


Ros. Poor Lucinda, I wish I could go up to her, but I am so engaged with my
own affairs --


Hodge. Mrs. Rosetta!


Ros. Well.


Hodge. Odds bobs, I must have one smack of your sweet lips.


Ros. Oh, stand off, you know I never allow liberties.


Hodge. Nay, but why so coy, there is reason in roasting of eggs; I would not
deny you such a thing.


Ros. That Is kind; ha, ha, ha! -- But what will become of Lucinda? Sir William
waits for me? I must be gone. Friendship, a moment by your leave; yet as our
sufferings have been mutual, so shall our joys? I already loose the remembrance
of all former pains and anxieties.

AIR.
The traveller benighted,
And led through weary ways,
The lamp of day new lighted,
With joy the dawn surveys.
The rising prospect viewing,
Each look is forward cast;
He smiles, his course pursuing,
Nor thinks of what is past. Exit.

Hodge. H^st, stay! don't I hear a noise?


Lucin. [within] Well, but dear, dear aunt --


Mrs. Deb. [within] You need not speak to me, for it does not signify.


Hodge. Adswains, they are coming here! ecod I Will get out of the way -- Murrain
take it, this door is bolted now -- So, so.


Mrs. Deb. Get along, get along; [driving in Lucinda before her] you are a
scandal to the name of Woodcock: but I was resolved to find you out, for I have
suspected you a great while, though your father, silly man, will have you such
a poor innocent,


Lucin. What shall I do?


Mrs. Deb. I was determined to discover what you and your pretended
music-master were about, and lay in wait on purpose: I believe he thought to
escape me, by slipping into the closet when I knocked at the door; but I was
even with him, for now I have him under lock and key, and, please the fates,
there he shall remain till your father comes in: I will convince him of his
error, whether he will or not.


Lucin. You will not be so cruel, I am sure you will not: I thought I had made you my
friend by telling you the truth.


Mrs. Deb. Telling me the truth, quotha! did I not overhear your scheme of
running awa^ tonight through the partition? did not I find the very bundles
packed up in the room with you, ready for going off? No, brazen-face, I found
out the truth by my own sagacity, though your father says I am a fool; but now
we'll be judged who is the greatest -- And you, Mr. Rascal, my brother shall
know what an honest servant he has got.


Hodge. Madam!


Mrs. Deb. You were to have been aiding and assisting them in their escape, and
have been the go between, it seems, the letter-carrier!


Hodge. Who me, madam!


Mrs. Deb. Yes, you, sirrah.


Hodge. Miss Lucinda, did I ever carry a letter for you? I Will make my affidavy
before his worship --


Mrs. Deb. Go, go, you are a villain, hold your tongue.


Lucin. I own, aunt, I have been very faulty in this affair; I don't pretend to
excuse myself; but we are all subject to frailties; consider that, and judge of
me by yourself; you were once young and inexperienced as I am.

AIR.
If ever a fond inclination
Rose in your bosom to rob you of rest;
Reflect with a little compassion,
On the soft pangs which prevailed in my breast.
Oh where, where would you fly me,
Can you deny me, thus torn and distressed?
Think, when my lover was by me,
Would I, how could I, refuse his request?
Kneeling before you, let me implore you;
Look on me, sighing, crying, dying;
Ah! is there no language can move?
If I have been too complying,
Hard was the conflict 'twixt duty and love.

Mrs. Deb. This is mighty pretty romantic stuff! but you learn it out of your
play-books and novels. Girls in my time had other employments; we worked at our
needles, and kept ourselves from idle thoughts: before I was your age, I had
finished with my own fingers, a complete set of chairs, and a fire-screen, in
tent-stitch; four counterpanes in Marseilles quilting; and the creed and the
ten commandments in the hair of our family: it was framed and glazed, and hung
over the parlour chimney-piece, and your poor dear grandfather was prouder of
it than of ever a picture in his house. I never looked into a book, but when I
said my prayers, except it was the Complete Housewife, or the great family
receipt book: whereas you are always at your studies! Ah, I never knew a woman
come to good, that was fond of reading.


Lucin. Well, pray, madam, let me prevail on you to give me the key to let Mr.
Eustace out, and I promise I never will proceed a step farther in this
business, without your advice and approbation.


Mrs. Deb. Have not I told you already my resolution? -- Where are my clogs and
my bonnet? I Will go out to my brother in the fields. I Am a fool, 'you know,'
child; now let us see what the wits will think of themselves -- Don't hold me --
Exit.


Lucin. I Am not a going -- I have thought of a way to be even with you, so you
may do as you please. Exit.


Hodge. Well, I thought it would come to this, I Will be shot if I didn't -- 'So,
here is a fine job' -- But what can they do to me? -- They cannot send me to jail
for carrying a letter, seeing there was no treason it; and how was I obligated
to know my master did not allow of their meetings? -- The worst they can do to
me is to turn me off, and I am sure the place is no such great purchase --
indeed, I should be sorry to leave Mrs. Rosetta, seeing as how matters are so
near being bro't to an end betwixt us; 'but she and I may keep company all as
one;' and I find Madge has been speaking with Gaffes Broadwheels, the waggoner,
about her carriage up to London: so that I have got rid of she, and I am sure I
have reason to be main glad of it, for she led me a wearisome life -- But
that is the way of them all.

AIR.
A plague on those wenches, they make such a pother,
When once they have let'n a man have his will;
They Are always a whining for something or other,
And cry he is unkind in his carriage.
What tho'f he speak them never so fairly,
Still they keep teazing, teazing on;
You cannot persuade 'em,
Till promise you have made 'em;
And after they have got it,
They Will tell you -- add rot it,
Their character's blasted, they are ruined, undone:
And then to be sure, sir,
There is but one cure, sir.
And all their discourse is of marriage. Exit.

SCENE, a Greenhouse. Enter Young Meadows. Y. Meadows. I am glad I had the
precaution to bring this suit of clothes in my bundle, though I hardly know
myself in them again, they appear so strange, and feel so unwieldy. However, my
gardener's jacket goes on no more. -- I wonder this girl does not come*
[looking at his watch] perhaps she will not come -- Why then I Will go into the
village, take a post-chaise, and depart without any farther ceremony. AIR.
How much superior beauty awes,
The coldest bosoms find:
But with resistless force it draws,
To sense and sweetness joined.
The casket, where, to outward show,
The workman's art is seen,
Is doubly valued, 'when we know
It holds a gem within.
Hark! she comes.


Enter Sir William Meadows and Hawthorn. Y. Meadows. Confusion! my father? What
can this mean?


Sir Will, Tom, are not you a sad boy, Tom, to bring me a hundred and forty
miles here -- May I never do an ill turn, but you deserve to have your head
broke; and I have a good mind, partly -- What, sirrah, don't you think it worth
your while to speak to me?


Y. Meadows. 'Forgive me,' sir; I own I have been in a fault.


Sir Will. In a fault! to run away from me because I was going to do you good.
-- Master Hawthorn, may I never do an ill turn, if I did not pick but as fine a
girl for him, partly, as any in England; and the rascal run away from me, and
came here and turned gardener. And pray what did you propose to yourself, Tom?
I know you were always fond of botany, as they call it; did you intend to keep
the trade going, and advertise fruit trees and flowering-shrubs, to be had at
Meadows's nursery?


Hawth. No, Sir William, I apprehend the young gentleman designed to lay by the
profession; for he has quitted the habit already.


Y. Meadows. I am so astonished to see you here, sir, that I don't know what to
say; but 'I assure you,' if you had not come, I should have returned home to
you directly. Pray, sir, how did you find me out?


Sir Will. No matter, Tom, no matter; it was partly by accident, as a body may
say; but what does that signify -- Tell me, boy, how stands your stomach
toward matrimony; do you think you could digest a wife now?


Y. Meadows. Pray, sir, don't mention it: I shall always behave myself as a
dutiful son ought; I will never marry without your consent, and I hope you
will not force me to do it against my own.


Sir Will. Is not this mighty provoking, master Hawthorn? Why, sirrah, did you
ever see the lady I designed for you?


Y. Meadows. Sir, I don't doubt the lady's merit; but at present I am not
disposed --


Hawth. Nay, but young gentleman, fair and softly, you should pay some respect
to your father in this matter.


Sir Will. Respect, master Hawthorn! I tell you he shall marry her, or I Will
disinherit him! there is once. Look you, Tom, not to make any more words of the
matter, I have brought the lady here with me, and I Will see you contracted
before we part, or you shall delve and plant cucumbers as long as you live.


Y. Meadows. Have you brought the lady here, sir! -- I am sorry for it.


Sir Will. Why sorry? what then you will not marry her? we'll see that! Pray,
master Hawthorn, conduct the fair one in. -- Ay, sir, you may fret, and dance
about, trot at the rate of fifteen miles an hour, if you please, but marry,
whip me, I Am resolved.


Enter Rosetta. Hawth. Here is the lady, Sir William.


Sir Will. Come, in madam, but turn your face from him -- he would not marry
you because he had not seen you: but I Will let him know my choice shall be his,
and he shall consent to marry you before he sees you, or not an acre of estate
-- Pray, sir, walk this way.


Y. Meadows. Sir, I cannot help thinking your conduct a little extraordinary;
but, since you urge me so closely, I must tell you my affections are engaged.


Sir Will. How, Tom, how!


Y. Meadows. I was determined, sir, to have got the better of my inclination,
and never have done a thing which I knew would be disagreeable to you.


Sir Will. And pray, sir, who are your affections engaged to? let me know that.


Y. Meadows. To a person, sir, whose rank and fortune may be no recommendation
to her; but whose charms and accomplishments entitle her to a monarch. I am
sorry, sir, it is impossible for me to comply with your commands, and I hope you
will not be offended if I quit your presence.


Sir Will. Not I, not in the least; go about your business.


Y. Meadows. Sir, I obey.


Rosetta advances, Young Meadows turns round and sees her. 'AIR.
'Ros. When we see a lover languish,
'And his truth and honor prove,
'Ah! how sweet to heal his anguish,
'And repay him love for love!'

Sir Will. Well, Tom, will you go away from me now?


Hawth. Perhaps, S^r William, your son does not like the lady; and if so, pray
don't put a force upon his inclination.


Y. Meadows. You need not have taken this method, sir, to let me see you are
acquainted with my folly, whatever my inclinations are.


Sir Will. Well, but Tom, suppose I give my consent to your marrying this young
woman?


Y. Meadows. Your consent, sir!


Ros. Come, Sir William, we have carried the jest fa^ enough; I see your son is
in a kind of embarrassment, and I don't wonder at it; but this letter, which I
received from him a few days before I left my father's house, will, I
apprehend, expound the riddle. He cannot be surprised that I ran away from a
gentleman who expressed so much dislike to me; and what has happened since
chance has brought as together in masquerade, there is no occasion for me to
inform him of.


'Y. Meadows.' What is all this? Pray don't make a jest of me.


Sir Will. May I never do an ill turn, Tom, if it is not truth; this is my
friend's daughter.


Y. Meadows. S^r!


Ros. Even s^; it is very true indeed. In short, you have not been a more
whimsical gentleman than I have a gentlewoman; but you see we are designed for
one another, it is plain.


Y. Meadows. I know not, madam, what I either hear or see; a thousand things
are crowding on my imagination; while, like one just awakened from a dream, I
doubt which is reality, which delusion.


Sir Will. Well then, Tom, come into the air a bit, and recover yourself.


Y. Meadows. Nay, dear sir, have a little patience; -- do you give her to me?


Sir Will. Give her to you! ay, that I do, and my blessing into the bargain.


Y. Meadows. Then, sir, I am the happiest man in the world; I enquire no
farther; here I fix the utmost limits of my hopes and happiness.


AIR.
Y. Mead. All I wish, in her obtaining,
Fortune can no more impart;

Ros. Let my eyes, my thoughts explaining,
Speak the feelings of my heart.

Y. Mead. Joy and pleasure never ceasing,

Ros. Love with length of years increasing.

Together. Thus my heart and hand surrender,
Here my faith and troth I plight;
Constant still, and kind, and tender,
May our flames burn ever bright.

Hawth. Give you joy, sir; and your fair lady -- And, under favor, I Will salute
you too, if there is no fear of jealousy.


Y. Meadows. And may I believe this? -- Pr'ythee tell me, dear Rosetta.


Ros. Step into the house, and I Will tell you every thing -- I must entreat the
good offices of Sir William and Mr. Hawthorn, immediately; for I am in the
utmost uneasiness about my poor friend Lucinda.


Hawth. Why, what is the matter?


Ros. I don't know, but 'I have reason to fear I left her just now in very
disagreeable circumstances; however,' I hope, if there is any mischief fallen
out between her father and her lover --


Hawth. The music-master! I thought so.


Sir Will. What, is there a lover in the case? May I never do an ill turn, but
I am glad, so I am; for we'll make a double wedding; and, by way of celebrating
it, take a trip to London, to show the brides some of the pleasures of the
town. And, master Hawthorn, you shall be of the party -- Come, children, go
before us.


Exeunt Y. Meadows and Rosetta. Hawth. Thank you, Sir William; I Will go into the
house with you, and to church to see the young folks married; but as to London,
I beg to be excused.

AIR.
If ever I Am caught in those regions of smoke,
That sent of confusion and noise,
May I never know the sweets of a slumber unbroke,
Nor the pleasure the country enjoys;
Nay more, let them take me, to punish my sin,
Where, gaping the Cockneys they fleece,
Clap me up with their monsters, cry, Masters walk in,
And show me for twopence a piece.

Exeunt. SCENE, Justice Woodcock's Hall. Enter Justice Woodcock, Mrs. Deborah
Woodcock, Lucinda, Eustace, Hodge. Mrs. Deb. Why, brother, do you think I cannot
hear, or see, or make use of my senses? I tell you I left that fellow locked up
in her closet; and, while I have been with you, they have broke open the door,
and got him out again.


J. Woodcock. Well, you hear what they say.


Mrs. Deb. I care not what they say: it is you encourage them in their impudence
-- Hark'e, hussy, will you face me down that I did not lock the fellow up?


Lucin. Really, aunt, I don't know what you mean; when you talk intelligibly,
I Will answer you.


Eust. Seriously, madam, this is carrying the jest a little too far.


Mrs. Deb. What then, I did not catch you together in her chamber, nor
over-heat your design of going off tonight, nor find the bundies packed up? --


Eust. Ha, ha, ha!


Lucin. Why, aunt, you rave.


Mrs. Deb. Brother, as I am a christian woman, she confessed the whole affair
to me from first to last; and in this very place was down upon her marrow-bones
for half an hour together, to beg I would conceal it from you.


Hodge. Oh Lord! Oh Lord!


Mrs. Deb. What, sirrah, would you brazen me too? Take that. [boxes him.]


Hodge. I wish you would keep your hands to yourself; you strike me, because
you have been telling his worship stories.


J. Woodcock. Why, sister, you are tipsey!


Mrs. Deb. I tipsey, brother? -- I -- that never touch a drop of any thing
strong from year's end to year's end; but now and then a little anniseed-water,
when I have got the cholic.


Lucin. Well, au^, you have been complaining of the stomach-ach today: and may
have taken too powerful a dose of your cordial.


J. Woodcock. Come, come, I see well enough how it is; this is a lie of her own
invention, to make herself appear wise: but, you simpleton, did you not know I
must find you out?


Enter Sir William Meadows, Hawthorn, Rosetta, and Young Meadows. Y. Meadows.
Bless me, sir! look who is yonder.


Sir Will. Cocks^ones, Jack! honest Jack, are you there?


Eust. Plague on it, this rencounter is unlucky [aside.] -- Sir William, your
servant.


Sir Will. Your servant again, and again, heartily your servant; may I never do
an ill turn, but I am glad to meet you.


J. Woodcock. Pray, Sir William, are you acquainted with this person?


Sir Will. What, with Jack Eustace! why he is my kinsman: his mother and I are
cousin-germans once removed, and Jack's a very worthy young fellow; may I never
do an ill turn if I tell a word of a lie.


J. Woodcock. Well, but Sir William, let me tell you, you know nothing of the
matter; this man is a music-master; a thrummer of wire, and a scraper of
cat-gut, and teaches my daughter to sing.


Sir Will. What, Jack Eustace a music-master! no, no, I know him better.


Eust. 'Sdeath,' why should I attempt to carry on this absurd farce any longer?
-- What that gentleman tells you, is very true, sir; I am no music-master,
indeed.


J. Woodcock. You are not, you own it then?


Eust. Nay, more, sir, I am, as this lady has represented me, [ pointing to
Mrs. Deborah] your daughter's lover; whom, with her own consent, I did intend
to have carried off this night; but now that Sir William Meadow^ is here, to
tell you who, and what I am; I throw myself upon your generosity, from which I
expect greater advantages than I could reap from any imposition on your
unsuspicious nature.


Mrs. Deb. Well, brother, 'what have you to say for yourself now?' You have
made a precious day's work of it! Had my advice been taken: Oh, I am ashamed of
you: but you are a weak man, and it cannot be helped; however, you should let
wiser heads direct you.


Lucin. Dear papa, pardon me.


Sir Will. Ay, do, sir, forgive her; my cousin Jack will make her a good
husband, I Will answer for it.


Ros. Stand out of the way, and let me speak two or three words to his worship.
-- Come, my dear sir, though you refuse all the world, I am sure you can deny
me nothing: love is a venial fault -- you know what I mean. -- Be reconciled to
your daughter, I conjure you by the memory of our past affections -- What, not
a word!

AIR.
Go, naughty man, I cannot abide you;
Are then your vows so soon forgot?
Ah! now I see, if I had tried you,
What would have been my hopeful lot.
But here I charge you -- Make them happy;
Bless the fond pair, and crown their bliss:
Come, be a dear good-natured pappy,
And I Will reward you with a kiss.

Mrs. Deb. Come, turn out of the house, and be thankful my brother does not
hang you, for he could do it, he is a justice of peace; -- turn out of the
house, I say: --


J. Woodcock. Who gave you authority to turn him out of the house? -- he shall
stay where he is.


Mrs. Deb. He shall not marry my niece.


J. Woodcock. Shall Not ^e? 'but I Will show you the difference now,' I say he shall
marry her, and what will you do about it?


Mrs. Deb. And you will give him your estate too, will you?


J. Woodcock. Yes, I will.


Mrs. Deb. Why, I Am sure he is a vagabond.


J. Woodcock. I like him the better, I would have him a vagabond.


Mrs. Deb. Brother, brother!


Hawth. Come, come, madam, all is very well; and I see my neighbor is what I
always thought him, a man of sense and prudence.


Sir Will. May I never do an ill turn, but I say so too.


J. Woodcock. Here, young fellow, take my daughter, and heaven bless you both
together; -- but h^rk'e, -- no money till I die; observe that.


Eust. Sir, in giving me your daughter, you bestow upon me, more than the whole
world would be without her.


Ros. Dear Lucinda, if words could convey the transports of my heart upon this
occasion --


Lucin. Words are the tools of hypocrites, the pretenders to friendship: only
let us resolve to preserve our esteem for each other.


Y. Meadows. Dear Jack, I little thought we should ever meet in such odd
circumstances -- but here has been the strangest business between this lady and
me --


Hodge. What then, Mrs. Rosetta, are you turned false-hearted after all; will
you marry Thomas the gardener? and did I forsake Madge for this?


Ros. Oh lord! Hodge, I beg your pardon; I protest I forgot; but I must
reconcile you and M^dge, I think, and give you a wedding-dinner to make you
amends.


H^dge. N -- ah.


Hawth. Adds me, sir, here are some of your neighbors come to visit you, and I
suppose to make up the company of your statute ball; yonder is music too, I see:
shall we enjoy ourselves? If so, give me your hand.


J. Woodcock. Why, here is my hand, and we will enjoy ourselves; Heaven bless
you b^th, children, I say -- Sister Deborah, you are a fool.


Mrs. Deb. You are a fool, brother; and mark my words -- But I Will give myself
no more trouble about you. Exit.


Hawth. Fiddlers, strike up.

AIR.
Hence with cares, complaints, and frowning,
Welcome jollity and joy;
Every grief in pleasure drowning,
Mirth this happy night employ:
Let Us to friendship do our duty,
Laugh and sing some good old strain;
Drink a health to love and beauty --
May they long in triumph reign.

CHORUS. Let Us to friendship, etc.

Exeunt omnes. NEW SONG, set by SACCHINI, introduced by Mrs. BILLINGTON, at
Covent Garden, instead of that at page 38.
Ah! the rural scene no more
Shall hear the tale of love;
The golden reign of truth is over,
And demons haunt the grove.
THE END.
BOOKS printed by MATTHEW CAREY, And for sale, at his store, No. 118,
Market-street, Philadelphia:
1. AMERICAN MUSEUM from its commencement in January, 1787, to its termination
in December, 1792, in twelve volumes, price, neatly bound and lettered,
nineteen dollars and one fifth.

The opinion of the President of the United States respecting this work, is as
follows:

"I believe the American Museum has met with extensive* I may say with
universal approbation from competent judges; for I am of opinion, that the work
is not only eminently calculated to disseminate political, agricultural,
philosophical, and other information -- but that it has been uniformly
conducted with taste, attention and propriety. If to these important objects be
superadded the more immediate design, of rescuing public documents from
oblivion -- I will venture to pronounce, as my sentiment, That a more useful
literary plan has never been undertaken in America, or one more deserving of
public encouragement.

2. A complete Atlas for the present war; containing, 1. Map of the United
Provinces, 2. Map of the French, Dutch, and Austrian Netherlands. 3. Map of
France divided into departments. 4. Map of Spain and Portugal. 5. Map of
Germany and Switzerland. 6. Map of Italy. 7. Chart of the West Indies.
(Price Two Dollars.)

3. A short Account of ALGIERS, containing a description of that country, of
the manners and customs of the inhabitants, and of their several wars against
Spain, France, England, Holland, Venice, and other powers of Europe; from the
usurpation of Barbarossa and the invasion of the emperor Charles V. to the
present time; with a concise view of the Origin of the Rupture between Algiers
and the United States; with a map of Algiers, Fez, Morocco, Tunis, and Tripoli.
-- 1 s10.

4. A short Account of the Malignant Fever, lately prevalent in Philadelphia.
To which are added an Account of the Plague in London and at Marseilles. --
Price Half a Dollar.

5. The Romp, a Musical Entertainment. -- Price 1 s.

6. The Farmer, a comic opera. -- Price 1 s.

7. Don Juan, a pantomimical ballet. -- Price 1 s.

8. No Song no Supper. -- Price 1 s.

9. Wild Oats. -- Price 1 s6.

10. The Misses Magazine. -- Price, bound in two volumes, 11 s3.

11. A brief examination of the observations of lord Sheffield, on the commerce
of the United States. -- Price 5-8ths of a dollar.

12. The Constitution of the several States, with the Federal Constitution and
the Amendments thereto. N. B. This edition contains the Constitution of
Vermont; not in any former one. -- Price 5-8ths of a dollar.

13. Mr Fingal, an epic poem. By John Trumbull, Esquire. A new edition in 12mo. --
Price 3-8ths of a dollar bound.

14. American Jest Book, in two parts, with two very neat engravings. -- Price
bound, 3-^ths of a dollar.

15. The HOLY BIBLE, translated from the Latin Vulgate. -- Price in plain
binding, 6 dollars -- in calf, lettered, 50 s2.

16. The Garden of the ^ul. Price, on fine paper, and bound in calf and
lettered, three ^^arters of a dollar -- on common paper, plain binding, half a
dollar*

17. The devout Christian's Vade Mecum, being a summary of select and necessary
devotions. Price a quarter of a dollar.

18. Think Well O'^t, or Reflections for every day in the Month. By Bi^hop
Chancellor. Price a quarter of a dollar.

19. Christian Economy, translated from a Greek manuscript found in the island
of Patmo^, where Saint John wrote the Apocalypse. Price a fifth of a dollar.

20. History of Charles Grandison, abridged. Price a sixth of a dollar.

21. Poems by Col. Humphreys. Price a third of a dollar.

22. Select Poems. Price a sixth of a dollar.

23. Blair's Lectures on Rhetoric and Belles Lettres, 2 vols. 8vo. 25 s.

24. Burke's Reflections on the French Revolution. -- 7 s6.

25. Buchan's Domestic Medicine. 15 s.

26. Letters from an American Farmer, describing certain provincial situations,
manners and customs, 5 s7.

27. Smith's Letters to Married Women, on nursing and the management of
Children. 4 s8.

28. Charms of Melody, a choice collection of valuable Songs. 1 s10.

29. Duncan's Elements of Logic. 5 s7.

30. Beauties of Fielding. 3 s.

31. Beautie's of Blair. 3 s9.

32. The Ladies' Library. 6 s6.

33. Smith's History of New York, from its first settlement to the year 1782.
To which is annexed, a description of the country, with a short account of the
inhabitants, their religious and political state, and the constitution of the
Courts of Justice. Price a dollar and a quarter.

34. Elements of Moral Science. By James Beattie, L. L. D. Price three fourths
of a dollar.

35. Sermons, by Hugh Blair, D. D. Price two dollars.

THE SUSPICIOUS HUSBAND, A COMEDY BY THE RIGHT REVEREND DR. BENJAMIN HOADLY.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY WILLIAM SPOTSWOOD M DCC XCI.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
MR. STRICTLAND, FRANKLY, BELLAMY, RANGER, JACK MEGGOT, BUCKLE, TESTER, Servant
to RANGER, SI^^ON, (...), Footmen, etc.
WOMEN.
MRS. STRICTLAND, CLARINDA, JACINTHA, LUCETTA, LANDLADY, MILLENER, MAID.
SCENE, LONDON.

PROLOGUE.
WHILE other culprits brave it to the last;
Nor beg for mercy till the judgment's past:
Poets alone, as conscious of their crimes,
Open their trials with imploring rhymes.
Thus crammed with flattery and low submission,
Each trite dull prologue is the bard's petition.
A stale device to calm the critic's fury,
And bribe at once the judges and the jury.
But what avail such poor repeated arts?
The whimp'ring scribbler never can touch your hearts:
Nor ought an ill-timed pity to take place --
Fast as they rise, destroy the increasing race:
The vermin else will run the nation over --
By saving one, you breed a million more.
Though disappointed authors rail and rage,
At fancied parties, and a senseless age,
Yet still has justice triumphed on the stage.
Thus speaks and thinks the author of today,
And saying this, has little more to say.
He asks no friend his partial zeal to show,
Nor fears the groundless censures of a foe;
He knows no friendship can protect the fool,
Nor will an audience be a party's tool.
It Is inconsistent with a freeborn spirit,
To side with folly, or to injure merit.
By your decision he must fall or stand,
Nor, though he feels the lash, will blame the hand.
EPILOGUE.
THOUGH the young smarts, I see, begin to sneer,
And the old sinners cast a wicked leer:
Be not alarmed, ye fair -- you have naught to fear.
No wanton hint, no loose ambiguous sense,
Shall flatter vicious taste at your expense,
Leaving for once these shameless arts in vogue:
We give a Fable for the Epilogue.
AN ass there was, our author bid me say,
Who needs must write -- he did -- and wrote a play.
The parts were cast to various beasts and fowl:
Their stage a barn; -- the manager an owl!
The house was crammed at six, with friends and foes;
Rakes, wits, and critics, citizens and beaux.
These characters appeared in different shapes
Of tigers, foxes, horses, bulls and apes;
With others too, of lower rank and station: --
A perfect abstract of the brute creation!
Each, as he felt, marked out the author's faults,
And thus the connoisseurs expressed their thoughts.
The critic curs first snarl'd -- the rules are broke!
Time, place, and action sacrificed to joke!
The goats cried out, 'twas formal, dull, and chaste --
Not writ for beasts of gallantry and taste!
The horned-cattle were in piteous taking,
At fornification, rapes and cuckold making!
The tigers swore, he wanted fire and passion.
The apes condemned -- because it was the fashion!
The generous steeds allowed him proper merit:
Here marked his faults, and there approved his spirit.
While brother-bards brayed forth with usual spleen,
And, as they heard, exploded every scene.
When reynard's thoughts were ask^d, the shrugging sage,
Famed for hypocrisy, and worn with age,
Condemned the shameless license of the stage!
At which the monkey skipp'd from box to box,
And whispered round the judgment of the fox:
Abused the moderns, talked of Rome and Greece!
Bilk'd every box-keeper; and damned the piece.
Now every fable has a moral to it --
Be churchman, statesman, any thing -- but poet.
In law, or physic, quack in what you will;
Cant, and grimace conceal the want of skill!
Secure in these, his gravity may pass --
But here no artifice can hide the ass.
THE SUSPICIOUS HUSBAND.
ACT I.
SCENE I. Ranger's Chambers in the Temple.
Enter RANGER. ONCE more I am got safe to the Temple -- let me reflect a little
-- I have sat up all night. I have my head full of bad wine, and the noise of
oaths, dice, and the damned tingling of tavern bells; my spirits jaded, and my
eyes sunk into my head: and all this for the conversation of a company of
fellows I despise. Their wit lies only in obscenity, their mirth in noise, and
their delight in a box and dice. Honest Ranger take my word for it, thou art a
mighty silly fellow.

Enter Servant, with a wig dressed. Where have you been, rascal? If I had not
had the key in my pocket, I must have waited at the door in this dainty dress.

Serve. I was only below combing out your honor's wig.


Rang. [Pulling off his wig.] Well, give me my cap -- why, how like a raking
dog do you look, compared to that spruce, sober gentleman -- Go, you battered
devil and be made fit to be seen.


Serve. Cod, my master's very merry this morning,


Exit. Rang. And now for the law. Reads.

Tell me no more I am deceived,
That Chloe's false and common.
By Heaven, I all along believed
She was a very woman.
As such I liked, as such caressed;
She still was constant when possessed:
She could do more for no man.
Honest Congreve was a man after my own heart. Enter Servant. Have you been for
the money this morning, as I ordered you?


Serve. No, sir, you bad me go before you was up -- I did not know your honor
meant before you went to to bed.


Rang. None of your jokes, I pray, but to business -- go to the coffee-house,
and enquire if there has been any letter or message left for me.


Serve. I shall, sir. Exit.


Rang. You think she is false, I Am sure she is kind,
I take her body, you her mind;
Which has the better bargain?
Oh, that I had such a soft, deceitful fair to lull my senses to their desired
sleep -- [Knocking at the door.] Come in.


Enter Simon. Rang. Oh, master Simon, is it you? How long have you been in town?


Simon. Just come, sir, and but for a little time neither; and yet I have as
many messages as if we were to stay the whole year round. Here they are all of
them. [Pulls out a number of cards.] And among them one for your honor.


Rang. [Reads] Clarinda's Compliments to her Cousin Ranger, and should be glad
to see him for ever so little a time that can be spared from the more weighty
business of the law -- Ha! ha! ha! the same merry girl I ever knew her.


Simon. My lady is never sad, sir, Knocking at the door.


Rang. Pry'thee, Simon, open the door. Enter Millener. Well, child -- and who
are you?


Mill. Sir my mistress gives her service to you, and has sent you home the
linen you bespoke.


Rang. Well Simon, my service to your lady, and let her know I will most
certainly wait upon her -- I am a little busy, Simon -- and so --


Simon. Ah, you're a wag, Master Ranger, you're a wag -- but mum for that! Exit.


Rang. I swear my dear, you have the prettiest pair of eyes -- the loveliest
pouting lips -- I never saw you before.


Mill. No, sir, I was always in the shop.


Rang. Was you so? Well, and what does your mistress say? -- The Devil fetch
me, child, you looked so prettily, that I could not mind one word you said.


Mill. Lard, sir, you are such another gentleman! Why, she says she is sorry
she could not send them sooner. Shall I lay them down?


Rang. No, child. Give'em me! dear little smiling angel -- Catches and kisses
her.


Mill. I beg, sir, you would be civil.


Rang. Civil! Egad, I think I am very civil.


Kisses her again. Enter Servant and Bellamy. Serve. Sir, Mr. Bellamy.


Rang. Damn your impertinence -- Oh, Mr. Ballamy, your servant.


Mill. What shall I say to my mistress?


Rang. Bid her make half a dozen more; but be sure you bring them home
yourself. [ Exit Millener] Pshah! pox! Mr. Bellamy, how should you like to be
served so yourself?


Bella. How can you, Ranger, for a minute's pleasure, give an innocent girl the
pain of heart I am confident she felt? -- There was a modest blush upon her
cheek convinces me she was honest.


Rang. May be so. I was resolved to try, however.


Bella. Fie, Ranger, -- will you never think?


Rang. Yes, but I cannot be always thinking. The law is a damnable dry study,
Mr. Bellamy, and without something now and then to amuse, and relax, it would
be too much for my brain, I promise ye -- but I am a mighty sober fellow grown
-- Here have I been at it these three hours -- but the wenches will never let
me alone --


Bella. Three hours! Why, do you usually study in such shoes and stockings?


Rang. Rat your inquisitive Eyes. Ex pede Herculem. Egad, you have me! The
truth is I am but this moment returned from the tavern. What, Frankly here too!


Enter Frankly. Frank. My boy Ranger, I am heartily glad to see you. Bellamy,
let me embrace you. You are the person I want. I have been at your lodgings,
and was directed hither.


Rang. It is to him then I am obliged for this visit: but with all my heart --
he is the only man, to whom I don't care how much I am obliged.


Bella. Your very humble servant, sir.


Frank. You know Ranger, I want no inducement to be with you. But -- you look
sadly -- what -- no merciless jade has -- has she?


Rang. No, no, sound as a roach my lad. I only got a little too much liquor
last night, which I have not slept off yet.


Bella. Thus, Frankly, it is every day. All the morning his head aches, at noon
he begins to clear up, toward evening he is good company, and all night he is
carefully providing for the same course the next day.


Rang. Why, I must own, my ghostly father, I did relapse a little lastnight,
just to furnish out a decent confession for the day.


Frank. And he is now doing penance for it. Were you his confessor indeed, you
could not well desire more.


Rang. Charles, he sets up for a confessor with the worst grace in the world.
Here he has been reproving me for being but decently civil to my millener.
Plague! because the coldness of his constitution makes him insensible of a fine
woman's charms, every body else must be so too.


Bella. I am no less sensible of their charms than you are; though I cannot kiss
every woman I meet, or fall in love, as you call it, with every face which has
the bloom of youth upon it. I would only have you a little more frugal of your
pleasures.


Frank. My dear friend, this is very pretty talking. But let me tell you, it is
in the power of the very first glance from a fine woman utterly to disconcert
all your philosophy.


Bella. It must be from a fine woman then: and not such as are generally
reputed so -- and it must be a thorough acquaintance with her too, that will
ever make an impression on my heart.


Rang. Would I could see it once! for when a man has been all his life hoarding
up a stock, without allowing himself common necessaries, it tickles me to the
soul to see him lay it all out upon a wrong bottom, and become a bankrupt at
last.


Bella. Well, I don't care how soon you see it. For the minute I find a woman
capable of friendship, love, and tenderness, with good sense enough to be
always easy, and good nature enough to like me, I will immediately put it to
the trial, which of us shall have the greatest share of happiness from the sex,
you or I.


Rang. By marrying her, I suppose! Capable of friendship, love, and tenderness,
ha, ha, ha! That a man of your sense should talk so. If she be capable of love
it is all I require of my mistress; and as every woman, who is young, is capable
of love, I am very reasonably in love with every young woman I meet. -- My Lord
Coke, in a case I read this very morning, speaks my very sense.


Both. My Lord Coke!


Rang. Yes, my Lord Coke! What he says of one woman, I say of the whole sex. I
take their bodies, you their minds; which has the better bargain?


Frank. There is no arguing with so great a lawyer. Suppose therefore we
adjourn the debate to some other time. I have some serious business with Mr.
Bellamy, and you want sleep I am sure.


Rang. Sleep! mere loss of time, and hindrance of business -- We men of spirit,
sir, are above it.


Bella. Whither shall we go?


Frank. Into the Park. My chariot is at the door.


Bella. Then if my servant calls, you will send him after us. Exeunt.


Rang. I will. [Looking on the card.] Clarinda's compliments -- a pox of this
head of mine! Never once to ask where she was to be found. It Is plain she is
not one of us, or ^ should not have been so remiss in my inquiries. -- No
matter -- I shall meet her in my walks.


Enter Servant. Serve. There is no letter nor message, sir.


Rang. Then my things, to dress Exeunt


SCENE II. A CHAMBER.
Enter Mrs. Strictland and Jacintha, meeting. Mrs. Strict. Good Morrow my dear
Jacintha.


Jacin. Good Morrow to you, madam. I have brought my work, and intend to sit
with you this morning. I hope you have got the better of your fatigue. Where is
Clarinda? I should be glad if she would come and work with us.


Mrs. Strict. She work! she is too fine a lady to do any thing. She is not
stirring yet -- we must let her have her rest. People of her waste of spirits
require more time to recruit again.


Jacin. It is pity she should be ever tired with what is so agreeable to every
body else. I am prodigiously pleased with her company.


Mrs. Strict. And when you are better acquainted, you will be still more
pleased with her. You must rally her upon her partner at Bath: for, I fancy,
part of her rest has been disturbed on his account.


Jacin. Was he really a pretty fellow?


Mrs. Strict. That I cannot tell. I did not dance myself, and so did not much
mind him. You must have the whole story from herself.


Jacin. Oh! I warrant ye, I get it all out. None are so proper to make
discoveries in love as those who are in the secret themselves.


Enter Lucetta. Lucet. Madam, Mr. Strictland is enquiring for you. Here has
been Mr. Buckle with a letter from his master, which has made him very angry.


Jacin. Mr. Bellamy, said indeed he would try him once more, but I fear it will
prove in vain. Tell your master I am here. [ Exit Lucetta] What signifies
fortune, when it only makes us slaves to other people?


Mrs. Strict. Do not be uneasy, my Jacintha You shall always find a friend in
me: but as for Mr. Strictland, I know not what ill temper hangs about him
lately. Nothing satisfies him. You saw how he received us when we came off our
journey; though Clarinda was so good company. He was barely civil to her, and
downright rude to me.


Jacin. I cannot help saying I did observe it.


Mrs. Strict. I saw you did. Hush! he is here.


Enter Mr. Strictland. Mr. Strict. Oh, your servant, madam! here I have
received a letter from Mr Bellamy, wherein he desires I would once more hear
what he has to say -- You know my sentiments -- Nay, so does he.


Jacin. For Heaven's sake consider, sir. This is no new affair, no sudden start
of passion -- We have known each other long. My father valued and loved him;
and I am sure were he alive, I should have his consent.


Mr. Strict. Don't tell me. Your father would not have you marry against his
will; neither will I, against mine; I am your father now.


Jacin. And you take a fatherly care of me.


Mr. Strict. I wish I had never had any thing to do with you.


Jacin. You may easily get rid of the trouble.


Mr. Strict. By listening, I suppose, to the young gentleman's proposals.


Jacin. Which are very reasonable, in my opinion.


Mr. Strict. Oh, very modest ones, truly; and a very modest gentleman it is
that proposes them! a fool, to expect a lady of thirty thousand pounds fortune
should, by the care and prudence of her guardian, be thrown away upon a young
fellow not worth three hundred a year. He thinks being in love is an excuse for
all this; but I am not in love. What does he think will excuse me?


Mrs. Strict. Well, but Mr. Strictland, I think the gentleman should be heard.


Mr. Strict. Well, well! Seven o'clock is the time if the man has the good
fortune, since I saw him last, to persuade somebody or other to give him a
better estate, I give him my consent not else. His servant waits below. You may
tell him, I shall be at home. [ Exit Jacin.] But where is your friend, your
other half, all this while? I thought you could not have breathed a minute
without your Clarinda.


Mrs. Strict. Why, the truth is, I was going to see what makes her keep her
chamber so long.


Mr. Strict. Look ye Mrs. Strictland, you have been asking me for money this
morning. In plain terms, not one shilling shall pass through these fingers,
till you have cleared my house of this Clarinda.


Mrs. Strict. How can her innocent gaiety have offended you? She is a woman of
honor, and has as many good qualities --


Mr. Strict. As women of honor generally have. I know it and therefore am
uneasy.


Mrs. Strict. But, sir, --


Mr. Strict. But madam, -- Clarinda, nor ever a rake of fashion in England,
shall live in my family to debauch it.


Mrs. Strict. Sir, she treated me with so much civility in the country, that I
thought I could not do less than invite her to spend as much time with me in
town, as her engagements would permit. I little imagined you could have been
displeased at my having so agreeable a companion.


Mr. Strict. There was a time when I was company enough for leisure hours.


Mrs. Strict. There was a time when every word of mine was sure of meeting with
a smile: but those happy days, I know not why, have long been over.


Mr. Strict. I cannot bear a rival, even of your own sex. I hate the very name
of female friends. No two of you can ever be an hour by yourselves, but one or
both are the worse for it.


Mrs. Strict. Dear Mr. Strictland. --


Mr. Strict. This I know, -- and will not suffer.


Mrs. Strict. It grieves me, sir, to see you so much in earnest: but to
convince you how willing I am to make you easy in every thing, it shall be my
request to her to remove immediately.


Mrs. Strict Do it then -- hark ye? -- your request, why yours? it is mine. --
My command -- tell her so -- I will be master in my own family, and I care not
who knows it.


Mrs. Strict. You fright me, sir -- but it shall be as you please. [ In tears.]
Goes out.


Mr. Strict. Ha! have I not gone too far? I am not ma^er of myself -- Mrs.
Strictland. -- [she returns.] Understand me right. I do not mean by what I have
said, that I suspect your innocence: but by crushing this growing friendship
all at once, I may prevent a train of mischief which you do not foresee. I was
perhaps too harsh, therefore do it in your own way. But let me see the house
fairly rid of her. Exit. Mr. Strictland.


Mrs. Strict. His earnestness in this affair amazes me. I am sorry I made this
visit to Clarinda -- and yet I Will answer for her honor -- what can I say to
her? Necessity must plead in my excuse -- for at all events, Mr. Strictland
must be obeyed.


Exit. SCENE III. St. JAMES'S PARK.
Enter Bellamy and Frankly. Frank. Now, Bellamy, I may unfold the secret of my
heart to you with greater freedom; for though Ranger has honor, I am not in a
humor to be laughed at. I must have one, that will bear with my impertinence,
sooth me into hope, and like a friend indeed, with tenderness advise me.


Bella. I thought you appeared more grave than usual.


Frank. Oh! Bellamy, my soul is so full of joy, of pain, hope, despair and
ecstasy, that no word but love is capable of expressing what I feel.


Bella. Is love the secret Ranger is not fit to hear? In my mind, he would
prove the more able counselor. And is all the gay indifference of my friend at
last reduced to love?


Frank. Even so -- Never was prude more ^esolute in chastity and ill nature,
than I was fixed in indifference: but love has raised me from that inactive
state above the being of a man.


Bella. Faith, Charles, I begin to think it has -- but pray bring this rapture
into order a little, and tell me regularly, how, where, and when?


Frank. If I was not most unreasonably in love, those horrid questions would
stop my mouth at once. But as I am armed against reason -- I answer -- at Bath
-- on Tuesday, she danced and caught me.


Bella. Danced? -- and was that all? But who is she? What is her name? her
fortune? where does she live?


Frank. Hold! hold! not so many hard questions. Have a little mercy. I know but
little of her, that^s certain. But all I do know you shall have. That evening
was the first of her appearing at Bath. The moment I saw her I resolved to ask
the favor of her hand. But the easy freedom with which she gave it, and her
unaffected good humor during the whole night, gain^d such a power over my
heart, as none of her sex could ever boast before. I waited on her home, and
the next morning, when I went to make the usual compliments, the bird was
flown. She had set out for London two hours before; and in a chariot and six --
you rogue.


Bella. But was it her own, Charles?


Frank. That I don't know; but it looks better than being dragged to own in the
stage. That day and the next I spent in enquiries. I waited on the ladies who
came with her. They knew nothing of her. So, without learning either her name
or fortune, I even called for my boots, and rode post after her.


Bella. And how do you find yourself after your journey?


Frank. Why, as yet, I own, I am but upon a cold scent. But a woman of her
sprightliness and gentility cannot but frequent all public places; and when
once she is found, the pleasure of the chase will over-pay the pains of rousing
her. Oh! Bellamy, there was something peculiarly charming in her, that seemed
to claim my farther acquaintance: and if in the other more familiar parts of
life she shines with that superior luster, and at last I win her to my arms,
how shall I bless my resolution in pursuing her!


Bella. But if, at last she should prove unworthy --


Frank. I would endeavor to forget her.


Bella. Promise me that, Charles, [Takes his hand.] and I allow -- but we are
interrupted.


Enter Jack Meggot. Jack Meg. Whom have we here? my old friend Frankly? Thou
art grown a mere antique since I saw thee: how have thou done these five
hundred years?


Frank. Even as you see me; well, and at your service, ever.


Jack Meg. Ha! who is that?


Frank. A friend of mine. Mr. Bellamy, this is Jacky Meggot, sir, as honest a
fellow as any in life.


Jack Meg. Pho! prithee! pox! Charles -- Don't be silly -- Sir, I am your
humble -- Any one who is a friend of my Frankly's I am proud of embracing.


Bella. Sir, I shall endeavor to deserve your civility.


Jack Meg. Oh! sir, -- Well! Charles, what? -- dumb? Come, come; you may talk
though you have nothing to say, as I do -- Let us hear, where have you been?


Frank. Why, for this last week, Jack, I have been at Bath?


Jack Meg. Bath! the most ridiculous place in life! -- amongst tradesmens wives
that hate their husbands, and people of quality that had rather go to the devil
than stay at home. People of no taste -- no go^st -- and for divertimenti; if
it were not for the puppet-show, la virtue would be dead amongst them. -- But
the news, Charles? -- the ladies, -- I fear your time hung heavy on your hands,
by the small slay you made there.


Frank. Faith and so it did Jack. The ladies are grown such idiots in love --
the cards have so debauched their five senses, that Love, almighty Love
himself, is utterly neglected.


Jack Meg. It is the strangest thing in life, but it is just so with us abroad.
Faith! Charles! to tell you a secret, which I don't care, if all the world
knows, I am almost surfeited with the services of the ladies; she modest ones I
mean. The vast variety of duties they expect -- a^ dressing up to the fashion,
losing fashionably, keeping f^shionable hours, drinking fashionable liquors,
and fifty other such irregular niceties, so ruin a man's pocket and
constitution, that foregad! he must have the estate of a duke, and the strength
of a gondolier, who would list himself into their servi^e!


Frank. A free confession truly, Jack, for one of your coat.


Bella. The ladies are obliged to you.


Enter Buckle, with a l^tter to Bellamy. Jack Meg. Oh lard! Charles! I have had
the greatest misfortune in life, since I saw you -- poor Otho! that I brought
from Rome with me, is dead.


Frank. Well! well! get you another, and all will be well again.


Jack Meg. No! the rogue broke me so much china, and gnawed my Spanish ^ea^her
shoes so filthily, that when he was dead, I beg^n not to endure him.


Bella. Exactly at seven! run back, and assure him I will not fa^l. [ Exit
Buckle.] Dead! pray, who was the gentleman?


Jack Meg. This gentleman was my monkey, sir, -- an odd sort of a fe^^ow that
used to divert me, -- and pleased every body so at Rome, that he always made o^
^n our conversazioni. But Mr. Bellamy, I saw a servant, I hope no engagement.
For you two positively shall dine with me. I have the finest macaroni in life.
Oblige me so far.


Bella, Sir, -- your servant! what say you, Frankly?


Jack Meg. Pho! pox! Charles! you shall go. My aunts think you begin to neglect
them; and old maids, you know, are the most jealous creatures in life.


Frank. Ranger swears they cannot be maids, they are so good natur^d! Well! I
agree, on condition I may eat what I please, and go away just when I will.


Jack Meg. Ay! ay! you shall do just what you will. But how shall we do? my
post-chaise will not carry us all.


Frank. My chariot is here; and I will conduct Mr. Bellamy.


Bella. Mr. Meggot, -- I beg pardon, I cannot possibly dine out of town! I have
an engagement early in the evening. --


Jack Meg. Out of town! no, my dear! I live just by. I see one of the
Dilettanti, I would not miss speaking to for the universe. And so I expect you
at three. Exit.


Frank. Ha! ha! ha! and so you thought you had at least fifty miles to go post
for a spoonful of macaroni.


Bella. I suppose then he is just come out of the country.


Frank. Nor that neither. I would venture a wager, from his own house hither;
or to an auction or two of old dirty pictures, is the utmost of his travels
today: or he may have been in pursuit, perhaps, of a new cargo of Venetian
tooth-picks.


Bella. A special acquaintance I have made today.


Frank. For all this, Bellamy, he has a heart worthy your friendship. He spends
his estate freely, and you cannot oblige him more, than by showing him how he
can be of service to you.


Bella. Now you say something. It is the heart, Frankly, I value in a man.


Frank. Right! -- and there is a heart even in a woman's breast that is worth
the purchase, or my judgment has deceived me. Dear Bellamy, I know your concern
for me. See her first, and then blame me, if you can.


Bella. So far from blaming you, Charles, that if my endeavors can be
serviceable, I will beat the bushes with you.


Frank. That I am afraid will not do. For you know less of her than I. But if
in your walks you meet a finer woman than ordinary, let her not escape till I
have seen her. -- Wheresoe'er she is, she cannot long lie hid. Exeunt.


ACT II.
SCENE I.
St. JAMES'S PARK. Enter Clarinda, Jacintha and Mrs. Strictland. Jacin. AY! ay!
we both stand condemned out of our own mouths.


Clar. Why I cannot but own -- I never had a thought of any man that troubled
me, but of him.


Mrs. Strict. Then I dare swear, by this time, you heartily repent your leaving
Bath so soon.


Clar. Indeed you are mistaken. I have not had one scruple since.


Jacin. Why, what one inducement can he have ever to think of you again?


Clar. Oh! the greatest of all inducements, curiosity. Let me assure you, a
woman's surest hold over a man is to keep him in uncertainty. As soon as ever
you put him out of doubt, you put him out of your power: but when once a woman
has awaked his curiosity, she may lead him a dance of many a troublesome mile
without the least fear of losing him at last.


Jacin. Now do I heartily wish he may have spirit enough to follow and use you
as you deserve. Such a spirit, with but a little knowledge of our sex, might
put that heart of yours into a strange flutter.


Clar. I care not how soon. I long to meet with such a fellow. Our modern beaux
are such jointed babies in love, they have no feeling. They are entirely
insensible either of pain or pleasure, but from their own dear persons: and
according as we flatter, or affront their beauty, they admire or forsake ours.
They are not worthy even our displeasure; and, in short, abusing them is but so
much ill nature merely thrown away. But the man of sense, who values himself
upon his high abilities: or the man of wit, who thinks a woman beneath his
conversation -- to see such the subjects of our power, the slaves of our frowns
and smiles is glorious indeed!


Mrs. Strict. No men of sense, or wit either, if they be truly so, ever did, or
ever can think a woman of merit beneath their wisdom to converse with.


Jacin. Nor will such a woman value herself upon making such a lover uneasy.


Clar. Amazing! why, every woman can give ease; you cannot be in earnest?


Mrs. Strict. I can assure you she is, and has put in practice the doctrine she
has been teaching.


Clar. Impossible! who ever heard the name of love mentioned without an idea of
torment? But pray let us hear.


Jacin. Nay, there is nothing to hear that I know of.


Clar. So I suspected, indeed! the novel is not likely to be long, when the
lady is so well prepared for the denouement.


Jacin. The novel, as you call it, is not so short as you may imagine. I and my
spark have been long acquainted. As he was continually with my father, I soon
perceived that he loved me, and the manner of his expressing that love was what
pleased and won me most.


Clar. Well! and how was it? the old bait! Flattery, dear Flattery, I warrant
ye?


Jacin. No indeed, -- I had not the pleasure of hearing my person, wit and
beauty painted out with forced praises; but I had a more sensible delight in
perceiving the drift of his whole behavior was to make every hour of my time
pass-away agreeably.


Clar. The rustic! what, did he never say a handsome thing of your person?


Mrs. Strict. He did, it seems what pleased her better. He flattered her good
sense as much as a less cunning lover would have done her beauty.


Clar. On my conscience you are well matched.


Jacin. So well, that if my guardian denies me happiness, (and this evening he
is to pass his final sentence) nothing is left but to break my prison, and fly
into my lover's arms for safety.


Clar. Hey day! O my conscience, thou art a brave girl. Thou art the very first
prude that ever had honesty enough to avow her passion for a man.


Jacin. And thou art the first finished coquet who ever had any honesty at all.


Mrs. Strict. Come, come! you are both too good for either of those characters.


Clar. And my dear Mrs. Strictland here, is the first young married woman of
spirit, who has an ill-natured fellow for a husband, and never once thinks of
using him as he deserves. -- Good heaven, if I had such a husband --


Mrs. Strict. You would be just as unhappy as I am.


Clar. But come now -- confess -- do not you long to be a widow?


Mrs. Strict. Would I were any thing but what I am!


Clar. Then go the nearest way about it. I Would break that stout heart of his in
less than a fortnight. I Would make him know --


Mrs. Strict. Pray be silent. You know my resolution.


Clar. I know you have no resolution.


Mrs. Strict. You are a mad creature, but I forgive you.


Clar. It is all meant kindly, I assure you. But since you will not be persuaded
to your good; I will think of making you easy in your submission as soon as
ever I can. I dare say, I may have the same lodging I had last year. I can know
immediately -- I see my chair: and so ladies both, adieu! Exit Clarinda.


Jacin. Come, Mrs. Strictland, we shall but just have time to get home before
Mr. Bellamy comes.


Mrs. Strict. Let us return then to our common prison. You must forgive my
ill nature, Jacintha, if I almost wish Mr. Strictland may refuse to join your
hand where your heart is given.


Jacin. Lord! madam, what do you mean?


Mrs. Strict. Self-interest only, child! methinks your company in the country
would soften all my sorrows, and I could bear them patiently.


Re-enter Clarinda. Clar. Dear Mrs. Strictland -- I am so confused, and so out
of breath --


Mrs. Strict. Why, why what is the matter?


Jacin. I protest you fright me.


Clar. Oh! I have no time to recover myself, I am so frightened and so pleased.
In short then, the dear man is here?


Mrs. Strict. Here -- lord -- where?


Clar. I met him this instant. I saw him at a distance, turned short; and ran
hither directly. Let us go home, I tell you he follows me.


Mrs. Strict. Why, had you not better stay, and let him speak to you?


Clar. Ay! but -- then -- he will not know where I live without telling him.


Mrs. Strict. Come, the^ Ha! ha! ha!


Jacin. Ah! poor Clarinda! -- Allons done. Exeunt.


Enter Frankly. Frank. Sure that must be she! her shape and easy air cannot be
so exactly copied by another. -- Now, you young rogue, Cupid, guide me directly
to her, as you would the surest arrow in your quiver. Exit.


SCENE II. Changes to the street before Mr. Strictland's door.
Re-enter Clarinda, Jacintha, and Mrs. Strictland. Clar. Lord! -- dear Jacintha
-- for heaven's sake make haste. He Will overtake us before we get in.


Jacin. Overtake us? Why, he is not in sight.


Clar. Is not he? Ha! sure I have not dropped my twee -- I would not have him
lose sight of me neither.


Aside. Mrs. Strict. Here he is --


Clar. In -- in -- in then.


Jacin. [Laughing.] What, without your twee?


Clar. Pshah! I have lost nothing -- In -- I Will follow you. Exeunt into the
house. Clarinda last.


Enter Frankly. Frank. It is impossible I should be deceived: my eyes and the
quick pulses at my heart assure me it is she. Ha! it is she, by heaven! and the
door left open too -- a fair invitation, by all the rules of Love -- Exit.


SCENE III. Changes to an apartment in Mr. Strictland's house.
Enter Clarinda, Frankly following her. Frank. I hope, madam, you will excuse
the boldness of this intrusion, since it is owing to your own behavior that I
am forced to it.


Clar. To my behavior, sir?


Frank. You cannot but remember me at Bath, madam, where I so lately had the
favor of your hand --


Clar. I do remember, sir; but I little expected any wrong interpretation of my
behavior, from one, who had so much the appearance of a gentleman.


Frank. What I saw of your behavior was so just, it would admit of no
misinterpretation. I only feared, whatever reason you had to conceal your name
from me at Bath, you might have the same to do it now; and though my happiness
was so nearly concerned, I rather chose to venture thus abruptly after you,
than be impertinently inquisitive.


Clar. Sir, there seems to be so much civility in your rudeness, that I can
easily forgive it; though I don't see how your happiness is at all concerned.


Frank. No, madam! I believe you are the only lady, who could with the
qualifications you are mistress of, be insensible of the power they give you
over the happiness of our sex.


Clar. How vain should we women be, if you gentlemen were but wise! if you did
not all of you say the same things to every woman, we should certainly be
foolish enough to believe some of you were in earnest.


Frank. Could you have the least sense of what I feel whilst I am speaking, you
would know me to be in earnest, and what I say to be the dictates of a heart
that admires you. May I not say --


Clar. Sir, this is carrying the --


Frank. When I danced with you at Bath, I was charmed with your whole
behavior, and felt the same tender admiration: but my hope of seeing you
afterward kept in my passion till a more proper time should offer. You cannot
therefore blame me now, if after having lost you once, I do not suffer an
inexcusable modesty to prevent my making use of this second opportunity.


Clar. This behavior, sir, is so different from the gaiety of your
conversation then, that I am at a loss how to answer you.


Frank. There is nothing, madam, which could take off from the gaiety with
which your presence inspires every heart, but the fear of losing you. How can I
be otherwise than as I am, when I know not, but you may leave London as
abruptly as you did Bath?


Enter Lucetta. Lucet. Madam, the tea is ready, and my mistress waits for you.


Clar. Very well, I come -- [ Exit Lucetta.] You see, sir, I am called away;
but I hope you will excuse it, when I leave you with an assurance, that the
business which brings me to town will keep me here some time.


Frank. How generous it is in you thus to ease the heart, that knew not how to
ask for such a favor -- I fear to offend -- but this house, I suppose is yours?


Clar. You will hear of me, if not find me here.


Frank. I then take my leave. Exit.


Clar. I Am undone! he has me!


Enter Mrs. Strictland. Mrs. Strict. Well! How do you find yourself?


Clar. I do find -- that if he goes on, as he has begun, I shall certainly have
him without giving him the least uneasiness.


Mrs. Strict. A very terrible prospect, indeed!


Clar. But I must teize him a little. -- Where is Jacintha? How she will laugh
at me, if I become a pupil of hers, and learn to give ease. No! positively I
shall never do it.


Mrs. Strict. Poor Jacintha has met with what I feared, from Mr. Strictland's
temper -- an utter denial. I know not why, but he really grows more and more
ill-natured.


Clar. Well! now do I heartily wish my affairs were in his power a little, that
I might have a few difficulties to surmount. -- I love difficulties -- and yet,
I don't know, it is as well as it is.


Mrs. Strict. Ha, ha, ha! Come the tea waits.


Exeunt. Enter Mr. Strictland. Mr. Strict. These doings in my house distract
me! I met a fine gentleman -- when I enquired who he was; why he came to
Clarinda. I met a footman too, and he came to Clarinda. I shall not be easy
till she is decamped. My wife had the character of a virtuous woman -- and they
have not been long acquainted. But then they were by themselves at Bath! that
hurts -- that hurts -- they must be watched -- they must -- I know them, I know
all their wiles, and the best of them are but hypocrites. Ha! -- [Lucetta
passes over the stage.] Suppose I bribe the maid -- she is of their counsel --
the manager of their secrets -- It shall be so -- money will do it, and I shall
know all that passes. Lucetta!


Lucet. Sir.


Mr. Strict. Lucetta!


Re-enter Lucetta. Lucet. Sir. If he should suspect, and search me now I Am
undone. Aside.


Mr. Strict. She is a sly girl, and may be serviceable. [Aside.] Lucetta, you
are a good girl, and have an honest face. I like it. It looks as if it carried
no deceit in it. -- Yet if she should be false, she can do me no harm.


Aside. Lucet. Pray sir, speak out.


Mr. Strict. [Aside.] No! she is a woman, and it is the highest imprudence to
trust her.


Lucet. I am not able to understand you.


Mr. Strict. I am glad of it. I would not have you understand me.


Lucet. Then what did you call me for? If he should be in love with my face, it
would be rare sport. Aside.


Mr. Strict. [Aside.] Tster, ay, Tester is the proper person -- Lucetta, tell
Tester I want him.


Lucet. Yes, sir. -- [Aside.] mighty odd, this! it gives me time however to
send Buckle with this letter to his master. Exit Lucetta.


Mr. Strict. Could I but be once well satisfied that my wife had really
finished me, I believe I should be as quiet, as if I were sure of the contrary.
-- But whilst I am in doubt, I am miserable.


Enter Tester. Tester. Does your honor please to want me?


Mr. Strict. Ay, Tester. -- I need not fear. The honesty of his service, and
the goodness of his look make me secure. I will trust him. [Aside.] -- Tester,
I think I have been a tolerable good master to you?


Tester. Yes, sir, -- very tolerable.


Mr. Strict. [Aside.] I like his simplicity well. It promises honesty -- I have
a secret to impart to you -- a thing of the greatest importance. Look upon me,
and don't stand picking your fingers.


Tester. Yes, sir, -- no, sir.


Mr. Strict. But will not his simplicity expose him the more to Lucetta's
cunning? Yes, yes! she will worm the secret out of him. I had better trust her
with it at once. -- So -- I will. [Aside.] Tester, go send Lucetta hither.


Tester. Yes, sir, here she is. Re-enter Lucetta. Lucetta, my master wants you.


Mr. Strict. Get you down, Tester.


Tester. Yes, sir. Exit Tester.


Lucet. If you want me, sir, I beg you would make haste, for I have a thousand
things to do.


Mr. Strict. Well! well! what I have to say will not take up much time, could I
but persuade you to be honest.


Lucet. Why, sir, I hope you don't suspect my honesty?


Mr. Strict. Well! well! I believe you honest.


Shuts the door. Lucet. What can be at the bottom of all this? Aside.


Mr. Strict. So! we cannot be too private. Come hither hussy! nearer yet.


Lucet. Laud! sir! you are not going to be rude? I vow, I will call out.


Mr. Strict. Hold your tongue. Does the baggage laugh at me? [Aside.] She does
-- she mocks me, and will reveal it to my wife; and her insolence upon it will
be more insupportable to me than cuckoldom itself I have not leisure now,
Lucetta -- some other time -- hush! did not the bell ring? Yes, yes; my wife
wants you. Go, go, go to her. [Pushes her out.] There is no hell on earth like
being a slave to suspicion


Exit. SCENE IV. The Piazza, Covent Garden.
Enter Bellamy and Jack Meggot. Bella. Nay, nay, I would not put your family
into any confusion.


Jack Meg. None in life, my dear, I assure you. I will go and order every thing
this instant for her reception.


Bella. You are too obliging, sir; but you need not be in this hurry, for I am
in no certainty when I shall trouble you: I only know that my Jacintha has
taken such a resolution.


Jack Meg. Therefore we should be prepared; for when once a lady has such a
resolution in her head, she is upon the rack till she executes it, foregad! Mr.
Bellamy, this must be a girl of fire.


Enter Frankly. Frank. Buxom and lively as the bounding do. -- Fair a^
painting can express, or youthful poets fancy when they love. Tol de roll, lol!
Singing and dancing.


Bella. Who is this you talk thus rapturously of?


Frank. Who should it be, but -- I shall know her name tomorrow. Sings and
dances.


Jack Meg. What is the matter, ho! Is the man mad?


Frank. Even so, gentlemen, as mad as love and joy can make me.


Bella. But inform us whence this joy proceeds?


Frank. Joy! joy! my lads! she is found! My Perdita! my charmer!


Jack Meg. Egad! her charms have bewitched the man I think -- but who is she?


Bella. Come, come, tell us who is this wonder?


Frank. But will you say nothing?


Bella. Nothing, as I live.


Frank. Nor you?


Jack Meg. I Will be as silent as the grave --


Frank. With a tombstone upon it, to tell every one whose dust you carry.


Jack Meg. I Will be as secret as a debauched prude --


Frank. Whose sanctity every one suspects. Jack, Jack, it is not in thy nature.
Keeping a secret is worse to thee than keeping thy accounts. But to leave
fooling, listen to me, both, that I may whisper it into your ears, that Echo
may not catch the sinking sound -- I cannot tell who she is, 'faith -- Tol de
roll, lol --


Jack Meg. Mad! mad! very mad!


Frank. All I know of her is, that she is a charming woman, and has given me
liberty to visit her again -- Bellamy, it is she, the lovely she. Aside.


Bella. So I did suppose. To Frankly.


Jack Meg. Poor Charles! for heaven's sake, Mr. Bellamy, persuade him home to
his chamber. -- Whilst I prepare every thing for you at home. [Aside.] Adieu!
-- b'ye Charles! ha, ha, ha! Exit.


Frank. O, Love! thou art a gift worthy of a god indeed! dear Bellamy, nothing
now could add to my pleasure, but to see my friend as deep in love as I am.


Bella. I show my heart is capable of love, by the friendship it bears to you.


Frank. The light of friendship looks but dim before the brighter flame of
love. Love is the spring of cheerfulness and joy. Why, how dull and phlegmatic
do you show to me now? whilst I am all life; light as feathered Mercury. -- You
dull, and cold as earth and water; I light and warm as air and fire. -- Those
are the only elements in Love's world! why, Bellamy, for shame! get thee a
mistress, and be sociable.


Bella. Frankly, I am now going to --


Frank. Why, that face now? your humble servant, sir. My flood of joy shall not
be stopped by your melancholy fits, I assure you. Going.


Bella. Stay, Frankly, I beg you stay. What would you say now, if I really were
in love?


Frank. Why, faith, thou have such romantic notions of sense and honor, that I
know not what to say.


Bella. To confess the truth then, I am in love.


Frank. And do you confess it as if it were a sin? proclaim it loud -- glory in
it -- boast of it as your greatest virtue -- swear it with a lover's oath, and
I will believe you.


Bella. Why then, by the bright eyes of her I love!


Frank. Well said!


Bella. By all that is tender, amiable, and soft in woman --


Frank. Bravo!


Bella. I swear I am as true an enamorato as ever tagg'd a rhyme!


Frank. And art thou then thoroughly in love? Come to my arms, thou dear
companion of my joys --


They embrace. Enter Ranger. Rang. Why -- hey! -- Is there never a wench to be
got for love or money?


Bella. Pshah! Ranger here!


Rang. Yes, Ranger is here, and perhaps does not come so impertinently as you
may imagine. Faith! I think I have the knack of finding out secrets. Nay, never
look so queer. -- Here is a letter Mr. Bellamy, that seems to promise you
better diversion than your hugging one another.


Bella. What do you mean?


Rang. Do you deal much in these paper tokens?


Bella. Oh! the dear kind creature! It is from her herself.


Rang. What! is it a pair of laced shoes she wants? or have the boys broke her
windows?


Bella. Hold your profane tongue!


Frank. Nay, prithee Bellamy, don't keep it to yourself, as if her whole
affections were contained in these few lines.


Rang. Prithee let him alone to his silent raptures: but it is, as I always
said -- your grave men ever are the greatest whore-masters.


Bella. I cannot be disobliged now, say what you will. But how came this into
your hands?


Rang. Your servant Buckle and I changed commissions. He went on my errand, and
I came on his.


Bella. God's Death! I want him this very instant.


Rang. He will be here presently! but I demand to know what I have brought you?


Frank. Ay! ay! out with it! you know we never blab, and may be of service.


Bella. Twelve o'clock! oh! the dear hour.


Rang. Why, it is a pretty convenient time, indeed.


Bella. By all that is happy, she promises in this letter here -- to leave her
guardian this very night -- and run away with me.


Rang. How is this?


Bella. Nay, I know not how myself -- she says at the bottom -- Your servant
has full instructions from Lucetta, how to equip me for my expedition -- I will
not trust myself home with you tonight, because I know it is inconvenient;
therefore I beg you would procure me a lodging; it is no matter how far off my
guardian's. -- Yours, Jacintha.


Rang. Carry her to a bagnio, and there you may lodge with her.


Frank. Why this must be a girl of spirit, faith!


Bella. And beauty equal to her sprightliness. I love her, and she loves me --
she has thirty thousand to her fortune.


Rang. The devil she has!


Bella. And never plays at cards --


Rang. Nor does any one thing like any one other woman I suppose?


Frank. Not so, I hope, neither.


Bella. Oh! Frankly, Ranger. I never felt such ease before. The secret's out,
and you don't laugh at me.


Frank. Laugh at thee? -- for loving a woman with thirty thousand pounds! thou
art a most unaccountable fellow.


Rang. How the devil could he work her up to this? I never could have had the
face to have done it. But -- I know not how -- there is a degree of assurance
in you modest gentlemen, which we impudent fellows can never come up to --


Bella. Oh! your servant, good sir; you should not abuse me now, Ranger, but do
all you can to assist me.


Rang. Why, look ye, Bellamy, I am a damnable unlucky fellow -- and so will
have nothing to do in this affair. I Will take care to be out of the way, so as
to do you no harm. This is all I can answer for, and so success attend you.
[Going.] I cannot leave you quite to yourself neither, for if this should prove
a roundhouse affair, as I make no doubt it will, I believe I may have more
interest there than you; and so, sir, you may hear of me at -- Whispers.


Bella. For shame, Ranger, the most noted gaming-house in town.


Rang. Forgive me this once, my boy. I must go, faith, to pay a debt of honor
to some of the greatest rascals in the nation. Exit.


Frank. But where do you design to lodge her?


Bella. At Mr. Meggot's -- he is already gone to prepare for her reception.


Frank. The properest place in the world. His aunts will entertain her with
honor.


Bella. And the newness of our acquaintance will prevent its being suspected.
-- Frankly, give me your hand. This is a very critical time --


Frank. Pho! none of your musty reflections now! when a man is in love to the
very brink of matrimony, what the devil has he to do with Plutarch and Seneca?
Here is your servant with a face full of business -- I Will leave you together --
I shall be at the King's Arms, where, if you want my assistance, you may find
me. Exit.


Enter Buckle. Bella. So -- Buckle -- you seem to have your hands full.


Buck. Not fuller than my head, sir, I promise you. You have had your letter, I
hope?


Bella. Yes, and in it she refers me to you for my instructions.


Buck. Why, the affair stands thus -- as Mr. Strictland sees the doors locked
and barred every night himself, and takes the keys up with him; it is
impossible for us to escape any way but through the window: for which purpose I
have a ladder of ropes.


Bella. Good --


Buck. And because a hoop, as the ladies wear them now, is not the most decent
dress to come down a ladder in -- I have in this other bundle a suit of boy's
clothes, which I believe will fit her. At least, it will serve the time she
will want it -- you will soon be for pulling them off, I suppose.


Bella Why, you are in spirits, you rogue.


Buck. These I am now to convey to Lucetta -- have you any thing to say, sir?


Bella. Nothing, but that I will not fail at the hour appointed -- bring me
word to Mr. Meggot's how you go on. Succeed in this, and it shall make your
fortune.


Exeunt. ACT III.
SCENE I. The street before Mr. Strictland's house.
Enter Bellamy in a chairman's coat. Bella. HOW tediously have the minutes past
these last few hours! and the envious rogues will fly, no lightning quicker,
when we would have them stay. -- Hold! let me not mistake. -- This is the
house. [Pulls out his watch.] By heaven! it is not yet the hour -- I hear
somebody coming. The moon's so bright -- I had better not be here, 'till the
happy instant comes. Exit.


Enter Frankly. Frank. Wine is no antidote to love, but rather feeds the flame.
Now am I such an amorous puppy, that I cannot walk straight home, but must come
out of my way to take a view of my queen's palace by moonlight. Ay, here
stands the temple where my goddess is adored! The door opens. Retires.


Enter Lucetta. Lucet. [Under the window.] Madam, madam, hist! madam. -- How
shall I make her hear?


Jacintha in boys clothes at the window. Jacin. Who is there? -- what is the
matter?


Lucet. It is I, madam. You must not pretend to stir till I give the word --
you will be discovered if you do. --


Frank. [Aside.] What do I see! a man. My heart misgives me! --


Lucet. My master is below fitting up for Mrs. Clarinda. He ^aves as if he was
mad about her being out so late.


Frank. [Aside.] Here is some intrigue or other. I must see more of this,
before I give further way to love.


Lucet. One minute he is in the street -- the next he is in the kitchen. Now he
will lock her out, and then he will wait himself and see what figure she makes
when she vouchsafes to venture home.


Jacin. I long to have it over. Get me but once out of this house!


Frank. [Aside.] Cowardly rascal! would I were in his place.


Lucet. If I can but fix him any where, I can let you out myself -- you have
the ladder ready in case of necessity.


Jacin. Yes! yes! Exit Lucetta.


Frank. [Aside.] The ladder! This must lead to some discovery. I shall watch
you my young gentleman, I shall.


Enter Clarinda, and Servant. Clar. This whift is a most enticing devil. I am
afraid I am too late for Mr. Strictland's sober hours.


Jacin. Ha! I hear a noise!


Clar. No! I see a light in Jacintha's widow. You may go home. [Giving the
servant money.] I am safe.


Jacin. Sure it must be he! Mr. Bellamy. -- Sir!


Frank. [Aside.] Does not he call to me?


Clar. [Aside.] Ha! who is that? I am frighted out of my wits. -- A man! --


Jacin. Is it you?


Frank. Yes! yes! it is I! it is I!


Jacin. Listen at the door.


Frank. I will, it is open -- there is no noise -- all is quiet.


Clar. Sure it is my spark -- and talking to Jacintha.


Frank. You may come down the ladder -- quick.


Jacin. Catch it then and hold it.


Frank. I have it. Now I shall see what sort of mettle my young spark is made
of. Aside.


Clar. With a ladder too! I Will assure you. But I must see the end of it. Aside.


Jacin. Hark! did not some body speak?


Frank. No! no! be not fearful -- 'sdeath! we are discovered. Frankly and
Clarinda retire.


Enter Lucetta. Lucet. Hist! hist! are you ready?


Jacin. Yes, may I venture?


Lucet. Now is your time. He is in high conference with his privy counselor
Mr. Tester. You may come down the back stairs, and I Will let you out. Exit.
Lucet.


Jacin. I will, I will, and am heartily glad of it.


Exit Jacintha. Frank. [Advancing.] May be so -- but you and I shall have a few
words before you get off so cleanly.


Clar. [Advancing.] How lucky it was I came home at this instant. I shall spoil
his sport, I believe. Do you know me, sir?


Frank. I am amazed! you here! This was unexpected indeed!


Clar. Why, I believe I do come a little unexpectedly; but I shall amaze you
more -- I know the whole course of your amor; all the process of your mighty
passion from its first rise --


Frank. What is all this! --


Clar. To the very conclusion, which you vainly hope to effect this night.


Frank. By heaven, madam, I know not what you mean. I came hither purely to
contemplate on your beauties.


Clar. Any beauties, sir, I find will serve your turn. Did I not hear you talk
to her at the window?


Frank. Her!


Clar. Blush, blush for shame; but be assured you have seen the last both of
Jacintha and me. Exit.


Frank. Jacintha! hear me, madam -- she is gone. This must certainly be
Bellamy's mistress, and I have fairly ruined all his scheme. This it is to be
in luck.


Enter Bellamy behind. Bella. Ha! a man under the window!


Frank. No, here she comes, and I may convey her to him.


Enter Jacintha, and runs to Frankly. Jacin. I have at last got to you: let us
haste away -- oh!


Frank. Be not frightened, lady.


Jacin. Oh! I am abused, betrayed!


Bella. Betrayed! Frankly!


Frankly. Bellamy!


Bella. I can scarce believe it, though I see it. Draw --


Frank. Hear me, Bellamy -- lady.


Jacin. Stay -- do not fight.


Frank. I am innocent; it is all a mistake.


Jacin. For my sake be quiet -- we shall be discovered. The family is alarmed.


Bella. You are obeyed -- Mr. Frankly, there is but one way --


Frank. I understand you. Any time but now. You will certainly be discovered.
To morrow -- at your chambers. --


Bella. 'Till then, farewell. Exeunt Bella. and Jacin.


Frank. Then, when he is cool, I may be heard; and the real, though suspicious
account of this matter may be believed. Yet amidst all this perplexity, it
pleases me to find my fair incognita is jealous of my love.


Mr. Strict. [Within.] Where Is Lucetta? Search every place.


Frank. Hark! the cry is up. -- I must be gone.


Exit Frankly. Enter Mr. Strictland, Tester, and servants. Mr. Strict. She Is
gone! she is lost! I am cheated! pursue her! seek her!


Tester. Sir, all her clothes are in her chamber.


Serve. Sir, Mrs. Clarinda said she was in boy's clothes.


Mr. Strict. Ay, ay! I know it -- Bellamy has her -- come along -- pursue her.
Exeunt.


Enter Ranger. Rang. Hark! -- was not the noise this way -- no -- there is no
game stirring. This same goddess Diana, shines so bright with her chastity,
that egad! I believe the wenches are ashamed to look her in the face. Now am I
in an admirable mood for a frolic! I have wine in my head, and money in my
pocket, and am so furnished out for the cannonading any countess in
Christendom! ha! what have we here! a ladder! this cannot be placed here for
nothing -- and a window open! -- Is it love, or mischief now that is going on
within? -- I care not which -- I am in a right cue for either. Up I go -- Stay,
-- do I not run a greater chance of spoiling sport than I do of making any?
that I hate as much as I love the other -- There can be no harm in seeing how
the laud lies -- I Will up. [Goes up softly.] -- All is hush! -- ha! a light! and
a woman, by all that is lucky, neither old, nor crooked -- I Will in -- ha! she is
gone again! I will after her. [Gets in at the window.] And for fear of the
squawls of virtue, and the pursuit of the family, I will make sure of the
ladder. Now, fortune be my guide. Exit with the ladder.


SCENE II. Mrs. Strictland's Dressing Room.
Enter Mrs. Strictland, followed by Lucetta. Mrs. Strict. Well! I am in great
hopes she will escape.


Lucet. Never fear, madam. The lovers have the start of him, and I warrant,
they keep it.


Mrs. Strict. Were Mr. Strictland ever to suspect my being privy to her flight,
I know not what might be the consequence.


Lucet. Then you had better be undressing -- He may return immediately --


As she is sitting down to the toilet, Ranger enters behind. Rang. Young and
beautiful. -- Aside.


Lucet. I have watched him pretty narrowly of late, and never once suspected
till this morning --


Mrs. Strict. And who gave you authority to watch his actions, or pry into his
secrets?


Lucet. I hope madam, you are not angry? I thought it might have been of
service to you to know my master was jealous.


Rang. And her husband jealous! if she does but send away the maid, I am happy.


Mrs. Strict. [Angrily.] Leave me!


Lucet. This it is to meddle with other peoples affairs.


Exit in anger. Rang. What a lucky dog I am! I never made a gentlemen a cuckold
before. Now, Impudence assist me.


Mrs. Strict. [Rising.] Provoking! I am sure I never have deserved it of him.


Rang. Oh cuckold him by all means, madam, I am your man! [ She sh^ieks.] Oh,
fie, madam! if you squawl so cursedly, you will be discovered.


Mrs. Strict. Discovered! What mean you, sir? Do you come to abuse me?


Rang. I Will do my endeavors, madam: you can have no more.


Mrs. Strict. Whence came you? How got you here?


Rang. Dear madam, so long as I am here, what signifies how I got here, or
whence I came? But that I may satisfy your curiosity. First, as to your whence
came you? I answer, out of the street: and to your how got you here? I say, in
at the window. It stood so invitingly open, it was irresistible. But, madam, --
you was going to undress. I beg I may not incommode you.


Mrs. Strict. This is the most consummate piece of impudence! --


Rang. For heaven's sake, have one drop of pity for a poor young fellow, who
long has loved you.


Mrs. Strict. What would the fellow have?


Rang. Your husband's usage will excuse you to the world.


Mrs. Strict. I cannot bear this insolence, help! help!


Rang. Oh! hold that clamorous tongue! madam, speak one word more, and I am
gone, positively gone!


Mrs. Strict. Gone! so I would have you.


Rang. Lord! madam, you are so hasty.


Mrs. Strict Shall I not speak, when a thief, a robber breaks into my house at
midnight? help! help!


Rang. Ha! no one hears. Now, Cupid, assist me! look ye, madam, I never could
make fine speeches, and and cringe, and bow, and fawn, and flatter, and lie, I
have said more to you already, than I ever said to a woman in such
circumstances in all my life. But since I find you will yield to no persuasion
to your good -- I will gently force you to be grateful. [throws down his hat,
and seizes her.] Come, come! unbend that brow, and look more kindly on me!


Mrs. Strict. For shame, sir -- thus on my knees, let me beg for mercy.
Kneeling.


Rang. And thus, on mine, let me beg the same.


He kneels, catches and kisses her. Mr. Strict. [within.] Take away her sword!
she will hurt herself.


Mrs. Strict. Oh! heavens! that is my husband's voice!


Rang. [Rising.] The devil it is!


Mr. Strict. [within.] Take away her sword, I say, and then I can close with
her.


Mrs. Strict. He is upon the stairs, now coming up. I am undone, if he sees you.


Rang. Pox on him! I must decamp then. Which way?


Mrs. Strict. Through this passage into the next chamber.


Rang. And so into the street. With all my heart. You may be perfectly easy,
madam. Mum's the word. I never blab -- [Aside.] I shall never leave off so, but
wait till the last moment. Exit Ranger.


Mrs. Strict. So, he is gone! What could I have said, if he had been discovered!


Enter Mr. Strictland, driving in Jacintha, Lucetta following. Mr. Strict. Once
more, my pretty masculine madam, you are welcome home. And I hope to keep you
somewhat closer than I have done: for to-morow morning, eight o'clock, is the
latest hour you shall stay in this lewd town.


Jacin. Oh, sir! when once a girl is equipped with a hearty resolution, it is
not your worship's sagacity, nor the great chain at your gate can hinder her
from doing what she has a mind.


Mr. Strict. Oh, lord! lord! how this love improves a young lady's modesty.


Jacin. Am I to blame to seek for happiness any where, when you are resolved to
make me miserable here!


Mr. Strict. I have this night prevented your making yourself so; and will
endeavor to do it for the future. I have you safe now, and the devil shall not
get you out of my clutches again. I have locked the doors and barred them, I
warrant you. So, here -- [giving her a candle.] Troop to your chamber, and to
bed, whilst you are well, go -- [ He treads on Ranger' s hat.] What Is here? a
hat! a man's hat in my wife's dressing room!


Looking at the hat. Mrs. Strict. [Aside.] What shall I do?


Mr. Strict. [ Taking up the hat, and looking at Mrs. Strictland.] Ha! by hell!
I see it is true.


Mrs. Strict. My fears confound me. I dare not tell the truth, and know not how
to frame a lie!


Mr. Strict. Mrs. Strictland! Mrs. Strictland! how came this hat into your
chamber!


Lucet. [Aside.] Are you that way disposed, my fine lady, and will not trust me?


Mr. Strict. Speak, wretch, speak. --


Jacin. I could not have suspected this. Aside.


Mr. Strict. Why do thou not speak?


Mrs. Strict. Sir --


Mr. Strict. Guilt -- it is guilt that ties your tongue!


Lucet. I must bring her off, however -- no chambermaid can help it. -- Aside.


Mr. Strict. My fears are just, and I am miserable -- thou worst of women!


Mrs. Strict. I know my innocence, and can bear this no longer.


Mr. Strict. I know you are false, -- and it is I who will bear my injuries no
longer.


Both walk about in a passion. Lucet. [ To Jacintha aside.] Is not the hat
yours? own it, madam.


Takes away Jacintha' s hat, and Exit. Mrs. Strict. What ground? what cause
have you for jealousy, when you yourself can witness, your leaving me was
accidental; your return uncertain; and expected even sooner than it happened?
the abuse is gross and palpable.


Mr. Strict. Why, this is true!


Mrs. Strict. Indeed, Jacintha, I am innocent.


Mr. Strict. And yet this hat must belong to somebody.


Jacin. Dear, Mrs. Strictland, be not concerned when he has diverted himself a
little longer with it --


Mr. Strict. Ha!


Jacin. I suppose he will give me my hat again?


Mr. Strict. Your hat?


Jacin. Yes, my hat. You brushed it from my side yourself, and then trod upon
it; whether on purpose to abuse this lady or no, you best know yourself.


Mr. Strict. It cannot be. -- It Is all a lie.


Jacin. Believe so still -- with all my heart -- but the hat is mine. Snatches
it and puts it on.


Mr. Strict. Why did she look so?


Jacin. Your violence of temper is too much for her. You use her ill, and then
suspect her for that confusion which you yourself occasion.


Mrs. Strict. Why did not you set me right at first?


Jacin. Your hard usage of me, sir, is a sufficient reason why I should not be
much concerned to undeceive you at all. It Is for your lady's sake, I do it now;
who deserves much better of you than to be thus exposed for every slight
suspicion. See where she sits -- go to her.


Mrs. Strict. [Rising.] Indeed, Mr. Strictland, I have a soul as much above --


Mr. Strict. Whew! now you have both found your tongues, and I must bear their
eternal rattle!


Jacin. For shame! sir, go to her, and --


Mr. Strict. Well! well! what shall I say? I forgive -- all is over. I, I, I
forgive!


Mrs. Strict. Forgive! what do you mean?


Jacin. Forgive her? is that all? consider, sir --


Mr. Strict. Hold -- hold your confounded tongues, and I Will do any thing. I Will
ask pardon -- or forgive -- or any thing. Good now, be quiet -- I ask your
pardon -- there -- [Kisses her.] For you, madam -- I am infinitely oblig^d to
you, and I could find in my heart to make you a return in kind, by marrying you
to a beggar, -- but I have more conscience. Come, come; to your chamber. --
Here take this candle --


Enter Lucetta pertly. Lucet. Sir, if you please, I will light my young lady to
bed.


Mr. Strict. No! no! no such thing, good madam. She shall have nothing but her
pillow to consult this night, I assure you -- so in, in. [The ladies take
leave.] [ Exit Jacintha.] Good night, kind madam.


Lucet. Pox of the jealous fool! we might both have escaped out of the window
purely. Aside.


Mr. Strict. Go, get you down and do you hear; order the coach to be ready in
the morning at eight exactly. [ Exit Lucetta.] [Locks the door after her.] So
she is safe till tomorrow, and then for the country; and when she is there, I
can manage as I think fit.


Mrs. Strict. Dear Mr. Strictland --


Mr. Strict. I am not in a humor, Mrs. Strictland, fit to talk with you. -- Go
to bed, I will endeavor to get the better of my temper, if I can -- I Will
follow you! [ Exit Mrs. Strictland.] How despicable have I made myself! Exit.


SCENE III. Another CHAMBER.
Enter Ranger. Rang. All seems hushed again, and I may venture out. I may as
well sneak off whilst I am in a whole skin. And shall so much love and claret
as I am in possession of, only lull me to sleep, when it might so much better
keep me waking? forbid it, Fortune; and forbid it, Love. This is a chamber,
perhaps of some bewitching female, and I may yet be happy. Ha! a light! the
door opens. A boy! pox on him.


He retires. Enter Jacintha, with a candle. Jacin. I have been listening at the
door; and from their silence, I conclude they are peaceably gone to bed
together.


Rang. [Aside.] A pretty boy, faith! he seems uneasy.


Jacin. [Sitting down.] What an unlucky night has this proved to me! every
circumstance has fallen out unhappily.


Rang. He talks aloud. I Will listen. Aside.


Jacin. But what most amazes me is, that Clarinda should betray me!


Rang. Clarinda? She must be a woman! well! what of her? Aside.


Jacin. My guardian else would never have suspected my disguise.


Rang. [Aside.] Disguise! ha! it must be so. What eyes she has? What a dull
rogue was I not to suspect this sooner?


Jacin. Ha! I had forgot the ladder is at the window still, and I will boldly
venture by myself. [ Rising briskly, sees Ranger.] Ha! a man! and well dressed!
ha! Mrs. Strictland, are you then at last dishonest?


Rang. [Aside.] By all my wishes she is a charming woman! lucky rascal!


Jacin. But I will if possible, conceal her shame, and stand the brunt of his
impertinence.


Rang. What shall I say to her? no matter; any thing soft will do the business.


Jacin. Who are you?


Rang. A man, young gentleman.


Jacin. And what would you have?


Rang. A woman.


Jacin. You are very free, sir. Here are none for you.


Rang. Ay, but there is one, and a fair one too; the most charming creature
Nature ever set her hand to; and you are the dear little pilot, that must
direct me to her heart.


Jacin. What mean you, sir? It is an office I am not accustomed to.


Rang. You will not have far to go, however. I never make my errands tedious! it
is to your own heart. Dear madam, I would have you whisper in my behalf. Nay,
never start. Think you such beauty could ever be concealed from eyes so well
acquainted with its charms?


Jacin. What will become of me! if I cry out Mrs. Strictland is undone, that is
my last resort.


Aside. Rang. Pardon, dear lady, the boldness of this visit, which your
guardian's care has forced me to -- but I long have loved you, long doated on
that beauteous face, and followed you from place to place, though perhaps,
unknown and unregarded.


Jacin. Here Is a special fellow! Aside.


Rang. Turn then an eye of pity on my sufferings; and by heaven -- one tender
look from those piercing eyes -- one touch of this soft hand --


Going to take her hand. Jacin. Hold, sir -- no nearer.


Rang. Would more than repay whole years of pain.


Jacin. Hear me. But keep your distance, or I raise the family. --


Rang. Blessings on her tongue, only for prattling to me. Aside.


Jacin. Oh! for a moment's courage, and I shall shame him from his purpose.
[Aside.] If I were certain so much gallantry had been shown on my account only.
--


Rang. You wrong your beauty to think that any other could have power to draw
me hither. By all the little loves that play about your lips I swear --


Jacin. You came to me, and me alone?


Rang. By all the thousand graces that inhabit there, you, and only you have
drawn me hither.


Jacin. Well said.


Rang. By heaven she comes! ah! honest Ranger, I never knew thee fail! -- Aside.


Jacin. Pray, sir, where did you leave this hat?


Rang. That hat! -- that hat -- It Is my hat. -- I dropped it in the next chamber
as I was looking for yours.


Jacin. How mean and despicable do you look now?


Rang. So! so! I am in a pretty pickle! Aside.


Jacin. You know by this, that I am acquainted with every thing that has passed
within: and how ill it agrees with what you have profes^ed to me -- let me
advise you, sir, to be gone immediately. Through that window you may easily get
into the street -- one scream of mine; the least noise at that door will wake
the house.


Rang. Say you so? Aside.


Jacin. Believe me, sir, an inju^^d husband is not so easily appeased, and a
suspected wife that is jealous of her honor --


Rang. Is the devil, and so let us hear no more of her. Look ye, madam, [Going
between the door and her.] I have but one argument left, and that is a strong
one. Look on me well, I am as handsome a strong well-made fellow as any about
town, and since we are alone, as I take it, we can have no occasion to be more
private.


Going to lay hold of her. Jacin. I have a reputation, sir, and will maintain
it.


Rang. You have a bewitching pair of eyes.


Jacin. Consider my virtue. Struggling.


Rang. Consider your beauty and my desires.


Jacin. If I were a man, you dared not use me thus.


Rang. I should not have had the same temptation.


Jacin. Hear me, sir, I will be heard. [Breaks from him.] There is a man who
will make you repent this usage of me. -- Oh! Bellamy, where art thou now?


Rang. Bellamy!


Jacin. Were he here you durst not thus affront me.


Bursting out a crying. Rang. His mistress on my soul! [Aside.] You can love
madam; you can love, I find. Her tears affect me strangely. Aside.


Jacin. I am not ashamed to own my passion for a man of virtue and honor. -- I
love and glory in it.


Rang. O! brave! and you can write letters, you can. I will not trust myself
home with you this evening, because I know it is inconvenient.


Jacin. Ha!


Rang. Therefore I beg you would procure me a lodging; it is no matter how far
off my guardian's. Yours, Jacintha.


Jacin. The very words of my letter! I am amazed. Do you know Mr. Bellamy?


Rang. There is not a man on earth I have so great a value for: and he must
have some value for me too, or he would never have shown me your pretty
epistle. Think of that, fair lady. The ladder is at the window. And so madam, I
hope delivering you safe into his arms will, in some measure, expiate the crime
I have been guilty of to you.


Jacin. Good heaven, how fortunate is this?


Rang. I believe I make myself appear more wicked than I really am. For, damn
me, if I do not feel more satisfaction in the thoughts of restoring you to my
friend, than I could have pleasure in any favor your bounty could have
bestowed.


Jacin. Your generosity transports me.


Rang. Let us lose no time then, the ladder is ready. -- Where was you to lodge?


Jacin. At Mr. Meggot's.


Rang. At my friend Jacky's? better and better still.


Jacin. Are you acquainted with him too?


Rang. Ay, ay! why did I not tell you at first that I was one of your old
acquaintance? I know all about you, you see; though the devil fetch me if ever I
saw you before. Now Madam --


Jacin. And now, sir, -- have with you.


Rang. Then thou art a girl of spirit. And though I long to hug you for trusting
yourself with me, I will not beg a single kiss, till Bellamy himself shall give
me leave. He must fight well that takes you from me. Exeunt.


ACT IV.
SCENE. I. The PIAZZA.
Enter Bellamy and Frankly. Bella. PSHA! what impertinent devil put it into
your head to meddle with my affairs?


Frank. You know I went thither in pursuit of another.


Bella. I know nothing you had to do there at all.


Frank. I thought Mr. Bellamy you were a lover.


Bella I am so; and therefore should be forgiven this sudden warmth.


Frank. And therefore should forgive the fond impertinence of a lover.


Bella. Jealousy, you know, is as natural an incident to love --


Frank. As curiosity. By one piece of silly curiosity I have gone nigh to ruin
both myself and you. Let not then your jealousy complete our misfortunes! I
fear I have lost a mistress as well as you. Then let us not quarrel. All may
come right again.


Bella. It is impossible. She is gone, removed for ever from my sight. She is
in the country by this time.


Frank. How did you lose her after we parted?


Bella. By too great confidence. When I got her to my chair, the chairmen were
not to be found. -- And safe, as I thought in our disguise, I actually put her
into the chair, when Mr. Strictland and his servants were in sight; which I had
no sooner done, than they surrounded us, overpowered me, and carried her away.


Frank. Unfortunate indeed! could you not make a second attempt?


Bella. I had designed it. But when I came to the door, I found the ladder
removed; and hearing no noise, seeing no lights, nor being able to make any
body answer, I concluded all attempts as impracticable as now I find them. Ha!
I see Lucetta coming. Then they may be still in town. Enter Lucetta. Lucetta
welcome! what news of Jacintha?


Lucet. News, sir! you fright me out of my senses! why is she not with you?


Bella. What do you mean? With me! I have not seen her since I lost her last
night.


Lucet. Good heaven! then she is undone for ever.


Frank. Why what is the matter?


Bella. Speak out -- I Am all amazement.


Lucet. She is escaped without any of us knowing how. Nobody missed her 'till
morning. We all thought she went away with you. But heaven knows now what may
have happened!


Bella. Somebody must have accompanied her in her flight.


Lucet. We know of nobody. We are all in confusion at home. My master swears
revenge on you. My mistress says a stranger has her.


Bella. A stranger!


Lucet. But Mrs. Clarinda --


Bella. Clarinda! who is she?


Lucet. [To Frankly.] The lady, sir, you saw at our house last night.


Frank. Ha! what of her?


Lucet. She says she is sure one Frankly, is the man. She saw them together,
and knows it to be true.


Frank. Damned fortune!


Lucet. Sure this is not Mr. Frankly?


Frank. Nothing will convince him now. Aside.


Bella. [ looking at Frankly.] Ha! it is truth -- I see it is true. [Aside.]
Lucetta run up to Buckle, and take him with you to search wherever you can.
[Puts her out.] Now, Mr. Frankly, I have found you. -- You have used me so ill,
that you force me to forget you are my friend.


Frank. What do you mean?


Bella. Draw.


Frank. Are you mad? By heavens! I am innocent.


Bella. I have heard you, and will no longer be imposed on. -- Defend yourself.


Frank. Nay, if you are so hot, I draw to defend myself, as I would against a
madman.


Enter Ranger. Rang. What the devil, swords at noonday! Have among you, faith!
[parts them.] What Is here, Bellamy? -- Yes, gad, you are Bellamy, and you are
Frankly. Put up, put up both of you -- or else -- I am a devilish fellow when
once my sword is out.


Bella. We shall have a time --


Rang. [ Pushing Bellamy one way.] a time for what?


Frank. I shall be always as ready to defend my innocence as now.


Rang. [ Pushing Frankly the other way.] Innocence! ay, to be sure! -- at your
age! -- a mighty innocent fellow, no doubt. But what in the name of common
sense is it that ails you both? Are you mad? The last time I saw you, you were
hugging and kissing; and now you are cutting one another's throats -- I never
knew any good come of one fellow's be slavering another -- But I shall put you
into better humor, I warrant you. Bellamy, Frankly, listen both of you -- such
fortune -- such a scheme --


Bella. Pr'ythee, leave fooling! what, art drunk?


Frank. He is always so, I think.


Rang. And who gave you the privilege of thinking? Drunk! no! I am not drunk --
tipsy perhaps, with my good fortune -- merry and in spirits -- though I have not
fire enough to run my friend through the body. Not drunk, though Jack Meggot and I
have box'd it about -- Champaign was the word for two whole hours, by
Shrewsbury clock.


Bella. Jack Meggot! Why I left him at one going to bed.


Rang. That may be, but I made a shift to rouse him and his family, by four
this morning. Ounds! I picked up a wench and carried her to his house.


Bella. Ha!


Rang. Such a variety of adventures -- nay, you shall hear. But before I begin
Bellamy, you shall promise me half a dozen kisses before hand, for the devil
fetch me, if that little jade, Jacintha, would give me one, though I pressed hard.


Bella. Who, Jacintha? Press to kiss Jacintha!


Rang. Kiss her! ay, why not? Is she not a woman, and made to be kissed.


Bella. Kiss her! -- I shall run distracted.


Rang. How could I help it, when I had her alone, you rogue, in her bedchamber
at midnight? If I had been to be sacrificed, I should have done it.


Bella. Bedchamber at midnight? I can hold no longer. -- Draw.


Frank. Be easy, Bellamy. Interposing.


Bella. He has been at some of his damned tricks with her.


Frank. Hear him out.


Rang. 'Sdeath! how could I know she was his mistress? But I tell this story
most miserably. I should have told you first, I was in another lady's chamber.
By the lord, I got in at the window by a ladder of ropes.


Frank. Ha! another lady?


Rang. Another. And stole in upon her, whilst she was undressing; beautiful as
an angel, blooming and young --


Frank. What, in the same house?


Bella. What is this to Jacintha? Ease me of my pain.


Rang. Ay, ay, in the same house, on the same floor. The sweetest, little angel
-- but I design to have another touch with her.


Frank. 'Sdeath! but you shall have a touch with me first.


Bella. Stay, Frankly. Interposing.


Rang. Why, what strange madness has possessed you both, that nobody must kiss
a pretty wench but yourselves.


Bella. But what became of Jacintha?


Rang. Ounds! what have you done that you must monopolize kissing?


Frank. Pr'ythee, honest Ranger, ease me of the pain I am in. Was her name
Clarinda?


Bella. Speak, in plain words, where Jacintha is, where to be found -- dear
boy, tell me.


Rang. Ay, now it is, honest Ranger; and dear boy, tell me -- and a minute ago,
my throat was to be cut. -- I could find in my heart not to open my lips. But
here comes Jack Meggot, who will let you into all the secret, though he designed
to keep it from you, in half the time that I can, though I had ever so great a
mind to tell it you.


Enter Jack Meggot. Jack Meg. So, save ye! save ye, lads! we have been
frightened out of our wits for you. Not hearing of Mr. Bellamy, poor Jacintha
is ready to sink for fear of any accident.


Bella. Is she at your house?


Jack Meg. Why, did you not know that? We dispatched master Ranger to you three
hours ago.


Rang. Ay, plague! but I had business of my own, and so I could not come. Hark
ye, Frankly, is your girl maid, wife, or widow?


Frank. A maid, I hope.


Rang. The odds are against you, Charles. -- But mine is married, you rogue,
and her husband jealous. -- The devil is in it, if I do not yet reap some
reward for my last night's service.


Bella. He has certainly been at Mrs. Strictland herself. But Frankly, I dare
not look on you.


Frank. This one embrace cancels all thoughts of enmity.


Bella. Thou generous man: -- but I must haste to ease Jacintha of her fears.
Exit.


Frank. And I to make up matters with Clarinda.


Exit. Rang. And I to some kind wench or other, Jack. But where I shall find
her, heaven knows. And so, my service to your monkey.


Jack Meg. Adieu, rattle pate. Exeunt.


SCENE II. The Hall of Mr. Strictland's House.
Enter Mrs. Strictland and Clarinda. Mrs. Strict. But, why in such a hurry, my
dear? stay till your servants can go along with you.


Clar. O, no matter! they will follow with my things. It is but a little way off,
and my chair will guard me. After my staying out so late last night, I am sure
Mr. Strictland will think every minute an age whilst I am in his house.


Mrs. Strict. I am as much amazed at his suspecting your innocence as my own:
and every time I think of it, I blush at my present behavior to you.


Clar. No ceremony, dear child.


Mrs. Strict. No Clarinda, I am too well acquainted with your good humor. But
I fear in the eye of a malicious world, it may look like a confirmation of his
suspicion.


Clar. My dear, if the world will speak ill of me, for the little innocent
gaiety, which I think the peculiar happiness of my temper, I know no way to
prevent it; and am only sorry the world is so ill-natured: but I shall not part
with my mirth, I assure them, so long as I know it innocent. I wish, my dear,
this may be the greatest uneasiness your husband's jealousy ever gives you.


Mrs. Strict. I hope he never again may have such occasion, as he had last
night.


Clar. You are so unfashionable a wife! -- why, last night's accident would
have made half the wives in London easy for life. Has not his jealousy
discovered itself openly? and are not you innocent? there is nothing but your
foolish temper that prevents his being absolutely in your power.


Mrs. Strict. Clarinda, this is too serious an affair to laugh at. Let me
advise you, take care of Mr. Frankly, observe his temper well; and if he has
the least taint of jealousy, cast him off, and never trust to keeping him in
your power.


Clar. You will hear little more of Frankly, I believe. Here is Mr. Strictland.


Enter Mr. Strictland and Lucetta. Mr. Strict. Lucetta says you want me, madam.


Clar. I troubled you, sir, only that I might return you thanks for the
civilities I have received in your family, before I took my leave.


Mr. Strict. Keep them to yourself, dear madam. As it is at my request that you
leave my house, your thanks upon that occasion are not very desirable.


Clar. Oh, sir, you need not fear, my thanks were only for your civilities.
They will not overburden you. But I Will conform to your humor, sir, and part
with as little ceremony. --


Mr. Strict. As we met.


Clar. The brute! [Aside.] My dear, good-b'ye, we may meet again. To Mrs.
Strictland.


Mr. Strict. If you dare trust me with your hand.


Clar. Lucetta, remember my instructions. Now, sir, have with you.


Mr. Strictland leads Clarinda out. Mrs. Strict. Are her instructions cruel or
kind, Lucetta? for I suppose they relate to Mr. Frankly.


Lucet. You have a mind to try, if I can keep a secret, as well as yourself,
madam. But I will show you I am fit to be trusted by keeping this, though it
signifies nothing.


Mrs. Strict. This answer is not so civil, I think.


Lucet. I beg pardon, madam. I meant it not to offend.


Mrs. Strict. Pray let us have no more such. I neither desire, nor want you
assistance.


Re enter Mr. Strictland. Mr. Strict. She is gone. I feel myself somewhat
easier already. Since I have begun the day with gallantry, madam, shall I
conduct you up?


Mrs. Strict. There is something, sir, which gives you secret uneasiness. I
wish --


Mr. Strict. Perhaps so, madam, and perhaps it may soon be no secret at all.
Leads her out.


Lucet. Would I were once well settled with my young lady; for at present, this
is but an odd sort of a queer family. Last night's affair puzzles me. A hat
there was that belonged to none of us, that is certain. Madam was in a fright,
that is as certain; and I brought all off. Jacintha escaped, no one of us knows
how. The good man's jealousy was yesterday groundless; yet today, in my mind,
he is very much in the right. Mighty odd, all this! Somebody knocks! If this
should be Clarinda's spark, I have an odd message for him too.


She opens the door. Enter Frankly. Frank. So, my pretty handmaid. Meeting with
you gives me some hopes. May I speak with Clarinda?


Lucet. Whom do you want, sir?


Frank. Clarinda, child. The young lady I was admitted to yesterday.


Lucet. Clarinda? -- No such person lives here, I assure you.


Frank. Where then?


Lucet. I don't know, indeed, sir.


Frank. Will you enquire within?


Lucet. Nobody knows in this house, sir, you will find.


Frank. What do you mean? She is a friend of Jacintha's your lady. I will take
my oath she was here last night; and you yourself spoke of her being here this
morning -- not know!


Lucet. No. None of us know. She went away of a sudden. No one of us can
imagine whither.


Frank. Why, faith, child, thou have a tolerable face, and have delivered this
denial very handsomely. But let me tell you, your damned impertinence this
morning had like to have cost me my life. Now, therefore, make me amends. I
come from your young mistress, I come from Mr. Bellamy. I come with my purse
full of gold (that persuasive rhetoric) to win you to let me see, and speak to
this Clarinda once again.


Lucet. She is not here, sir.


Frank. Direct me to her.


Lucet. No! I cannot do that neither.


Enter Mr. Strictland behind. Mr. Strict. I heard a knocking at the door, and a
man's voice -- ha! Aside.


Frank. Deliver this letter to her.


Mr. Strict. By all my fears; a letter! Aside.


Lucet. I don't know but I may be tempted to do that.


Frank. Take it then -- and with it this.


Kisses her, and gives her money. Mr. Strict. Um! there are two bribes in a
breath! What a jade she is?


Lucet. Ay! this gentleman understands reason!


Frank. And be assured you oblige your mistress, while you are serving me.


Mr. Strict. Her mistress? -- Damned sex! and damned wife, thou art an epitome
of that sex!


Frank. And if you can procure me an answer, your see shall be enlarged. Exit
Frankly.


Lucet. The next step is to get her to read this letter.


Mr. Strict. [Snatches the letter.] No noise -- but stand silent there, whilst
I read this.

Breaks it open, and drops the case. Madam, the gaiety of a heart happy as mine
was yesterday, may, I hope, easily excuse the unseasonable visit I made your
house last night. -- Death and the devil! confusion, I shall run distracted. It
is too much! there was a man then to whom the hat belonged; and I was gulled,
abused, cheated, imposed on by a chit, a girl -- oh woman! woman! -- But I will
be calm, search it cooly to the bottom, and have a full revenge. --


Lucet. [Aside.] So here is a fine work! he will make himself very ridiculous though!


Mr. Strict. [Reads on.] I know my innocence will appear so manifestly, that I
need only appeal to the lady who accompanied you at Bath. Your very humble
servant, good, innocent, fine madam Clarinda -- And I do not doubt but her
goodnature, [Bawd! bawd!] will not let you persist injuring your obedient
humble servant, Charles Frankly.

Now, who can say my jealousy lacked foundation, or my suspicion of sine
madam's innocent gaiety was unjust -- gaiety? why, ay! 'twas gaiety brought him
hither. Gaiety makes her a bawd -- my wife may be a whore in gaiety. What a
number of sins become fashionable under the notion of gaiety -- What! You
received this epistle in gaiety too; and were to deliver it to my wife I
suppose, when the gay fit came next upon her? Why* you impudent young strumpet,
do you laugh at me!


Lucet. I would, if I dared, and heartily -- be pleased, sir, only to look at
that piece of paper that lies there.


Mr. Strict. Ha!


Lucet. I have not touched it, sir. It is the case that letter came in, and the
direction will inform you whom I was to deliver it to.


Mr. Strict. This is directed to Clarinda?


Lucet. Oh! is it so? Now read it over again, and all your foolish doubts will
vanish.


Mr. Strict. I have no doubts at all. I am satisfied that you, Jacintha,
Clarinda, my wife, all are --


Lucet. Lud! lud! you would make a body mad?


Mr. Strict. Hold your impertinent tongue.


Lucet. You Will find the thing to be just as I say, sir.


Mr. Strict. ^egone. [ Exit Lucetta.] They must be poor at the work, indeed, if
they did not lend one another their names. It Is plain, it is evident: and I am
miserable. But for my wife, she shall not stay one night longer in my house.
Separation, shame, contempt shall be her portion. I am determined in the thing;
and when once it is over, I may perhaps be easy. Exit.


SCENE III. The STREET.
Enter Clarinda, in a chair, Ranger following. Rang. Hark ye, chairmen! Damn
your confounded trot. Go slower.


Clar. Here, stop.


Rang. By heavens the monsters hear reason, and obey.


Clar. [Letting down the window.] What troublesome fellow was that?


1 Chairm. Some rake, I warrant, that cannot carry himself home, and wants us
to do it for him.


Clar. There -- and pray do you take care I be not troubled with him. Goes in.


Rang. That Is as much as to say now, pray follow me. Madam, you are a charming
woman, and I will do it --


1 Chairm. Stand off, sir.


Rang. Pr'ythee, honest fellow -- what -- what writing is that? Endeavoring to
get in


2 Chairm. You come not in here!


Rang. Lodgings to be let! a pretty convenient inscription, and the sign of a
good modest family! There may be lodgings for gentlemen as well as ladies. Hark
ye, rogues! I Will lay you all the silver I have in my pocket, there it is, I get
in there in spite of your teeth, ye pimps? Throws down money and goes in.


1 Chairm. What, have you let the gentleman in?


2 Chairm. I Will tell you what, partner, he certainly slipped by whilst we were
picking up the money. Come take up.


Exeunt. SCENE IV. CLARINDA 'S LODGINGS.
A noise without between Ranger and Landlady. Clarinda enters laughing, a Maid
following. Clar. My madcap cousin Ranger, as I live. I am sure he does not know
me. -- If I could but hide my face now, what sport I should have! a mask, a
mask! run and see if you can find a mask.


Maid. I believe there is one above.


Clar. Run, run, and fetch it. Exit Maid.
Here he comes! Enter Ranger and Landlady.
How unlucky this is! Turning from 'em.

Landl. What Is your business here, unmannerly sir?


Rang. Well, let us see these lodgings that are to be let. -- Gad, a very pretty
neat tenement! -- but hark ye, is it real and natural, all that, or only
patched up and new-painted this summer-season against the town fills?


Landl. What does the saucy fellow mean with his double tenders here? get you
down --


Enter Maid with a Mask. Maid. Here is a very dirty one. Aside to Clarinda.


Clar. No matter -- now we shall see a little what he would be at. Aside.


Landl. This is an honest house -- for all your laced waistcoat, I Will have you
thrown down neck and heels.


Rang. Phoh! not in such a hurry good old lady -- a mask! -- nay, with all my
heart. It saves a world of blushing -- have you never a one for me? -- I am apt
to be ashamed myself, on these occasions.


Landl. Get you down, I say --


Rang. Not if I guess right, old lady. Madam, [ To Clarinda, who makes signs to
the Landlady.] Look ye there now! that a woman should live to your age, and
know so little of the matter. Be gone. [Exit Landlady.] By her forwardness,
this should be a whore of quality. My boy Ranger, thou art in luck today. --
She will not speak, I find -- then I will. [Aside.] Delicate lodgings truly,
madam; and very neatly furnished. -- A very convenient room this, I must needs
own, to entertain a mixed company -- but my dear charming creature, does not
that door open to a more commodious apartment for the happiness of a private
friend, or so? the prettiest brass lock. -- Fast, um! that will not do. 'Sdeath,
you are a beautiful woman! I am sure you are. Pr'y-thee let me see your face.
It is your interest child. -- The longer you delay, the more I shall expect.
Therefore, [taking her hand.] my dear, soft, kind, new acquaintance, thus let
me take your hand, and whilst you gently with the other, let daylight in upon
me: let me softly hold you to me, that with my longing lips I may receive the
warmest, bes^ impression. [She unmasks.] Clarinda!


Clar. Ha! ha! your servant, cousin Ranger: Ha, ha, ha.


Rang. Oh! your humble servant, madam! you had liked to have been beholden to
your mask, cousin! I must brazen it out. Aside.


Clar. Ha! ha! ha! you were not so happy in your disguise, sir. The pretty
stagger in your gate, that happy disposition of your hair, the genteel
negligence of your whole person, and those pretty flowers of modish gallantry
made it impossible to mistake you, my sweet cuz. Ha, ha.


Rang. Oh! I knew you too, but I fancied you had taken a particular liking to
my person, and had a mind to sink the relation under that little piece of black
velvet! and, egad, you never find me behind hand in a frolic. But since it is
otherwise, my merry-good-humoured cousin, I am as heartily glad to see you in
town, as I should be to meet any of my old ^^ttle acquaintance.


Clar. And on my side, I am as happy in meeting your worship, as I should be in
a rencounter with ever a petticoat in Christendom.


Rang. And if you have any occasion for a dangling gallant to Vauxhall,
Ranelagh, or even the poor neglected Park, you are so unlike the rest of your
virtuous sisters of the petticoat, that I will venture myself with you.


Clar. Take care what you promise; for who knows but this face you were pleased
to say so many pretty things of, before you saw it, may raise so many rivals
among your kept mistresses, and reps of quality.


Rang. Hold! hold! a truce with your satire, sweet cuz; or if scandal must be
the topic of every virtuous woman's conversation -- call for your tea-water --
and let it be in its proper element. Come, your tea; your tea.


Enter Landlady. Clar. With all my heart -- who is there? Get tea upon condition
that you stay till it comes.


Rang. That is according as you behave, madam.


Clar. Oh! sir, I am very sensible of the favor.


Rang. Nay! you may, I assure you; for there is but one woman of virtue besides
yourself, I would stay with ten minutes, (and I have not known her above these
twelves hours.) The insipidity, or the ra^cour of their discourse, is
insufferable. 'Sdeath! I had rather take the air with my grandmother!


Clar. Ha! ha! ha! the ladies are highly obliged to you, I vow.


Rang. I tell you what. The lady I speak of was obliged to me, and the generous
girl is ready to own it.


Clar. And pray when was it you did Virtue this considerable service?


Rang. But this last night, the devil fetch me! a romantic whim of mine
conveyed me into her chamber, where I found her young and beautiful, alone at
midnight, dressed like a soft Adonis, her lovely hair all loose about her
shoulders --


Clar. In boys' clothes! (this is worth attending to.)


Aside. Rang. Gad! I no more suspected her being a woman, than I did your being
my cater-cousin.


Clar. How did you discover it at last?


Rang. Why, faith, she very modestly dropped me a hint of it herself.


Clar. Herself! (if this should be Jacintha.) Aside.


Rang. Ay, 'foregad, did she! which I imagined a good sign at midnight. Ha,
cousin? so I even invented a long story of a passion I had for her, (though I had
never seen her before) you know my old way; and said so many such tender things
--


Clar. As you said to me just now?


Rang. Psh^h! quite in an another style, I assure you. It was midnight, and
then I was in a right cue.


Clar. Well! and what did she answer to all these protesta^io^s?


Rang. Why, instead of running into my arms at once, as I expected --.


Clar. To be sure.


Rang. 'Gad! like a freehearted honest girl, she frankly told me, she liked
another better than she liked me; that I had something in my face that showed I
was a gentleman: and she would even trust herself with me, if I would give her
my word, I would convey her to her spark.


Clar. Oh, brave! and how did you bear this?


Rang. Why, curse me, if I am ever angry with a woman for not having a passion
for me; I only hate your sex's vain pretense of having no passion at all. 'Gad!
I loved the good-natured girl for it; took her at her word; stole her out of
the window: and this morning made a very honest fellow happy in the possession
of her.


Clar. And her name is Jacintha.


Rang. Ha!


Clar. Your amors are no secrets, sir. You see you might as well have told me
all, the whole of last night's adventure; for you find, I know.


Rang. All! why, what do you know?


Clar. Nay, nothing. I only know, that a gentleman's hat cannot be dropped in a
lady's chamber. --


Rang. The devil!


Clar. But a husband is such an odd, impertinent, awkward creature, that he
will be stumbling over it.


Rang. Here has been fine work. [Aside] But how, in the name of wonder should
you know all this?


Clar. By being in the same house.


Rang. In the same house?


Clar. Ay, in the same house. A witness of the confusion you have made.


Rang. Frankly's Clarinda, by all that is fortunate. It must be so. Aside.


Clar. And let me tell you, sir, that even the dull, low-spirited diversions
you ridicule in us tame creatures, are preferable to the romantic exploits that
only wine can raise you to.


Rang. Yes, cousin! but I Will be even with you.


Aside. Clar. If you reflect, cousin, you will find a gre^^ (...), in ^^ocki^g
a l^^y's m^de^^y, (...) her quiet, tainting her reputation, and ruining the
peace of a whole family.


Rang. To be sure.


Clar. These (...) your high-mettled pleasures of you men of spirit, that the
insipidity of the virtuous can never arrive at. And can you in reality think
your Burgundy, and your Bacchu^, your Venus, and your Loves an excuse for all
this? Fie, cousin, sy.


Rang. No, cousin.


Clar. What, dumb? I am glad you have modesty enough left not to go about to
excuse yourself.


Rang. It is as you say. When we are sober, and reflect but ever so little on
the follies we commit, we are ashamed and sorry; and yet the very next minute,
we run again into the ve^^ sa^^ (...) ^dities.


Clar. What! mora^^^ing, (...) ha! ha! ha!


Rang. What you know is ^^t half, not a hundredth part of the mischief of my
last night's f^olle. And yet, the very next petticoat I saw this morning, I
must follow it, and be damned to me. The for ought I know, poor Frankly's (...)
may d^pend upon it.


Clar. Whos^ ^ise, sir?


Rang. And here do I stand prating to you now.


Clar. Pray, good cousin, explain yourself.


Rang. Good cousin! She has it. [Aside.] Why, whilst I was making off with the
wench, Bellamy and he were quarreling about her: and though Jacintha and I made
all the haste we could, we did not get to them before --


Clar. Before what? (I Am frightened out of my wits.)


Rang. Not that Frankly cared three halfpence for the girl.


Clar. But there was no mischief done, I hope.


Rang. Pho! a slight scratch. Nothing at all, as the surgeon said: though he was
but a queer looking son of a bitch of a surgeon neither.


Clar. Good God! why, he should have the b^^t that can be found in London.


Rang. Ay, indeed, so he should. That was what I was going for, when I saw you.
[Sits down.] They are all at Jack Meggol's hard by, and you will keep me here.


Clar. I keep you here! for heaven's sake begone.


Rang. Your (...) is a damned while a coming.


Clar. You shall have no tea now, I assure you.


Rang. Nay! one dish.


Clar. No, positively, you shall not stay.


Rang. Your commands are absolute, madam.


Going. Clar. Then Frankly is true, and I am only to blame.


Rang. [Returns.] But I beg ten thousand pardons, cousin, that I should forget
to salute you.


Clar. Pshah! how can you trifle at such a time as this?


Rang. A trifle! wrong not your beauty.


Clar. Lord! how teizing you are? There.


Rang. [Kisses her.] Poor thing! how uneasy she is! nay, no ceremony. You shall
not stir a step with me.


Exit. Clar. I do not intend it. This is downright provoking. Who Is there?


Enter Landlady. Landla. Madam, did your ladyship call?


Clar. Does one Mr. Meggot live in this neighborhood?


Landla. Yes, madam, a fine gentleman, and keeps a noble house, and a world of
company.


Clar. Very well. I don't want his history. I wonder my servants are not come
yet.


Landla. Lack-a-day, madam, they are all below.


Clar. Send up one then with a card to me. I must know the truth of this affair
immediately.


Exeunt. ACT V.
SCENE I. A room in Mr. Strictland's house. Mr. and Mrs. Strictland discovered;
she weeping and he writing at a table.
Mrs. STRICTLAND. HEIGH! ho!


Mr. Strict. What can possibly be the occasion of that sigh, madam? You have
yourself agreed to a maintenance, and a maintenance no duchess need be ashamed
of.


Mrs. Strict. But the extremities of provocation that drove me to that
agreement --


Mr. Strict. Were the effect of your own follies. Why do you disturb me? Writes
on.


Mrs. Strict. I would not willingly give you a moment's uneasiness. I but
desire a fair and equal hearing: and if I satisfy you not in every point, then
abandon me, discard me to the world, and its malicious tongues.


Mr. Strict. What was it you said? -- Damn this pen.


Mrs. Strict. I say Mr. Strictland, I would only --


Mr. Strict. You would only! -- you would only repeat what you have been saying
this hour, I am innocent; and when I showed you the letter I had taken from
your maid, what was then your poor evasion? but that it was to Clarinda, and
you were innocent!


Mrs. Strict. Heaven knows I am innocent.


Mr. Strict. But I know your Clarinda, your woman of honor is your blind, your
cover, your -- but why do I distract myself about a woman I have no longer any
concerns with? Here, madam, is your fate. A letter to your brother in the
country.


Mrs. Strict. Sir --.


Mr. Strict. I have told him what a sister he is to receive, and how bid her
welcome.


Mrs. Strict. Then my ruin is complete. My Brother!


Mr. Strict. I must vindicate my own honor; else what will the world say?


Mrs. Strict. That brother was my only hope, my only ground of patience. In his
retirement I hoped my name might have been safe, and slept, till by some happy
means you might at length have known me innocent, and pitied me.


Mr. Strict. Retirement! pretty soul! no, no! that face was never made for
retirement. It is another sort of retiring you are fittest for. -- Ha! hark!
what is that. [A knocking at the door.] Two gentle taps -- and why but two? Was
that the signal, madam? Stir not on your life.


Mrs. Strict. Give me resolution, heaven, to bear this usage, and keep it
secret from the world. Aside.


Mr. Strict. I will have no signs, no items. No hem, to tell him I am here! Ha!
another tap. The gentleman is in haste I find. [ Opens the door, and enters
Tester.] Tester! why did not you come in, rascal! [Beats him] all vexations
meet to cross me.


Tester. Lard, sir! what do you strike me for? My mistress ordered me never to
come in where she was, without first knocking at the door.


Mr. Strict. Oh! cunning devil! Tester is too honest to be trusted!


Mrs. Strict. Unhappy man! will nothing undeceive him? Aside.


Tester. Sir, here is a letter.


Mr. Strict. To my wife?


Tester. No sir, to you. The servant waits below.


Mr. Strict. Art sure it is a servant?


Tester. Sir! [staring.] It is Mr. Buckle, sir.


Mr. Strict. I am mad. I know not what I say or do, or think. But let us read.
Reads to himself. Sir, we cannot bear to reflect that Mrs. Strictland may
possibly be ruined in your esteem, and in the voice of the world, only by the
confusion which our affair has made in your family, without offering all within
our power to clear the misunderstanding between you. If you will give yourself
the trouble but to step to Mr. Meggot's, where all the parties will be; we
doubt not but we can entirely satisfy your most flagrant suspicions, to the
honor of Mrs. Strictland, and the quiet of your lives.

Jacintha, John Bellamy.


Hey! here is the whole gang witnessing for one another. They think I am an ass,
and will be led by the nose, to believe every thing. Call me a chair. [ Exit
Tester.] Yes I will go to this rendezvous of enemies -- I will -- and find out
all her plots, her artifices, and contrivances. It will clear my conduct to her
brother and all her friends. Exit. Mr. Strictland.


Mrs. Strict. Gone, so abruptly! what can that letter be about! no matter.
There is no way left to make us easy but by my disgrace, and I must learn to
suffer. Time and innocence will teach me to bear it patiently.


Enter Lucetta. Lucet. Mrs. Bellamy, madam (for my young lady is married,) begs
you will follow Mr. Strictland to Mr. Meggot's. She makes no doubt, but she
shall be able to make you and my master easy.


Mrs. Strict. But how came she to know any thing of the matter?


Lucet. I have been with them, madam. I could not bear to see so good a lady so
ill-treated.


Mrs. Strict. I am indeed Lucetta, ill-treated. But I hope this day will be the
last of it.


Lucet. Madam Clarinda, and Mr. Frankly will be there: and the young gentleman,
madam, who was with you in this room last night.


Mrs. Strict. Ha! if he is there there may be hopes; and it is worth the trying.


Lucet. Dear lady -- let me call a chair.


Mrs. Strict. I go with you. I cannot be more wretched than I am. Exeunt.


SCENE II. A room in Meggot's house.
Enter Frankly, Ranger, Bellamy, Jacintha, and Meggot. Frank. Oh, Ranger! this
is news indeed. Your cousin, and a lady of such fortune!


Rang. I have done the business for you. I tell you; she is your own: she loves
you.


Frank. Words are too faint to tell the joy I feel.


Rang. I have put that heart of hers into such a flutter, that I Will lay a
hundred guineas, with the assistance which this lady has promised me, I fix her
yours directly.


Jacin. Ay, ay, Mr. Frankly, we have a design upon her which cannot fail. But
you must obey orders.


Frank. Most willingly. But remember, dear lady I have more than life at stake.


Jacin. Away then into the next room; for she is this instant coming hither.


Frank. Hither? you surprise me more and more.


Jacin. Here is a message from her, by which she desires leave to wait on me
this afternoon.


Rang. Only for the chance of seeing you here, I assure you.


Frank. L^^ (...) thee, though I know not how to believe it.


Rang. P^ pr'ythee, do not stifle me! it is a busy day, a very busy day.


Jack Meg. Thou art the most unaccountable creature in life.


Rang. But the most lucky one, Jack, if I succeed for Frankly, as I have for
B^llamy; and my heart whispers me I shall. Come in, most noble Mr. Buckle; and
what have you to propose?


Enter Buckle. Buckle. A lady, madam, in a chair, says her name is Clarinda.


Jacin. Desire her to walk up.


Bella. How could you let her wait? Exit Buckle. You must excuse him, madam.
Buckle is a true batchelor's servant, and knows no manners.


Jacin. Away, away, Mr. Frankly, and stay till I call you. A rap with my fan
shall be the signal. [ Exit Frankly.] We make very free with your house, Mr.
Meggot.


Jack Meg. Oh! You could not oblige me more!


Enter Clarinda. Clar. Dear Mrs. Bellamy, pity my confusion. I am to wish you
joy, and ask your pardon all in a breath. I know not what to say. I am quite
ashamed of my last night's behavior.


Jacin. Come, come, Clarinda, it is all well! all is over and forgot. Mr.
Bellamy. Salutes.


Clar. I wish you joy, sir, with all my heart, and should have been very sorry
if any folly of mine had prevented it.


Bella. Madam, I am obliged to you!


Clar. [Aside.] I see nothing of Mr. Frankly! my heart misgives me.


Rang. And so: you came hither purely out of friendship, goodnature, and
humility.


Clar. Purely.


Rang. To confess your offenses, to beg pardon, and to make reparation.


Clar. Purely. Is this any thing so extraordinary?


Jack Meg. The most so of any thing in life, I think.


Rang. A very whimsical business for so sine a lady, and an errand you seldom
went on before, I fancy, my dear cousin.


Jacin. Never, I dare swear, if I may judge by the awkward concern she shows in
delivering it.


Clar. Concern? lard! well! I protest, you are all exceeding pretty company!
Being settled for life, Jacintha, gives an ease to the mind, that brightens
conversation strangely.


Jacin. I am sorry, with all my heart, you are not in the same condition; for
as you are, my dear, you are horridly chagrine.


Rang. But with a little of our help, madam, the lady may recover, and be very
good company.


Clar. Hum! what does he mean, Mr. Bellamy?


Bella. Ask him, madam.


Clar. Indeed I shall not give myself the trouble.


Jacin. Then you know what he means.


Clar. Something impertinent, I suppose, not worth explaining.


Jacin. It is something you will not let him explain I find.


Enter a servant, and whispers Meggot. Jack Meg. Very well! desire him to walk
into the parlour. Madam, the gentleman is below.


Jacin. Then every one to your posts. You know your cues.


Rang. I warrant ye. Exeunt gentlemen.


Clar. All gone! I am glad of it, for I want to speak to you.


Jacin. And I, my dear Clarinda, have something which I do not know how to tell
you. But it must be know sooner or later.


Clar. What Is the matter?


Jacin. Poor Mr. Frankly --


Clar. You fright me out of my senses!


Jacin. Has no wounds, but what you can cure! ha! ha! ha!


Clar. Pshah! I am angry!


Jacin. Pshah! you are pleased! and will be more so, when I tell you this man,
whom fortune has thrown in your way, is, in rank and temper, the man in the
world, who suits you best for a husband.


Clar. Husband! I say, husband indeed! where will this end? Aside.


Jacin. His very soul is yours, and he only waits an opportunity of telling you
so. He is in the next room. Shall I call him in?


Clar. My dear girl, hold!


Jacin. How foolish is this coyness now, Clarinda? if the men were here indeed,
something might be said. -- And so, Mr. Frankly!


Clar. How can you be so teazing?


Jacin. Nay, I am in downright earnest; and to show you how particular I have
been in my enquiries, though I know you have a spirit above regarding the modish,
paltry way of a Smithfield bargain -- his fortune --


Clar. I don't care what his fortune is.


Jacin. Don't ye so? then you are farther gone than I thought you were.


Clar. No, psha! pr'ythee! I don't mean so neither.


Jacin. I don't care what you mean. But you will not like him ^e worse, I hope,
for having a fortune superior to our own. Now, shall I call him in?


Clar. Pho! dear girl -- some other time.


Jacin. [raps with her fan.] That Is the signal, and here he is. You shall not
stir. I positively will leave you together. Exit Jacintha.


Clar. I tremble all over.


Enter Frankly. Frank. Pardon this freedom, madam, -- but I hope our having so
luckily met with a common friend in Mrs. Bellamy --


Clar. Sir!


Frank. Makes any farther apology for my behavior last night absolutely
unnecessary.


Clar. So far, Mr. Frankly, that I think the apology should be rather on my
side, for the impertinent bustle I made about her.


Frank. This behavior gives me hopes, madam. Pardon the construction -- but
from the little bustle you made about the lady, may I not hope, you was not
quite indifferent about the gentleman?


Clar. Have a care of being too sanguine in your hopes. Might not a love of
power, or the satisfaction of showing that power, or the dear pleasure of
abusing that power; might not these have been foundation enough for more than
what I did?


Frank. Charming woman! -- with most of your sex, I grant, they might, but not
with you. Whatever power your beauty gives, your goodnature will al^ow you no
other use of it, than to oblige.


Clar. This is the height of compliment, Mr. Frankly.


Frank. Not in my opinion, I assure you, madam; and I am now going to put it to
the trial.


Clar. [Aside.] What is he going to say now?


Frank. [Aside.] What is it that ails me, that I cannot speak? psha! he here!


Enter Ranger. Clar. Interrupted! impertinent!


Rang. There is no sight so ridiculous as a pair of your true lovers. Here are
you two now, bowing and cringing, and keeping a passion secret from one
another, that is no secret to all the house beside. And if you don't make the
matter up immediately, it will be all over the town within these two hours.


Clar. What do you mean?


Frank. Ranger --


Rang. Do you be quiet, cannot ye! [Aside.] But it is over, I suppose, cousin,
and you have given him your consent.


Clar. Sir, the liberties you are pleased to take with me --


Rang. Oh! in your airs still, are you? Why then Mr. Frankly, there is a
certain letter of yours, sir, to this lady.


Clar. A letter to me!


Rang. Ay! to you, madam.


Frank. Ha! what of that letter?


Rang. It is only fallen into Mr. Strictland's hands, that is all; and he has
read it.


Frank. Read it!


Rang. Ay! read it to all his family at home, and to all the company below: and
if some stop be not put to it, it will be read in all the-coffee-houses in town.


Frank. A stop! this sword shall put a stop to it, or I will perish in the
attempt.


Rang. But will that sword put a stop to the talk of the town -- only make it
talk the faster, take my word for it.


Clar. This is all a trick.


Rang. Is it so? you shall soon see that my sine cousin.


Exit Ranger. Frank. It is but too true, I fear. There is such a letter which I
gave Lucetta. Can you forgive me? Was I much to blame, when I could neither see
nor hear of you?


Clar. [ Tenderly]. You give yourself, Mr. Frankly, a thousand more
uneasinesses than you need about me.


Frank. If this uneasiness but convinces you how much I love you -- interrupted
again!


Clar. [Aside.] This is downright malice.


Enter Ranger, followed by Jacintha, Mr. Strictland, Bellamy, and Meggot. Rang.
Enter, enter, gentlemen and lady.


Clar. Mr. Strictland here! what is all this?


Rang. Now you shall see whether this is a trick or no.


Jacin. Do not be uneasy, my dear; we will explain it to you.


Frank. I cannot bear this trifling, Ranger, when my heart is on the rack.


Rang. Come this way then, and learn.


Jacintha, Clarinda, Frankly, and Ranger retire. Mr. Strictland, Bellamy, and
Meggot advance. Mr. Strict. Why, I know not well what to say. This has a face.
This letter may as well agree with Clarinda as with my wife, as you have told
the story; and Lucetta explained it so -- but she for a sixpenny piece would
have construed it the other way.


Jack Meg. But, sir, if we produce this Mr. Frankly to you, and he owns himself
the author of this letter.


Bella. And if Clarinda likewise be brought before your face to encourage his
addresses, there can be no farther room for doubt.


Mr. Strict. No! let that appear, and I shall -- I think I shall be satisfied
-- but, yet it cannot be --


Bella. Why not? Hear me, sir. They talk.


Jacintha, Clarinda, Frankly and Ranger advance. Jacin. In short, Clarinda,
unless the affair is made up directly; a separation, with all the obloquy on
her side, must be the consequence.


Clar. Poor Mrs. Strictland, I pity her; but for him, he deserves all he feels
were it ten times what it is.


Jacin. It is for her sake only that we beg of you both to bear with his
impertinence.


Clar. With all my heart. You will do what you please with me.


Frank. Generous creature?


Mr. Strict. Ha! here she is, and with her the very man I saw deliver the
letter to Lucetta -- I do begin to fear I have made myself a fool -- now for
the proof -- here is a letter, sir, which has given me great disturbance, and
these gentlemen assure me it was writ by you.


Frank. That letter, sir, upon my honor, I left this morning with Lucetta, for
this lady.


Mr. Strict. For that lady! and Frankly, the name at the bottom is not feigned,
but your real name.


Frank. Frankly is my name.


Mr. Strict. I see, I feel myself ridiculous.


Jacin. Now Mr. Strictland -- I hope --


Jack Meg. Ay! ay! a clear case.


Mr. Strict. I am satisfied, and will go this instant to Mrs. Strictland.


Rang. Why then the devil fetch me, if this would satisfy me.


Mr. Strict. What Is that?


Rang. Nay, nothing. It is no affair of mine.


Bella. What do you mean, Ranger?


Mr. Strict. Ay! what do you mean? I will know before I stir.


Rang. With all my heart, sir. Cannot you see that all this may be a concerted
matter between them?


Frank. Ranger, you know I can resent.


Mr. Strict. Go on -- I will defend you, let who will resent it.


Rang. Why then, sir, I declare myself your friend; and were I as you --
nothing but their immediate marriage should convince me.


Mr. Strict. Sir, you're right, and are my friend, indeed. Give me your hand.


Rang. Nay, were I to hear her say, I, Clarinda, take thee Charles, I would not
believe them 'till I saw them a-bed together. Now ^esent it as you will.


Mr. Strict. Ay, sir, as you will. But nothing less shall convince me; and so,
my fine lady, if you are in earnest --


Clar. Sure, Mr. Strictland --


Mr. Strict. Nay, no flouncing! you cannot escape.


Rang. Why, Frankly has't no soul?


Frank. I pity her confusion.


Rang. Pity her confusion! -- the man's a fool -- here, take her hand --


Frank. Thus on my knees then, let me ravish with your hand, your heart.


Clar. Ravish it you cannot; for it is with all my heart I give it you.


Mr. Strict. I am satisfied.


Clar. And so am I, now it once is over.


Rang And so am I, my dainty cousin -- and I wish you joy of a man, your whole
sex would go to cuffs for, if they knew him but half so well as I do -- ha! she
here! this is more than I bargained for. Aside.


Jacintha leads in Mrs. Strictland. Mr. Strict. [ Embracing Mrs Strictland.]
Madam, reproach me not with my folly, and you shall never hear of it again.


Mrs. Strict. Reproach you! No! if ever you hear the least reflection pass my
lips, forsake me in that instant. Or, what would yet be worse, suspect me again.


Mr. Strict. It is enough. I am ashamed to talk to thee. This letter which I
wrote your brother, thus I tear in pieces, and with it part forever with my
jealousy.


Mrs. Strict. This is a joy indeed! as great as unexpected. Yet there is one
thing wanting to make it lasting.


Rang. What the devil is coming now? Aside.


Mrs. Strict. Be assured, every other suspicion of me was as unjust as your
last; though perhaps you had more foundations for your fears.


Rang. She will not tell sure, for her own sake. Aside.


Mrs. Strict. All must be cleared before my heart will be at ease.


Rang. It looks plaguey like it, though! Aside


Mr. Strict. What mean you? I am all attention.


Mrs. Strict. There was a man, as you suspected, in my chamber last night.


Mr. Strict. Ha! take care, I shall relapse.


Mrs. Strict. That gentleman was --


Rang. Here is a devil for you! Aside.


Mrs. Strict. Let him explain the rest.


Rang. A frolic! a mere frolic! on my life.


Mr. Strict. A frolic! Ounds! They interpose.


Rang. Nay don't let us quarrel the very moment you declared yourself my
friend. There was no harm done, I promise you. Nay, never frown. After I have
told my story: any satisfaction you are pleased to ask, I shall be ready to
give.


Mr. Strict. Be quick then and ease me of my pain.


Rang. Why then, as I was strolling about last night, -- upon the look out, I
must confess -- Chance, and chance only, conveyed me to your house: where I
espied a ladder of ropes most invitingly fastened to the window.


Jacin. Which ladder I had fastened for my escape.


Mr. Strict. Proceed.


Rang. Up mounted I, and up I should have gone, if it had been into the garret.
I opened one door, then another, and to my great surprise, the whole house was
silent. At last, I stole into a room where this lady was undressing.


Mr. Strict. 'Sdeath and the devil! you did not dare sure --


Rang. I don't know whether I had dared, or no: if I had not heard the maid say
something of her master's being jealous. O! damn me, thought I, then the work
is half done to my hands.


Jacin. Do you mind that Mr. Strictland?


Mr. Strict. I do -- I do most feelingly.


Rang. The maid grew saucy, and most conveniently to my wishes, was turned out
of the room; and if you had not the best wife in the world --


Mr. Strict. Ounds! sir, but what right have you --


Rang. What right sir? if you will be jealous of your wife without a cause; if
you will be out at that time of night, when you might have been so much better
employed at home: we young fellows think we have a right --


Mr. Strict. No joking, I beseech you. You know not what I feel.


Rang. Then seriously, I was mad, or drunk enough, call it which you will, to
be very rude to this lady; for which I ask both her pardon and yours! I am an
odd sort of a fellow, perhaps: but I am above telling you or any man, a lie* --
damn me if I am not.


Mr. Strict. I must, I cannot but believe you; and for the future, madam, you
shall find here a heart ready to love and trust you. No tears, I beg; I cannot
bear them.


Mrs. Strict. I cannot speak; and yet there is a favor, sir. --


Mr. Strict. I understand you -- and as a proof of the sincerity with which I
speak, I beg it as a favor, of this lady, in particular [ to Clarinda], and of
all the company in general, to return to my house immediately; where every
thing, Mr. Bellamy, shall be settled to your entire satisfaction -- no thanks;
I have not deserved them.


Jack Meg. I beg your pardon, sir: the fiddles are ready; Mrs. Bellamy has
promised me her hand; and I will not part with one of you till midnight; and if
you are as well satisfied as you pretend to be, let our friend Rattle here
begin the ball with Mrs. Strictland; for he seems to be the hero of the day.


Mr. Strict. As you and the company please.


Rang. Why this is honest. Continue but in this humor, and faith, sir, you may
trust me to run about your house like a spaniel. -- I cannot sufficiently
admire at the whimsicalness of my good fortune, in being so instrumental to
this general happiness. -- Bellamy, Frankly, I wish you joy with all my heart!
(though I had rather you should be married than I, for all that.) Never did
matrimony appear to me with a smile upon her face, till this instant.

Sure joys for ever wait each happy pair,
When sense the man, and virtue crowns the fair;
And kind compliance proves their mutual care.

A dance. FINIS.

