^


THE Christian's POCKET LIBRARY.

BY JOHN STANFORD. M.A.



VOL. I. NEW YORK. Printed for the Editor by (...) Swords. 1796.

PREFACE.
THE intention of this publication is to disseminate the TRUTH of the
EVERLASTING GOSPEL, in its rich variety of doctrine, precept, experience and
history, both by prose and verse, in a manner calculated to gratify the more
sublime taste, and to instruct the plainest capacity. In a day of dissipation,
infidelity and error, like the present, when, by precept and example, our
youth, of every description, are industriously prejudiced against the volume of
REVELATION; and while many professors of religion start aside into new paths,
too many efforts, in every agreeable form, cannot be made to defend the truths
of PRIMITIVE CHRISTIANITY, and to lead the serious enquirer to taste its sacred
streams which lead him to God, refine his soul, regulate his life, support him
under sufferings, and animate his hope in prospect of a blissful immortality!

How far the efforts of the EDITOR of the Christian's Pocket Library may have
answered these purposes, he leaves with God, and the public. It is, however,
with greatful pleasure he reviews the long list of respectable SUBSCRIBERS to
this WORK, and from thence presumes his labors have not been unacceptable, nor
in vain. Thus prompted, he ventures, under the smiles of IMMANUEL, and the
farther encouragement of his pious READERS, upon the publication of another
volume.

New York, August 1, 1796.
Explanation of the VIGNETTE upon the Title Page.
IN the center is a figure of JESUS CHRIST, our ADORABLE SAVIOR, accompanied
by MERCY and JUSTICE.

JUSTICE, in her left hand, poises a pair of scales: one of which contains the
two tables of the MORAL LAW; -- the other a BUBBLE, emblematical of man in his
fallen state. The latter, being weighed in the balance, is found wanting.
JUSTICE receives from CHRIST a Cross, representing his own SACRIFICE. This she
accepts, and by her inverted SWORD, pronounces satisfactory.

MERCY, on the right hand of our SAVIOR, receives from him an Olive Branch,
the well known emblem of PEACE, and a sure pledge of his love to sinners, to be
published among all nations.

THE CHRISTIAN's POCKET LIBRARY. No. I. -- Vol. I.
ON HAPPINESS
(...)

(...)
IN my principle in (...) in the desire of happiness* (...) in such pur^uit in
(...) and (...) of m^n. (...) If God (...) man for Life, and (...) HIMSELF
(...) the supreme (...) of his fullness; if man was created lord of the (...)
universe, and by the (...) of his Maker put in p^ssession of the infinite
variety of terrestrial good; whence this foul mistake, and man enveloped in
scenes of complicated woe? SIN contaminated the heart; -- by sin the delightful
vision of God in Nature was lost; -- man became alienated from the life of God,
and exposed to all the miseries incurred by reiterated transgression. Reduced
to such a mass of depravity and guilt, no wonder that man mistake the true
nature, object, and means of happiness! As by the carnal principle of the heart
objects are selected and embraced, which promise that sort of felicity which is
^ongenial with its own nature, it is to be expected that such in the pursuit
will meet with disappointment, shame and grief. Not to enumerate the variety of
means which men pursue after happiness, it is sufficient to say, it constitutes
the grand business of all orders and ranks of men; and this is the very spring
which keeps the whole world in motion.

As these reflections on human nature are too true to admit of controversy, it
may not be improper to ask, "What, in man's present state, can restore to him
that happiness which the capacious powers of his soul are capable of enjoying?"
As a sinner, he must have a full pardon from his JUDGE; as a depraved subject,
his mind must be illuminated, and his passions refined; as a traveller through
the thorny path of life, he needs some thing adequate to support him, and bring
his mind into acquiescence with his lot; as a creature immortal, and hastening
to a future state, he must have assurance that after death he shall be
transmitted to the bosom of JEHOVAH, where alone, sinless, undisturbed
happiness reigns. Where then can these blessings be obtained? Go, search the
volumes of Nature, -- alas! not a line in her extensive page can assure a
sinner there are pardons with his JUDGE. Go, pass through all the scenes of
dissipation, honor, wealth, with all the world calls good and great, and see if
a balm can be procured adequate to heal the guilty conscience, or meliorate the
heart. Here Nature herself becomes dumb, and the seats of royalty are found the
very regions of anxiety, disappointment and pain. Turn then to the volume of
REVELATION; there learn that to restore human happiness God freely gave his
BELOVED SON to sustain that weight of misery we incurred by our sin; that he
who knew no sin, was made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness
of God in him. 2 Cor. v.21. Though he was rich, for our sake he became poor,
that we through his poverty might be rich. 2 Cor. viii.9. By the merit of his
holy life, vicarious death, and triumphant resurrection, derived from his union
with the DEITY, he did not make our happiness possible, but actually obtained
it. Heb. ix.11, 12. In Jesus is deposited all that grace which our depraved
nature can demand, to restore its felicity. Through HIM the sublime pleasures
of communion with God, as a COVENANT EVERLASTING FATHER, is enjoyed, a sense of
whose adopting love diffuses in our breast the most inexpressible delight! From
Jesus, by his SPIRIT's aid, we may daily receive light, peace, joy, love,
strength, with every other virtue to adorn our minds, support us under
suffering, and animate us in obedience. All the vicissitudes of Providence,
whether prosperous or adverse, we learn, are in the hand of HIM who bought us
with his blood; and these, however contrary to human apprehension, shall work
together for the good of those who love him. And the same adored IMMANUEL, by
his conquest over death, has brought life and immortality to light, and
unfolds to us the brightest scenes of unutterable bliss! 2 Timothy i.10. Here then
is happiness restored! Here the immortal mind may find its center, and be
forever blessed. Happy is that people that is in such a case: happy is that
people whose God is the Lord. Psa. cxlv.15. Interested in this ADORED LORD, I
find a heaven below. None of the ills of life shall discompose my heart, nor
shall its thousand sna^s tempt my feet to stray.

-- Thou, my all!
My theme, my inspiration, and my crown!
My soul's ambition, pleasure, wealth! my world!
My boast through time, my bliss through eternity.
Eternity, too short to speak thy praise,
Or fathom thy profound of love to man!
How art thou pleased by bounty to distress!
To make us groan beneath our gratitude,
Too big for birth! to favor and confound,
To challenge and to distance all return!
Praise! flow forever (if astonishment
Will give thee leave) my praise for ever flow:
Praise ardent, cordial, constant, to high heaven
More fragrant than Arabia sacrificed,
And all her spicy mountains in a flame.
To direct men to this grand source of substantial happiness, is the humble
attempt of the Editor of the CHRISTIAN'S POCKET LIBRARY; wholly depending upon
the smiles of the Almighty to render it effectual to his readers of every
class; and to God, the FOUNTAIN of FELICITY, would he ascribe all the glory!

MEMORIAL Of the Lord's Visitation to the CITY OF NEW YORK, by a malignant
Fever, which swept away, by death, seven hundred and forty-six Inhabitants,
from the 26th of July till the 5th of November, 1795.
Before HIM went the PESTILENCE.

HABAKKUCK.
THE judgment we deplore is one of the swiftest and most tremendous calamities
that can fall upon a people: It evidently is " The Lord's voice to the city,"
and demands our solemn attention. Surely there was a cause -- " God does not
willingly afflict the children of men." This city was growing in opulence, and
indulged with every privilege, civil and religious, which could constitute our
happiness. Let us then ask if our gratitude has been proportionate to our
obligation? It is with extreme regret we review the too many instances of
pride, luxury, discontent, avarice, and dissipation, which have increased with
our years. Who but must drop a tear on recollecting the astonishing growth of
infidelity, and the many attempts to traduce the person and gospel of the Son
of God, by whom alone we can be saved! and it is with still greater sensibility
we behold the extreme indifference paid by professors to the life, power and
prosperity of the pure primitive truth and worship of christianity! Thus,
Because iniquity abounds the love of many waxes cold. Matt. xxiv.13. That this
has long been the unhappy state of our city, many, many of the more serious of
different religious denominations have acknowledged with grief. God could not
behold us without some tokens of his displeasure. On the 20th of September,
1793, our inhabitants fled to the sanctuary to implore the Divine protection
from a severe judgment which then pervaded a neighboring city, and threatened
our borders; -- then did every heart tremble, and every eye flow with tears:
but the Lord was entreated for the land, the plague was stayed, and we were
preserved. 2 Samuel xxiv.25. That the sight of this chastising rod did not
produce its desired effect, is evident by our Lord's laying upon us his severer
hand. He commissioned not a foe against us which could have been driven from
our borders by force of arms, but " -- A victor, whose unbounded force
"Over bulwarks breaks with unresisted course;
"A thousand ways the swift contagion takes,
"Flows with the stream, or stagnates with the lakes.
"The winds, infected with the deadly breath,
"Bear on their sooty wings the scent of death."
Many, with swift precipitation, fled from their habitations, while the horrors
of death sat on the brow of those who were left behind. Slow, yet steady to his
purpose, the foe advanced; and, oh! who is competent to describe his awful
spoils? Blooming youths, once the joy of their parents, and the hope of their
country, cut down and lodged in the recesses of corruption! How many persons of
the most brilliant parts were arrested by the polluting hand of Pestilence, and
the public forever deprived of their useful virtues! The parent, how shall I
speak it! the tender parent, not only called to mourn over his departed babe,
but compelled, by the law of self-preservation, to fly from the putrid corpse
of her who once lay in his bosom with delight! -- Dictated by humanity in
relieving others by every kind office in their power, how many " -- Caught
their friend's departing breath,
"Joined in the dark society of Death?
"They took one melancholy last embrace,
"Then slept together in the arms of Peace."


O Lord, surely thou art known by the judgments which thou executes. May it
never be said of us, "This people turns not to him that smites them, neither
do they seek the Lord of Hosts." Isa. ix.13. Although our affliction has been
great, and never to be forgotten, yet, neither so great as we justly merited,
nor as Philadelphia experienced. Let us remember if this visitation leaves us
without salutary effects, God has still more arrows in his quiver, more keenly
pointed, and more swift in flight. In the year 79 three cities were destroyed
by an earthquake in Cyprus. In 1456, by the same messenger of justice, 40,000
people were lost in Naples. And, in 1665, there died of the plague, in London,
68,600 inhabitants. Isaiah, when Jerusalem were insensible of the judgments of
God upon them, declared, Thou shall be visited of the Lord of Hosts with
thunder, and with earthquake, and great noise; with storm and tempest, and the
flame of devouring fire. Isa. xxix.6. Who will not fear before this great and
terrible JEHOVAH! Let us, therefore, incessantly pray, that this severe
judgment may be succeeded by copious showers of the richest grace! that
magistrates may rule in the fear of the Almighty; ministers preach with
additional zeal; our congregations walk more sensibly in the light of the Lord,
and multitudes be converted unto our God! Amen.

A DAY'S WORK AT SEA MORALIZED
Written by a Minister for the Improvement of (...) on his Voyage to the
East-Indi^ (...) Captain (...) to open the (...) Sea.

NOW, my dear Sir, you may be far from the immediate embraces of your friends,
but the arm, of your omnipotent Immanuel surround you. The liquid horizon
attracts your eye, and gives you the most striking emblem of the IMMENS^
SUP^EM^! When you trod his hollowed courts, his glory shone upon your soul; and
here the watery worlds proclaim the gran^eur of your Lord. Safe in his hand,
and happy in his breast, may you remain, and plow the briny deep. Soon may you
return, and speak the praise of HIM who, through calms, and tempests, brings
his people to their desired haven. Psa. cvii.23 -- 31.

You're sad, my friend; come take a chair and let us converse. Who so happy as
the man that, while sailing over Life's tempestuous ocean, has God to be his
guide? Retirement is an aid to true devotion; it drops a kind of curtain, and
in a measure hides the busy scenes of time, while we converse with God.
Certainly you have an advantage on the seas, unfelt, if not unknown, to us on
land; you are immediately, and more sensibly dependent on him whom winds and
seas obey. Ever uncertain, you cast your anchor in your Father's breast. The
winds, you learn, are a part of his treasure, and in awful majesty he rides
upon their wings: Raging storms and bellowing tempests are but the voice of
God. Now he speaks with terrible majesty, and casts the foaming deep to
mountains hight -- anon, his milder voice is heard; the gentle gale springs up
and fills the pendant sheets, and peace sits smiling on the humble wave. This,
how charming! how welcome to the mind, which, from the storm without, felt
greater storms within! But this God is yours, your Father and your Friend.
Though storm and tempest rage, and all the sea be foam, may you be perfect
calm, and leave yourself, your friends, your all with him.

Captain, let us take a walk on deck, it is near sunrise. How s^^ene the
morning! the filthy fog has retired to give us leave to see the sun; -- see,
his beams appear and gladden every wave. He seems to tinge the sea with golden
hue, and pour his rays through all the sky -- What earthly monarch ever rose so
bright? Yet sol is but a faint resemblance of Israel's King; that King whose
wide domain shall reach to yonder eastern clime. Soon may he send his heralds
there to sound his precious name; soon may he hear that east unites with north
and south and west, and all the globe proclaim the Savior's love! Who can
tell, Captain; you see the sun arise and strike his rays around; perhaps the
Savior too may now arise with healing in his beams, and save the heathen race!
Go, go speed your way, and bring the happy news.

Heave the log -- let us see the ^ook -- adjust the points, and know our course.
So far advanced, yet, ah! how much lee-way. So is our life. How swift we move,
but seldom keep ou^ course. Amazing! so much lee-way and waste time is gone. I
look back but see the wake is closed; my minutes, days and years are mingled
with the flood. O thou Heavenly Pilot! so teach me to number my fleeting days,
that I may apply my heart unto wisdom. Psa. xc.12.

Boy, bring coffee! Still our floating habitation affords us pleasing food.
Heaven bless the poor on land, and kindly feed the souls that famish on the
seas! Take away, boy; -- hand the chart, compass and scale; -- thanks to the
Artist for his skill in pointing out the pathless sea. Let us now survey our
course, prove our log, and see what rocks and shoals are nigh. So let us take
the precious Book of God, that CHART DIVINE; my FAITH a compass, and my HEART a
scale; with these let me find the way that leads to perfect bliss. How many
heedless mortals, like the lazy seaman, never view their tract till, running on
the rocks or shoals of vice, they are plunged into woe! See, Captain, depicted
on your chart your destined port! how minutely it is laid down! yet, not more
certain than is the harbor of eternal rest in God's most sacred page. O let me
have my heaven in view, my days shall then be bliss, nor cares shall rob my
heart! Come thou celestial winds, fill my sails, and I shall speed my way to
yonder happy shore, and see my God, my Father, and my Friend!

It Is almost twelve o'clock: -- boy, hand up my quadrant! How fine the horizon
-- how clear the sun! What wisdom God has given to man to form an instrument
like this -- so simple in itself -- so useful on the seas! By this we prove our
log and ascertain our course. May you, dear Sir, by ^aith, behold the exalted
sun of righteousness -- by ^im confirm your hope, and regulate your life.

Take the quadrant, boy, and bring on deck the cherry-rum, the biscuit and the
cheese! Every creature of the Lord is good when not abused. Come, mates, let us
take a cheering glass; -- the vessel seems to heel to disappoint our lips --
well, it is sailors' fare! See how yonder shark heaves his fins to make us
sport. The dolphin too, see, he cuts the wave, and darts to catch his flying
prey. How pleasant is the scene! No verdan^ fields, nor shady groves, are here
-- those we leave for friends at home. Hark! what horrid oaths belch from
yonder Jack-tar's mouth -- little does he think on what a slender thread he
hangs over Hell's yawning deep. It Is habit, sure; -- go, Captain go give him
kind reproof -- a sailor's heart may feel. Wear ship! -- stand to the halyards
-- all ready -- about she goes! -- make fast, my lads!

Captain, hear the boy -- "It is one o'clock and dinner waits." -- How fine and
mellow is this beef; -- excellent cider; -- how profusely is our table spread!
Boy, hand some glasses! One glass to our owners, and one to all our absent
friends. It Is fine Madeira, it warms and refreshes as it goes. A few nuts to
crack and pick, and then we'll walk again on deck. Alas! no news today. Po
Jose Wetmore The news-carrier.
goes round in vain for us.

The night draws on -- the sun begins to fall; clear he bids us all farewell! O
may I, when spent my days, set like the sun, nor cloud possess! The moon
appears, and over the deep her silver mande throws. Thanks to that ALMIGHTY
LORD who formed the sun to rule the day, and moon to give us light by night.
The stars now (...), and bespangle the canopy of Heaven -- how truly grand!
But, ah! how faint are these rolling flames when once compared to the righteous
throng above! Redeemed from sin and death by Jesus' precious blood, they stand
before the throne of God, and celebrate his praise. Great King of heaven, and
earth, and seas, O bring my soul to that delightful place where I shall sing
thy boundless praise, when suns shall rise and set no more!

Call the watch! Put out your lights below! Well, dear Captain, thanks for my
entertainment today. If you wish to have an hour's chat tomorrow, let your
cabbin-boy hand you this paper. Good night, Captain -- good voyage -- farewell!

The Christian reader will require no apology for the terms and phrases used in
this letter, as it was intended both to enliven and to instruct.

AN INSTANCE OF THE POWER OF DIVINE GRACE.
Written by Dr. Fresenius, Senior of the Clergy at Frankfort.
AFTER the battle of Bergen, in Germany, April 10, 1759, among the many wounded
who were brought into Frankfort upon the Main* there was the Right Honorable
George Charles Dyke^n, Baron, Lieutenant General of the Saxon troops, in the
service of the King of France. He was born of an ancient and noble family, in
Silesia, April 10, 1710, so that it was just on his birthday that he received
his wound. He was of equal abilities as a minister in the closet, and a general
in the field: In his younger years he had gone through a regular course of
study in the university, and made a great proficiency in philosophy, especially
in mathematics; afterward he studied polemic divinity, till he reasoned
himself into an infidel.

During his illness, he showed not the least desire for pious company, or
serious discourse, till the surgeon let his valet-de-chambre know that he could
not live long. The man then asked his master whether he did not choose to be
visited by a clergyman? He answered with warmth, I shall not trouble those
gentlemen; I know well myself what to believe and do. His man, not discouraged,
continued thus, My lord, have you ever found me wanting in my duty, all the
time I have been in your service? He answered, No. Then, replied he, I will not
be wanting now; the surgeons count you past recovery, but every one is afraid
to tell you so; you stand on the brink of eternity; pray, Sir, order a
clergyman to be called. He paused a little, but soon gave his hand to the
servant, thanked him for his honesty, and ordered him to send for me.

When I came, the man plainly told me the general was a professed infidel. I
went in, and, after a short compliment, said, I am told, my lord, your life is
near an end, therefore I presume, without any more ceremony, to ask you one
plain question: Is the state of your soul such, that you can entertain a solid
hope of salvation? He answered, Yes. On what do you ground this hope? He
replied, I never committed any wilful sin; I have been liable to frailties; but
I trust in God's mercy, and the merits of his Son, that he will have mercy upon
me. These words he uttered very slowly, especially the merits of his Son. I
made the following reply: I am apt to believe you are not tainted with the
grossest vices, but I fear you a little too presumptuously boast of never
having committed wilful sin; if you would be saved, you must acknowledge your
being utterly corrupted by sin, and consequently deserving the curse of God,
and eternal damnation. As to your hoping for God's mercy through the merits of
his Son, I beg leave to ask you, Do you believe God has a Son -- that his Son
assumed our nature, in order to be our Savior -- that in the execution of his
office he has given ample satisfaction for us, and recovered our title to
heaven? He answered, I cannot now forbear ^ more minute description of the
state of my soul; let me tell you. Doctor, I have some knowledge of philosophy,
by which I have chosen for myself a way of salvation: I have always endeavored
to live a sober life, to the uttermost of my power, not doubting but the Being
of all beings would then graciously accept me. In this way I stood in need of
Christ, and therefore did not believe on him; but if I take the scripture to be
a divine revelation, this way of mine I perceive is not the right one; I must
believe on Christ, and through him come to God. I replied, You say, if you
believe the scriptures to be a divine revelation. He fetched a deep sigh, and
said, O God! thou will make me say, because I take the scripture to be thy
word. I said, There are grounds and reasons enough to determine the divine
origin o^ ^hristianity, as I could show from its most essential principles,
were not the period of your life so short; but we do not now need that
diffusive method; faith being the gift of God, a poor sinner tottering on the
brink of eternity, has not time to inquire about grounds and reasons: rather
betake yourself to earnest prayer for faith, which, if you do, I doubt not but
God will give it you. I had no sooner spoken these words, but, putting off his
cap, and lifting up his hands and eyes, he cried out, O almighty God! I am a
poor cursed sinner, worthy of damnation; but, Lord Jesus, eternal Son of God,
thou diedst for my sins also, it is through thee alone I can be saved. O give
me faith, and strengthen that faith! Being extremely weak, he was obliged to
stop here. A little after he asked, Is faith enough for salvation? Yes, Sir,
said I, if it be living faith. Methinks, said he, it is so already; I perceive
it will be more so by and by; let us pray for it.

Perceiving he was very weak, and to give him some rest, I retired into the
next room; but he soon sent to call me. I found him praying, and Jesus was all
he prayed for. I reminded him of some scriptures treating of faith in Christ,
and he was much delighted with them; indeed he was quite swallowed up by the
grace of Jesus, and would hear of nothing but Jesus Christ and him crucified.
He cried out, I do not know how it is with me; I never in my life felt such a
change; I have power to love Jesus, and to believe in him, whom I so long
rejected. O my Jesus, how merciful art thou to me!

About noon I stepped home; but he sent for me directly; so that I could scarce
eat my dinner. We were both filled with joy, as the partakers of the same grace
which is in Jesus; and that in such a manner, as if we had been acquainted
together for many years.

Many officers of the army came to see him continually, to all of whom he
talked freely of Jesus, of the grace of the Father in him, and of the power of
the Holy Ghost through him; wondering without ceasing at his having found
Jesus, and at the happy change, by which all things on this side eternity were
become indifferent to him.

In the afternoon he desired to partake of the Lord's supper; which he received
with a melting, praising, and rejoicing heart. All the rest of the day he
continued in the same state of soul. Toward the evening he desired, that if
his end should approach I would come to him, which I promised; but he did not
send for me till next morning.

I was told by his valet, that he slept well for some hours, and then waking,
prayed for a considerable time, continually mentioning the name of our Lord,
and his most precious blood; and that he had desired several of the officers to
make his conversion known to his court, (that of the king of Poland.) After
some discourse I asked, Has your view of Christ, and his redemption, been
neithe^ altered nor obscured since yesterday? He answered, Neither altered nor
obscured; I have no doubt -- not even a remote one: it is just the same with me
as if I had always believed, and never doubted; so gracious is the Lord Jesus
to me a sinner.

The second day he was unwearied in prayer and exercises of faith. Toward
evening he sent for me in haste. When I came, I found him dying, and in a kind
of delirium; so I could do no more than give him now and then a word of
comfort. I prayed afterward for him, and those that were present; some of whom
were of high birth and rank. I then, by imposition of hands, as usual, gave him
a blessing; which being done, he expired immediately.

A royal prince who was there (prince Xavier of Saxony) could not forbear
weeping; the rest of the officers bewailed the death of their general, yet
praised God for having shown such mercy to him.

I wrote an account of it without delay to his mother, and had an immediate
answer. She was a lady of seventy-two, of exemplary piety. She praised God for
his mercy, adding, that he had now answered her prayers, which she had never
ceased to offer on his behalf for eleven years.

NATURAL HISTORY.


NATURAL history is a source of pleasurable entertainment, and, when morally
improved, assists our admiration of the infinite wisdom, power, and goodness of
the SUPREME. Those who are indulged with a spiritual preception in the use of
the holy scriptures, find many of the productions of Nature employed by the
Spirit of inspiration to familiarize to their min's the riches of grace, and to
teach them the wonderful undertaking, and ineffable excellence of that adorable
Savior, by whom, and for whom all things were created, and by whom all things
consist. We shall, therefore, esteem ourselves happy, in the course of this
publication, frequently to assist our readers in the study and improvement of
this delightful science. Our first effort shall be on

THE EAGLE.
This creature is so highly enriched by Nature, and so majestic in appearance,
that the ancients called it the bird of Heaven; but moderns have pronounced it
the king of birds. According to Linnaeus, he is a species of the second genus
called Falco, belonging to the first order accipetes, or rapacious. The eagle
is of different sorts, probably only denominated from their color, and the
place of their retreat. That called the golden eagle is most esteemed, being
larger and of a more noble appearance than others. His beak is very strong,
crooked and sharp; his head and neck are clothed with narrow sharp pointed
feathers of a deep brown color, but those on the head, in old age, turn gray.
The whole body is of a dark brown, and the feathers of the back are beautifully
clouded with a deeper shade. The wings, when clothed, reach to the tail, which
is of a deep brown, irregularly bar^ed, and blotted with an obscure ash color.
Every year he moults, and becomes almost naked and bald, and then renews its
youth by producing a set of new feathers. His legs are yellow, short, and very
strong, covered with feathers of a dark gray; his toes are coated with scales,
and armed with the most formidable claws. The body may weigh a dozen pounds.
From the point of the bill to the tail it measures four feet; and between the
points of each wing, when extended, near six feet. He is a bird of great
strength, exceeding bold, and very voracious in seizing its prey, which are
generally geese, cranes, hares, rabbits, lambs, kids, fawns, and serpents; but
when impelled by hunger will seize on much larger animals; and Sir Robert
Sibbald assures us, that children, when unattended, have been devoured by them.
They generally quench their thirst with the blood of their prey; and, after
feeding on the flesh, break the bones to extract the marrow. It is, however, to
be observed, that this bird, unless pressed with famine, will not stoop to
carrion, and never devours but what he has earned by his own pursuits. The
sight of the eagle is quick, strong, and piercing, not only discovering their
prey at an amazing distance, but penetrating the rays of the meridian sun.
Angelus, the jesuit, informs us that the reason why the eagle, the fibers of
whose optic nerves are not stronger than those of other animals, is able to
face the sun, and endure its rays, is, that it has two sets of eyelids; the
one thick and close, and the other thiner and finer, which last it draws over
the eyes when it looks at any luminous body, and thus breaks the force of its
rays. Of all birds the eagle flies the highest, even to a proverb. Prove.
xxiii.5. It frequents the highest mountains, and the most inaccessible clifts
of the rock; there they generally make their nest, deposit their eggs, which
are seldom more than two. They foster their young with peculiar affection and
care. In a time of famine they are said to feed their young with their own
blood, sooner than suffer them to perish. When danger surrounds them, the eagle
flutters over the nest to defend the brood from their enemies, or takes them on
its wings and bears them away to a more safe retreat. But this bird is most
remarkable for its longevity, and its faculty for sustaining a long abstinence
from food. Keysler relates, that an eagle died at Vienna, after a confinement
of an hundred and four years.

IMPROVEMENT.
Thou great Supreme! who has created every winged fowl after its kind, that
they might fly above the earth in the open firmament of heaven, at thy command
the eagle mounts and makes her nest on high; she dwells and abides on the
rock, upon the crag of the rock, and the strong place; from thence she seeks
the prey, and her eyes behold afar off; her young ones also suck her blood, and
where the slain are there is she. Genesis i.20, 21. Job xxxix.27 -- 30. While the
beast of the field, and fowls of the air, praise the name of their adored
Creator, may I ever employ my breath in praising the name of the Lord, for his
name alone is excellent, and his glory is above the earth and heaven!

The eagle, with its wings extended, was religiously consecrated by the
Persians, and afterward by the Romans, who, in the second year of the
consulate of C. Marius, was fixed upon as the device on their standard, made in
relievo of silver or gold, borne on the tops of pikes. This bird, according to
the opinion of Martinius, was selected as a deity from the derivation of the
Greek name (...), from (...), to breath (from which verb says he, (...) the air
is derived) because it is sacred to Jupiter, who is allegorically the air.

The most high adorable Jehovah, who has provided a full, free, and an
everlasting salvation for his guilty people, has graciously condescended to
reveal himself and his mercy in every age, by images and emblems, that by
objects of sense our faith in him might be established. The Ark and Cherubims,
with their apparatus, ordained by God, first for the Tabernacle of Moses, then
for the Temple of Solomon, were an exhibition of what had been transacted in
heaven, and was yet to be completed for man. The mercy-seat, to be sprinkled
with atoning blood, was made of pure gold; and of the same piece was beaten out
two figures, each possessing four faces, bearing the likeness of an ox, a lion,
an eagle, and a man, called the Cherubims of Glory; each of them had wings
extended, embracing each other; and between these Jehovah dwelt, and, by the
office of the High Priest, communicated his will, and blessed the tribes of
Israel. Some very learned and evangelical writers Park^urst, Hut^hi^on, ^o^in,
etc.
have considered these golden hieroglyphics as emblems of the Great Ones, the
Three Covenantees in the person of the man Christ Jesus, and establish their
sentiments on the nature and symbolical uses of the four creatures. The ox,
fire -- the lion, light -- the eagle, spirit, or air; the first expressive of
the Father, the second of the Son, and the third of the Spirit; these being in
union with the fourth, the likeness of the human nature, assumed by the Son,
exhibiting to us the eternal Jehovah engaged in three coequal persons in the
redemption of man. Into these names, as the portion of the church, all who
believe, whether Jew or Gentile, under the gospel, are baptized. Matt.
xxviii.19.

But, perhaps, as the mercy-seat of pure gold, sprinkled with blood, was a type
of Christ, whom God has set forth a propitiation for sin; and as the cherubs
were made out of the very same mass of gold with the mercy-seat, they may not
improperly be considered representatives of the personal glories of the same
Immanuel. The extraordinary eye of the eagle, capable of penetrating the rays
of the sun, and to discover its object at so remote a distance, and his power
by flight to ascend up on high, are no inexpressible emblems of the omniscience
and omnipresence peculiar to the Son of God. The ox equally expresses the labor
of Jesus in our redemption, and the lion his boldness and magnanimity in the
execution of his work. These, united with the features of a man, not only
denote his wond^^^ul incarnation, but his eternal love and benevolence to
mankind: Of this we are certain, that as an eagle stireth up her nest,
fluttereth over her young, spreads abroad her wings, takes them, bears
them on her wings -- so Jesus, as the Redeemer of his people, bears their
persons, their guilt, their punishment, and their necessities; defends them
from their foes, elevates them to the highest abodes of heaven, and actually
feeds them with his own most precious blood. Deuteronomy. xxxii.11.

As Christ and his people are one, it is not uncommon for the Spirit of
inspiration to express them by the same emblem. As the eagle changes his
feathers, and renews his youth, so many of the children of the Lord, like
David, molts, if I may so say, and loose the vigor of health, the enjoyments of
life, and the very comforts of their souls; but, through the bounties of
Providence, and the riches of all-glorious grace, GOD forgiveth their
iniquities, heals their infirmities, and satisfies their mouth with good
things, so that their youth is renewed like the eagle's. Psa. ciii. By the
sovereign aid of his Spirit, they again ascend up on high, and, by faith,
contemplate the splendour of the Sun of Righteousness, and bask beneath the
bright beams of his love. Isa. xl.31. At the day of resurrection, clothed anew
with salvation and glory, the body likewise shall arise from the earth, and fly
away as an eagle toward heaven, and take its eternal rest in the mansions of
never-fading bliss!

DIALOGUE Between a Father and his Son.
PART I.
Father. MY son, although I have often given you my advice, while passing
through your childhood; as you have now entered your sixteenth year, you need
more circumspection than youth of your age generally imagine. I hope,
therefore, you will permit me to discharge my parental duty in offering you
counsel, which, I pray that God, who has been the guide of my youth, and who
is now the strength of my years, may render of service to you, when I shall be
numbered with the dead.


Son. Sir, I am happy in having this opportunity to express my gratitude for
the tender care you have already exercised toward my person and education.
These marks of your paternal love, my honored father, will never be erased from
my breast; and I sincerely hope to profit by any advice your heart may dictate
for my future welfare.


Father. The period at which you have now arrived, most certainly demands your
devout acknowledgment to the Author of your being. How often has your life been
recovered from those disorders incident to infancy and childhood! How greatly
have you been distinguished from thousands who, in their early age, have been
destitute of the means of education! How bountiful has the Almighty been in the
bestowment of mental accomplishments upon you, and from which, as your parent,
I anticipate your future usefulness in the world! yet, my child, those who have
arrived at the meridian of life know that your stage is the most critical,
important, and dangerous. The latent evils of your heart will now begin to
issue forth as bitter waters from a corrupted spring: the world will unfold to
you her delusive charms, and ten thousand objects will advance to tempt your
feet from the path of honor. -- Wipe away that tear which stands trembling in
your eye; be assured, my son, had I reason to believe you would thus depart
from virtue, I should be the most wretched of fathers. Though hitherto free
from those vices to which, alas! too many have been addicted, your breast, like
all the sons of men, possesses those seeds of vice which only await the powers
of darkness to draw forth, and bear their baneful fruit, and from which none
but a God of grace can keep you.


Son. My father will excuse my sensibility. I weep not for your faithful
counsel, but because I have already, in some degree, felt the force of those
unhappy tempers that would fain disturb my peace, and pollute my heart.


Father. I am glad you begin to feel yourself -- this is one step toward a
cure. You know I have ever taught you to respect the Bible, because I have
sufficient evidence to believe it is the mind of God to man. Take that book, my
son, with a design to trace the source, the nature, and the consequences of
that evil your heart so bitterly laments. That these pages exhibit to me my
true likeness, as a sinner, is an evidence of their divine original, which my
unbelieving heart, nor all the powers of infidelity, can destroy. Remember
also, that the same God who has delineated the features of fallen nature, must
give you eyes to see and an heart to understand.


Son. Although I have often read the scriptures, and have derived pleasure from
its history, yet I never thought of using it for the purpose you recommend.
Should you, Sir, point to me a few passages, it may assist me in my researches.


Father. Take pen and paper -- I will recite you a few. Genesis viii.21. Eccl.
xi.9. Psa. xiv. Isa. i. Jer. xvii.9. Ezekiel. xvi. Mark vii.14 -- 23. to which may
be added Genesis vi.5. as that passage strikingly explores the evil of the heart.
Take time for this work; be not afraid to know the worst of yourself. It is
natural to men to live strangers to themselves, and it requires equal grace
from God to irradiate the mind as it does to pardon sin; your father has known
and felt this in his own breast, therefore it is that I direct you to the same
all-glorious fountain, and wish ever to testify my gratitude to my God.


Son. Sir, I thank you for your assistance, and especially for your
condescension in unfolding to me the experience of your heart; I shall only add
my request, that my father will pray for me when he bows before the Lord, and
then -- retire.


Father. My son, your father cannot forget you, unless he were capable of
forgetting himself. -- Adieu.


(To be continued.) AN EXTRACT.
A Society of gentlemen, most of them possessed of a liberal education and
polished manners, but who, unhappily, had been seduced from a belief of the
scriptures, used to assemble alternately in each other's houses, on the bank of
the Tweed, for the purpose of ridiculing Revelation, and hardening each other
in their infidelity. At last they unanimously formed a resolution solemnly to
burn the Bible, and so to be troubled no more with a book which was so hostile
to their principles, and disquieting to their consciences. The day fixed upon
came -- a large fire was prepared -- a Bible was laid upon the table, and a
flowing bowl stood ready to drink its dirge. For the execution of their plan,
they fixed upon a young gentleman of high birth, brilliant vivacity, and
elegance of manners. He undertook the task, and, after a few enlivening
glasses, amidst the applauses of his jovial companions, he approached the
table, took up the Bible, and was walking resolutely forward to put it in the
fire; but, happening to give it a look, all at once he was seized with
trembling; paleness overspread his countenance, and his whole frame seemed
convulsed. He returned to the table, and, laying down the Bible, said, with a
strong asserveration, "WE WILL NOT BURN THAT BOOK TILL WE GET A BETTER!"

IOTA. TO WALK WITH GOD.
1. PRESERVE an abiding sense of your reconciliation to God, by the justifying
of righteousness and atoning blood of Christ, revealed to your soul through the
influence of the eternal Spirit; for how can two walk together except they be
agreed? 2 Cor. v.19. Romans v.10. Col. i.21. Amos iii.3.

2. Reflect on your translation from nature to grace -- from beneath the curse
of the law into the grace of the gospel, with the security and privileges
connected with your happy state. Col. i.13. Romans vi.14. Romans viii.17.

3. Under the sensibility of your increasing wants, whether for soul or body,
learn the divine art of living by faith on the fullness of the Son of God,
expressed and secured to you by the promises of the everlasting gospel. Phil.
iv.19. Gal. ii.20. Psa. xxxvii.3.

4. When harrassed with innate sin, or surrounded with temptation, parley not
with your enemy, nor trust your own strength, but repair to the Armor of
Righteousness, and to the Blood of the Lamb, for victory. Prove. xxviii.26. Ephesians.
vi.10 -- 17. Rev. xii.11.

5. Live in the habit of daily examination, lest you be found indulging sin, or
neglecting the commands of Christ, either of which will not fail to intercept
your communion with God, disturb your tranquillity, and cover you with darkness.
2 Cor. xiii.5. Psa. cxxxix.23, 24. Psa. lxxxix.30 -- 34. John viii.12.

6. Be clothed with humility. 1 Pet. v.5. Glory only in the cross of Christ.
Gal. vi.14. Lean upon the tender bosom of your Lord. John xiii.23. Seek all
your evidences of salvation from the testimony of the Word and the Holy Spirit.
Romans viii.14, 16. As a branch from the Vine draw your faith, hope, love,
holiness, and every other gift and grace from Jesus, who is the head over all
things to the church. John xv.4, etc. Ephesians. i.22, 23.

7. Forsake not the assembly of the Saints; for in the Church Christ has his
dwelling; and with the provision of his House, he will satisfy his poor with
bread. Heb. x.25. Psa. cxxxii.15.

8. Familiarize death through the death of Christ; view the grave as a refining
pot for the body; contemplate the heaven of heavens as your eternal home; keep
a sense of your adoption warm upon your heart; -- then, die when, or where you
may, your latter end will be triumphant. Heb. ii.14, 15. Phil. i.21. Heb.
xi.16. Psa. cxvi.15.

SEARCH THE SCRIPTURES.

POETRY.
FOR New Year's DAY.
BY THE REVEREND JOSEPH SWAIN.
HARK! in the ear of reason, what deep sound
So solemnly to recollection calls?
It is the voice of Time, whose rushing wings
Call to attention, as he passes by,
And wake the sluggard, as he lies supine
On his soft pillow: nor do even the wise
And diligent escape reproof from him,
Who never varies in his steady course.
Is Time gone by? Yes, twelve succeeding months.
Improved or unimprov'd, are all revolved
Since the last year closed its account in shades.
Fellow mortals, up! and overtake
The universal warner, lest he turn --
Whet his broad scythe, and, by divine command,
Mow down your hopes, unripe; and, unprepared,
Summon you sudden to the awful bar
Where Justice sits, who will not take a bribe;
But, with impartial hand and heart unmoved,
To holy saints or hardened infidels
Deals life eternal, or eternal death!
We live but moments; and a moment soon
Will cut the strings that by appointment hold
The imprisoned soul in its corporeal cage.
Then should experience be a living clock,
And every breath a moving dial's hand,
To point us to the hour when we must die;
While every blessing we through time receive
Should, as a nimble finger, lead the mind
Up to its author God -- of good the source.
But whence is Time? and what his errand here,
That his incessant voice attention claims?
From God he comes, the sovereign Lord of all,
To measure man's existence here on earth,
And waft him from the cradle to the grave.
Swift, on his wings, he bears us through the maze
Of life's short race, its pleasures and its pains;
Till our appointed moment to depart;
Then drops us deep into eternity!
And what is eternity? it is all the past
And all the future, seeming to unite
And render now a point unseen by man.
And yet this now is the hour in which we dress,
That we may and before the awful Judge
Of quick and dead in robes of heavenly dye;
^it to attend the marriage of the Lamb;
Or, in polluted rags, for heaven unfit,
To sink into the di^mal shades of hell!
Where Is then the spotless robe in which, arrayed,
The happy soul may from the righteous Judge
Meet an eternal smile, and sit approved
In that august assembly, where the man
In all the Godhead clothed presides supreme?
Not that self-wrought, by Pharisees of old
Held in such high esteem -- the piercing eye
Of him who sits on his eternal throne
Through the appearance searches to the heart,
And, short of what springs thence in genuine streams
Of pure affection, and obedience pure,
No works can in his sight acceptance find:
But human nature and perfection now
Meet not on earth -- heaven is their meeting place,
And Christ their center -- from his fullness flows
All that can render human nature fair
In God's all-searching eye. On earth he wrought
A robe of righteousness, which covers all
The sins of his elect; and now in heaven
He sits an advocate to plead their cause!
His merit and his sufferings of their hope
Are all the ground, the firm foundation, where
The heav'n-taught-wise build for eternity.
This is the robe in which the saints shall stand
Before the great tribunal, from the law,
With all its threat'nings, freely justified,
When rolling years, and months, and weeks, and days,
And cold, and heat, and changing light and shade,
With all the marks and measurement of time,
Give place to one eternal blaze of day!
ON THE CITY's RESTORATION FROM SICKNESS.
BY JOHN COBBY.
UPON the willows long unstrung
Your harps ye mourning saints have hung;
Now tune each string in grateful lays,
To sound your great PRESERVER's praise!
Vicegerents M^.
of the heavenly King,
Preserved by him, his praises sing:
Pastors and Flocks adore his grace,
Who grants you yet a longer space.
Let age and youth his power confess,
Let churches own, adore, and bless
His potent arm, his mighty hand,
By which upheld in life they stand.
Grim Death his desolations spread,
Waved his pale banner over our head;
Greedy of conquest, aimed his dart,
With pois'ned venom, to the heart.
From relatives, how many torn!
With deepest grief survivors mourn:
With hearts oppressed, their face appears
Disconsolate in flowing tears.
Forbear! Almighty goodness cried,
Here let thy ravages subside:
In terror clad no longer reign,
Thy conquest stay, thy hand refrain.
Voracious Death the fiat heard,
And blooming Health once more appeared;
Our city healed, our joys restored,
Our great PHYSICIAN is the LORD.
We sing our great DELIV'RER's praise,
And thus our Eben-Ezer raise:
May we record the blessing past,
While life, and breath, and being last!
THE SPIDER AND TOAD.
SOME author (no great matter who,
Provided what he says be true)
Relates he saw, with hostile rage,
A spider and a toad engage:
For though with poison both are stored,
Each by the other is abhorred,
It seems as if their common venom
Provoked an enmity between 'em.
Implacable, malicious, cruel,
Like modern hero in a duel,
The spider darted on his foe,
Infixing death at every blow.
The toad, by ready instinct taught,
An antidote when wounded sought
From the herb Plantane growing near,
Well known to toads its virtues rare,
The spider's poison to repel;
It cropp'd the leaf and soon was well.
This remedy it often tried,
And all the spider's rage defied.
The person who the contest viewed,
While yet the battle doubtful stood,
Removed the healing plant away --
And thus the spider gained the day.
For when the toad returned once more
Wounded, as it had done before,
To seek relief, and found it not,
It swelled and died upon the spot.
In every circumstance but one
(Could that hold true, I were undone)
No glass can represent my face
More justly than this tale my case.
The toad's an emblem of my heart,
And satan acts the spider's part.
Envenomed by his poison I
Am often at the point to die;
But he who hung upon the tree
From guilt and woe to set me free,
Is like a Plantane leaf to me.
To him my wounded soul repairs,
He knows my pain, and hears my prayers.
From him I virtue draw by faith,
Which saves me from the jaws of death:
From him fresh life and strength I gain,
And satan spends his rage in vain.
No secret arts or open force
Can rob me of this sure resource,
Though banished to some distant land
My medicine would be still at hand;
Though foolish men its worth deny,
Experience gives them all the lie;
Though Deists and Socinians join,
Jesus still lives, and still is mine.
It Is here the happy difference lies,
My Savior reigns above the skies,
Yet to my soul is always near,
For he is God, and every where.
His blood a sovereign balm is found
For every grief and every wound;
And sooner all the hills shall flee
And hide themselves beneath the sea,
Or ocean, starting from its bed,
Rush over the cloud-topt mountain's head,
The sun, exhausted of its light,
Become the source of endless night,
And ruin spread from pole to pole,
Than Jesus fail the tempted soul.
An obvious CONCLUSION from the CIRCUMSTANCE of ST. PETER's IMPRISONMENT and
RELEASE. Acts xii.
DEEP in the dungeon's hateful gloom,
The victim of tyrannic hate,
Lo! Peter bows to cruel fate,
And, galled with fetters, meets his doom*
Remorseless Herod gave the word,
And soldiers grasp the vengeful sword
To keep their captive there;
And hardened keepers vigils keep,
While Peter, sunk in peaceful sleep,
Knows respite from his care.
For Peter's sake the ransomed few
With melting hearts and earnest cries,
And prayers, that sweet as incense rise,
Their supplicating vows renew;
The God of saints inclined his ear,
And listened to their urgent prayer,
And ordered quick relief;
For in the troubles of his saints,
He hears with pity their complaints,
And feels for all their grief.
Sent on an errand of his grace,
An angel wings for Peter's cell
(Such embassies please angels well)
Commissioned Peter to release:
So all who seel a chain within,
That binds them fast the slaves of sin,
Like liberty would share,
If they could but by faith aspire
Upon the wings of pure desire,
And try -- the force of prayer.
T. P. AN HYMN OF PRAISE TO JESUS.
EXALTED on a throne of grace,
With smiles eternal on his face,
Jesus, a Prince and Savior, reigns;
Blessed Angels, full of holy flame,
His uncreated power proclaim,
In lofty everlasting strains.
Triumphant saints around the throne,
Sing what the Prince of life has done,
His peerless love, and precious blood;
They swell the music of the sky,
Possessed of pure eternal joy,
In presence of their loving God.
Hark! how the Empyrean rings!
While each wrapped seraph sweetly sings,
O could I catch their sacred flame!
Then rocks, and caves, and woodlands round,
Should echo with the charming sound
Of Jesus, precious Jesu's name.
Come, touch my lips with hallowed fire,
My heart with melody inspire,
To sing my Savior's bleeding love;
To save me from the pains of hell,
In which damned souls and devils dwell,
He left the splendid throne above.
Hosanna to the mighty God,
Who lived for me, and shed his blood,
That grace and glory might be mine;
Ten thousand thousand thanks be given
To HIM who made my peace with heaven,
And fills my soul with love divine.
JOSEPHUS. OBITUARY.
ON the 26th of September, 1795, died, in the 32d year of his age, of the
malignant fever which then prevailed in New York, the Rev. JACOB BRUSH, one of
the Elders of the Methodist Episcopal Church. Mr. Brush attended Mr. Courtney,
at whose house he boarded, and who died of the fever; and on the next
Lord's Day he preached a sermon on the occasion, from Matt. xxv.23. in the new
church. Mr. Brush, immediately on his return home, was taken ill, languished
five days and died, and on the Sabbath following the Rev. Mr. Kingston preached
a sermon, from Rev. xiv.13. in the same pulpit, on the death of Mr. Brush.
Shall not this event make a solemn impression upon surviving Ministers, that
they may so faithfully discharge their office as to be ready to go from the
pulpit to the tribunal of Jehovah? What is yet remarkable, Mr. Brush, in a few
days, was to have been married to Miss E. M. -- How soon may our most pleasing
prospects be over-cast, and we torn from the embraces of our friends, and
lodged in the chambers of corruption!

Mr. Brush, at an early period of life, became seriously affected with divine
things. After deep distress for sin, he obtained faith in Christ as his
Savior. He then thought it his duty to preach the Gospel of that Christ who
had done so much for his soul, and in 1785 he was admitted as probationer into
the Conferrence of Methodist Ministers. In 1788 he was ordained a Deacon, and
in 1790 he entered the Eldership. As a minister, he was zealous, wise, bold and
successful; as a christian, devout and circumspect; and as a friend,
sympathetic, kind and constant. In his last sickness he appeared solemnly
happy; and, a few hours before his death, he was asked "Whether he felt happy
in God, and had an assurance of the divine favor?" To which (by signs) he
answered in the affirmative. The last Lord's Day that he preached he appeared
to be so resigned to the will of God, that some of the hearers observed, "they
never heard him preach with so much power before, and that he seemed to preach
as though it were his last."

Thus was cut off, in the prime of life, a promising and useful Minister of
Christ, and as highly beloved among the people of his connection.

In thee, my Brush, the Lord did sweetly join
The Friend, the Christian, and Divine;
Thy message was, "go preach the sacred word,"
Nor did thou fear to draw the preacher's sword.
Supported thus thy race through life is run,
Thy battle fought, and crown of glory won:
Thy Master smiles and bids thee to retire,
With "Well done servant, now receive thy hire!"
Escaped from earth, thou'st gained the happy plain,
Where tempting is no more, nor racking pain;
There Jesus views his flock with sweet delight;
He looks benign, and says they are his right.
My Brush, my friend, and brother, ever dear!
Thy memory from my eye extorts a tear,
Of friendship, while thy worth I view*
By few excelled among the pious few.
O God of love! our hearts do thou inspire
To live, to preach, like Brush, and never tire;
So shall we meet in realms of bliss above,
With Christ, to celebrate a feast of love.
A BROTHER. THE CHRISTIAN's POCKET LIBRARY. No. II. -- VOL. I.
AN ESSAY ON JUSTIFICATION.
[By the Rev. William Rogers, D. D. Professor of English and Belles Letters in
the University of Pennsylvania.]
In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory.

ISAIAH.
JUSTIFICATION is one of the most important articles of our holy religion, and
demands our most solemn attention. Brevity and perspicuity being our aim in
preparing this paper, we shall -- explain the term -- consider the author --
the objects interested -- the blessings resulting.

We are, I. To explain the term. Justification, spiritually or evangelically
considered, is a complete acquittal from imputed and contracted guilt; a
deliverance from the condemning power of sin; an act of free grace flowing from
Jehovah's sovereign good will and pleasure. By many eminent divines this
leading doctrine is considered as twofold -- ETERNAL and DECLARATIVE. By the
former, we understand that which existed in the divine mind from everlasting,
respecting the chosen seed, united with Christ their head, "who has saved us,
according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus,
before the world began." 2 Timothy i.9. By the latter, viz. declarative
justification, is designed that which, in time, takes place in or on the
conscience of a believer, commonly styled justification by or through faith. It
is upon this we now address you. To be thus fully absolved from all sin and
guilt, by virtue of Christ's plenary satisfaction, and pronounced "heirs of
eternal life," oh, how enlivening the thought! how animating the reflection!
"Bless the Lord, O our souls, and all that is within us, bless his holy name."

We come, II. to consider the author of our justification. "It is God who
justifies." Romans viii.33. A Triune God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost. A truth
this, when viewed in all its parts, calculated to excite not only within us,
but amid the angelic choir the highest wonder, "which things the angels desire
to look into." 1 Pet. i.12. "Whom GOD has set forth to be a propitiation,
through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of
sins that are past, through the Forbearance of God; to declare, I say, at this
time his righteousness; that he might be just, and the justifier of him who
believes in Jesus. Romans x.25, 26. "Be it known unto you therefore, men and
brethren, that through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins;
and by HIM all that believe are justified from all things, from which ye could
not be justified by the law of Moses." Acts xiii.38, 39. "And such were some of
you; but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the
name of the Lord Jesus, and by the SPIRIT of our God." 1 Cor. vi.11. Many other
pertinent texts might be quo^ed; but permit us, previous to our dismission of
this head, to mention, with all due conciseness, a few of the causes of our
being thus justified or pronounced RIGHTEOUS. "The works of the Lord are great,
sought out of all them who have pleasure therein," is of equal force now as
when penned by Israel's king. Thus supported, we will not be backward in
asserting --

1st. That from this main pillar, this Sublime Characteristic of gospel truth,
man's obedience to a law of works is to be utterly excluded. Paul peremptorily
says, "By the deeds of the law no flesh shall be justified in his sight." Romans
iii.20. This single declaration, confirmed by repeated equal testimony,
condemns at once every idea of justification by virtue of our own doings. Those
who harbor a sentiment so opposed to Jehovah's revealed will, vainly imagine,
consistent with themselves, to bring the supreme governor of universal nature
under obligation to do them good. But, beloved, we have not so learned Christ,
we do not wish to rob the blessed Redeemer of the brightest jewel in his
mediatorial crown, we do not intend thus basely to detract from that glory
which peculiarly belongs to the sacred Three-One. "For there is not a just man
upon earth who does good and sins not." Ecc. vii.20. "But we are all as an
unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags." Isa. lxiv.6.

2dly. What is by too many denominated compliance with gospel terms, we do not
admit as having any claim. The gospel of our salvation is unconditional; it
knows no terms on our part as leading to a justifying righteousness. Faith and
repentance are graces bestowed by the Spirit of God; they are blessings flowing
from that covenant which is ordered in all things, and sure. In fine,
regeneration of soul, sanctification of heart, sincerity of disposition,
holiness of life, persevering fidelity, undeviating acquiescence in Jehovah's
government, steady zeal for Immanuel's interest, all our own pious frames of
mind, comfortable feelings and approving testimonies of conscience are, with
respect to this all-essential doctrine, to be kept totally out of view. To
what, then, is our justification to be ascribed?

We reply, 1st. To the mere grace or favor of God as the moving cause, "being
justified freely by his grace." Romans iii.24. "But after that the kindness and
love of God our Savior toward man appeared; not by works of righteousness,
which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us." Titus iii.4, 5.
That, which never could have been found out by men or angels, the wisdom of
Jehovah contrived, and his love has made known. This is the original source.
Here is the fountain from whence all springs.

2dly. To the life and passion of Jesus as the procuring cause. "But God
commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died
for us. Much more then being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from
wrath through him." Romans v.8, 9. He fulfilled every precept, he bore the whole
penalty of the law in the room and stead of his people: thus was the law
magnified and rendered honorable, an end made of sin and everlasting
righteousness brought in; "and this is his name whereby he shall be called, THE
LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS." Jeremiah xxiii.6. Oh glorious name! predicted long
before his incarnation -- Unto whom should we go but unto our once bleeding but
now risen Savior for acceptance? -- For us he drank the bitter cup -- Let us
not substitute any thing in the place of his noble sacrifice -- It is now a
righteous thing with God, freely to justify and abundantly to pardon. "In the
LORD shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory." Isaiah
xlv.25. The robe of Christ's righteousness is a garment down to the foot,
wherewith every member of the mystical body is amply covered; "for he has made
him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might be made the righteousness
of God, in him." 2 Cor. v.21. "Such an high priest became us who is holy,
harmless, undefiled and separate from sinners." Heb. vii.26. Should any put the
question -- How does Christ's righteousness, thus consisting of the holiness of
his nature, his active and passive obedience, become our's in such wise that we
also are necessarily deemed RIGHTEOUS?

We readily answer -- By IMPUTATION; by making it over unto us; reckoning it
our's, or placing it to our account, being wrought out by our elder brother on
behalf of the whole ransomed flock. "David describes the blessedness of the
man, unto whom God imputes righteousness without "works." Romans iv.6. --
Pursuant, therefore, to the unalterable purpose of heaven, agreeable to the
economy of man's redemption, this righteousness of the precious Jesus, whereof
so many glorious things are spoken, is as much our's as though wrought out by
ourselves in our own proper persons. Romans v.18, 19. Phil. iii.8, 9. Thus
clothed upon with raiment of needle work -- Thus united with the HEAD, how can
the members be viewed by God the judge of all but as perfectly and completely
justified? "And ye are complete in him, who is the head of all principality and
power." Col. ii.10.

3dly. Our justification is by some ascribed to faith as an instrumental cause.
Strictly speaking, we apprehend says as no cause at all in this momentuous
procedure, but rather as an effect. It is true, the scriptures frequently
mention a justification by faith -- By such expressions it is evident the
object, and not the act of faith, is designed: the object of faith is Christ
and his righteousness: this the believing soul holds fast. Faith is the eye
which discovers, the hand which receives; espying a Savior's worth, charmed
with his merit, the believer is so enraptured as to cast away all his heavy
burden, falls at Messiah's feet, confides in the promise, and pleads atoning
blood, "with the heart man believes unto righteousness." Romans x.10. It is
beautifully observed by one of our very first and most orthodox writers: "The
reason why any are justified is not because they have faith -- But the reason
why they have faith is because they are justified." If justified by faith as a
work performed by us, or as a grace wrought without us, where would have been
the necessity of the death and resurrection of Jesus? Faith is that precious
grace by which we do, in a certain manner, put on the righteousness of the
Lord's anointed, and receive the greatest of all blessings from the God of our
salvation. "It is a grace (says one) which quarrels much with human pride, and
makes its only boast of Sharon's rose; and never was meant to be our justifying
righteousness in the sight of God, else it would learn to boast -- Faith says,
'In the Lord have I righteousness,' and tells a sinner, 'I cannot save thee,'
thou art saved by grace through faith." The grace of Jesus, and that alone,
brings salvation; and the sinner, through faith, as an instrument put in his
hand, is enabled to reach the rich donation; just as a beggar, by his empty cap
stretched forth, receives an alms. We proceed,

III. To describe the objects interested. In the Examination of this
particular, what abundant reason have we to adopt the prophetic language, "to
the law and to the testimony? If they speak not according to this word, it is
because there is no light in them." Isaiah viii.20. The persons justified
through rich and sovereign grace are in the living oracles declared to be
"ungodly," Romans iv.5. also "sinners." Gal. ii.17. Was it not for declarations
like these, where would be our comfort? We are all sinners, we are all ungodly;
does it from hence follow, that all who are sinners, all who are ungodly, are
without exception justified? By no means! the whole canon of scripture combine
with the dictates of sound experience to render every such idea inadmissible.
It is true, we read, "that by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon
all men unto justification of life." Romans v.18. By a careful revision of what
goes before and follows after, we shall find the apostle did not mean all men
absolutely, but all the chosen, all believers; his epistle was directed to "all
that be in Rome, beloved of God, called to be saints." Moreover, the justified
are represented as a peculiar people, and have such characters ascribed to them
as cannot, without the greatest inconsistency and abuse of language, be
ascribed to all the progeny of fallen Adam. They are spoken of as those who are
predestined, redeemed, pardoned, effectually called, sanctified, regenerated,
etc. That these things are not true, with respect to all the lapsed family,
every unprejudiced mind must acknowledge. Upon the whole, those who are
unworthy and guilty in themselves, but in the everlasting covenant elected and
beloved, have that righteousness whereon their justification is founded, not
only exhibited to them by the gospel, but brought nigh by the Holy Ghost, these
are the "purchased possession," this is the "bride," the lamb's wife; between
whom and the Lord Jeses, an union not only now exists, but has existed,
ancient as eternity itself, "I have loved thee with an everlasting love:
therefore, with loving kindness have I drawn thee," Jer. xxxi.3. a multitude
which no man can number. The

IV. And last thing proposed for investigation, is the blessings resulting from
justification.

Where shall we begin, and how shall we end? blessings great indeed crowd in
upon us! blessings beyond compare are consequential on our being thus freely
justified! a doctrine pregnant with comfort inexpressible! a foundation is
hereby laid not simply for fluctuating hope, but for the full assurance of
present and future bliss. By virtue hereof, we experience -- 1. A freedom or
deliverance from sin and condemnation. From all sin, as to its guilt, from its
reigning power and dominion, and by and by from its in-being "the blood of
Jesus Christ his son, cleanses us from all sin." 1 John i.7. Heb. x.12 -- 14.
Our sins are covered and hid from the all-penetrating eye of divine justice,
and when sought for hereafter shall not be found; "there is, therefore, now no
condemnation to them who are in Christ Jesus." Romans viii.1. Gal. iii.13. When
seriously reflecting on our happy rescue from the hands of satan, our accusing
foe; also from death and the grave, as penal evils; but more especially from
the pains of hell and the wrath to come; and all as the effect of love divine,
what heart among us can remain cold and lifeless? what tongue can cease to
praise? -- 2. As justified we enjoy peace with God. "Therefore, being justified
by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ." Romans v.1.
Connected herewith is real peace of mind. Oh happy souls! brought fully to
behold a crucified Redeemer making peace by the blood of his cross, "the
chastisement of our peace was upon him." Isaiah liii.5. Knowing this to be the
case, well may we, "on the Dove-like wings of faith, fly, far away from the
storms and tempests of an opposing conscience, and find in the rock of ages a
quiet sanctuary and safe retreat." -- 3. The acceptance of our persons and
services is another blessing resulting herefrom. The Father is well pleased
with both for the alone sake of Christ his Son, "to the praise of the glory of
his grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the Beloved." Ephesians. i.6. Christ's
garments smell of myrrh, aloes and cassia, wherewith his people being clad, the
Lord smells a sweet savor in them also. A view of this emboldens us to draw
near to the King of kings. Heb. x.19 -- 22. The person, the blood, the
righteousness, the mediation of Jesus, are the only foundation of all our pleas
at the celestial throne. -- 4. As justified we are blessed through life, shall
be so at death, and through eternity. While on earth, we are expressly assured
that "all things work together for our good:" when summoned to die, we need not
fear the grim messenger. The property of temporal death, with respect to God's
people, is greatly changed; it puts an end to all their sorrows, has its sting
taken away, and will prove to be our very great gain. In honor and triumph are
such conveyed to the mansions above; and oh, with what joy are the everlasting
doors expanded wide for their reception! Our bodies, though mouldering to dust,
will nevertheless enjoy a glorious resurrection -- our persons at the last day
shall have an honorable distinction, and gracious approbation from the judge
supreme. Never-ceasing felicity, consummate happiness, and perpetual glory will
be our portion. "Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has entered into
the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them who love him." 1
Cor. ii.9. We shall then, O joyful period! live and reign with Christ for ever
and ever, and our song will uninterruptedly be, "unto him who loved us and
washed us from our sins in his own blood; and has made us kings and priests
unto God and his father; to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever."

DIALOGUE Between a Father and his Son. [Continued from page 33.]
PART II. A Country Seat.
Father. DISENGAGED from the business of the city, and enjoying the enlivening
sweets of country air, what, my son, if we take a ride before our morning
repast?


Son. With pleasure, Sir, I accept your invitation, and will immediately order
our horses to the gate.


Father. How fine the dawn! how melodiously the bird, pearched on yonder twig,
salutes the sun who tops the mountains with his beams, and enlivens universal
nature!


Son. Delightful indeed! Yet what reproof to man, the noblest part of the
creation, and most backward to express his MAKER's praise!


Father. True, my son, the beauties and the law of nature unite and condemn the
sin of man, and leave him without excuse. -- William, your nag has caught the
fragrance of the morn, and seems almost too sprightly for its rider.


Son. Yes, Sir, he is more brisk than common. It seems a sprightly steed and
dejected rider illy suit together.


Father. My son, cheerfulness has been your constant companion, why now
dejected?


Son. My heart is conscious of its guilt before the Lord. I little thought my
offenses were so great. The Bible not only informs me that my open sins are
cognizable by the Almighty, but that the very words of my lips, and the secret
thoughts of my heart, are exposed to his displeasure. All I can hope for is,
that God will give me grace that I may exert my best endeavors to live more
holy in my future life. I should be glad, Sir, it, at your leisure, you would
write me a few rules by which I may walk more circumspectly, and, by that
means, recommend myself to the Divine clemency.


Father. That your future life should be attended with the practice of the most
brilliant virtues, and your soul enjoy the approving smiles of God, are the
ardent wishes of your father's heart; but, my son, what think you will become
of the guilt of those offenses you have now confessed? Will future obedience
compensate for past transgressions?


Son. What else can man return?


Father. If injured Justice would accept such return, has man therewith to
offer? Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy
soul, and with all thy might, Deuteronomy. vi.5. is the requirement of God's most holy
law, and to which a penalty is annexed. The soul that sins shall die. Now,
if you can love the Lord without the shadow of variation, and abstain from the
least appearance of evil, you might be somewhat more excuseable for your
conjecture of an ability to make return for your offenses. Such is the state of
my heart, even in its best frame, that I cannot pray without a wandering
thought, nor attempt to love the Lord without lamenting extreme alloy; like
Paul, when I would do good, evil is present with me. Suppose a holy life could
be produced, will Justice accept it for past transgressions? You lately
accompanied me to the supreme court, and heard the trial of a man criminated
for a capital offense; you heard his protestations; but did the law accept his
plea, or reverse the sentence? No, the judges told him they were the servants
of the people, and the guardians of the law, which he had offended, and
instantly pronounced upon him the solemn sentence of death. If such be the
inflexibility of human law, can we suppose the holy, just, and good law of God
capable of variation? As many as are under this law, and found sinners, are
under its curse; for cursed is every one that continues not in all things
written in the book of the law to do them.


Son. Then my case is yet more afflictive.


Father. Though you are my child, and I love you with the most tender
affection; yet, your state as a sinner most deeply impresses my heart. And
while I describe to you the wretched state of man, faithfulness and grief flow
with my address.


Son. Sir, my feelings are indiscribable. This morning all nature is gay around
me, but my heart is filled with gloomy sorrow!


Father. My son, my tears mingle with your own. What a mercy is it that MERCY,
the speediest messenger of God, has found its way to man! Jesus, the Son of
God, has engaged for sinners. That Law and Justice should unite in pronouncing
pardon, Jesus assumed our nature, was charged with our guilt, obeyed the law,
and magnified it in his life, and by shedding of his blood and bowing in death
on the cross, he made the violated law honorable, and God became just in
pardoning sinners. Here, my child, is your relief, and here is my consolation
-- A free, full, glorious salvation in the Son of God, who says by Isaiah, look
unto me all ye ends of the earth, for I am God, and besides me there is no
Savior. It is the same Jesus that bestows this blood-bought pardon, that must
give you eyes of faith to behold his glory, and an heart to enjoy his grace. Be
not overwhelmed with grief; sinners Jesus came to save, and he has said, he
that comes unto me I will in no wise cast out. Plead with him by prayer,
depressed as you may be, and remember that he has promised his Spirit to them
that ask him, -- who will help their infirmities, -- testify of Christ, --
apply the virtues of Christ, -- and give you boldness to call God your father
in him.


Son. Sir, this is good to hear; but, at present I feel I know not how; I want
a something, I know not what.


Father. See, this rising hill gives us a full prospect of the harbour's mouth.
How finely those ships enter the Hook, their sails full, and their hearts
elated with joy on approach of shore.


Son. Pleasant indeed, Sir. The lively morn seems to congratulate them to their
desired haven.


Father. True. Perhaps a little while ago, they were surrounded with storm and
tempest; the heavens appeared to cast their awful frowns, while the trembling
sailors beheld Death riding upon every wave. Now they forget their sorrow, and
all is gay! So, infinitely more so may you, my son, though at present
surrounded with darkness, and filled with fear, find the way to the bosom of
Jesus, and your heart shall then rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of
glory! Let us pass through yonder gate, and we soon shall reach our home, be
refreshed at a well-spread table, and then set out for York again.


[To be continued.] The Life of the late Reverend and learned AUGUSTUS MONTAGUE
TOPLADY, M. A. Vicar of Broad Hembury, in Devonshire, Great Britain.
THIS eminent servant of Christ was born at Farnham, in Surrey, Nov. 4, 1740.
His father, Richard Toplady, Esquire a captain in the army, died at the siege of
Carthagena soon after the birth of his son. Augustus received the first part of
his education at Westminster school; but it becoming necessary for his mother
to make a journey to Ireland, to pursue some claims to an estate in that
kingdom, he accompanied her thither, and was entered at Trinity College in
Dublin, where he took his degree of Bachelor in arts. In August. 1756, being in
his 16th year, the Lord visited his soul with salvation under the ministry of
Mr. Morris, while preaching from Ephesians. ii.13. "Strange, says Mr. Toplady, that
I, who had so long sat under the means of grace in England, should be brought
nigh to God, in an obscure part of Ireland, amidst an handful of God's people
met together in a barn and under the ministry of one who could hardly spell his
own name! Surely, it was the Lord's doing, and is mavelous! The excellency of
such power must be of God, and cannot be of man. The regenerating spirit
breathes not only on whom, but likewise when, where, and as HE lists."

Mr. Toplady enjoying the comforts of religion in his soul, God gave him a most
ardent desire for the ministry of the gospel; and, as he abhorred the Popish
tenet, that "Ignorance was the mother of devotion," so his wish, as well as his
duty, was, to be thoroughly furnished; and to avoid the presumption of teaching
the ignorant and those that are out of the way, without having the knowledge,
as well as the grace, indispensibly necessary for that purpose, he pursued his
studies with redoubled ardour, and directed them entirely for the honor of his
Lord and the good of men. On June the 6th, 1762, Mr. Toplady received episcopal
ordination, and some time after was inducted to the living of Broad Hembury,
where he labored in the gospel with success, and composed most of those
writings which will render service to the church, and do honor to his memory,
while truth and learning shall be esteemed valuable among men. He had no
preferment in the church besides the vicarage of Broad Hembury, which, as his
mind could never brook the idea of living ill with his parish on account of
tithes, did not amount to 80l. a year. His own account of his engaging in the
pastoral office, in his History Proof, is too excellent to be omitted here. "I
bles^ God," says he, "for enabling me to esteem the reproach of Christ greater
treasure than all the applause of men, and all the preferments of the church.
When I received Orders, I obtained mercy to be faithful, and from that moment
gave up what is called the world, so far as I conceived it to interfere with
faith and a good conscience. -- I can never be sufficiently thankful, that my
religious principles were all fixed long before I entered into orders. Through
the good hand of my God upon me, I sat out in the ministry with clear
gospel light from the first; a blessing not vouchsafed to every one. Many an
evangelical minister has found himself obliged to retract, and unsay what he
had taught before in the days of his ignorance. Lord, how is it that I have
been so signally favored of Thee! O keep me to the end steadfast in thy truth!
Let me but go on experimentally to know Thee, and then it will be absolutely
impossible for me to depart from the precious doctrines of grace; my early
insight into which I look upon as one of the distinguished blessings of my
life." -- "For my own part," says he in a letter to a friend, "I wish to live
and die with the sword of the spirit in my hand, and, as Dr. Young expresses
it, never to put off my armor till I put on my shroud." -- Nor did he fail of
his wish; he had, as it were, taken me^sure for his shroud be^^re he lay down
his pen* in defense of the pure doctrines of God's everlasting love, and his
discriminating, all-glorious grace to men.

In September, 1773, on the introduction of the Rev. John Ryland, sen. of
Northampton, Great Britain, the college in Rhode Island conferred on Mr.
Toplady the degree of MASTER IN THE ARTS. In 1775, finding his bodily
constitution much impaired by the moist atmosphere of Devonshire, with which it
never agreed, he removed to London. Here, by the solicitation of his numerous
friends, and from a desire to promote the welfare of Zion, he engaged the
chapel belonging to the French Reformed, near Leicester Fields, where he
continued in the exercise of his ministry as frequent as his health permitted,
God crowning his labors with the most pleasing success. By a slow consumption
he, however, gradually drew to the period of his life. As his outward man
wasted, his inward man was refreshed and renewed, day by day. Still, while life
and breath remained, he must be either preaching or writing, to vindicate the
honor of his Master, and propagate the glory of evangelic truth, for the
comfort of the souls of men. To a friend, who expressed some concern for his
own ease in his debilitated state, on his close applications, he thus replied,
"God give us to sink deeper and deeper into his love, and to raise higher and
higher into the image of his holiness! and thoroughly persuaded I am, that the
more we are enabled to love and resemble Him, the more active we shall be to
promote his glory, and to extend his cause with our lips, our pens, our lives,
our all. Be this our business, and our bliss, on earth! In heaven we shall have
nothing to do, but to see him as he is, to participate his glory, and to sing
his praise, in delightful, in never-ending concert with angels, with saints who
are got home before us, and with those of the elect, whom we knew and loved
here below." The nearer he drew to the grave, the more abundantly did the
consolation of God abound in him. He looked not only with composure, but
delight on the tomb, and groaned earnestly to enter the mansions of the
blessed. Dr. Young's beautiful expression, one eye on death, and one full fixed
on heaven," was never more evident than in Mr. Toplady. While on his dying bed,
he discovered a remarkable jealousy, for fear of receiving any part of that
honor which is due to Christ alone. He desired to be nothing, and that Jesus
might be all, and in all.

Notwithstanding Mr. Toplady was so highly favored with the smiles of the
Savior, he had a proportionate sensibility of his wretchedness as a sinner.
"Oh!" said he, "that ever such a wretch as I should be tempted to think highly
of himself! I that am, of myself, nothing but sin and weakness; I, in whose
flesh naturally dwells no good thing; I who deserve damnation for the best work
I ever performed! Lord Jesus, humble me to the dust, yea, to the very center of
abasement, in thy presence. Root out and tear up this most poisonous, this most
accursed weed, from the unworthiest heart that ever was! Keep me sensible of my
sinnership. Sink me down, deeper and deeper, into penitence and
self-abhorrence! Break the dagon of pride in pieces before the ark of thy
merits! Demolish, by the breath of thy Spirit, the walls, the bables of
self-righteousness and self-opinion; -- level them with the trodden soil, grind
them to powder, annihilate them for ever and ever! -- Grace! grace! be all my
experience, and all my cry."

[To be concluded in our next.]

NATURAL HISTORY.
THE ELEPHANT.
THE elephant is supposed to be the largest of any quadruped in the known
world; and seems to be the wisest also. The observation is Cicero's: whose
words ( De Not. Deor. i.) are, "Elephanto belluarum nualla providentior. At
figura quae vastior?" All the amiable, and all the furious passions, are to be
found in this animal: and its docility is wonderful; for, when properly tamed,
he is capable of being instructed and disciplined into a vast variety of
entertaining and useful qualifications.

Do him a material injury, and he will act as if he had been tutored by the late
Lord Chesterfield; i. e. if it be in his power, he will immediately revenge the
affront; but it restrained for the present, either by motives of prudence, or
by inability to wreak his resentment, he will retain the offense in his memory
for years together, and take care to repay it with interest, the first
favorable opportunity. I have heard or read of a boy, who wantonly struck the
proboscis, or trunk, of an elephant; and then courageously secured himself by
running away. Seven years afterward, the lad was playing near the side of a
river; and had, probably, forgot his past misdemeanor. But the elephant had a
better memory; and, making up to the young delinquent, grasped him with his
trunk, and very sedately carried the sprawling captive to the water; where he
ducked him once or twice over head and ears, and then quietly setting him down
again on terra firma, permitted him to walk off without further hurt.

It is said, that in those countries where elephants abound, such of them as
are tame, go about the streets, like any other domestic animal; and, it is
common for people to give them fruit as they pass. In time they commence
absolute beggars, and will put in the extremity of their trunks at doors and
windows, in hope of receiving the little benevolences which custom has inured
them to expect. After waiting a short while, if nothing is given them, they
withdraw their trunks, and pass on to the next accessible house. It is related,
that some tailors were at work, on a board, withinside of a window whose
casement stood open. A passing elephant stopped, and put in his trunk. One of the
men, instead of conferring a douceur, gave the animal's trunk a scratch with
his needle. The injured party took no present notice of the provocation, but
patiently walked away. He repaired to a neighboring stream; and, having filled
his capacious trunk with a large quantity of water, returned to the window,
where he coolly avenged himself, by spouting the fluid artillery on the
aggressor and his comrades, for their late breach of hospitality. -- If we do
not relieve the indigent, they at least have a right not to be insulted. And,
very frequently, the meanest are able, sooner or later, to retaliate, with
usury, the contempt they undeservedly receive.

Every beggar is not honest. Nor are all elephants actuated by a strict sense
of moral delicacy. Their smell is very acute: and if a person has any fruit or
cakes about him, they show, by the quick and judicious application of their
trunks to the proper part of his dress, that they are adepts in the art of
picking pockets, with excellent dexterity.

Elephants, like men, have (if I may be allowed the expression) their virtues
and their vices: though, to the honor of the former be it observed, the vices
of an elephant bear but small proportion to his virtues. There have been
instances of these creatures, who, in the first hurry of rage for
ill-treatment, have killed their keepers. But their subsequent remorse has been
so insupportably keen, that they have refused to take any sustenance, and
literally starved themselves to death. A lesson to persons of violent passions,
who, if hurried away by the impetuous torrent, either of excessive and
unguarded anger, or of headstrong and irregular desire, are liable to the
commission of irreparable evil, and may, in a single moment, lay the founda^ion
of irremediable ruin. He that HASTES with his feet, sins. O believer, if
thou art by nature hasty, vehement, and easily inflammable, call in superior
aid. He who, in the days of his flesh, rebuked the raging of the winds, and
stilled the tossings of the sea, can, by the sweet compescing influence of his
gracious SPIRIT, restrain thee within the bounds of holiness, and speak the
storm into a perfect calm. I have read of an Heathen, who, when he found
himself unduly fermented by the kindlings of inward wrath, would never utter a
single word, till he had first deliberately run over in his mind all the
letters of the alphabet. I have read of a Christian, who, when endangered by
similar temptation, would not suffer himself to speak a syllable, till he had
silently repeated the Lord's Prayer. Go, and do thou likewise. Repeat that
prayer to God, in the spirit of supplication: and thy victory over passion will
be more than probable.

Elephants are singularly grateful, and have a very deep sense of friendship.
They have been known to lay the death of a brother elephant, or of a kind
keeper, so much to heart, as to pine away from that time forward. Even virtue,
if strained beyond a certain pitch, degenerates into a fault. Nor is it right
for us to love, with too much ardour, any perishable good. Dr. Owen somewhere
remarks, that "strong affections make strong afflictions." Confine, therefore,
your absolve regards to FATHER, SON, and SPIRIT; the Three glorious Friends,
who never die, and whose loving kindness is immortal as themselves!

In some countries, we are told, elephants supply the place of executioners.
They are trained, at a given signal, to lay hold on the criminal with their
trunks, by a strong suction, and either dash him violently against the ground,
or toss him aloft in the air, till repeated contusions put a period to his
life. -- Mankind are very prone to value themselves on their supposed
civilization; and yet, by artfully practicing on the ferocity of inferior
animals, they sometimes teach brutes themselves to be still more brutal.

Clumsey as elephants are, they may be taught to dance, both singly and in
companies; and they move, on these occasions, with singular exactness and
order. They are not insensible to the harmony of music; and, if properly
inured, keep time with their feet, in a manner which discovers great powers of
judgment. If I rightly remember, Bishop Burnet informs us, in his travels, that
he saw an elephant play at ball, with all the ease and expertness of a man. But
PLUTARCH, in his life of Pyrrhus, mentions a much nobler instance of elephantin
understanding and adroitness; accompanied by such magnanimous courage and
fidelity, as would have redounded to the honor of a Sertorius, or of an
Alexander. When Pyrrhus stormed the town of Argos, a number of accoutered
elephants (according to the custom of those times) formed a part of his
military apparatus. One of these creatures, perceiving that his rider was
fallen, invited him, by every effort in his power, to re-mount. But finding,
soon after, that he [viz. the rider] was dead of the wounds he had received,
the animal, in a transport of grief and rage, rushed furiously on friends and
foes, without distinction; and, taking up the body with his trunk, made good
his retreat, and rescued the remains of his breathless master from further
violation, by faithfully and heroically conveying them from the scene of action.

With all his magnitude and strength, an elephant (if not sour'd by unkind
usage) may be rendered so passive and gentle, as to be led and governed by a
child. Just representation of that amiable meekness and humility, wherewith
christians of exalted rank condescend to men of low estate; and persons eminent
for superior grace, or for distinguished learning, bear with the infirmities,
and are courteous to the ignorance of the weak. It was in this spirit that the
excellent Doctor WATTS descended from the regions of philosophy, and stooped
from the heights of more elevated poetry, to compose his admirable hymns for
children, and teach infant warblers to lisp the praises of the great THREE-ONE.

The method by which wild elephants are taken, deserves to be noticed. A narrow
enclosure is made; one end of which is left open, for entrance; and, at the
extremity of the other, several tame female elephants are placed. Between both
(i. e. between the entrance and the extremity where the females are fixed) a
large pit is dug, whose surface is lined with a slight bridge-work, so neatly
turfed, that it has all the appearance of firm ground. Allured by the females,
the male elephants make toward the place, but are suddenly intercepted by the
unsuspected snare. Proper persons, who are stationed to watch the event, start
from their concealments; and, with exulting shouts, mock the indignant distress
of their unwieldy prisoners. -- Striking picture of the deceitfulness of sin;
the unthinking folly of heedless minds; and the terrible effects of successful
temptation.

Elephants are tamed chiefly by hunger and by blows. -- Providence hides pride
from man, and bends his stubbornness to obedience, by graciously afflictive
dispensations.

E^ephants are said to be extremely fond of pomp, and to receive very
pleasurable ideas from the exhibitions of splendor. Hence the natives of
East India, who hold the doctrine of Transmigration, imagine that these animals
are animated by the souls of departed princes. For this reason they are treated
(especially in the kingdom of Siam) with distinguished respect; and some of the
handsomest are decorated with rich ornaments, and even dignified with titles of
honor. An elephant of quality is known by the rings of gold, silver, or copper
with which his tusks are adorned. -- There is something very humiliating in the
pride of human reason, in conduct so extravagantly absurd as this. Absolute
goodnature is absolute folly. And yet, the fanciful surmise of the
transmigration of souls from one body into another, is attended with peculiar
felicities to the poor beasts who live in countries where that doctrine
obtains. It is our duty to adopt the humanity of those heathens without its
absurdities; and to be scrupulously tender of the life and happiness of every
inferior animal entrusted to our care: knowing that the sovereign Providence,
which has made them subservient to our wants, has given us no charter for the
exercise of unnecessary cruelty or wonton tyranny.

A REMARKABLE DREAM OF THE LATE DR. DODDRIDGE.
THE doctor and Dr. Clarke had been conversing together one evening upon the
nature of the separate state, and the probability that the scenes on the which
the soul would enter upon its leaving the body, would bear some resemblance to
those with which it had been conversant while on ear^h, that it might by
degrees be prepared for the more sublime happiness of the heavenly world. This
and other conversation of the same kind probably occasioned the following
dream: --

The doctor imagined himself dangerously ill at a friend's house in London; and
after laying in this state for some time, he thought his soul left the body,
and took its flight in some kind of fine vehicle, which (though very different
from the body it had just quitted) was still material. He pursued his course
till he was at some distance from the city, when turning back, and reviewing
the town, he could not forbear saying to himself, How trifling and how vain do
these affairs, in which the inhabitants of this place are so eagerly employed,
appear to me a separate spirit. At length, as he was continuing his progress,
and though without any certain director, yet easy and happy in the thoughts of
the universal providence and government of God, which extends alike to all
states and worlds, he was met by one, who told him he was sent to conduct him
to the place appointed for his abode; from whence he concluded that it could be
no other than an angel, though, as I remember, he appeared under the form of an
elderly man. They went accordingly on together, till they came within sight of
a spacious building, which had the air of a palace. Upon inquiring what it was,
his guide told him it was the place assigned for his residence at present; upon
which the doctor observed, that he remembered to have read, while on earth,
that "eye had not seen, nor ear heard, nor the heart conceived, what God had
laid up for his servants;" whereas he could easily have conceived an idea of
such a building from others he had seen, though he acknowledged they were
greatly inferior to this in elegance. The answer his guide made him was plainly
suggested by the conversation of the evening: it was, that the scene first
presented was contrived on purpose to bear a near resemblance to those he had
been accustomed to on earth, that his mind might be more easily and gradually
prepared for those glories that would open upon him hereafter, and which would
at first have quite dazzled and overpowered him.

By this time they were come up to the palace; and his guide led him through a
kind of saloon into an inner parlour. The first thing that struck him was a
large golden cup that stood upon the table, on which was embossed the figure of
a vine and clusters of grapes. He asked his guide the meaning of this; who told
him, it was the cup in which his Savior drank new wine with his disciples in
his kingdom; and that the figures cared on it were intended to signify the
union between Christ and his people, implying, that as the grapes derive all
their beauty and flavor from the vine, so the saints, even in a state of
glory, were indebted for the establishment and happiness of their union with
their Head, in whom they are all complete. While they were thus conversing, he
heard a tap at the door, and was informed by the angel, that it was the signal
of his Lord's approach, and was intended to prepare him for the interview.
Accordingly, in a short time, he thought our Savior entered the room; and,
upon his casting himself at his feet, he graciously raised him up, and with a
look of inexpressible complacency, assured him of his favor, and his kind
acceptance of his faithful services: and, as a token of his peculiar regard,
and the intimate friendship he intended to honor him with, he took the cup,
and, after drinking of it himself, gave it into his hands. The doctor would
have declined it at first, as too great an honor; but his Lord replied, (as to
Peter, in relation to washing his feet) "If thou drink not with me, thou have
no part in me." This scene, he observed, filled him with such a transport of
gratitude, love, and admiration, that he was ready to sink under it. His Master
seemed sensible of it, and told him he must leave him for the present, but it
would not be long before he repeated his visit; and, in the mean time, he would
find enough to employ his thoughts in reflecting on what had passed, and in
contemplating the objects around him. As soon as his Lord was retired, and his
mind a little composed, he observed the room was hung round with pictures; and,
upon examining them more attentively, he discovered, to his great surprise,
that they contained the history of his own life. The most remarkable scenes he
had passed through being thus represented in the most lively manner, it may
easily be imagined how much this would strike and affect his mind. The many
temptations and trials he had been exposed to, and the signal instances of the
divine goodness toward him in the different periods of his life, which by this
means were all presented at once to his view, excited the strongest emotions of
gratitude; especially when he reflected, that he was now out of the reach of
any future distress, and that all the purposes of divine love and mercy toward
him were at length happily accomplished. The ecstacy of joy and thankfulness
into which these reflections threw him, were so great, that they awoke him. But
for some considerable time after he arose, the impression continued so lively,
that tears of joy flowed down his cheeks; and he said, that he never on any
occasion remembers to have felt sentiments of devotion, love, and gratitude,
equally strong.

RESIGNATION.
ONE of the most remarkable instances of human resignation I ever remember to
have met with, is to be found in the conduct of Archbishop Fenelon. When his
illustrious and hopeful pupil, the Duke of Burgundy, lay dead in his coffin,
and the nobles of his court, in all the pomp of silent sadness, stood weeping
around, the Archbishop came into the apartment, and having fixed his eyes for
some time on the corpse, uttered the sensibility of his soul to this effect: --
"There lies my beloved prince, for whom my affections were equal to the
tenderest regard of the tenderest parent. Nor were my affections lost; he loved
me in return with all the ardor of a son. There he lies, and all my worldly
happiness lies dead with him! But if the turning of a straw would call him back
to life, I would not, for ten thousand worlds, be the turner of that straw, in
opposition to the WILL of God." Blessed are they who, under such painful,
bereaving providence, possess that charming, submissive grace; are still, and
know that the Lord is God alone! Psalm xlvi.10.

POETRY.
FELICITY ALONE IN CHRIST.
FLY from my thoughts, ye vanities of Time,
To nobler heights my ardent wishes climb;
Farewell each vain delight, -- inferior bliss,
Which never can boast of solid happiness.
To spheres above with restless haste I Would fly,
And view, by faith, my portion in the sky.
Ten thousand charms attract my warmest love,
Kindle a flame which heaven inspires above.
Refulgent glories now pervade my soul!
How blessed the hours, and sweet the minutes roll!
Anguish and care, and every grief suppressed,
Secure thus lodged within my Savior's breast.
This brigher vision animates my hope,
Supports my soul, and bears my spirits up:
Thick darkness long had dwelt around my clay;
But Christ my sun has rose to bless the day,
And with such charms as none but he imparts,
Binds the strong passions of my faithless heart.
Adieu ye fading, fluctuating scenes,
Which only pencil visionary dreams;
Such false named joys can never my soul delight,
The morning star! the bright celestial light
Eclipses these in one eternal night.
If one kind smile enraptures all my frame,
Sheds such a fragrance on thy sacred name,
What heavenly raptures soon shall seize my breast,
When I shall soar to dwell among the blessed!
Ere long my soul shall quit this meaner clay,
And on seraphic wings shall bear its way
Into that world of joy and pure delight,
Where Hope shall cease, and Faith be lost in sight.
Propitious period! Jesus haste and come --
O take thy captive to her native home!
E. E. ON THE XIXth PSALM.
THE heavens above our heads declare
Thy glory, Lord, in letters fair,
With marks of thine almighty power
Adorning each revolving hour.
The sun, when he begins his race,
The borders of thy works displays,
And, as his glories brighter shine,
More plainly shows thy skill divine:
Thy creatures' hearts with rapture bound,
While he with splendid speed goes round,
And daily, as thy bounteous hand,
Sheds blessings down on every land.
The moon, that from her azure throne
By night diffuses light alone,
Thy separating skill proclaims
Wherever she sends her borrowed beams.
The distant stars that, through the night,
From far emit their twinkling light,
Expand our views of thy domain,
And tell how vast, how wide thy reign.
The various trees, and plants, and flowers,
Born of thy heav'n-descending showers,
With fishes, birds, and beasts unite
Thy name through earth and seas to write.
Creation's works, in all their forms,
From rolling stars, to creeping worms,
In never-ceasing concord join
To sing thy name, thy power divine.
But when the dawn of heaven we view
In fallen sinners born anew;
When, in the Gospel's brighter skies,
We see the Sun of glory rise;
No more we ask the stars to tell
What Jesus only could reveal;
In him at once our eyes behold
More than creation ever told.
Omnipotence, to every age
Creation sings, in accents sage;
But love and justice, truth and grace,
Shine only in Redemption's rays.
Thy nature and thy name we read
When we behold Immanuel bleed;
And when we hear his dying groan,
His shame and sorrow tells our own.
Thy just commands, by him obeyed,
In all their beauty stand displayed;
Thy righteous vengeance falling there,
Fills earth and heaven with holy fear.
The luster of thy holy law
Thus honored, fills our minds with awe;
And Calv'ry's scenes at once reveal
More love and wrath than heaven and hell.
How pure the Truth that would not spare
Thine Equal, thine eternal Heir!
How great the love that freely gave
Thy Son, thine enemies to save!
Where end! -- where does this heaven begin?
The grace how great! how bright the scene!
Salvation sent so full, so free!
Lord, how may sinners honor thee?
O! let thy promised Spirit come,
And make our hearts his constant home!
That, in the light that shines from thee,
We may thy light, thy glory see!
Till each believer, like a sun,
Shall one eternal circle run,
And more sublimely sing thy love
To all the listening worlds above!
J. S. ODE UPON CHRIST's CRUCIFIXION. FROM THE GREEK.
ENOUGH of Pagan idle toys,
Change the strings and raise the voice,
To sacred notes the lyre applied,
Hail the King the Crucified!
Of wonders thou eternal store!
O what first shall I explore!
Fain would I ^can, fain would I tell
Mysteries unspeakable!
By man or spirit blessed on high,
How the living Lord could die!
I Will tell of love to creature's sight
Fathomless and infinite.
His well-lov'd Son the Father chose,
Bleeding Ransom for his foes!
I Will sing in lofty strains aloud
Triumphs of my buried Lord!
Hell and the grave are captives led;
Death is conquered by the Dead!
But hark! from Calvary rebounds
Mixture of affright'ning sounds.
Loud, echoing dreadful from afar,
Of the slain, and of the slayer,
That wounds mine ear! Haste, quickly fly
To the mountain's top, mine eye.
Him 'midst of three expiring view,
How unlike the other two!
His gentle head he meekly bends,
Wide his sacred arms extend;
The cruel nails, his weight that bear,
Tear him, fast'ning while they tear.
This suffered wretched man, for thee,
Without suffering can thou ^ee?
Thick rise thy groans, thy vesture tear,
Beat the breast and rend the hair;
The tenderest yearning pangs be thine,
All in purple see him shine;
Not purchased from the Tyrian shore,
Died, alas! with dropping gore,
Part by his bleeding temples shed,
From the thorns which pierced his head;
Part from the long-drawn furrows flowed,
Which the twisted scourge had plough'd:
High let the streams of sorrow rise,
Open the fountains of thine eyes;
Pour, pour on earth a gushing flood;
Since, so liberal of his blood,
His vital drops for thee he spares,
Can thou, mortal, grudge thy tears?
C. D. SOMETHING NEW.
SINCE man by sin has lost his God,
He seeks creation through,
And vainly hopes for solid bliss,
In trying Something new.
The new-possess'd (like fading flowers)
Soon loses its gay^ hue;
The bauble now no longer takes --
The soul wants Something new.
And could we call all Europe ours,
With India and Peru;
The mind would feel an aching void,
And still want Something new.
But when we feel the Savior's power,
All good in him we view;
The soul forsakes its vain pursuits,
Nor seeks for Something new.
The joys a dear Redeemer brings,
Will bear a strict review:
Nor need we ever change again,
For CHRIST is Always new.
On the Death of Miss REBECCA MOULDER.
IT IS done -- and loved Rebecca yields her breath!
But dies in peace to triumph over death:
That choicest flower of heaven, immortal love,
Just buds on earth, to bloom in worlds above.
To hear when death triumphant shook his dart,
The dreadful summons with a cheerful heart,
Sure sweet reflection on a life well spent,
Made the heart easy and the mind content;
Soothed all her anguish, softened all her woe,
And braved the horrors of the ghastly foe;
Bade heavenly prospects all around her rise,
And pleasing objects bless her closing eyes.
It Is next to love to share the tear of woe,
No other balm relieves the mourner so.
Her soul, uplifted on celestial wing,
Hears Heaven's high vaults with hallelujahs ring.
To worlds of blessedness she bends her flight,
And treads the immortal regions of delight:
Thou early saint! thy God's peculiar care,
Who gave thee wisdom, goodness, knowledge rare,
Taught thee through life's perplexing scenes to shine,
And proved by every mark a work divine.
Not to herself, but to her Savior flies,
And in his boundless love exulting dies.
PHILOS. OBITUARY. Philadelphia -- [Inserted by desire.]
ON the 5th of March, 1796, departed this life, Miss REBECCA MOULDER, of this
city, in the 26th year of her age. Her remains were interred in the Baptist
burying ground, attended by a respectable concourse of citizens and
sympathizing friends.

By those who were acquainted with this excellent young lady, no eulogium that
could possibly be given her, would be viewed as exagg^^ated.

Easy in her manners, she rendered herself agreeable to all. -- Her
conversation uniformly turned upon subjects calculated to impart benefit;
though of so modest a demeanor, her view was -- to receive it.

Possessed of a benevolent heart, she always felt for, and, agreeable to her
ability, afforded relief unto the poor and distressed. -- And as a "christian
is the highest style" of any human being -- she was one in an eminent degree!

A firm belief in JESUS and the RESURRECTION influenced her some years ago to
make a public profession of his name, which she constantly adorned -- This
always afforded her, considering her youth, unusual confidence; the verity of
which was realized on her dying bed --

For triumphing in the faith of the gospel -- she lived -- she bade adieu to
earth -- and now sleeps in the arms of her REDEEMER.

"Safe is she lodged above these rolling spheres;
The baleful influence of whose giddy dance
Sheds sad vicissitudes on all beneath."
THE CHRISTIAN's POCKET LIBRARY. No. III. -- VOL. I.
AN ESSAY On the Influence of Grace upon the Soul of Man.
AS, when a river is turned into a new channel, the stream forsakes its ancient
bed, and pursues a course unknown till then; so the soul of man, when its
native captivity to sin and death, is turned as the rivers in the South, flows
back to God, from whom it ran before; nor ceases to flow, till it has gained
the ocean of infinite good.

This is the inseparable effect of union and communion with Christ. The
glorious liberty of the children of God, is a liberty from the darkness of
unbelief, and from the bondage of moral corruption, into the light of faith,
the fire of love, and law of righteousness. That question in the prophet, Can
the Ethiopean change his skin, or the leopard his spots? admits of a favorable
solution. The converting SPIRIT of God does that for us which we could never do
for ourselves. He makes the Ethiopean, in a moral sense, fair as the driven
snow; and renders the spotted leopard spotless, in comparison of what he was.
The vassals of iniquity became vessels of glory; and the soul that once cleaved
to the dust of sensuality, and lay dead in trespasses and sins, is quickened
from above, and made to sit in heavenly places with Christ Jesus. When the
citadel of the human heart is taken by grace, the enemy's colors are
displaced; Satan's usurped authority is superseded; the standard of the Cross
is erected on the walls; and the spiritual rebel takes the vow of willing
allegiance to Christ, his rightful sovereign. The strong holds to sin on one
hand, and of self-righteousness on the other, are battered down; and the soul,
from that blessed moment, made free indeed, cries out, Other lords have had
dominion over me; but the darkness is past, and the true light now shines: the
snare is broken, and I am delivered.

From this experience of the divine power in our own hearts, we cannot but
adopt the celestial anthem, Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace,
good will toward men! Our Conversion becomes known to all; and some of the
practical effects, produced by, and connected with, that great display of
grace, are these that follow: --

Where Lust, that fiery serpent, was wont to crawl, divine LOVE kindles her
hallowed flame, and raises the affections, as on eagles' wings, to heaven.

Where Unbelief, blind and sullen as the mole, lay wrapped in malicious gloom,
loving darkness rather than light, and seeking to undetermine what she had not
eyes to see, FAITH diffuses the brightness of celestial day, and leads the
willing soul to Him who bought her with his blood.

Where Insensibility, thoughtless as the bird that hastens to the snare, and
gay as a victim crowned for the slaughter, sported on the precipice of
destruction, and danced on the verge of death, serious CONVICTION fixes her
keen, but salutary weapon; and filial FEAR keeps the avenues of the converted
person's heart, and the actions of his life, in powerful, but sweet, restraint.

Where Envy pined, where Malice hissed, where Slander sharpened her tongue, and
Pride, that bloated snake, lifted her swelling crest; universal CHARITY throws
wide her arms; HUMILITY stoops to the tenderest offices of beneficence; and
dove-like MEEKNESS smiles with benignity in her heart, and the law of candor
upon her lips.

Where Intemperance mixed the intoxicating bowl, and lawless riot pushed the
superfluous glass, seeking to drown every thought of eternity, and to sink the
poor remains of human dignity, in the poisonous draught; there, religious
MODERATION marks out the limits; mindful of that more than golden rule, Whether
ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God.

Where Profaneness, assuming the mask of wit, spawned the irreligious jest,
and solicited the hellish laugh, prostituting, perhaps, even the language of
Scripture to the purposes of licentious mirth, and playing on the very words of
the Holy Ghost; trifling with sacred subjects, at which angels tremble, and
lightly mentioning that adorable Name, at which angels bow; there, from the
moment of conversion, grace introduces a total change. The renewed sinner
abhors himself, as in dust and ashes, for all that he has done; and can never
sufficiently adore, admire, and revere, that infinite goodness, which, instead
of turning him into hell, has turned him to God, and made him a living
monument, not of deserved vengeance, but of unmerited mercy. His heart, which,
till then, was a sink of impurity and profanation, is transformed into an
house of prayer; and his mouth, once the seat of blasphemy, is consecrated into
an altar of praise.

Where Avarice sat brooding, tenacious as death, and insatiate as the grave;
unfeeling as marble, and deaf to the cries of distress, as the adder that stops
her ear: discreet LIBERALITY unlocks the heart, and well-directed Beneficence
extends her hand to bestow. The language of the soul is similar to that of
Zaccheus: Behold, Lord, the half of my goods, I give to the poor; and, if I
have taken any thing from any man, by false accusation, I restore him fourfold.
The true believer, like his adorable Savior, goes about, doing good, and
seeking whom he may relieve.

Where Discontent, like a wild bull in a net, raged and struggled, turning the
rod of affliction into a serpent, and charging Providence with folly; reclining
PATIENCE kisses the hand that smites, and, knowing that Infinite Wisdom and
Goodness have mingled the draught, not only receives, but even relishes, the
cup: while celestial HOPE casts her anchor on the inestimable promise of Him
who says, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee; and who has immutably
declared, that All things without exception, work together for good, to them
that love God, to them that are the called according to his purpose. Thus does
the follower of Christ, in the communicated strength of the Holy One, take up
his cross; content to bear it as long, and to carry it as far* as God's
unerring will shall please: "Nor thinks its chance, nor murmurs at the load;
"But knows, what man calls fortune, is from God."


Where sacrilegious Impiety once robbed Jehovah of his own Day, and profaned
the SABBATH, either by rioting and excess, or by traveling, or by the
transaction of worldly business, or by making it an opportunity of recreation
and idle amusement; thus rendering the best of days subservient to the worst
purposes, either of atrocious guilt, or of criminal insignificance; either
basely selling, or unprofitably squandering, those precious, those
irretrievable hours, which should be appropriated to the glory of God, and to
the spiritual improvement of the soul; -- There, religious regard to divine
appointment, and love to the gracious Appointer, constrain the Christian to
keep the Lord's Day holy to the Lord, and to cultivate an habitual, increasing
fitness for the enjoyment of that Sabbatism, that everlasting rest, which
remains for the people of God.

In a word, where Impenitency, armed with tenfold brass, stiffened her neck,
and withdrew her shoulder from the yoke of obedience; -- the once obdurate
sinner, being made willing in the day of God's power, cries out, with vanquished
Paul, Lord, what would thou have me to do? Tears of contrition flow, like
water from the smitten rock; REPENTANCE strikes her conscious breast; and
DEVOTION darts her aspiring eyes to heaven.

May those, who have, hitherto, been unconcerned about the great work of
conversion, beg of God to show them the things belonging to their peace, ever
death makes them wise indeed; wise, perhaps, too late!

And may such of us, as are influenced, by grace, to the experimental
knowledge, love, and imitation of Christ; be led, farther, and deeper, into
acquaintance with God, and communion with his blessed Spirit: gaining, day by
day, brighter evidences of our Election to eternal life, and more substantial
marks of our interest in the Covenant of Grace. Pray for the full assurance of
faith, for the feeling of God's favor to you in Christ Jesus, and for the
knowledge of salvation by the forgiveness of sins.

A. M. T. A PRESERVATION.
SIR James Thornhill was the person who painted the inside of the famous cupola
of St. Paul's, London. After having finished one of the compartments, he
stepped back, gradually, to see how it would look at a distance. He receded so
far (still keeping his eye intently fixed on the painting) that he was got
almost to the very edge of the scaffolding, without perceiving it: had he
continued to retreat half a minute more, he must have fallen to the pavement
beneath, and completed his destruction. A person present, who saw the danger
the great artist was in, had the happy presence of mind to snatch up one of the
brushes, and daubed it over the painting. Sir James, transported with rage,
sprung forward to save the remainder of the piece. But his rage was soon turned
into thanks, when the person addressed him -- "Sir, by spoiling the painting I
have saved the life of the painter. You had advanced to the extremity of the
scaffold, without knowing it. Had I called to you, to apprize you of your
danger, you would naturally have turned to look behind you; and the surprise of
finding yourself in such a dreadful situation, would have hastened your fall. I
had, therefore, no other method of retrieving you but by acting as I did."

Not altogether dissimilar to this is God's conduct to his people. It is the
vain employ of sinful man, by the imperfect duties of his life, to draw his own
portrait, in such delusive colors, as to esteem himself worthy the attention
of the Almighty; and, after the performance is executed, to view himself in
every favorable light to gratify the vanity of his self-righteous heart,
although every step he takes in the review, hastens his unwary feet to a fall
which must complete his destruction. But, it is the determination of the God of
Grace, to stain the pride of all human glory; and, as the by-stander daubed the
painting of Sir James Thornhill, purposely to save his life from death, so the
LORD the SPIRIT mars our legal performances, shows us the guilt that attends
them, and their inefficiency to justify us before the tribunal of JEHOVAH; then
directs our attention to JESUS, the Son of God, the Lord our Righteousness;
who, being the brightness of his FATHER 's glory, and the express image of his
PERSON, having purged our sins, becomes our only salvation. Then, instead of
our hearts arising in resentment against the conduct of the Almighty, in
destroying the works of our hands, we thankfully adore his grace, and triumph
in his love!

The Life of the late Reverend and learned AUGUSTUS MONTAGUE TOPLADY, M. A.
Vicar of Broad Hembury, in Devonshire, Great Britain. (Continued from page 72,
and concluded.)
ON a friend's suggesting to Mr. Toplady the loss which the Church of Christ
would sustain by his death, the utmost discomposure was visible in his
countenance, and with extreme sensibility he exclaimed, "What, by my death? No!
By my death? No! Jesus Christ is able, and will, by proper instruments, defend
his own truths. And with regard to what little I have been enabled to do in
this way, not to me, but to his name, and to that only, be the glory." A short
time preceding his death, his friend and physician, on his own earnest request,
informing him that his heart and arteries evidently beat, every day, weaker and
weaker; he replied immediately with a smile, -- " Why, that is a good sign, that
my death is fast approaching; and blessed be God, I can add, that my heart
beats every day stronger and stronger for glory."

Another friend took the liberty to ask him, if in his present situation he had
any doubt remaining upon his mind respecting the truth of those principles he
had so warmly propagated in his ministry. He replied, -- " Doubt, Sir, doubt!
Pray use not that word when speaking of me. I cannot endure the term; at least
while God continues to shine upon my soul, in the gracious manner he now does.
Not," added he, " but that I am sensible, that while in the body, if left of
him, I am capable, through the power of temptation, of calling into question
every truth of the gospel; but that is so far from being the case, that the
manifestation and comforts of his love are so abundant as to render my state
the most desirable in the world. I would not exchange my condition with any one
upon earth. And with respect to my principles, those blessed truths which I
have been enabled in my poor measure to maintain, appear to me more than ever,
most gloriously indubitable. My own existence is not, to my apprehension, a
greater certainty. To me sickness is no affliction; pain no curse; death itself
no dissolution.

A few days before his death, he said to a friend, with his hands clasped, and
his eyes lifted up, flowing with tears of evident joy, " O, my dear Sir, I
cannot tell you the comforts I feel in my soul: they are past expression! The
consolations of God to such an unworthy wretch are so abundant, he leaves me
nothing to pray for, but a continuance of them. I enjoy an heaven already in my
soul. My prayers are all converted into praise. Nevertheless, I do not forget
that I am still in the body, and liable to all those distressing fears which
are incident to human nature when under temptations, and without any sensible
divine support. But so long as the presence of God continues with me in the
degree I now enjoy it, I cannot but think that such a desponding frame is
impossible." The nearer he drew to his decease, the more happy and heavenly he
appeared in his spirit and conversation. Founded upon the rock Christ Jesus,
and influenced with the Father's everlasting love, he stands against the shock
of mortality. The truth he preached to others, being the food and nourishment
of his own soul, he now finds their sweetness to counterpoise the sorrows of
the grave. Happy, unspeakably happy is that man, and especially that minister,
who is thus divinely taught and enriched by a God of all grace! The truth of
Christ shall make them free from every fear, and safe conduct their feet
through the shades of death; while the unhappy formalist, and self-taught
professor, will tremble and sink beneath the prospect of immortality.

Not long before his exit Mr. Toplady exclaimed, " O how this soul of mine
longs to be gone! like a bird imprisoned in a cage, it longs to take its
flight. O that I had wings like a dove! then would I flee away to the realms of
bliss, and be at rest forever!" Being asked by a friend, if he always enjoyed
such comforts, he answered, " I cannot say there are no intermissions; for if
there were not, my consolations would be more and greater than I could possibly
bear; but, when they abate, they leave such an abiding sense of God's goodness,
and of the certainty of my being fixed upon the eternal rock of Christ Jesus,
that my soul is still filled with peace and joy." A little before his
departure, he blessed God for continuing to him his understanding in clearness;
but added, with a rapture, -- " Most of all, his abiding presence, and the
shining of his love upon my soul. The sky is clear; there is no cloud; come
Lord Jesus, come quickly!" Soon after this he closed his eyes, the 11th of
August, 1778, and found, as Milton expresses it -- a death like sleep,
A gentle wafting to immortal life.


The corpse of Mr. Toplady, agreeably to his own desire, was interred in
Tottenham Court Chapel, in a remarkably deep grave, in presence of a concourse
of people. And, notwithstanding Mr. Toplady had frequently expressed his
disapprobation of any funeral sermon being delivered on his death, yet the
REVEREND ROWLAND HILL could not forbear ascending the pulpit at the interment,
and made a very solemn and affectionate address to the thronged church.

MORNING's INTERVIEW Between Deacon Ridly and Colonel Sharpless, New Jersey.
Deacon. SO, so, Colonel, good morning; when did you return from York?


Col. Last night, and had I not been so desperately jaded, I should have called
upon you right away for a grain of comfort.


Deacon. Why, what in the world is the matter with you, you look mighty poorly;
come, sit down Colonel. Are markets low that make you feel so ugly?


Col. Deacon, as old a man as you are you never heard the like in all your
days; there is that great man Thomas Pain been writing against the bible, and
a great many Yorkers take side with him, and if something is not done, they
will all turn deists. Here, Deacon Ridly, is the book; do look at it; I bought
it at Swords's, in Pearl-street.


Deacon. Well, well, I will look at this mighty book. Molly, hand me your
grand-mother's spectacles. Perhaps, Colonel, you are more afraid than hurt. I
guess you are mistaken about the folks in York; I have long thought many of
them did not like the bible mighty well, and only wanted Tom Paine's fine
French cloak to walk in.


Col. Stay, Deacon, not quite so hard; -- Pain reasons desperately indeed; --
let me show you this place. Ah! there it is, he strikes home at the root. (P.
13) -- "Revelation, when applied to religion, means something communicated
immediately from God to man. No one will deny or dispute the power of the
Almighty to make such a communication if he pleases. But admitting for the sake
of a case, that something has been revealed to a certain person, and not
revealed to any other person, it is revelation to that person only. When he
tells it to a second person, a second to a third, and a third to a fourth, and
so on, it ceases to be a revelation to all those persons. It is a revelation to
the first person only, and heresay to every other, and consequently they are
not obliged to believe it." Now Deacon, how am I to know whether the bible be a
revelation of God or not -- Is it heresay to me!


Deacon. So, so, let me see if I cannot take this Tom Fox by the tail, and take
off his firebrand. Do Colonel hand me that book on the shelf; it is Paine's
Common Sense. -- See here, -- (p. 7.) On monarchy and hereditary succession, he
quotes the scriptures, and says, it is worth attending to, and shows the
origin, and succession of the kings of Israel; these portions of scripture,
says he, are direct and positive; they admit o^ to equivocal construction; and
then brings in the attestation of the Almighty in this case. Here Colonel, you
see, to point his pen against KINGS, he gives full credit to the bible, as much
as any parson in America; but when he got into France, he lost his " Common
Sense," and calls the bible a heresay. Thus you see Pain is either a believer
or an unbeliever, as suits his own purpose.


Col. Why, Deacon, I never saw you so merry in all my born days; I thought to
be sure, you would have burst your eyes in tears! But look a little farther and
you will see, -- aye, there it is, (p. 50) how he talks about the Savior
having no learning, and that he could not write.


Deacon. Aye, so he does. Take the bible Colonel, and turn to John viii.6. and
you will there see, Jesus stooped down and with his finger WROTE on the ground,
when the accusers of the adultress were before him. But, see here Colonel, in
the very same page, Pain says, "Jesus Christ called men to the practice of
moral virtues, and the belief of one God," therefore, Jesus must have had the
best sort of learning.


Col. Very true, Deacon. There is another place where he calls St. Paul a
manufacturer of quibbles, (p. 54) -- the book of Revelations is a riddle, (p.
32) and says the metaphor of a dishclout might have been introduced as a type,
(p. 146.)


Deacon. Paul was consistent in his writings, and not like Pain, in his Common
Sense approving the Scripture, and in his Age of Reason denying it; therefore
was no quibbler. -- The Revelation may appear a riddle to Pain, simply because
he had no eyes to read it, nor inclination to compare it with the successive
events of time; and, as to the metaphor of a dishclout, if he had looked sharp,
he would have found it already in Jeremiah. All our righteousnesses are as
filthy rags, Isaiah lxiv.6.
and if poor Tom had known his own heart, he would have found it in God's sight
more filthy than the dirtiest dishclout ever handled by a scullion in his
kitchen. However, Colonel, as Dr. Linn says, in his Sermon on the Times, "That
book, which has for so many ages stood the roaring of the lion, may well stand
the braying of an ass."


Col. Pain also says that the Christian Church sprung out of the tail of the
heathen mythology; and, Deacon, there are many things in scripture that look a
little that way. (p. 17 and 97.)


Deacon. I guess, Colonel, this rather comes from Paine's head than the
heathen's tail. Now, Colonel, I wonder our dominies do not more explain these
things to their people; but let that be as it may, if you compare the heathen
mythology with the scripture, you will find that the heathen mythology is a
corruption from the scripture; you know on man's expulsion from Paradise, God
placed cherubims to guard the tree of life; and, no doubt, Cain being familiar
therewith, he and his posterity, on their settlement, not fearing the true God,
made gods of their own from that figure. The same cherubims were appointed in
the Tabernacle of Moses; in the Temple of Solomon; and, mightily spoken of by
Ezekiel: now, these cherubims, in Hebrew, answer to the elements of Nature; and
when the tribes revolted under Jereboam, they carried the idea of these
hieroglyphics among the heathen, and thus, in my opinion, Jupiter, and all the
other heathen gods, were established and worshipped, as they all answer in
their names and natures to the four faces of the cherubims, as you may see
explained by the learned Mr. Parkhurst, in his Hebrew Lexicon.


Col. Then, Deacon, you don't believe what Pain says?


Deacon. Do you think I am so foolish in my old age as to believe an
unbeliever? No, no, let unbelievers credit one another if they please; were I
to believe such, my reason and common sense might laugh in my face.


Col. What think you could induce that man to write such a book?


Deacon. I Will tell you, Colonel; you know Pain was then in the clutches of the
French Convention, many of whom were deists greater than himself; and, to
recommend himself to their favor, and save his neck from Louis's
cutting-knife, the gullotine, I guess he wrote against the bible. Another
reason why he wrote against the christian religion is, because he had none in
himself; if he had known himself a sinner, he would have seen the necessity of
a Savior revealed, or perish. But, Colonel, I see Pain as in the hand of
Providence. France, you know, for many ages, has been as cup of infidelity and
superstition: in order for the reception of the pure wine of the Gospel, the
cup must be emptyed; and I look upon Paine's book as a just description of the
present state of religion, if such it may be called, in that country; and thus
he is the hand that shows us the contents of the cup of abominations. The time,
I believe, is not far distant, when truth and righteousness shall flourish
among that people, and the pure doctrines of Christ shall arise upon the ruins
of infidelity. But, stay Colonel, what is this he says, (p. 71) -- "I keep no
bible." The only true word in all his book, and a plain proof of his ignorance
and contempt of the subject.


Col. Deacon Ridly, I am mighty glad to hear you talk; it does me more good
than all the sermons I have heard this month past. I feel quite relieved; -- do
let us have a mug of your cider, and I Will go and order my team to plough; and at
another time I will ask you more about this book, for I vow it had almost
turned me upside down.


THE SLOTHFUL WORSHIPER ADMONISHED.
FOR a professed christian to enter a place of public worship when service is
half performed, is attended with extreme disadvantages to himself, and many
inconveniences to others; consequently merits friendly admonition.

Such a person, however, may reply, "better late than never;" but, on serious
reflection, he must find his tardy steps expose him to severe reflection. Does
he not give others leave to imagine he has indulged a bed of sloth, especially
when on every other morning in the week he is known to be first at market, and
the earliest at his business? Who can suppose he has had time for either family
or closet Devotion; or if performed at all, it must have been in a bustle to
get to Church before sermon. May not many steady worshippers imagine, that this
slothful christian, however he may talk of loving sermons, can have little idea
of the true worship of the great God, when he enters the door after prayer?
Should he be equally late in his attendance in the afternoon, who but may
imagine he has too freely eat at his table; or has taken a few glasses too
many? This, however, is certain, no one has reason to suppose his mind in a
lively frame for religion; that he loves the habitation of the Almighty; feels
a warm attachment to God's saints; or is a lover of prayer and praise.

This evil does not rest alone upon or with himself. What a bad example does he
set his family, and others in the congregation, especially young persons, who
need every stimulus to duty! What an interruption to public worship is it for a
person to bounce in, and almost out of breath, to take his seat, while service
is performed? And, what a discouragement is it to the minister to see so little
fruit of his labor, and perhaps to be interrupted in his work by this
negligent attendant, who catches the eye of every body in the church?

It is granted, that lawful, unavoidable obstructions may occur to prevent a
person's timely attendance on worship; where this is the real case, it will
create the pain of disappointment in that breast which glows with ardour for
Communion with God in his sanctuary; but it is to be feared, many, very many
habitually neglect a due attendance on the house of the Lord, and need
admonition to quicken their steps, which, if effected hereby, will answer the
desired end of this paper.

THE REFLECTION.
AM I a sinner? -- The conviction of my conscience, the events of my life, and
the law of my creation, confirm the solemn truth. Sin has produced in my breast
unhallowed desires, deranged by mental powers, and debased my softer passions;
it prepares for my steps a thorny path, and creates a stubborn will, averse to
all that is good. In vain I pass the busy scenes of life, or seek to drown my
conscious sensibility among the sons of mirth: these enhance my pain in
reflecting hours, and arm my pillow with thorns, more piercing than the
poisoned arrow. I am amenable to HIM who made me. This, a conscience something,
resident within, announces. And this I learn from the various scenes of life,
and the passage of my fellow mortals, though against their will, to a state
from which they never, never will return. Ah! my soul, every fleeting moment
brings thee nearer to the fatal crisis, when thou, and all that is mortal, shall
bid adieu, and then to stand before thy Maker's august throne. But O! -- this
God is good, and mercy dwells with him. Yet, say my soul, this God is righteous
too; nor can his goodness, nor his mercy, reach thee as a sinner, at expense so
dear as forfeiture of justice. If there be a God, immutable must be his
attributes; nor one impeach or cross another. How then, as a sinner, can thou
hope to meet his smiles? -- Say thou, revolve, repent; yet alas! who will
pay the old arrear! Will repenting tears obliterate the awful debt I owe? But,
should I say I will repent, can repentance flow from a heart so hard and vile
as mine? The terrors of my God forbid repentance; inflexible is his law, and
exorable is his justice; -- my guilty breast feels encrusted; my tears refuse
to flow; nor can I find repentance, though by repentance I should be saved.
Whither then would thou fly? Survey the stores of nature, if a victim can be
found to satisfy thy God; -- see, if among her choicest sweets, a balm so full
of virtue can be found to make the whole. All, all is vain! "Shall I come
before the Lord with burnt-offerings, with calves of a year old? Will the Lord
be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousands of rivers of oil?
Shall I give my first born for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the
sin of my soul?" These, alas! have no merit for human offense; and the very
offering of them would betray my folly and accumulate my guilt. What said
Abraham to his son? -- "God will provide himself a lamb for a burnt-offering."
Genesis xxii.8. The gospel points me to that Lamb; God's coequal, coeternal Son
-- that Lamb, who was lead to the slaughter; bled beneath the stroke of
justice; and whose atoning sacrifice is accepted by that God against whom my
sins arise. Here then will I rest. On this rock of salvation will I cast my
soul with all its guilt and cares. O thou bleeding, suffering dying Lamb of
God, who takes away the sin of the world; wash me in thy precious blood,
clothe me in thy justifying righteousness, and, by thy sovereign, efficacious
grace, restore my heart, my life, my soul, to thy holy image! and when flesh
and heart shall fail, be thou the strength of my life and my portion for ever.

THE DOCTOR's MISTAKE.
DR. D -- 's besetting sin seems to have been an excess and laxness of
complaisance. Being to preach one Sunday at a country town, where were two
different churches, the one Calvinistic, the other Armenian, the Doctor
provided himself with two sermons, as opposite in their plan as were the
congregations to which he was to preach. When arrived at the place, he mounted
the Calvinist pulpit in the morning. He gave out his text, and began his
discourse; but had not got far before he perceived he had pulled out the wrong
sermon. He could not, however, recede; but went through with it with much
uneasiness to himself, and to the great dissatisfaction of his auditory. Having
but two sermons with him, and knowing that many of his morning hearers would
follow him to the other church in the afternoon, he was under the necessity of
preaching his Calvinistic discourse to the Armenian congregation, where he gave
as much discontent as he had done to the other before. The Doctor lamenting his
mistake shortly after to an intimate friend, received this mortifying answer:
"Never mind it, Sir, you only happened to put your hand in the wrong pocket."

DIALOGUE Between a Father and his Son. [Continued from page 66, and concluded.]
PART III.
Father. MY son, did you read in the gazette of today, the treaty of peace
between the DEY of Algiers and the United States?


Son. I did, Sir, and it afforded me peculiar satisfaction to find that our
trade was in some degree preserved from interruption by that rapacious nation;
and especially as it may afford a ray of hope to our suffering citizens, now
confined in that dreadful country. Who that feels the flame of religious and
civil liberty within his breast, but must often drop for them the sympathetic
tear!


Father. I know, my child, you always felt a generous heart for another's woe.
Civil liberty is sweet; yet, those slaves, chained to the galleys, enduring the
most severe bondage, did they feel liberty of soul from the power of sin and
the condemnation of the law by the sacrifice of Christ, they must be pronounced
infinitely more happy than the most wealthy merchant, that neither knows nor
fears the Lord. Since, my son, we are upon the subject of liberty, as you
expressed to me when riding on the Island, the unhappy state of your mind, I
wish you to inform me if you have obtained any relief.


Son. Contrary to my expectation I have felt relief, and in a way once remote
from my desires. I cannot but be astonished at the delusion of my mind, and the
change of my heart! I saw neither my danger nor my deliverer. Surely it is the
Lord who has revealed them both, or I should have been ignorant of them still.


Father. You fill my heart with joy! Favor me, my son, with the way by which
your mind was made at ease.


Son. After our conversation while riding on the Island, I sought a retired
moment for prayer; but while bending my knees, a gloom overspread my mind; --
my mouth was stopped; -- I had no view of God, although my heart was filled
with his terrors. Arising from my knees, I was about to leave my chamber, and
while my hat was in my hand, these words sensibly occurred to my thoughts, All
thy children shall be taught of God, and great shall be the peace of thy
children. Isa. live.13. I immediately returned to prayer, and begged the Lord to
teach me the knowledge of himself; -- my mind expanded; -- I saw, God was a
just God, and yet a Savior; -- that Jesus had died for sinners, -- for his
very enemies. The love of Christ engaged my heart; -- I wept; -- I prayed. The
voice of Jesus, saying, Come unto me, all ye that labor, and are heavy laden,
and I will give you rest, Matt. xi.28. reached my heart; -- I felt a
willingness to lay at his feet with my guilt and folly. I was persuaded that
his blood could cleanse from all sin. When I arose from prayer, it seemed all
my distress was gone. I wished the Lord would take charge of me, and that my
body and soul might be sealed his for ever! I resolved to inform you of it
immediately, but I know not what forbid me, for three weeks past; probably it
might have been a temptation -- I hope, Sir, you will excuse it --


Father. O my child! how bountiful is God to me! how rich is his mercy to you!
May the Lord seal you indeed for his own! Now you will feel new motives for
obedience, and be led to a source of happiness unknown to you before. Remember,
it is said, Messiah shall feed his flock like a shepherd; he shall gather the
lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom. Isaiah xl.11. Look to him to
defend your tender mind from evil, conduct your feet in the path of duty, and
finish the work I hope he has graciously begun. I forbear describing to you
the thorny path you have to tread, and the many enemies that will assault you.
I will not interrupt your joy. Still contemplate the beauties of Christ, the
riches of grace, and the prospects of eternity, and my heart shall drink with
you of the same sacred cup.


Son. I hope, Sir, you will pray the Lord that my present comforts may not
deceive me, for I have had a fear already arise, that such might be possible;
however, I dare not yield to it.


Father. Such fears are common to those wholly at the Shepherd's feet; be
assured they are injected by an infernal foe. Whenever such suspicions arise,
beg of the Lord to shine upon what you esteem to be his own work; and if it be
his work indeed, he will make it evident to you, that you may enjoy the comfort
of it. And, for your encouragement, read the complete suit of armor described
in Ephesians. vi. which, if worn by faith, will make you proof against your foes, and
no weapon formed against you shall prosper. I shall not cease to pray for you
while life and breath remain; be assured, that to see you walk worthy of the
Lord in the various relations of private and public life, will afford me that
happiness which can only be exceeded by the more immediate smiles of my God.


POPULATION.
THE aggregate population on the surface of the known habitable globe, is
estimated at 895,300,000 souls. If we reckon, with the ancients, that a
generation lasts thirty years, then, in that space, 895,300,000 human beings
will be born and die; consequently 81,760 must be dropping into eternity every
day, 3407 every hour, or about 56 every minute. How solemn the reflection! how
important the admonition, Be ye also ready!

ON BEING AWOKE FROM SLEEP BY A STORM.
HOW dreadful is the storm which has aroused me from my deep sleep! The
artillery of heaven seems doubly charged! How sharp the lightning that
penetrates the crevices of my windows! The thunder of the sky makes the house
rock, and my very bed to tremble! The hailstones seem commissioned to destroy,
and tempestuous winds appear to have lost their wonted bounds! My God! are
these the tokens of thy displeasure? Is my awakened frame agitated at these
demonstrations of thy awful grandeur? How then shall I arise from the bed of
death by the archangel's trump, and amidst dissolving elements, and the wreck
of nature, meet thee in tremenduous judgment! Who can stand in thy fight when
thou art angry! Yet to what expressions of thy indignation have my offenses
exposed me! How shall I allay the storm of thy righteous vengeance! Were I to
offer unto thee thousands of gold and silver, or all the vast treasures of ten
thousand worlds, the mighty sum would be infinitely too poor: would be spurned
from thy throne, and the very offering serve only to accumulate my offenses.
Lost in myself, I cast my eyes toward that slaughtered Lamb who takes away the
sins of men. O thou bleeding, prevailing sacrifice! let thy spirit apply that
blood to my guilty heart, which, on Mount Calvary, appeased incensed justice,
and procured salvation for the vile; let my imperfect soul be wrapped within
the mantle of thy pure obedience, and in which I may boldly stand the solemn
day. Thou adored Son of God has sustained the fiery indignation; and thou art
to me a covert from the storm, and a refuge from the tempest! Beneath the
shadow of thy winds I rest secure, and wait the judgment day. Let thunders
roar, and lightning pierce the sky; let the massy globe, with all its
splendor, fade away, and the arched heavens vanish as the smoke: I will
rejoice in the Lord, and triumph in his grace! O thou God of sovereign power
and majesty, let a sense of thy august Presence guard my steps this day, that I
err not from thy just commands. Let the solemn lesson of the morning abide till
the setting sun, and yield its sacred sweets; and thus the morning and the
evening shall celebrate thy praise.

THE BOOK-STEALER.
A Gentleman of Bristol, Great Britain, of pretty strong sentiments against the
person of Jesus, took occasion, in almost every company, to speak
contemptuously of the leading doctrines of revelation. Being one day at the
sale of the library of a late minister of that city, in one of the lots there
happened to be a volume entitled Christ Crucified. The lot being sold, and the
volume missing, there was a general inquiry after it through the room; when,
very unfortunately, it happened to be found in the possession of the
abovenamed gentleman, who, without hesitation, gave it up with a sneer,
saying, "Here, take your Christ Crucified, for any thing it is good for." Upon
which another gentleman in company, patting him upon the shoulder, very smartly
whispered him, "I FIND IT IS NOTHING UNCOMMON FOR THIEVES TO REVILE A CRUCIFIED
JESUS."

SELECT SENTENCES.
1. THE promises of God, like a well-drawn picture, look on all that look on
them with an eye of faith. They are like the beams of the sun, which shine as
freely in at the windows of the poor man's cottage as the rich man's palace.

2. Many persons shift their sins, as men do their clothes; they put off one to
put on another; this is but waiting on the devil in a new livery.

3. When a christian thinks he can go alone he is nearest falling.

4. The blood of Christ, which satisfied the justice of God, may well satisfy
the conscience of a sensible transgressor.

5. The imperfections of a believer's sanctification make him continually
depend on Christ for justification.

6. A complete christian lives like a king; and prays like a beggar.

7. Nature in man must have bread, but grace in man must have Christ: give a
gracious soul all the world, and take away Christ, and you give him stones for
bread.

8. The devil's softest pillow is a stony heart.

9. Prayer is a key which unlocks the blessings of the day, and locks up the
dangers of the night.

10. Extreme poverty is a strong temptation to dishonesty: it is hard for an
empty bag to stand upright.

ON THE LOVE OF CHRIST. In a Letter to the Right Hon. Lady Frances Shirley, by
the late Rev. James Hervey.
MY LADY,
ON Saturday in the afternoon, I promised myself a singular pleasure, the
pleasure of writing to your Ladyship; but was hindered from enjoying it, by
company which could not be left, and my business which could not be postponed.

I think, my Lady, you have a note under my hand, for a few thoughts on The
Love of CHRIST. How glad am I to pay, as far as my ability will reach, all my
obligations to your Ladyship! especially when they are of a nature so
peculiarly pleasing. Shall we then consider

The original of his love? It is free; perfectly free; without any desert, or
the least amiableness in us. We love our kind friends, and generous
benefactors: those that are accomplished in themselves, or serviceable to our
interests. But CHRIST loved us when we were sinners; when we were forgetful of
him; nay, enemies to him, by evil tempers, and wicked works. He loved us, (O
sovereign, most unmerited kindness!) when we deserved nothing, but utter
abhorrence, and eternal vengeance.

The commencement of his love. His love is not of yesterday. His love, like his
outgoings, is from everlasting. I have loved thee, says he to his church, with
an everlasting love. We value the affection that is of long standing; has taken
deep root; and still continues unshaken. How excellent, then, is thy loving
kindness, O blessed JESUS! which, before the mountains were brought forth, or
ever the earth and the world were made, was fixed upon sinful dust! O! that we,
my Lady, should be in the thoughts, be upon the very heart, of GOD's adorable
Son, even from the ages of eternity?

The duration of his love. It is invariable and eternal. Having loved his own,
he loves them even unto the end. It neither began with time, neither will it
end with time. As no worthiness in us caused it, so neither will our failings
extinguish it; no, nor our infirmities damp it. We change frequently; our holy
frames fail; but our adored Redeemer is the same yesterday, today, and for
ever. Fear not then, my honored Lady, neither life nor death, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate
us from the ever tender, the ever constant, the ever triumphant love of GOD our
Savior!

The effects of his love. It brought him from the heaven of heavens, to dwell
in clay, and be lodged in a manger. It brought him from those happy mansions,
where is the fullness of joy, and where are pleasures for evermore; to be
destitute, afflicted, tormented in this vale of tears. O my Lady! it made him,
who is heir of all things, not to have where to lay his head; till he was
stretched on the Cross, and laid it in the gloom of the grave. Unparalleled and
stupendous! Who can declare the noble acts of the Redeemer's love, or show
forth its praise?

The fruits of this love. To this is owing all the good we possess or expect;
every spiritual and heavenly blessing. If our eyes are enlightened, in any
degree, to see the things that belong to our peace: if our desires are
awakened, to seek the inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not
away: for this we are indebted to the love and grace of CHRIST. If we are
sanctified in part, and desirous to grow in true godliness: if we are perfectly
justified before GOD, and adopted to be his sons and daughters: these also are
streams, which issue from that inexhaustible fountain, THE LOVE OF CHRIST. As
it was stronger than death, in its actings and sufferings; it is richer than
all worlds in its precious, precious fruits.

Justly, therefore, does the scripture make use of all the endearing relations,
that subsist among mankind, to represent the love of CHRIST. Great is the love
of a friend; greater the love of a brother; greater still the love of a parent;
greatest of all the love of a bridegroom: but infinitely greater than any, than
all, is the love of the ever blessed IMMANUEL to his people. When all has been
said, all has been imagined; it transcends every comparison; it exceeds all
thought; or, as St. Paul speaks, it passes knowledge. -- May your Ladyship have
more and more exalted apprehensions of it; and live under a delightful sense of
its richness and perpetuity! -- May it be your sweet incitement to every duty,
and your sovereign cordial under all tribulation! -- And when eternity, the
vast eternity opens, it shall be, in a sense that no heart can conceive, your
crown of rejoicing; your exceeding great reward. -- And, I hope, you will
sometimes pray, that it may be the present comfort, and eternal joy of, my
Lady, your Ladyship's much obliged, and most dutiful humble servant,

J. HERVEY.
Miles's Lane, Feb. 4, 1752.
A WORD IN SEASON.
A word fitly spoken is like apples of gold in baskets of silver.

Prove. xxv.11.
THE late excellent and reverend Mr. James Hervey, Rector of Weston Flavel,
being one day on a journey, a lady who happened to be in the same carriage with
him, was expatiating in a very particular manner on the amusements of the
stage, as being, in her esteem, superior to any other pleasures. Among other
things she said, "There was the pleasure of thinking on the play before she
went, the pleasure she enjoyed when there, and the pleasure of ruminating upon
it when on her bed at night." Mr. Hervey, (who sat and heard her discourse
without interrupting her) when she had concluded, said to her, that there was
one pleasure more besides what she had mentioned that she had forgot. "What can
that be?" said she, "for sure I have included every pleasure, when I have
considered the enjoyment before hand -- at the time -- and afterward. Pray,
Sir, what is it?" To which Mr. Hervey, with a grave look, and in a manner
peculiarly amiable to himself, answered, "Madam, the pleasure that it will give
you on your DEATHBED." A clap of thunder, or a flash of lightning could not
have struck her with more surprise. The stroke went to her very heart, and she
had not one word to say, but seemed quite occupied in thinking upon it. In
short, the consequence of that well-timed word was, that she never went any
more to the playhouse, but became a pious woman, and a follower of those
pleasures which would afford her true satisfaction on her deathbed.

OBSERVATION.
ZEUXIS, the famous Grecian painter, used, in the latter part of his life, to
give away his pictures, without accepting any thing for them; for which he
assigned this reason: "I give away my pictures for nothing, because they are
above all price." Rollin's Arts and Sciences, vol. i. p. 205. -- And does not
GOD freely give us a place in the book of life, an interest in his Son, and a
title to his kingdom; nay, does he not make us a present of himself in Christ,
because these blessings are above all praise? To great, too high, too glorious,
to be purchased by the works of man!

POETRY.
ODE ON THE HOLY TRINITY.
FATHER of heaven and earth! coeval SON!
And co-existing SPIRIT! Trinal One!
Mysterious deity; invisible;
Indefinite and omnipresent God,
Inhabiting eternity! Shall dust,
Shall ashes, dare presume to sing of Thee?
O for a David's heart, and tongue of fire,
To rival angels in my praise and zeal!
Yet love immense, and gratitude, with awe
Religious mixed, shall elevate the hymn,
My heart enkindle, and inspire my tongue.
FATHER CREATOR! who beholds thy works,
But catches inspiration! Thou the earth
On nothing hung, and balanced in the void
With a magnetic force, and central poise.
Ocean of brightness Thou! Thy grand behest
Flung on thy orb, the sun, a sparkling drop,
To light the stars, and feed their silver urns
With unexhausted flame; to bid them shine
Eternal in their courses, over the blue
Which mantles night, and woo us to repose
With roscid radiance. They, harmonious roll
In majesty of motion, solemn, loud,
The universal hallelujah: sphere,
In lucid order, 'quiring sweet to sphere,
Deep-felt, and loftier than a seraph's song.
The symphony of well-according worlds!
But man, thy beam, thy breath, thy image shines
The crown, the glory, and the lord of all;
Of all below the stars! a plant ^^om heaven
Traduced to spread the riches of its bloom
Over earth, and watered with etherial dews;
Incorruptible aliment! the birds
Warble among his boughs; the cattle, safe,
Pasture within his shade; and earth beneath
The imperial umbrage of his branches smiles.
The smiling earth, the spangled spheres, and man
Their great Creator praise! but praise how long
Unless by thy Almighty arm upheld,
Preserver infinite? by Thee unless
Upheld, the earth would from her basis reel;
The spheres forego their courses, (off their orbs
The silver softness melted into shade)
Obscurely dissonant; and mortal man
(Void of all fostering fires) his stately form
To dust be moulder'd: Chaos would resume
Her ancient anarchy, confusion rule;
And darkness swallow ALL. In Thee we live,
In Thee we move: our beings in thy chain,
Linked to eternity, fasten on Thee,
The pillar of our souls! For me, (how late
A neighbor of the worm!) when I forget
The wonders of thy goodness ray'd on me,
And cease to celebrate, with matin harp
Or vesper song, the plenitude of love,
And healing mercy, may the nightly power,
Which whispers on my slumbers, cease to breathe
Her modulating impulse through my soul;
Untuned, unhallow^^ discord, string my lyre,
Idly, my finger, press the fretted gold,
Rebellious to the dictates of my hand,
When indolent, to swell the notes for Thee,
FATHER of heaven and earth! -- Coeval SON!
(His word, his essence, his effulgence pure!)
Not less thy FILIAL likeness I adore,
Nor from thy Father's glory aught disjoin,
Redeemer! Mediator! from the birth
Of uncreated time, thy Father's wrath
(Sprung from omniscience!) to appease for Man
Upright as yet, to mediate mercy waked
Unbounded love in Thee; unbounded love
Contracted to the measure of a span
Immensity of GODHEAD, and thy crown
Reft from thy faded brow. Listen, O earth!
And wonder, O ye heavens! Shall He, whose feet
Are clothed with stars, (the glory of his head
For who can tell?) whose looks divine illume
The dazzled eyes of cherubs, and the youth
Of saints with everlasting bloom renew;
Shall He, whose vital smiles with splendour fill
The circuits of creation, and sustain
The abodes of all existence, from the depths
Of hell beneath, above heaven's highest orb,
With life, and health, and joy! Shall He, to God
Dear as his eye and heart, engraven there
Deep from eternity; alone beloved,
Alone begotten! say, shall He become
A man of grief -- for man? ^^y, more, his foe,
Rebellous next the fiends? -- Astonishment
Had chained my tongue to silence, if the powers
Of tenderest pity, and of warmest love,
Provoked by pensive measures, sadder strains
Of elegiac sorrow, with the theme
Mournfully varying. Take, my soul redeem!
O take the moaning dove's dew-dropping wing,
Fly, fly to Solyma! and melt thy woe
To Cedron's murmurs: -- thence extend thy flight,
To Golgatha's accursed tree. Behold!
Clouds rolled on clouds of wrath (the blackest wrath
Of an offended God!) His beauties shade,
But shade not long: it soon in drops dissolves,
Sweet to the soul as manna to the taste,
As pride of summer-flow'r to sight or smell!
Behind this shadowing cloud, this mystic gloom,
The Sharon rose, died in the blood of Heaven;
The lily of the valley, white from stain,
Bows the fair head, in loveliness declines,
And, sweetly languishing, it droops and dies!
But, darkness veils the sun! a curtain draws,
Before the passion! beyond wonder great,
Great beyond silence! (Awe-struck, pause awhile;)
And heavy as the burden of our sins! --
' It Is finished! -- Change the lyre, -- the numbers change!
Let holy anthem-airs inspire the hymn. --
Glory in heaven! -- Redemption to mankind!
And peace on earth! dominion! blessing! praise!
Thanksgiving! blessin^! power! salvation to our God!
Salvation to our God, and to the Lamb!
And co-existing Spirit! Thou, whose breath
My voice informs, shall it be mute to Thee,
Eternal Paraclete! in order, last,
Equal in glory to Omnipotence;
The FIRST, as to the Second; and from both
Proceeding; (O inexplicable NAME!)
Mystical link of the unnumber'd THREE!
To Learning, night; to Faith, the noontide day.
Soul of the universe! Thy wisdom, first
The rage composed of warring elements,
Yon all-surrounding heavens, with crystal orbs
Garnished, and living gems, in goodly ranks
And disciplined array, dividing night
From day, their ordinances 'stablish'd sure.
The waters saw thee moving over their face,
O God, the waters saw thee, and afraid,
Into their channel shrunk (capacious bed
Of liquid element!) and owned their bounds
Impassable, as the eternal gulf
' Twixt bliss and woe. -- The PRINCE OF PEACE Thy beams
Largely imbibed, when, dove-like, over his head,
Fast by the banks of Jordan's sacred stream,
Thy mantling wings diffused their heavenly hues;
And ABBA glorified his only SON,
Well pleased -- from thy tongues of cloven fire
Kindled, the nations burned in flaming zeal,
And unextinguish'd charity dispersed,
And glowing as the summer blaze at noon.
The rushing winds, on all their wings conveyed
The doctrine, strong to shake the guilty soul;
As, erst, the dome, low stooping to its base,
Before thy mighty presence learned to bend.
Thou, from the morning womb, upon our souls,
Barren and dry, thy sanctifying dews,
Abroad in silent softness shed'st: the dews
Of love unspotted, uncorrupted joy;
Obedient goodness, temperance subdued;
Unshaken faith, and meekness without guile!
Hence flow the odours out, our prayers perfume,
Like incense, rising fragrant on the throne
From golden phials poured by elder hands!
Extinct thy influential radiance, Sin,
Incumbent on the soul, as black as hell,
Holds godless anarchy: by thee refined,
Incensed, sublimed and sanctified, the soul
Invites the HOLIEST (O abyss of love!)
To choose a temple purer than the sun,
Incorruptible, formed not by hands,
Where best he loves to dwell. -- Thou all my bed,
Most holy Comforter! in sickness smoothed,
And violet buds and roses, without thorn,
Shower'd round the couch. From darkness, and the vale
Of shadowy death, to pastures fair, and streams
Of comfort, thy refreshing right hand led
My wearied soul, and bathed in health and joy!
TO light restored, and the sweet breath of heaven,
Beneath thy olive boughs, in plenteous flow,
The golden oil effusing on my head
Of gladness, let me sit and sing,
Thy numerous Godhead sparkling in my soul,
Thy self instilling praises, by thy ear
Not unapprov'd! for wisdom's steady ray,
The enlight'ning gift of tongues, the sacred fires
Of poesy are Thine, united Three!
FATHER of heaven and earth! coeval SON!
And co-existing SPIRIT! Trinal One!
PIOUS ASPIRATION.
I Lift my heart, I lift my eyes,
Beyond yon bright etherial skies,
Up to the heavens, where Jesus shines
In power and majesty divine!
My soul with ardent zeal aspire
To this fair object of desire;
Nor let the world, with all its toys,
Tempt thee to slight eternal joys.
One ray from his refulgent light
Will ravish all my powers of sight;
I pant, I long, I thirst to see
One sacred smile, my Lord, from thee
The shining moon, without this view,
Wears but at best a dismal hue;
Each prospect's dark without my God,
When I Am denied a look of love.
Dear Lord, in splendor now appear;
Bid doubts depart, and anxious fear:
Descend, blessed Comforter, and shine,
And give me faith to call thee mine!
I long to mount the starry sky,
And view my Savior eye to eye;
With rapid force I Would wing my way
To realms of bliss, unclouded day.
Z. A. THE CHRISTIAN's POCKET LIBRARY. No. IV. -- VOL. I.
AN ESSAY ON LOVE TO GOD.
Talk they of morals? O thou bleeding Love!
Thou maker of new morals to mankind,
The grand morality is LOVE OF THEE!
NIGHT THOUGHTS, No. 4.
LOVE to God is the essence of personal religion; without it the most splendid
profession is unsatisfying and vain. It will be our attempt in this essay to
explain the principles on which God has a right to demand our affections, and
the felicity of that man who loves the Lord with all his heart.

I. From the natural relation which subsists between God and the creature, he
has a right to demand our affections. When the Almighty formed man, he enriched
his soul with a propensity to love; and upon the exercise of this passion the
basis of human happiness was formed. Love is the most sensible, operative,
visible passion of the human soul, and leads every other in its train; in the
exercise of this our first parents, in their primeval state, grasped the vision
of JEHOVAH, as the God of universal Nature, and thereby experienced the most
inconceivable delight. This claim is consistent with the honor of God, and the
interest of his creature, and is supported by an holy and an inflexible law;
the tenor of which is, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
with all thy soul, and with all thy strength. Deuteronomy. vi.4, 5. Adam, in Paradise,
did thus love the Lord his God; but, on the entrance of sin, the knowledge of
God was turned into darkness, the affections were contaminated, enmity reared
its baneful head, and man fled with precipitation from the voice of his Maker.
Nor was this change in Adam's heart peculiar to him alone -- by his
disobedience many were made sinners. Romans v.19. The carnal mind is enmity
against God; it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be. Romans
viii.7. Jesus said unto the Jews, I know ye that ye have not the love of God in
you. John v.42. Thus, although man be under a natural and moral obligation to
love God, and the divine right to the creature's affections still abides, the
fact is too stubborn to be denied, that mankind, universally so by nature, are
lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God. 2 Timothy iii.4. Let the reader apply
this to his own heart, and ask, "Have I loved the Lord with all my heart, with
all my soul, and with all my strength?" Surely he has not. This view of human
nature calls for deep humiliation. Not to love God is to be destitute of a pure
fountain of happiness, and to be exposed to the awful penalty of death, annexed
to the law of our Sovereign. Glory be to God, that GRACE has restored what
NATURE lost! Therefore,

II. God claims the affections of his people from the principle of their
ADOPTION to HIMSELF in CHRIST JESUS flowing from the good pleasure of his will.
Ephesians. i.5. This, though unintelligible to nature, is the grand theme of
revelation, and is the only way in which the depraved sinner can be brought to
love the Lord with delight. It was the act of the FATHER to adopt; JESUS
engaged to assume our nature, bear our sins, magnify the law of love which we
had violated, atone for sin by the shedding of his blood, and prove our
adoption in HIMSELF worthy the attributes of JEHOVAH. The SPIRIT of ADOPTION,
in the fullness of time, is sent into the conscience of a redeemed sinner, shows
him his condemnation for sin, testifies of Christ as a complete Savior, sheds
abroad the love of God in his heart, and enables him to approach and enjoy God
as his father. Gal. iv. 4 -- 6. Romans v. 5. How different is the state and
sensibility of such a man to what they were! The enmity of his heart is slain;
he feels the force of reconciliation to God, and enjoys peace in his
conscience; he neither boasts of loving God upon the principles of nature, nor
cavils at adopting grace, but exults in the everlasting, distinguishing love of
FATHER, SON, and SPIRIT to him; by which he is brought to know and feel the
sweets of loving God. He that enjoys but the smallest degree of love to God,
though he may not to be able to recite any remarkable circumstances in his
conversion, is able to tell you that there was a time when he did not know nor
love God; and what little he now enjoys is the fruit of great grace. Thus, we
love GOD because he first loved us, sent his SON to die for us, and then gave
us his SPIRIT, to unite our hearts in love to himself, bearing testimony that
unless God had thus loved us we never should have been restored to enjoy the
sweets of love to him. To this we add,

III. GOD, as the REDEEMER of his people, has a right to their affections, from
their personal surrender of themselves to him, as the fruit of his own grace.
That heart which reviews its own native wretchedness by transgression,
contemplates the boundless love of God in his salvation, and is brought nigh,
by the blood of CHRIST, to enjoy the smiles of the EVERLASTING FATHER,
remembers that he is not his own, but bought with a price. He approaches the
Lord by faith and prayer, and adopts the language of David: Into thine hand I
commit my spirit, for thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of truth. Ps. xxxi.5.
In the retired chamber, at the water of baptism, at the gates of Zion, and at
the table of the Lord, the Christian, in lively emotions of heart, resigns
himself to be the Lord's for ever: No part of revealed truth but he receives in
the love of it; no command which dropped from his Savior's lips, whether for
private or public obedience, but is embraced with affection; no cross, no
suffering, but what he cheerfully welcomes; knowing that the many waters of
affliction cannot quench the flame of his love to God, neither can the floods
of temptation drown it. Sol. Song viii. 7. For the truth of these observations
I appeal to the scriptures, and to the experience of the Christian reader. You
have not repented giving your hand and heart to HIM who bought you with his
blood. From the principle of your surrender to God he addresses you, My son,
give me thine heart. Prove. xxiii.26. This claim is founded upon your sonship,
and is supported by God's endearing relation to you as your father in Christ.
Frequently, in duty and in trial, in providence and in conscience, Christ
addresses you in his language to Peter, Love thou me more than these? John
xxi. 15 -- 17. As the High Priest under the law bore the names of the Hebrew
tribes upon his breast plate, so Jesus, the great HIGH PRIEST of our
profession, bears his people upon his heart; and by the methods of his grace he
makes them to enjoy the comfort of that privilege, and then claims their hearts
for himself.

Let us now take these three parts of our subject, and view them as containing
the principles of natural and revealed religion. On the principles of adopting
grace, the obligation of nature's law is not annihilated, but established.
Grace restores what nature lost by sin. Though the honors of nature are
restored by the obedience of Christ, and our affections claimed by the Lord,
remember it is by the display of adopting grace alone. You behold God not as
Creator only, but in the new, eternal relation of your Father in Christ. You
never can be too well established in this important truth. Not viewing the
believer's love, as flowing from his adoption, is the principal cause of
blending law and gospel, nature and grace, obligation and privilege, together;
and, from this almost every other error proceeds. By the gospel your obedience
is directed into a new channel, and flows from the precious love of Christ: you
are actuated by new motives, have new sources opened for your perseverance in
holy obedience, and a sure and certain prospect of receiving the end of your
faith, in the final salvation of your soul. 1 Pet. i.9.

Let them, said Deborah, that love the Lord, be as the sun when he goes forth
in his might. Judges v.31. How pleasing the emblem to describe the happiness of
that man who loves the Lord with all his heart! like the SUN in the firmament,
he stands a monument of JEHOVAH's wisdom and almighty power! As at the
brightness of the sun the stars withdraw their light, so the redeemed of the
Lord, washed in the blood of the Lamb, clothed with the immaculate
righteousness of the God-man Christ Jesus, and replenished with his everlasting
love, outvies the formal moralist in pure obedience, and eventually he shall
outshine the angels in the height of glory above! -- As the SUN pursues his
course, and rejoices as a strong man to run a race, though storm and tempest
fill the sky; so the man that loves the Lord shall persevere through the raging
tempests produced by earth and hell; and the black clouds of affliction which
surround him, shall only tend to make him shine the brighter! -- Not as an idle
spectator the SUN is placed in the center of the mundane system, but governing
the surrounding planets, while his bright beams pierce through all the skies;
like the man who loves the Lord, placed in society, diffuses his knowledge,
candor, truth, benevolence, and zeal, for the happiness of all around! -- In
one instance, however, the emblem fails. The period will arrive when that great
source of light and heat shall set to rise no more, and be lost amidst the
wreck of nature: But the righteous shall shine forth as the sun in the kingdom
of their Father, for ever and ever. Mat. xiii.43.

THE FIGHTING PRELATE.
KING Richard I. in one of his battles with the French, took Philip de Dreux,
Bishop of Beauvais, prisoner. The Pope interceded for his liberty, in a letter,
wherein he styled the fighting Bishop his dearly beloved son. The King, by way
of answer, sent the Bishop's suit of armor, stained with blood and covered
with dust, to the Pope, and asked him, whether he knew his son's coat or no?
The Pope was ashamed at the fight, and left the Bishop to Richard's mercy. -- A
lesson this to POLITICAL CLERGY, to turn their attention wholly to their
Master's kingdom, which is not of this world, and to be persuaded, that God can
govern the nations of the earth without their aid.

DIFFERENCE BETWEEN REGENERATION AND CONVERSION.
REGENERATION is the ACT of God, as the God of all grace, turning to the
sinner, who, by nature, is dead in trespasses and sins -- quickening the
conscience -- forming a principle of spiritual life, with all its habits,
separate, and as distinct from the old body of sin, as the soul itself is from
the animal body. Titus iii.5. Ephesians. ii.1. John iii.6. 1 John iii.9. The Image of
God is formed upon this new creature, in embryo, as much as the human foetus
possesses all the habits, parts, and passions of man. Ephesians. iv.24. Col. iii.10.
Romans viii.29. Power, unfelt before, is now experienced -- a conflict commences
in the conscience, between this new life and the body of sin -- a desire is
produced, accompanied with an ability to turn unto God as the fountain of
mercy, and to enjoy the light, the exercise, and the pleasures, connected with
a spiritual state of existence. Ps. cxvi.4. Acts ix.6.

CONVERSION is the spiritual deliverance of a soul from a state of
regeneration, and is therefore called a birth. John iii.3 -- 5. It is the
motion of the living soul turning to God; and the exertion of spiritual life
embracing God, as he is revealed in the scriptures, as the believer's happy
portion in Christ Jesus, as much as by natural instinct the newborn infant
applies for sustenance to its mother's breast. Jer. xxxi.18. Sam. iii.24. Now,
the Image of God is displayed in obedience; and life becomes sensibly evident
in the exercise of all its faculties. Gal. v.22. Therefore, he that is
regenerated shall, in due time, be converted to a life of happiness in God; for
God cannot have a still-born child; his work is perfect. Deuteronomy. xxxii.4. Eccl.
xi.5.

To these observations may be added -- In REGENERATION the sinner is passive;
in CONVERSION he is active. REGENERATION is, by the secret operation of God's
holy spirit, alone; CONVERSION is enjoyed by the same Spirit, through the mean
of the word of truth. REGENERATION is once, and for ever; CONVERSION is
frequently necessary. Luke xxii. 32. James v.19. Let no man think of
conversion, until he be first regenerated: Life must be given before life can
either be exercised or enjoyed. Matt. xviii.3. This great work, of regeneration
and conversion, flows from the everlasting Love of the FATHER, through the
Person of his SON CHRIST JESUS; and is produced in the soul of guilty man, by
the sovereign, invisible operations of the HOLY GHOST. Jer. xxxi.3. Ephesians. ii.10.
John iii.5, 6.

ANECDOTE OF THE LATE KING OF SWEDEN.
THE late King of Sweden was, it seems, under great impressions of spiritual
religion for some time before his death. A peasant being once, on a particular
occasion, admitted to his presence; the King knowing him to be a person of
singular piety, asked him "What he took to be the true nature of faith?" The
peasant entered deeply into the subject, and much to the King's comfort and
satisfaction. The King at last, lying on his deathbed, had a return of his
doubts and fears, as to the safety of his soul; and still the same question was
perpetually in his mouth to those about him, "What is real faith?" His
attendants advised him to send for the Archbishop of Upsall; who, coming to the
King's bedside, began, in a learned, logical manner, to enter into the
scholastic Definition of Faith -- The Prelate's Disquisition lasted an hour.
When he had done, the King said, with much energy, "All this is ingenious but
not comfortable; it is not what I want -- Nothing, after all, but the Farmer's
Faith will do for me."

QUESTIONS NECESSARY FOR MINISTERS.
I. ARE my motives for the Gospel Ministry of a sinister nature, either seeking
the support, or enriching myself or family? for it is recorded, some take the
oversight of the flock for filthy luere sake; and others cry, Put me into the
Priest's office, I pray thee, that I may eat a piece of bread. 1 Pet. v.2. 1 Samuel ii.36.

II. Am I assured that God has called me by his grace -- changed my naturally
depraved heart, and, by his word and Spirit, introduced me to the privileges of
his believing family? Unless I am called as a Christian, I have no warrant to
believe that I am called as a Minister of God. Gal. i.15, 16. 2 Cor. iv.5 -- 7.

III. When first I entered the ministry, were I deeply impressed with a sense
of human misery, the virtues of the cross of Christ, and an anxious desire for
the conversion of sinners? And have these important truths increased in my
estimation, and been operative on my heart to the present moment? 2 Cor. v.11,
12, 20.

IV. Am I conscious that it is only by the influence of the Holy Spirit that my
labors can be made effica^^ous to men? That, although the ministry be my duty,
the holy work on souls is God's? And in consequence of which, do I habitually
feel myself as clay in the hand of the potter, and as a pen in the hand of a
ready writer, that God alone may be exalted in his own service? 2 Timothy iv.17.
Phil. iv.13.

V. Am I conscious that I am not as those who corrupt the word of God, handle
it deceitfully, and walk in craftiness; but renounce the hidden things of
dishonesty, and, by manifestation of the truth, commend myself to every man's
conscience in the sight of God? And, in my duty, as a minister, do I persevere,
regardless either of the smiles or the frowns of men, and study to approve
myself unto Christ, my sovereign Lord and only Master? 2 Cor. ii.17.iv.1, 2. 2 Timothy ii.14. Acts xx.14.

VI. Is it my daily delight to maintain communion with God as the center of my
mercy, my joy, and my home? And is it there that I receive my message for the
flock, and beg that the truth I convey to others may distill as the dew upon my
own soul; thus feeding the people with that sacred food of which I myself have
handled, felt, tasted, eaten, and digested in my own soul? Jonah iii.2. 1 John
i.1, 2.

VII. Do I with confidence look forward to that solemn day when I must give an
account of my stewardship, meet the souls who were committed to my care, and
expect an admission to the eternal mansions of glory? 2 Cor. v.10. Heb.
xiii.17. Acts xx.24.

A SINGULAR INSTANCE OF CONVERSION.
MRS. Mary Gurnee, now of New York, was a person, like too many others, who
lived a life of disobedience, without the knowledge of God, or hope in Christ.
Immediately on the delivery of her fourth child, it was seized with violent
fits; and as it lay at its mother's side, with its eyes darted upward and its
hands clenched, the mother, while beholding the child's agony, said, Can it be
praying? No, thought she, it has no sin of its own to pray for. Instantly a
thought darted to her mind, swift as the lightning from the east, -- The child
is praying for its ungodly mother, that never yet prayed for herself! In a few
hours the child died. The conviction of disobedience and guilt, however, lived
within the mother's breast, and produced a visible reformation of life. Some
time after she obtained a sense of pardon in the blood of the Lamb, and for
several years since has walked worthy of her christian profession.

How wonderful are the ways of the Almighty! and how rich his grace to sinners!
Mrs. G. could not read: -- The child must be born, however short, to live long
enough to be the silent bearer of a solemn message to the mother's heart, and
then to close its eyes in death, as having nothing more to do on earth!

FEMALE DOMESTIC EDUCATION.
Dialogue between a Mother and her Daughter.
Mother. MY daughter, shall we retire from the dining-table; leave your father
and his friends to enjoy their conversation, and take a tour in the garden?


Daughter. I am happy, Madam, in accepting your proposal.


Mother. How beautiful is yon bed of tulips! How fragrant the scent of that
mignonette! What a charming rose is this!


Daughter. No flower seems to engage my attention equal to this admirable
carnation -- how lively its colors?


Mother. Charming indeed! yet expressive emblem of the fading beauties of human
nature! Man comes up as a flower, and is cut down. Job xiv. 2. How promising
in his advance! How delightful his bloom! How short its duration! -- How soon,
my daughter, may the beauties of youth, like the leaves of yonder rose, fade,
and moulder in the dust? -- Let us enter the grove, and enjoy the cooling
shade. -- How agreeable this arbor!


Daughter. Charming retreat indeed! -- I wish I had a book to read. --


Mother. Let us take a seat, my daughter -- I will avail myself of this retired
spot, and converse with you upon a subject that concerns your welfare. -- As
you have now finished your education at the boarding-school, I wish you to
cultivate an acquaintance with domestic life.


Daughter. I think, Madam, my governess has sufficiently instructed me in plain
and ornamental needle work; and if you have no objection, I should be pleased
to spend my time in reading a very fine set of novels, which Mr. Lovewell has
obligingly offered me -- Miss Amelia tells me she has derived great pleasure
from the perusal of them.


Mother. In the past experience of my life, I have found, my child, that the
choice of books were as cautiously to be selected as our companions; and, that
they have an equal tendency, either to vitiate the mind, or mend the heart.
However new or alluring the publication, I have always found in those novels a
golden bait, suited to the youthful breast, and which diffuses the baneful
poison of dissipation; and, as those volumes are generally formed from fiction,
there are books of truth and refinement, more worthy of your perusal; a list of
which I will write you at my leisure. But, Eliza, you perfectly misunderstood
me, when I recommended to you the study of domestic life. I know your
competency in needle work; but, should you live, and be favored with a
virtuous husband, he will certainly expect something more from you than simply
making him a shirt. With such a qualification only I do not think a woman worth
a prudent man's acceptance; nor would such an one cut a very good figure in a
family. It is not only necessary for a mother to set at her table, and partake
of an agreeable repast with her children, or her friends, but she should know
the preparation of every dish that may be placed upon it.


Daughter. La, mamma, you did not mean to send me into the kitchen, did you?
(Miss flirts her fan, and throws back the ringlets of her hair, as a mark of
disapprobation.)


Mother. Most certainly I did, my dear, -- not as a servant, but as my
daughter, -- not as to a place of servitude, but as in a school.


Daughter. Do you think, mamma, that Mrs. Gay means to send Maria and Charlotte
into the kitchen? They tell me their father has bought for them a heap of
novels, finely bound; and the ladies are now to receive company, and make
visits, to prepare them for polite life.


Mother. To make and receive visits are highly necessary for young persons,
when properly selected and virtuously conducted: nor do I wish, my daughter,
that, on your return from the boarding-school, you should find a prison in your
father's house. Mrs. Gay's mode of introducing her daughters into life may make
them fine ladies, but cannot make them good wives or valuable mothers; nor can
such a domestic education, if such it may be called, promise any real benefits
to society. -- Your expectations, like the young ladies you just named, may be
placed upon the gift of a fortune by your father: but, my child, Providence, by
various viciffitudes, may deprive your parent of an ability to gratify you. In
such a case, it will be my ambition, that you be mistress of that knowledge,
prudence, and industry, that may recommend you to public attention. A man may
spend a woman's fortune; but her domestic accomplishments will ever remain a
valuable acquisition to herself and to her family.


Daughter. Madam, your arguments make a deep impression upon my mind; and as I
know you love me, it shall be my happiness to submit to your instruction.


Mother. As a proof of my affection for you, my daughter, I have prepared a
plan for your domestic conduct -- here it is, and I wish you to read it to me.

(Eliza reads.) Plan of Domestic Life for Miss Eliza Semour. By her
affectionate mother.
By leave of the Almighty arise at six in the morning in summer, and at seven
in winter: instantly on being dressed read a psalm, and as God may help you,
acknowledge, by prayer, the protection of his hand through the night, and
beseech his smiles through the day. Now, adjust your chamber, nor suffer one
article, from the bed to the floor, to escape your attention; then, if you
choose, as the weather may permit, take a turn in the garden, employ your
needle, or read a few passages in a profitable volume.

At eight o'clock, as usual, you will wait on your father for family prayer; --
eat your breakfast with cheerfulness and gratitude, and then you shall receive
from my hand a bill of fare for dinner. With this --

You will enter the kitchen; address the servants, not as beneath your notice,
nor as your equals; but with that pleasing affability which may at once gain
you their attention and esteem. Carefully observe the necessary preparations,
mark every procedure, examine the nature and qualities of every article for the
table -- the manner and the time of dressing; -- nor stand as spectator only;
according to your ability put your hand to the paste, the jellies, or the
soups, that on any neglect or change of servants, you may gratify your father's
table with a supply. -- Should any tradesmen enter the kitchen, while you are
present, conduct toward them with all courtesy, least they should imagine
pride to have been your acquisition at the boarding-school. To assist you in
the kitchen, you shall receive from me an excellent volume on the art of
cookery.

Now, you may retire to your chamber, ch^^^ge your apparel, and be ready for
the table.

After dinner, there are so many innocent, useful, pleasing ways for improving
your time, I can scarce give you a full enumeration; -- reading, music,
drawing, writing, needle work, walking, visiting. Among the many pleasing
employments, however new, I must recommend you one, taught me by my pious,
honored father. We are, my child, surrounded with many honest, industrious
poor; these, on every slight indisposition of their families, are unable to
employ a physician's aid. Although I do not expect you to study, or be a
proficient in Materia Medica, I wish you to study the nature and utility of
those common, simple medicines, suited to the ordinary complaints of human
nature; nor need I mention those more incident to your own sex. I will offer
you my assistance in this undertaking, and give you leave to prepare for your
closet an assortment of such jellies as the poor are unable to provide; and in
the distribution of these, you will be productive of more advantage to others,
and create more sublime satisfaction, than in reading Tom Jones, the Arabian
Night's Entertainment, or passing the rounds of dissipation.

As I wish you to commence my housekeeper, I shall, on a Monday, give you such
a portion of m^^ey as may answer the tradesmen's demand the e^g week; the
expenditures of which you will accurately enter every evening, and make a final
settlement with me on the Saturday. This will have a tendency to lead you into
the knowledge of the markets, and preserve you in the habit of writing and
arithmetic; while it will afford me a desirable opportunity to present you with
such tokens of my approbation, as your attention and my affection may dictate.

The employments of your evenings will be various: your father and myself will
be often delighted by your conversation, reading, and practice of music.

After your father has discharged the duties of the evening, and by prayer
committed his family to the protection of the Almighty, you can retire to your
chamber, where, after adjusting your apparel with neatness and care, you will,
I hope, commit yourself, by prayer, into the hand of that God who alone must
prove the guide of your youth and the strength of your growing years.



Daughter. Dear mamma, I return you my affectionate thanks for this expression
of your maternal care, and hope to make some small return by my obedience.


Mother. At some future period I shall wish, my child, to enter into
conversation with you upon a subject still more important. As the afternoon
declines, we will return by way of the kitchen-garden. How agreeable the spot!
How richly stored with vegetables! How carefully our industrious gardener's
hand has passed over the beds! Not a weed appears -- and every crop is so
accurately adjusted as to afford the highest satisfaction. Thus, you see, my
daughter, as we entered, we were entertained with the beauties of the
flower-garden; as we retire, we are encouraged by the kitchen-garden to expect
a rich supply for our family. -- So, my daughter, may you add the industrious
house-wife to the accomplished lady, and afford the most pleasing satisfaction
to your parents.


(To be continued.) SPECIMEN OF A DIARY.
MONDAY MORNING.
Grant I may ever, at the morning ray,
Open with prayer the consecrated day;
Tune Thy great praise, and bid my soul arise,
And with the mounting Sun ascend the skies;
As that advances, let my zeal improve,
And glow with ardour of consummate love;
Nor cease at eve, but with the setting Sun
My endless worship shall be still begun.
Dr. YOUNG.
ANOTHER week unfolds its busy scenes! Yet, in wisdom are its events concealed;
nor dare I once presume to search the secret will of God. Enough, my God is
wise -- he cannot err. His goodness, too, forbids him to be unkind in all he
may vouchsafe to do. Come, then, my soul; let hope or fear, pleasure or pain,
sickness or health, profit or loss, life or death, await my steps the opening
week; to all I cheerfully resign, while Christ is mine and I am his. Let me
then resolve, resolve with patience, to run the race now set before me, looking
unto Jesus, the author and finisher of my faith. O! let the recollection of
that rich plenitude of goodness, hitherto attendant on my path, prompt me to
advance; for as my day, my strength shall be. How animated in this resolve,
from the pleasures yesterday derived from the Lord on Zion's holy hill! There
God was known as a sure refuge; and there I beheld the beauties of my Savior,
and triumphed in his love! Preserved through the dangers of the night, to
behold another rising sun, what gratitude is due to my almighty Lord! O! let
them deeply impress my heart, and prompt my soul afresh to walk with God. Come,
blessed Savior; whatever may now await my steps, do thou afford thy friendly
aid, and grant thy sweetest smiles! Trusting to myself, I shall surely err,
wander from thy embraces, and deeply wound my heart. Ten thousand snares await
without, while ten thousand greater evils lurk within my breast, to tempt my
feet in paths of guilt. O thou Keeper of Israel! into thine arms I commit my
soul. In thy strength I will now advance, and this day strive to live to Thee
as though with it I may close my mortal life.

NOON.
How insensibly the busy world steals upon the soul! How extremely hard is it
to use the world with my hand, and leave the heart entire for God! In the
morning, how composed and resolute was my frame! I thought nothing should this
day disturb my tranquillity -- but it seems I am too soon irritated, and taken
off my guard by the various business of the day. How much happier are those who
move in an humble, private sphere, than such whose backs are loaded with ten
thousand cares, which must eventually be all thrown into the grave, if not
before reduced by some trying Providence! Lord, teach me the vanity and danger
of transitory bliss, and the infinite importance of a future state! Let
integrity and uprightness preserve my steps in every worldly path. Cast thou
thy sacred smiles upon my heart, and they shall draw my soul to Thee, and make
me more than blessed. Whom, blessed Savior! whom should I have in heaven but
Thee? and what object should I desire on earth, but thy glorious self? The rich
experience of thy love is better to me than thousands of the purest gold, and
shall fill my heart with solid joy, when the streams of earthly pleasures run
dry. -- Come, then, thou, my Guide and only Friend, -- come, support me through
the remaining duties of the day, and let the evening close in peace!

EVENING.
Shut the door of worldly thoughts, and learn, my soul, to close the day with
God. But ah! how stupid is my frame! I would fain review the successive events
of this day -- mourn over my follies -- feel grateful for my mercies -- and, in
sweet assurance, cast myself, with all I have, into my Savior's arms. But
whence this numbness, and amazing gloom of mind? Strange, that in so few hours
my frame should pass through so many changes! Uncertain as the weather! -- in
the morning, a serene sky, and a bright rising sun; in the evening, mist and
heavy clouds. What a mercy that, although I am such a fluctuating creature,
God, the Eternal God, knows not the shadow of a change! Here rests my hope --
and from hence will I derive my peace. Jesus, thou art the same yesterday,
today, and for ever. Thou art the true Friend that loves at all times, -- the
sun that ever shines, though storm and tempest fill the sky. While, therefore,
blessed Lord, I would mourn for my dark and distressing frame of mind, I would
plead thy unchanging grace to dissipate my clouds. May I not ask for one ray of
thy light, before I lay me down to rest? -- Can it be well-pleasing to thee,
that I should shut my eyes in sleep without a smile from thee? -- Come, Lord,
though the sun in the firmament be set to our hemisphere, and the time of sleep
be come; thou can arise as the glorious Sun of righteousness; -- diffuse thy
joy within my breast, and fill my soul with prayer and praise! Thus will I lay
me down in peace, for thou, Lord, can make me dwell in safety. Thou shall
draw the curtains of thy Providence around my bed, and give thine holy angels
charge concerning me. If my bed should prove my tomb, may I arise to a better
morning, and meet thee in the skies! If spared to tread again the thorny path
of life, may I honor thy gracious Name, and wait the appointed hour, until my
change shall come. Even so, blessed Savior! amen.

ANECDOTE.
HENRY I. made the length of his own arm a standard measure (since called a
yard) throughout England. -- Do not bigots act much the same part in matters of
religion?

NATURAL HISTORY.
THE FOX.
THE Fox, in Greek Alopex, in Hebrew Shual, is an animal of the dog kind, much
resembling the common dog in form, and of the size of the spa^iel. It differs,
however, from the common dog in the length, dense disposition, and softness of
the hairs, especially those about its tail, which is bushy, and much admired by
the animal itself, and in cold weather wrapped round his nose; and in its
smell, which is peculiarly rank and offensive. It is said, that the fox makes
use of its urine, which is remarkably foeted, to force the cleanly badger from
its habitation, and takes possession of it for himself. Its usual color is a
reddish tawny, though it is sometimes found white, and sometimes black. Its
manner of digging itself a hole in the earth is also a custom wholly different
from all the dog kind; and it is far from the tameness of that animal, being
with difficulty made to lose its fierceness. Of all animals the fox has the
most significant eye, by which it expresses every passion of love, fear,
hatred, etc. The fox is a crafty, lively, libidinous animal; it breeds only
once a year, unless some accident befalls its first litter, and brings four or
five young, which, like puppies, are born blind. They are distinguished by
different names: the greyhound fox is the largest, tallest, and boldest, and
will attack a grown sheep or wether: the mastiff fox is less, but more strongly
built: the cur fox is the least, lurks about hedges and outhouses, and is the
most pernicious to the feathered tribe. The first of these has a white tip to
the tail; the last a black. The skin of this animal is furnished with a soft
and warm fur, which is frequently used to make muffs, etc. The fox in the first
year is called a cub; in the second a fox; and afterward an old fox. It is a
beast of chase, usually very prejudicial to the husbandman, by taking away and
destroying his lambs, geese, and poultry; but in vineyards he commits the
greatest devastation, by eating the grapes and destroying the vines. His
sagacity and genius for stratagem is peculiarly observable in his plunders. He
is fond of honey; and as the wasps and bees fasten on his skin, he either
drowns them in water, or crushes them to death by rolling on the ground, till
they are forced to leave him in unmolested possession of their cells. The very
fretful porcupine, in the expansion of its prickles, he wearies out, by his
artful and teazing tricks, and then kills and eats him. When pinched with
hunger, he indiscriminately feeds on quadrupeds, fowls, fishes, and vegetables;
nothing comes amiss to him. The common way to catch him is by gins, which being
baited, and a train made by drawing raw flesh across his usual paths or haunts
to the gin, it proves an inducement to lure him to the place of destruction. He
is sometimes taken by hunting, of which sport the dogs are extremely fond,
though it often proves very offensive to the nose of the huntsman. This
creature, on being pursued, shows astonishing powers of running, turning,
winding, fighting, and eluding the hounds, often urining upon his tale, to
strike his pursuers in the face; and when he finds himself without farther
resource, he boldly faces about, calls up his courage, and struggles for his
life with the most desperate and bloody resolution.

IMPROVEMENT.
HOW remarkable is it, that such a creature as the fox, so fly, even to a
proverb, so filthy in his nature, and so destructive in his life, should be
favored with such peculiar instinct, as to provide himself with so commodious
and secure an habitation! Yet, infinitely more remarkable, and which claims our
highest astonishment, JESUS, the SON OF GOD, whose heart was replete with love,
and whose hands were filled with beneficence to perishing men, that the
ADORABLE LORD, PROPRIETOR of heaven and earth, so emptied himself, and
submitted to so deep a state of poverty, as to compel him to say to the
enquiring scribe, The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests;
but the Son of Man has no where to lay his head. Matt. viii.20 -- Ye^, Jesus
left the habitation of his glory, to rescue me from the den of the damned: he
denied himself an habitation on earth, that he might grant me a mansion in
heaven!

JESUS, the true judge of human nature, compared Herod, who sought his life, to
a fox, [Luke xiii. 32.] cruel, crafty, bold in rapine. Such are all those who
wickedly hate the sheep of Christ's flock; whose crooked, irregular paths of
disobedience expose them to the curse of God's law; whose filthy nature, by
sin, is not changed by grace to serve the Lord in pleasurable obedience. -- A
man may have the splendor of a Herod, but if not changed by grace, he is but a
filthy fox still.

The foxes, and the little foxes, who spoil the vines with tender grapes,
recorded in 2 Sol. Song. xv. may intend those false Teachers and Professors who
creep under the fence of God's vineyard, the Church, to disturb and destroy the
ungodly. How fly, malignant, voracious, deceitful, and abominably filthy are
these! Ezekiel. xiii. 4. Prove. 30. 12. They walk in craftiness, use good words and
fair speeches, whereby they deceive the hearts of the simple. These foxes
should be taken -- detected in their first efforts -- drove from the vineyard;
not burned with fire and faggot, but taken by prayer to that God who can change
the fox into a lamb. Wherever, and as long as God has a vine of grace in the
vineyard of his church, a cub fox, a grown fox, or an old fox will long for the
grapes.

POETRY.
TO A LADY, ON SEEING HER CLOSET.
Oh lost to virtue, lost to manly thought,
Lost to the noble sallies of the soul!
Who think it solitude to be alone.
Communion sweet! communion large and high!
Our reason, guardian angel, and our God!
Then nearest these when others most remote.
YOUNG.
SAY, can I enter this sequestered bower,
Where fair Melodia spends the serious hour,
And not the humble muse attempt a song?
A muse, the meanest of the tuneful throng.
Hail, Meditation! source of sweeter joys
Than ever sprang from vain Amusement's noise:
Shunned by the giddy, hated by the gay;
But who fatigued, and who deceived as they?
Friendship would wish, nor may it wish in vain,
Blessings descending in a numerous train;
A rich return for every just desire
That hence ascends in pure Devotion's fire.
Friendship would wish, Melodia here may find
Peace in her soul, and vigor in her mind:
A present God, a heaven begun within,
Faith conquering Fear, and Grace subduing Sin.
In this retreat may bright Devotion reign,
With sacred pleasures smiling in her train;
In this retreat may female genius shine,
To beautify the sentimental line.
Melodia's page can never fail to please,
Each thought expressed with elegance and ease;
Her modest wit, her piety and sense
Stamp real worth on all imparted hence.
Proceed, Melodia, with increasing skill,
Dispensing pleasure, and improving still;
But, O ingenious maid! be health your care --
Prudence forbids your late continuance here.
May earth detain you long, a useful guest,
To friends a blessing, and by friendship blessed:
If cares invade, my inward peace prevail,
Nor God withdraw, nor closet pleasures fail.
J. O. THE GLORY OF CHRIST.
O For a seraph's flaming tongue
To tell what my Redeemer's done,
To show the people all his worth,
And set the wondrous Savior forth.
Could I but paint his beauteous name,
Or draw the outlines of his fame,
The world would sure enamored be,
Nor one deny his Deity.
Compelled by his redeeming love,
He left the blissful choirs above,
Eloped from those triumphant lays
Which constant echo forth his praise.
Down to this lower world he came
To bear the guilty sinner's shame,
And carry all that weight of woe
Which none but God could undergo.
Thus, having wrought our righteousness,
And purchased by his blood our peace,
Back to the heavenly realms be fled,
His people's ever-living Head.
And now he intercedes above,
And still retains the tenderest love:
He hears our groans, he notes our sighs,
And all our needful wants supplies.
He soon will bid the archangel come,
To blow his trump, and call us home;
His favorites then shall mount above,
And bask for ever in his love.
For love like this, ye saints, arise
Superior to all earthly ties:
Proclaim the Savior's praise abroad,
And magnify the Triune God.
FRATER. SPRING IMPROVED.
THE Winter's past, with all its sable train,
And blooming Spring once more is seen again;
Nature revived, appears in beauteous forms;
The rising hills, and the adjacent lawns,
In bright prosperity sit smiling round,
While woods and groves with joyful shouts resound;
The fields again renew their verdant green,
And add fresh grandeur to the pleasing-scene;
The budding tribe are opening into flowers,
Refreshed by gentle, salutary showers;
The mute creation bids our wonder rise,
In grateful tributes to the upper skies;
While airy songsters of the woodlands sing
The auspicious period of returning spring;
Their warbling notes are tuned in softest lays,
Yet loudly speak their great Creator's praise;
Music's soft voice in innocence is heard,
In grateful echoes to the sovereign Lord.
Shall man be mute, and not attempt to raise
A ready tribute to Jehovah's praise;
Whose matchless goodness bids the Spring to dawn,
To forward harvest, and revive the corn?
His tender care provides an ample store,
Supplies the needy and the neighboring poor.
For us this earth performs its annual round,
And every season knows its utmost bound.
Awake my soul, let sweet reflection rise
On loftiest wings to you etherial skies,
Where are sweet fields of never fading green,
No withering joys but perfect bliss is seen.
Great God my wintry frame I d^^ty mourn,
Give the command and Spring shall now return:
Thou Sun of Righteo^^ness arise, and shine
With bright refulgence on this heart of mine:
Bid gloomy Winter never more appear,
But beauteous Spring bless each revolving year.
E. E. THE PENITENT RESTORED.
'TWAS in an hour when sin prevailed,
And sore temptations pressed,
A sudden groan my ear assailed,
And pierced my shivering breast.
I turned and shed a pitying flood
At what mine eyes surveyed,
A Prince expiring in his blood,
And on a cross displayed.
I knew him, though his thorny crown
Dimmed his majestic air:
And turned, demanding with a frown,
"What traitor fixed him there."
No answer to my voice I heard,
Nor could discern a foe!
When, lo! his fainting head he reared,
And spoke in words of woe:
"Cease, wretch, from vain inquiry rest,
"My cruel murderer see;
"Thy hands have rent my bleeding breast,
"And nailed me to the tree."
Trembling I fell, and kissed his wounds,
And wept the gore away;
I saw him smooth his killing frowns,
And heard him gently say:
"Rise, let thy heart its grief compose,
"Thy Savior can forgive;
"He feels the burden of thy woes,
"And dies to bid thee live."
For me! a wretch so vile and base,
Shall thy dear blood be shed!
O doom me to that just disgrace,
And nail me in thy stead!
Too great my guilt, allowed too long.
And, O! too often expressed;
I fear to think thy love so strong,
And dare not hope the rest.
Be hushed, attend thy Savior's voice;
He cries, "My brother, friend!"
And bid my troubled soul rejoice,
And all her sorrows end.
To me he turns, he smiles, he speaks,
"Receive the grace you crave." --
And thus vile sinners still he seeks,
And seeking, loves to save!
OBITUARY.
APRIL 15, 1796, departed this life Mrs. ELIZABETH HARRIOT HAMILTON, an ACTRESS
on the STAGE in New York. -- Presuming the circumstances attending this lady's
death may be interesting to the reader, and as the EDITOR carefully preserved
minutes of the conversation he had with her, they are now made public.

On invitation, I visited Mrs. Hamilton, with whom I had an acquaintance for
several years: entering her chamber she thus addressed me: -- Sir, never was I
more happy to see any one than yourself. This with me is a period of distress.
I sink fast into mortality. O what a dark gulf appears before me! My soul has
no hope; no, not one ray of light to cheer my passage to eternity. The
physician tells me he can do no more. Then, said I, you need something to bear
you above all that is mortal. O! replied she, I do, I do, indeed! O that I could
with Barnwell say, 'I FIND A POWER WITHIN, THAT BEARS MY SOUL ABOVE THE FEARS
OF DEATH, AND, SPITE OF CONSCIOUS SHAME AND GUILT, GIVES ME A TASTE OF
PLEASURES MORE THAN MORTAL.' G. Barnwell, Act 5. How many times has that play
been recited, while the heart was a stranger to the subject! But, I feel my
need of mercy to bear my guilty soul through death, and fit me for the skies!
After reciting to her the fullness of Christ, his ability to save, and the
consolations with which, even now, he could bless her, I prayed with her, and
was about to take my leave, when she grasped my hand, and with flowing tears
urged me to repeat my visit: -- O Sir, who knows -- God may make you an
instrument to save my guilty soul! Assuring her that salvation was alone to be
found in Christ, and that it was the office of his Spirit to reveal it to her
heart, I left her chamber.

On my second visit, interrogating her on the state of her mind, she replied,
My mind 'IS ILL AT EASE.' O that I had one glimpse of hope! Darkness covers my
mind, and I feel more than adamantine hardness within my guilty heart. What a
dreadful thing is it to be on the precipice of eternity, to know the gospel,
and not to feel it! The religious education I received from my parents, who
were attendants at the late Dr. Mason's church in this city, now reproves my
soul, and covers me with shame. Were I restored to perfect health, and
possessed the wealth of ten thousand globes, with one smile from God I would
wish to depart from this scene of woe. Although, continued she, my companions
who tread the stage are not, perhaps, more wicked than others, yet our employ
is a path of temptation that precludes almost a thought for immortality. Many
excellent morals are set us in the compositions we perform, but they are
diverted from our hearts. We seldom enjoy the sabbath. On a Saturday we often
play; fatigued on the sabbath, we have no ability for devotion, and are
frequently obliged to learn for future play. Thus absorbed, my soul has been
most grossly neglected. Should I be raised again from this bed, having one
smile from God, I would sooner beg my bread than tread the stage again -- Yes,
the most menial employ shall rather fill my days, than I pursue a path so big
with sorrow at the end! -- I cannot but wish, if I should be raised to health,
as life from the dead, that my future days may be employed in adoration of my
deliverer. Yet, for life am I not anxious. Not as I will, but as thou will, O
blessed Savior! Only grant me one smile from Thee, I am content to live or
die. Could this heart arise to God -- could this soul enjoy liberty with
heaven, I should not fear to die. Disclosing this sensibility of mind, I more
fully explained to her the fullness and freeness of salvation, in the person,
blood, and righteousness of the Son of God; to be known and enjoyed only by the
teaching of the Holy Spirit; -- that sinners, like herself, the vilest sinners,
sensible of their need of mercy, are encouraged, by the promises of God, to
hope for that invaluable blessing. This salvation is worthy a God to provide,
and necessary for a sinner to receive for everlasting happiness. -- To this she
listened with that solemn, eager attention, that it may be said, "her soul was
in her eyes." Ah! said she, this suits my case, and encourages my hope.

On my next visit she addressed me, Sir, my mind is as the ocean, after
agitated by tempest, and cast into rooling billows, now begins to settle into a
calm -- I feel much composed -- Numberless passages of scripture occur to my
thoughts; yes, Sir, to my guilt and shame I speak it, many promises now occur,
which have not passed my mind for many years, and seem to draw my discomposed
heart into a calm. -- "What a mercy is it," said I, "that God should reveal to
us such promises in his word! How ungenerous those who, by ridicule, would
deprive us of that sacred volume! But, my friend, what passages have afforded
you relief?" -- True, Sir, replied she, were the Bible untrue, or removed from
me, what could encourage my guilty soul that I should meet with a pardon from
my Judge! nothing but deep despair would hover before my eyes. That passage in
Lam. iii. 21, 22. much encourages me. THIS I RECALL TO MIND, THEREFORE HAVE I
HOPE. IT IS OF THE LORD'S MERCIES THAT WE ARE NOT CONSUMED, BECAUSE HIS
COMPASSION FAIL NOT. But particularly Isa. i.18. COME NOW AND LET US REASON
TOGETHER, SAYS THE LORD; THOUGH YOUR SINS BE AS SCARLET, THEY SHALL BE AS
WHITE AS SNOW; THOUGH THEY BE RED LIKE CRIMSON, THEY SHALL BE AS WOOL. These
scriptures suit my state, and give me some prospect of mercy. The relief they
have afforded me these forty-eight last hours, is indescribable. O that Jesus
would grant me one smile, however faint; it would be worth more to me than
millions of worlds! By thinking upon the parable of the unjust judge, who heard
the widow's cry, and our Lord's improvement upon it, I am encouraged that he
will hear me also. You know, Sir, there is a DOOR, TO HIM THAT KNOCKS IT
SHALL BE OPENED, AND WHOSOEVER SEEKS, SHALL FIND.

On my next visit I found her mind much discomposed; the cause of which was the
recollection of the following circumstance: -- While in the West Indies, she
was persuaded, by an Episcopal clergyman, to receive the Lord's Supper, which,
said she, was without knowledge and faith in Christ, or real love to Him; and
which, she concluded, ranked her among those who were guilty of the body and
blood of Christ. I informed her, that in my early days, through ignorance and
persuasion, I had done so myself: when I was brought to the knowledge of the
Lord, it deeply impressed my spirits; but, by an application of this scripture,
THE BLOOD OF JESUS CHRIST CLEANSES FROM ALL SIN, I enjoyed relief. To this she
paused, lifted up her eyes to heaven, and then proceeded: -- Could I attain one
ray of solid hope, enlivened by faith in Christ, I would quit the world without
a sigh. At times, I feel my heart expand to Jesus -- I feel I love him in my
heart -- nay, my soul seems full of love; but, at other times I feel so full of
guilt and fear, it bears me down with grief.

On my last visit I found her attended by a Philadelphian friend, who intimated
to Mrs. Hamilton the propriety of her withdrawing, with the nurse, while
she-conversed with me; to whom she replied, No, you need not go out; I have
nothing to say that I need be ashamed of; I have only to tell my need of a
Savior, and there is no shame in that* She was sensible that her end was
approaching. At intervals, she said, her heart felt a secret hope in God, and a
warm love to Christ; but was frequently so much absorbed by temptation and
pain, that none but Christ could support her. Still her earnest cry was for the
sensible smiles of the Savior, with which, she said, she could instantly
resign her breath. I told her, neither she, nor I, deserved a smile from God;
it was a rich mercy if he made us sensible of our guilt, and led us, by faith
for salvation, to the bleeding cross of his Son: if this be our case, the
smiles shall come by and by. O! replied she, it is at the cross I rest, and I
must wait and knock until the Lord shall answer. I prayed with her, and took my
final leave.

Death now made a rapid advance; yet Mrs. Hamilton seemed incessant in prayer.
Her friend informed me, that on asking her of the state of her mind a ^^^le
before her departure, she replied, I am still seeking -- still knocking! Then
lifting up her eyes to heaven, and clasping her hands, in solemn, powerful
accents she exclaimed, My God! my God! am I forsaken? Then I will rap yet the
harder! Agonizing under dissolving nature, she continued in silent prayer,
until she closed her eyes in death, aged fifty-two years, twenty-six of which
she had spent, to her manifest grief, on the delusive vanities of the stage.

Though Mrs. Hamilton was never chargeable, so far as I have ever heard, with a
profligate life, nor did she ever intimate this in my conversation with her,
yet it was evident, that her entrance and continuance on the stage gave her the
most pungent distress. The occupation of an actress she considered as
dangerous, exposing to numerous temptations, and inconsistent with a christian
profession. -- Charity leads us to believe, that she found that repentance,
carefully sought with tears, and experienced the virtue of the blood of Christ,
which cleanses from all sin.

No farther seek her merits to disclose,
Or draw her frailties from their dread abode;
There they alike in trembling hope repose
Upon the bosom of their Savior, GOD.
THE CHRISTIAN's POCKET LIBRARY. No. V. -- VOL. I.
AN ESSAY ON CHRISTIAN EXPERIENCE.
This is the scene of combat, not of rest;
Man's is laborious happiness at best:
On this side death his dangers never cease --
His joys are joys of conquest, not of peace.

EXPERIENCE is knowledge and advantage arising from practice: evangelically, as
applied to christians, it is the knowledge and enjoyment of God, arising from
the conflict in the soul between nature and grace; flesh and spirit; the old
man and the new. Although the experience of the heart admits of different
degrees of combat and sensibility, light and darkness, pleasure and pain, yet
there can be no christian, as such, without some measure of experience; it is
absolutely inseparable from his existence as a believer, either as a babe, a
young man, or a father, in Christ. A subject, therefore, of this magnitude is
worthy a place in this publication, and demands the most serious attention of
our numerous readers.

The AUTHOR of christian experience is the Spirit of God. This sentiment our
Lord taught in his discourse to the Jews: He that believes on me, out of his
belly shall flow rivers of living waters. This spoke he of the Spirit which
they that believe on him should receive. John vii.38, 39. To the woman of
Samaria he explained the same truth: Whosoever drinks of the water that I
shall give him, shall never thirst; but shall be in him a well of water
springing up into everlasting life. John iv.14. This well is dug in the
sinner's Regeneration; the sacred water springs in Conversion, flows through
every channel of Obedience, replenishes the heart under the severest
sufferings, and creates those sublime pleasures which bear the soul above the
fears of death, in prospect of immortal joys. Nor can we omit citing the great
channel of experience which our Lord has given us under the expressive emblem
of the vine and the branches, the vital sap of which, the power of the Blessed
Spirit, produces the buds of desire, the leaves of profession, the fragrant
flowers of comfort, and the richest fruit of love to God and man. The
experience of God's grace and love, the essence of religion, can no more be
enjoyed in the breast of a sinner without the Spirit of God, than the branch
can bear fruit without a living union with the vine. John xv. 1 -- 5. As it was
the office and work of CHRIST to make atonement for sin, by the shedding of his
blood; so it is the office and work of the SPIRIT to bring sinners into the
knowledge and experience of that great salvation. For a man to profess his
faith in the person and work of Christ, without being able to give a testimony
of the work of the Spirit upon his heart, is the most awful delusion -- If any
man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, let his profession be as
brilliant as it may. Romans viii.9.

The STANDARD of experience is the gospel of Christ. As the Holy Ghost dictated
the authors of the bible, so the gospel, in all its variety, fullness and glory,
is applied to a believing soul in the demonstration of the same Spirit, and of
power. 1 Thessalonians. i.5.ii.13. To the law, and to the testimony; if they speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. Isaiah
viii.20. It is in the volume of revelation alone that we know how God pardons
sin -- how it is our guilty conscience can have peace with God -- how we may
walk happily with him -- what are the enemies we have to fight against -- and
by what means we are made more than conquerors. It is here alone that we learn
the great, the glorious act of JEHOVAH, in adopting his children in Christ --
what are their features, trials, mercies, duties, privileges, and security. A
considerable part of this sacred book exhibits, in the most lively colors, the
EXPERIENCES of God's children, for many thousand years; and it is most certain,
that there is no man who has been made a partaker of God's grace, but has
found, in the lives of bible saints, an exact copy of his own frames, feelings,
fears, hopes, and joys. Let the men of grace be of whatever language, nation,
or particular visible denomination, they may, the pure language of experience
which God promised to turn to the people of his love, is the same, that they
may call upon the name of the Lord, and serve him with one consent. God's truth
can alone be the criterion of God's work. That experience which flows from
Christ, and rests upon his word, will satisfy, and abide; while that which is
derived from outward means only, and exists in mere frames, fits and passions,
shall vanish as the smoke, or prove as the morning cloud and as the early dew
which passes away. Hosea vi.4. There were some in the church at Corinth, and
such will be found in every church, who neglected the standard of the gospel,
and estimated their state by the feelings, gifts, and experiences of each
other. We dare not make ourselves of the number, or compare ourselves with
some, that commend themselves: but they, measuring themselves by themselves,
and comparing themselves amongst themselves, are not wise. 2 Cor. x.12. If he
that trusts in his own heart is a fool, equally so must he be that trusts in
another. Let us derive pleasure from reciting our experiences to each other;
but, let the word of the Lord be the light unto our feet, and a lamp unto our
path, to ascertain the perfection of our experience, and the safety of our
state.

The PROGRESS of experience is, in scripture, called, growing in grace, and in
the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; 2 Pet. iii.18. and, a
growing up into Christ in all things. Ephesians. iv.15. It is analogous to he advance
of vegetable nature; first the blade, then the ear, after that the full corn in
the ear. Mark iv.28. And, to the advance of humanity -- babe, youth, manhood,
old age; with all the passions, activity, duties, virtues, and advantages of
each stage. 1 John ii.13, 14. These productions of nature, like the growth of
the soul in grace, are gradual and imperceptible, and only to be ascertained by
their periods, light, strength, and virtue. The first efforts of grace are
described as seeing men as trees walking, Mark viii.24. its advance and
completion to the unity of the faith, the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a
perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. Ephesians.
iv.16. The prophet Ezekiel gives us a most delightful view of this subject, in
his description of the flowing of the water that issued out from under the
threshold of the house of the Lord; the depths of which were, to the ancles --
the knees -- the loins -- and waters to swim in, a river that could not be
passed over. Ezekiel xlvii.1 -- 5. In the advance of experience, we cannot but
perceive that faith, hope, love, repentance, meekness, long-suffering, and
truth, as derived from Christ, oppose the baneful powers of unbelief, despair,
hatred, pride, malice, and every other evil that arises from the old body of
sin that lodges within the soul. By this conflict the christian is led more
deeply to know and to loath the vileness of sin, pants after greater conformity
to Christ, and cleaves unto the Lord with full purpose of heart. The more
powerfully the snares of the world and satan surround him, the more ardently he
breathes for communion with God. The more sensibly he feels his own
imperfections, the more he cries for the enjoyment of the fullness of Jesus, and
rejoices in him as the great High Priest, who has made atonement, and bears
the iniquities of our most holy things. This conflict Paul felt, and has left
us a copy of his experience in the seventh chapter of the Romans. He that is a
partaker of the same grace, can, more or less, adopt his language in the fifth
chapter -- Therefore, being justified, by faith we have peace with God through
our Lord Jesus Christ; by whom also we have access by faith into this grace
wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God. And not only so, but
we glory in tribulation also, knowing that tribulation works patience, and
patience experience, and experience hope; and hope makes not ashamed, because
the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost, which is given
unto us.

The MEANS by which experience is advanced are necessary to be understood. As
vegetable nature prospers by the rays of the sun, and the rains from above, so
the christian is indebted to the beams of Christ, the glorious Son of
Righteousness, and to the constant influences of the Blessed Spirit. -- As the
body depends upon the air in which we breathe for the comforts, use, and
exertions of animal life, so the soul is incessantly dependant on the Spirit of
God for all the support, consolation, and activity, connected with a life of
faith on Christ. As the advance of animal nature is promoted by activity and
industry, so the christian finds an infinite variety of duties, personal and
relative, in the world, in the closet, in the family, and in the church; the
performance of which is connected with his hope in God, and his love to his
Savior. But, perhaps, experience is more rapidly advanced, and more strongly
rooted, in the furnace of affliction. It was in this furnace that the faith of
the primitive christians was found to be more precious than gold that
perishes. 1 Pet. i.7. Never did a believer pass through suffering, but, either
in it or after it, he was convinced that he could not have done without it. The
Lord made Joseph fruitful in the land of his affliction. Genesis xli.52. And in
all the Lord's dispensations to his people, he promotes their humility,
increases their faith, and gives them the greater enjoyment of his presence. It
is very observable, that the annual season that ripens the corn in the ear, is
most attended with thunder, lightning, storm, and tempest; and, many excellent
christians have found, that the nearer they advanced to the close of life,
temptations and afflictions increased upon them: and thus, as an oar of wheat
ripe for the sickle, he bows his head in humility, self-denial, and obedience;
while the language of his heart is, Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly!

To conclude this essay: let the professor of religion be persuaded to try his
experience by the testimony of the gospel. Psm. cxxxix.23, 24. -- Let not the
weak in faith be discouraged: although a babe in grace, be thankful for what
you enjoy, and remember, God gives more grace. James iv.6. -- Let those who
have good experience of pardon, peace and love in God, be ready to give a
reason of the hope that is in him with meekness and fear; proving the
genuineness of his profession by the holiness of his life. Matt. v.16. -- And,
let those who advance to the last stage of life know, that God will not forsake
the work of his own hand; but that you shall come to the grave in a full age,
like a shock of corn comes in in its season. Job v.27.

THE RELIEF.
A CLERGYMAN of the state of New York, not many years since, through a
misapprehension of a leading member, was precipitately deprived of his pulpit,
which involved a large family in necessity. At supper, the good man had the
pain of beholding the last morsel of bread placed upon the table, without the
least means or prospect of a supply for his children's breakfast. His wife,
full of grief, with her children, retired to her bed. The minister chose to set
up and employ his dark hours in prayer, and in reading the promises of God.
Some secret hope of supply pervaded his breast; but when, how, what, whence, or
by whom, he knew not. He retired to rest, and in the morning appeared with his
family, and performed the duty of prayer. It being the depth of winter, and a
little fire upon the hearth, probably to keep the poor children's expectations
alive, that breakfast should soon be enjoyed, he desired his wife to hang on
the kettle, and spread the cloth upon the table. -- The kettle boiled -- the
children cried for bread: the afflicted father, standing before the fire, felt
those emotions of heart unknown to those whose tables are replenished with
affluence. While in this painful state, some one knocked at the door -- entered
-- passed the compliments of the morning, and was about to leave the room, when
he stepped back and delivered a letter into the minister's hand. When the
gentleman was gone the letter was opened, and, to the minister's astonishment,
it contained a FOUR POUNDS BANK BILL, with a desire of acceptance. So manifest
an interposition of Divine goodness could not but be received with gratitude
and joy; and, should be a lesson to others to trust in that Savior who has
said, Verily thou shall be fed. Psm. xxxvii.3. I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee. Heb. xiii.5.

This remarkable occurrence being communicated to the EDITOR, who, having an
intimacy with the gentleman said to be the hand that offered the seasonable
relief, was determined, the next time he made him a visit, to introduce the
subject, and, if possible, to know the reason that induced the generous action.
The story was told -- the gentleman discovered a modest blush, which evinced
the tenderness of his heart. On interrogation, he said "He had frequently heard
that minister: on a certain morning he was disposed for a walk; thought, in the
severity of the winter season a trifle might be of service, as fuel was high;
felt a kind of necessity to enclose the money in a letter; went to the house;
found the family adjusted as was described; delivered the paper and retired;
but knew not of the extreme necessity of the minister and his family until this
moment."

The address made by the gentleman's amiable sister, present in the parlour,
shall serve as an improvement of this narrative. "Brother, learn from this
never to withhold your hand from relieving another, when you feel a dictate in
your own breast; as this instance must convince you, it was from God, and
greater benefit conveyed than ever you intended to bestow."

Go thou and do likewise.

Luke x.37. THE BENEVOLENCE OF GOD In concealing from Man the Knowledge of
future Events of Time.
"Great God! I would not ask to see
"What in Futurity shall be;
"If light and bliss attend my days,
"Then let my future hours be praise.
"Is darkness and distress my share?
"Then let me trust thy guardian care:
"Enough for me, if love divine
"At length through every cloud shall shine."

MAN, by transgression, has prepared for himself a thorny, tempestuous passage
through life. It has, however, pleased the Almighty to draw a kind of veil to
conceal from man the certain knowledge of those various and successive events
of time, the immediate prospect of which would crush the soul in deep despair.
No man can wisely boast of tomorrow; we know not what a day may bring forth;
no, nor even a moment, or the twinkling of the eye; -- such short transitions
of time are big with the most important events.

Could the merchant foresee the obstructions and the losses attending his eager
efforts in trade; or the husbandman anticipate the blasts that so often attend
the labor of his hands, the springs of industry would immediately fail, and
society at large become truly necessitous. Who would exult in forming the
pleasing connections of social life, were we to know beforehand the blasts of
friendship, the assaults of disease, or the period when death would tear from
our embraces the objects of our esteem, and lay them in the recess of
corruption? -- Were it possible for a man to ascertain, with precision, the
moment, the place, the circumstances that should be destined for his own death,
what perpetual anxiety and tormenting fear would rage in his breast, and
totally render himself incompetent to discharge the duties of public or private
life! Did such foreknowledge pervade the mind of man, childhood and youth
would bear the sorrows of old age; the powers of genius would fail; art be
unimproved; and nature herself unexplored. How little does the busy worldling
reflect on his obligation to infinite goodness, for his ability to perform the
duties of his station, and that the uncertainty of future events demands his
constant dependence upon the pleasure of the Almighty! Those whose minds are
directed to the Supreme, know, that the providence of God is a mystery to man
in all ages. It is as the bud which gradually and imperceptibly arises into
flower, and then emits its richest fragrance. It is a second bible; every day,
and every moment, like the several leaves of the sacred volume, presenting
something new and astonishing to the intelligent observer.

If the observations now made, as they relate to men in common life, be
pronounced just, I may venture to add, that the wisdom and goodness of God, in
withholding the knowledge of future events, is more highly esteemed by the real
Christian than by those whose habit of dissipation deprives them of an ability
to observe the dispensations of the Almighty. If God, in the early part of the
Christian's life, had uncovered the great deep of the heart; exposed the secret
evils that lodge within it; or had given the good man a view of the
imperfections, disappointments, temptations, crosses, and sorrows that awaited
him, how would his soul have trembled at the awful prospect, and bowed himself
to the very dust of the earth! The Christian sometimes ascends the mount of
contemplation; surveys the map of his past experience; remembers the way which
the Lord his God has led him; and in the review his soul is filled with
profound astonishment! So many winding, thorny paths, -- seas of tribulation,
-- dreary deserts, -- mountains of difficulty, -- valleys of humiliation! My
God! says he, and drops the silent tear, can I have passed through such ways as
these? Is it possible! Surely had I known the path, my feet had never made the
choice. It was thou, my God, my Savior, and my Guide, that safely brought me
through; nor can I now distrust thy future care. Secure beneath thy sacred
wings I shall pass my fleeting days; finish my course with joy; walk through
the shades of death, and mount to Zion's hill above, to celebrate thy praise!

Before I quit this paper, it may not be unnecessary to inquire, why God thus
conceals from man the knowledge of future events, when, as transgressors
against him, they merit every exhibition of present and eternal sorrow, as the
fruit of their own transgressions? We reply, JESUS HAS DELIVERED US FROM THE
WRATH TO COME. 1 Thessalonians. i.10. THE LORD THY GOD TURNED THE CURSE INTO A BLESSING
UNTO THEE, BECAUSE THE LORD THY GOD LOVED THEE. Deuteronomy. xxiii.5. The glory of
divine grace changes the vicissitudes of Providence. All things, however
afflictive, under the administration of ZION's KING, work together for the best
interest of those who love the Lord. Let us then forever sing, HALLELUJAH, FOR
THE LORD GOD OMNIPOTENT REIGNS! Amen.

THE INDIAN.
DURING the last war, Col. Graham being stationed at Fort-Schuyler, entered
into conversation with an intelligent Indian, to whom he proposed the following
question: "Do you know how your forefathers worshipped?" To which, with a
smile, he replied, Not as you white people do. We believe the GREAT SPIRIT to
be too holy to talk with every body; therefore we chose out the best man among
us, to talk with him, and what he tells him, that we do.

Does not this convince us that even among the savages, the supposed grosser
part of mankind, that there exists a conviction of the holiness of God, the
sinfulness of man, and the necessity of a mediator? Does not this confirm the
grosser ignorance of many who call themselves Christians, and yet think
themselves sufficiently virtuous to worship God, without being indebted to
Jesus Christ, as a mediator? And does not this teach us the importance of a
holy disposition in those who pass between God and man, in the duty and work of
the ministry?

PLEASING REFLECTION.
WHEN a person is going into a foreign land, where he never was before, it is
comfortable for him to consider, "Though I am embarking for an unknown country,
it is a place where I have many friends, who are already settled there, so that
I shall be, in fact, at home, the instant I get there." -- How sweet for a
dying Christian to reflect, that, though he is yet a stranger in the world of
spirits, still the world of spirits is no stranger to him. God, Christ, Angels,
and redeemed souls, are there; and many more believers follow every day. The
blood and righteousness of Immanuel are his true letters of recommendation, and
he goes on invitation of the King of the country.

NATURAL HISTORY.
THE ROSE OF SHARON.
-- Who can paint
Like NATURE? Can imagination boast,
Amid his gay creation, hues like these?
And can he mix them with that matchless skill,
And lay them on so delicately fine,
And lose them in each other, as appears
In every bud that blows? --
THOMSON's SPRING.
HOW infinite, how truly grand the works of the ALMIGHTY! On this lower globe,
what innumerable productions strike the eye of contemplation, and lead the soul
with profoundest reverence to adore the infinite, the wise, the glorious
Supreme! But, of all these, how is our sight gratified, and our senses regaled,
while passing through the FLOWERY NATIONS? Here nature wears her bright attire,
pours forth her wonders, and demands our highest praise. From this rich,
inexhaustible profusion of Nature's garden, let us at least select the ROSE of
SHARON, survey its beauties, and collect its sweets.

The ROSE, rosa, is acknowledged a genus of the polygamia order, belonging to
the icosandria class of plants. The sorts of roses are very numerous. Turnefort
reckons no less than fifty-three, and botanists find it very difficult to
determine with accuracy, which are species, and which are varieties, as well as
which are varieties of the respective species. On this account, Linnaeus, and
some other eminent authors, are inclined to think, that there is only one real
species of rose, which is the rosa canina, or dog-rose of the hedge, and that
all the other sorts are accidental varieties of it. However, according to the
present Linnaean arrangement they stand divided into fourteen supposed species,
each comprehending some varieties, which in some sorts are but few, others
numerous.

The rose we admire is the rose of Sharon, the most delightful in its colors,
and the richest in its fragrance. This invites our choice, because it is an
emblem of Immanuel's glory, and endears our hearts to him. Sol. Songs ii.1.

1. The beauty of its colors, red and white, expressive these of the glory of
the Godhead, and the sorrows of the humanity of Christ. My beloved, said the
church, is white and ruddy. Sol. Songs v.10. WHITE is properly no color at
all, but a composition of all colors; the light of the sun, therefore, said
Sir Isaac Newton, is only white, because consisting of all colors: neither is
BLACK, its opposite, a color, but a deprivation of all colors, therefore the
proper emblem of wretchedness and death. Apply these observations to the
scripture testimony of Jehovah: God is light, and in him is no darkness at all,
1 John i.5. demonstrative this of that underived, self-existent purity,
happiness, truth, love, and glory, which, without the shadow of variation,
disorder, and imperfection, is essential to Deity. That this excellence,
peculiar to Jehovah, is ascribed to Jesus, the current of scripture evinces.
Aaron, the High Priest, was to wear a pure linen garment under the ephod, to
represent the invisible divinity under the humanity. Daniel saw the Messiah,
the Ancient of days, with a garment white as snow. Dan. vii.9. When Jesus was
transfigured upon mount Tabor, his raiment was white as the light; more than
any fuller on earth could make them. Mark ix.3. Thus, Jesus Christ, the blesed
and only POTENTATE, the KING of KINGS, and LORD of LORDS; who not only has
immortality dwelling in the LIGHT, which no man can approach unto; whom, in his
divinity, no man has seen, nor can see, is worthy of honor and power
everlasting. 1 Timothy vi.15, 16. Let us now contemplate the other color that
forms this beautiful rose. This is to exhibit the quality of the human body,
generally acknowledged to be formed by the Almighty, from a sort of red earth.
Nor does it less intimate those sorrows which mankind experience as the fruit
of disobedience. But, as applied to Christ, denotes the greatness of his
sufferings, and his bloody death, as the redeemer of sinners. Isaiah beheld
Messiah, red in his apparel, and whose garment was like him that treads in
the wine-fat. lxiii.2. In the days of his flesh, sufferings attended his path,
and, in Gathsamane, his sorrows were such that produced strong cries and tears,
while sweat and blood issued from every vein, and fell down to the ground. His
death exhibited the most affecting scene; so great the agonies of his body by
crucifixion; so extreme the sorrows of his soul pressed with the weight of
divine judgment for our sins, that nature herself, by a supernatural darkness,
drew a veil over the distressed sufferer! In his exalted state, he is seen by
the glorified throng, as a Lamb that had been slain. John beheld this adored
Lord, wearing a name written that no man knew but himself; and he was clothed
with a vesture dipped in blood. Rev. xix.12, 13. Can we read these scriptures
without a conviction of the eternal power and Godhead of Christ? Can we turn
the sacred page without being deeply affected with the life and death of Jesus,
as a man of sorrows, and acquainted with griefs? Impossible! Cast then your
eyes upon THE ROSE OF SHARON, produced, may I say, on purpose to exhibit by its
color the same truth which revelation teaches. Let us look still closer, and
while the white and the red, pure in themselves, exhibit the perfection of
Nature's pencil; observe how delicately fine the union between the two; this to
teach us the great mystery of godliness, God manifest in the flesh. A union
this that constitutes the character of Christ as MEDIATOR; lays the foundation
of our pardon, and is the strong basis of our communion with God, perseverence
through life, support in death, and hope of a glorious immortality!

2. The odoriferous scent of the Rose of Sharon assists us to contemplate the
precious virtues of the Lord of glory. How richly does this sweet rose pour
forth its fragrance to gratify the sense! yet more richly does Jesus display
the glories of his name; opens the unbounded love of his heart; applies a full
pardon bought with his most precious blood; proclaims, by his gospel, the
inconceivable fullness of his grace as an all-sufficient supply for our support,
comfort, perseverance, sanctification, and everlasting felicity. Jesus, the
Rose of Sharon, is ever precious to them that believe; yet there are special
seasons when his delights are more sensibly enjoyed. David exclaimed, Though I
walk in the midst of trouble, thou will revive me. Psm. cxxxviii.7. And
thousands in every age have enjoyed more sensible comforts in Christ, at a
period of affliction, than ever they experienced in a time of ease and
affluence. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation
also abounds by Christ. When the church attends the supper of the Lord, how
often does the Redeemer gladden their hearts with the light of his countenance,
while communion, with bread and wine, yields the richest delight! But, however
precious and delightful the Rose of Sharon may be to us in our passage through
life, in the article of death, far superior enjoyments are conferred. Precious
in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints. When flesh and heart fail;
when the sweets of human friendship are no longer to be enjoyed; when the
richest cordials and the most delicious productions of nature cease to gratify
the taste, and pollute upon the lips, then for the soul to be regaled with the
smiles of Jesus, the delightful Rose of Sharon, how great is the blessing!
Sheltered beneath Immanuel's wings, and sweetly solaced with his love, how many
thousands have launched into eternity with a smile, and hailed the promised
crown of life!

3. The medicinal virtues of the rose affords us further aid to explore the
excellence of the Lord Christ. There is not a more rich perfume than the
essence of roses. The rose distilled with water yields a small portion of a
butyraceous oil, whose flavor exactly resembles that of the rose itself. This
oil, and the distilled water, are very useful and agreeable cordials. A
conserve of roses is of various uses, particularly in relieving imperfections
attending the eye, and of meliorating and removing complaints, unnecessary now
to be mentioned.

But whence these medicinal virtues of the rose? Do they flow while blooming in
the field? No: this delightful flower must be cut down, cast into a Still, and
undergo the severity of fire, before its essence can be enjoyed. Solemn thought
this, when applied to Christ, the Rose of Sharon! He appeared in all the
perfection of humanity, and displayed the glory of divinity thirty-three years;
then was cut down by death, the instrument of justice, cast into the grave,
sustained the fire of divine anger against sin, and thus, as the Redeemer of
his people, yielded the virtues of his sacrifice, for their pardon, peace, and
happiness in God. There is no virtue in the rose to regale the fainting
spirits, restore the wasted frame, heal the obstructed sight, or cure the
burning fever, but what there are infinitely greater virtues in a crucified
Jesus, to cure similar, nay, every disorder possible incident to the soul of
man. Thousands in every age, under the most complicated mental evils, have
received with joy the virtues of the Rose of Sharon; and thousands still, and
thousands more, shall enjoy its sacred sweets and triumph in its praise!

4. SHARON, (that is, a plain or field) the native soil of the lovely rose,
will help us to conceive a few more thoughts of the adored Redeemer. This plain
of Sharon was a delightful, fertile place, where David f^d his numerous flock,
and may denote the open, free publication of Christ in the world by his gospel;
or his church, where he dwells, conducts his sheep, displays his glory, heals
the sick, and comforts the sorrowful. By the presence of the Lord, this
wilderness, solitary place of our earthly pilgrimage, dreary as the desert, is
made to blossom as the rose. Isaiah xxxv.1, 2. Wherever his love is
experienced, there is that sacred joy which can only be exceeded by drinking at
the fountain head in glory!

As the Rose grew upon Sharon's plain, free for all who had eyes to see, sense
to smell, or hands to embrace, so Jesus is freely and fully published in his
gospel. Whosoever will, let him come, and him that comes unto me, I will in no
wise cast out. But, those who have neither eyes to see, nor sense to smell,
pass by the Rose of Sharon, treat it with disdain, and attempt to crush it
under foot.

5. No Rose without its Thorn; no, not even the Rose of Sharon! Who takes
Christ must take the cross too. If any man will be my disciple, let him deny
himself, take up his cross, and follow me. If any man will live godly in Christ
Jesus, he must suffer persecution. When men without grace take Jesus, the Rose
of Sharon, in the hand of mere profession, the thorn of persecution makes them
throw away the rose, and seek for other flowers to gratify their carnal taste;
but, when men of grace, by the hand of faith, pluck this precious flower, the
thorn of suffering makes them grasp the harder, enjoy its sweets more sweetly,
and dare to stand though blood itself should flow.

In Sharon's lovely rose
Immortal beauties shine;
Its sweet refreshing fragrance shows
Its origin divine.
How blooming and how fair!
O may my happy breast
This lovely rose forever wear,
And be supremely blessed!
THE AFFLICTED MOTHER.
A PIOUS gentleman and his wife, possessed of an agreeable fortune, were
favored with a son and two daughters. The mother fixed her attention
inordinately upon her children, and gradually declined in the warmth of her
affections to God* so hard is it for us to possess the natural enjoyments of
life, and yet to reserve the heart for God! God, however, is a jealous God to
them who are the objects of his love; and, according to his own promise, he
visits their iniquities with a rod. Psm. lxxxix.32. God said to Hosea, Ephraim
is joined unto idols, let him alone. Hosea iv.17. This woman idolized her
children, and God convinced her of her folly. Her youngest child was seized
with a fever, lay a few days, and died. This bereaving providence, instead of
impressing her mind with a sense of the uncertainty of human enjoyments, and,
that God alone was the center of happiness, she called his judgments in
question, and murmured at his hand. A few months after this, her other
daughter, after affording her mother great pleasure by her prattle in the
parlour, entered the garden, walked on the edge of a fine fish pond, slipped
in, and was drowned, before relief could be obtained. The unfortunate mother
was now filled with distraction; sullen grief succeeded; at length, by
temptation, she highly reflected on the conduct of the Almighty, and gradually
declined in her attendance on the public duties of religion. Her son, now her
only child, a remarkably promising youth, had just finished his education, and
returned from the boarding-school -- went out one morning with his gun for
sport, in company with a neighboring gentleman; arriving at a fence, rested
their guns; the youth, while in conversation, placed his hand, and reclined his
head upon the mouth of the barrel; accidentally, by the motion of his foot, he
touched the trigger, and instantly the contents of the piece was discharged
through his brain. In this affecting state he was conveyed to his parents; but
what pen is able to recite the dreadful emotion of their hearts on the
melancholy sight! What submission might possess the father's breast, is
uncertain; but the unhappy mother, while surrounded with weeping friends, in
the midst of her agonies unguardedly exclaimed, God has taken away my children,
and what can he now do more? God soon convinced her that he could do more. Her
husband caught a violent cold, a consumption ensued, and death received him to
his gloomy shades. When the information of his death was given to his wife, she
fainted. On her recovery, she fell upon her knees, the tears gushed from her
eyes, and with accents indescribable, she exclaimed, "Lord, thou have at length
bowed my rebellious heart! Thou have stripped me of my children, and my husband
is no more; here, Lord, take my heart -- never more suffer a creature, however
dear, to remove it from thyself. I own thy judgments just, and ask the comforts
of thy love!

This woman survived several years, and lived an example of real piety. Let
this narrative teach others, that strong affections produce strong afflictions;
and that thus is the creature best enjoyed when held in subordination to the
pleasure of the Lord.

THE REVOLTING CHRISTIAN.
-- False breast!
Fickle and fond of every guest;
Each fairy image at it flies,
Here finds admittance through my eyes.
This foolish heart can leave her God,
And shadows tempt her thoughts abroad.
WATTS.
THAT a person who, through grace, has enjoyed the rich manifestations of a
Savior's smiles, and has been numbered with Christ's visible flock, may be
liable to fall into temptation, lose the bloom of his profession, and the
comforts of his soul, for a season, is a truth so evident in the scriptures,
and so convicting in the conscience, as at once demands our assent and our
tears. Although it be absolutely impossible to describe every sensation of a
backsliding heart, and the many erring paths to which such are exposed, I
shall, in this paper, draw the general outline of such an unhappy case, and add
my fervent prayer, that God may make it a mean to alarm the careless, humble
the disobedient, and reclaim the wanderer.

True religion begins with Christ; he is our pardon, peace, hope, and
everlasting salvation. To sit under his shadow, and by faith experience the
fruit of his passion, sweet to our taste, constitutes the sublime happiness of
our souls: It is therefore evident, that the first step to our departure from
God, and our errors in life, begins at the cross. John vi.68. The eye is
allured from beholding the person of Jesus and the heart partially ceases; to
have sensible enjoyment of his grace and his love. Perhaps this observation may
meet with conviction in the reader's breast; -- the time is remembered, that
when impressed with guilt, and loaded with distress, he rested at the cross,
beheld the bleeding Lamb, and felt peace and pleasure with God. Then, how
incessant was the panting of the heart (...) communion with the Savior! the
least (...), and the smallest evil, keenly wounded (...) soul, and made the
eyes flow with tears. But now, though the name of Christ be approved, it is not
preciously enjoyed. The soul and Christ seldom meets in love, and feels the
sweets of pardon in his blood. A shyness has taken place, and the perfidious
conduct of the Christian deeply convinces his conscience, and leaves him
without excuse. Perhaps the Savior's charge may reach the reader's ears, and
pierce his guilty breast: -- " Know, therefore, and see, that it is an evil,
and a bitter thing, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God. Jer. ii.19.

As by the cross of Christ we are brought nigh to God, and enjoy the sweets of
fellowship with him as our Father; so, a neglect of the virtues of the cross
imperceptibly obstructs us in the enjoyment of that high privilege. Our
communion with God is carried on by faith, meditation, and prayer; the essence
of which is, the secret motion of the soul in peace, adoration, hope, love, and
joy; producing that solid satisfaction and sublime pleasure, which none but he
that feels it knows. This experience constitutes our heaven upon earth. We thus
walk with God, and never feel ourselves unhappy but when interrupted in this
holy path. Whatever affliction may attend us, it is in communion with God that
our tears are wiped away, learn the design of every adverse providence, and
receive grace to help in time of need. Perhaps the reader may bring to
recollection the time when he enjoyed this privilege with sweet delight, drew
near the Lord by prayer, could tell him all your grief, and receive the
satisfaction which gave you boldness to pursue the path of life with joy; but,
you are conscious it is not so now. You pray; but it is not in prayer: your
meditations are attended with darkness; your faith is surrounded with such
amazing unbelief, that often induces you to question if ever you believed at
all; and the motion of your heart to God is in great coldness and heaviness.
Thus, when you would do good, evil is ever present with you; and a
consciousness of guilt hurries you away from prayer, and increases the distance
of your soul from God. Standing thus as on the threshold of the closet, you are
ripe to embrace any temptation which satan may propose. Thousands of most
excellent Christians have marked this fatal spot, where apostasy more visibly
began. If David could say, It is good for me to draw near to God, O how
extremely bitter and dangerous the consequence of living at a sensible distance
from God! Christian, where art thou? Take heed lest there be in you an evil
heart of unbelief in departing from the living God; for, be assured, the
backslider in heart shall be filled with his own ways. Prove. xiv.14. And, if
you feel it not now, it will be more severe at a future period. You know not
whither you may be led by sin, therefore return unto the Lord, from whom you
have deeply revolted.

The loss of sensible communion with God soon discovers itself in the
disposition of the mind, and in the actions of the life. The Word of the Lord
was precious in those days when the Christian lived near to God: now it is read
with indifference, without faith, without prayer, without a desire to find
Christ, and a determination to follow his precepts or embrace his promises. In
the discharge of domestic duties, the temper is altered; morning and evening
prayer becomes formal; and the imperfections of servants and children are
passed over without reproof, because the conscience is an accuser of its own
sin. Religious conversation, if held at all, is not upon the beauties of
Christ, the riches of grace, or the experience of the heart; but, on
speculative points, the gifts of ministers, the misfortunate miscarriages of
others, or (what is pretty fashionable among professors of this day) the
decline of religion, without producing one effort to revive it in themselves or
others. The Lord's day now comes rather of course, than from pleasing
anticipation. Public prayer is little enjoyed; and the preaching of the gospel
is not nourishing, for want of faith in him that hears it. Heb. iv.2. -- Either
the minister is charged with barrenness, or the hearer thinks himself
sufficiently wise without fresh instruction: nor is it uncommon to find such a
person going from one minister to another, in search of something new; yet
nothing really satisfies the heart, because, the man is dissatisfied with
himself, and at a distance from the Lord. This spiritual decline of heart paves
the way for a more general neglect of the means of grace -- lives above them,
and concludes, he is as well at home, or walking in the fields, as he would be
at church. Thus, no wonder that the man who has lost the comforts of grace in
his soul should misimprove, or totally neglect the means of grace also.

Lut us now take one step farther with the revolting Christian, and mark the
change which takes place in his conduct in the more busy scenes of life. That
sweet restraint which a sense of the love of God once created upon his soul,
and directed his cautious steps in forming his connections, managing his trade,
and answering his obligations, gradually wears away, and his heart takes a more
speedy flight after all which the world calls good and great. He may now pass
for a polite Christian; having the name, but destitute of the spirit of a
lively believer, and of course tries pretty hard to make his profession and his
worldly pursuits comport with each other. The men of business cannot, however,
but perceive that this man has considerably lost the fine bloom of his
religious profession, and triumphantly exclaim -- See, the man has become like
one of us! It is now that he stands in the way of indulging those maxims, and
committing those evils which before his soul abhorred, and which he severely
reproved in others. Satan meets him upon his own ground, suits his bates to the
frame of his heart, and, by every method in his infernal power, blinds his
mind, hardens his heart, and pollutes his passions. Here, at least, let us stop
-- No man's pea, or tongue, can ascertain how far, and to what wretched lengths
a man in such a state may go; -- rather than attempt such a pursuit, it is the
wish of the writer of this paper to ask the reader, Is this case your own?
Happy for you, if it is not. Testify your gratitude to God; live upon Christ;
plead his Spirit; keep his statutes; watch the motion of your heart, and you
are happy indeed! But, if this description of a backslider, in either, or in
all its stages, shows your own likeness, and your conscience says, Thou art the
man, let me solemnly entreat you to reflect upon your case. Each stage has an
easy transitition to another; he that is not watchful of the first, will soon
find himself in the next, and, like a rolling stone, will find the way to the
botton.

Remember, the sin of your departure from God has been committed with your eyes
open. What ingratitude is this to God for his love -- to Christ for his
salvation -- and to the Blessed Spirit for his instruction and consolation! --
Did you not solemnly devote yourself to be the Lord's at your conversion; and
have you not frequently renewed this surrender in private, at your baptism, and
at the Lord's Supper? -- What evil has the Lord done unto you? and wherein has
he wearied you? Were not his paths pleasant, his promises sweet, and his smiles
charming? In how many scenes of distress has he delivered you? And in the
bounty of his providence, and the riches of his grace, how often has he
exceeded your highest expectations? What griefs does your present coldness of
heart and disobedience of life create in the breast of those who are the
friends of Christ, and who knew you when a humble, lively, happy christian? --
Neither forget the discouragements which you give to the lambs of the flock who
are seeking the paths of the Lord; and the advantage you offer the enemies of
the gospel to impeach its virtues. -- Surely you cannot be insensible what
injury you do your own souls. Are you as happy now as when you delighted
beneath the Shepherd's care, and fed in the rich pasture of his grace? O! no.
Think, for a moment, were temptations now to assail you, how awfully you might
fall, and sink deeper into sin and misery? -- If death was now to advance,
where is your certain hope of future bliss? Can you shut your eyes, harden your
heart, pursue in sin, and abandon the Lord of life? God forbid! There is a
certain something within your breast that fills you with shame, produces a
tear, and makes you cry, O that it were with me as in months past! Lord turn
unto me, have mercy upon me, heal my backslidings, let me once more find the
way to thine arms, and enjoy that peace I felt when first I knew thy love.

Presuming this may be the desire of your heart, I shall, in the next number,
show you some of those methods by which Christ the good Shepherd restores his
wandering sheep, and the sensibility such have of their merciful restoration.

Dialogue between a Mother and her Daughter. (Continued from page 169.)
Daughter. DEAR mamma, excuse my entering your chamber so early this morning;
-- affecting news has just arrived!


Mother. My daughter, what has happened? -- why this extreme agitation of mind?


Daughter. A servant has just delivered me a letter on the death of dear
Charlotte Gay, who left the boarding-school with me. O madam, you don't know
how it affects me!


Mother. Distressing indeed, Eliza! -- Do sit down and read me the letter.


Daughter. Reads.

DEAR ELIZA SEMOUR,
It is with inexpressible grief I inform you of the death of my dear and much
loved sister Charlotte. This was a sudden stroke to us. She was arrested by a
violent fever that baffled the skill of our ablest physicians. In her illness,
she earnestly desired to see you; but such was the rapid progress of mortality,
we were unable to inform you in time. Her spirit was much discomposed; she
talked to us all in a manner she never did before, praying that we might all
think of our latter end. She often said, she did not know whither she was
going; and wished she might live longer to make her peace with God. But, my
dear Eliza Semour, this subject is so affecting, I must bid your adieu, and
assure you that I am

Your affectionate MARIA GAY.



Mother. A very serious event indeed -- I wish it may be productive of real
advantage to all concerned. Ah, poor child! what distress must lodge within her
breast, when the pangs of death seized her spirit! -- Not to know whither she
was going! -- perhaps she had neglected her bible, and preferred novels, else
she would have known that our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ has abolished
death, and brought life and immortality to light by the gospel. To pass from a
dissipated circle to a dying bed, is a solemn change! -- "She talked as she had
not done before;" -- no -- the lips of youth seldom speak of God, of Christ*
mercy, a future state. Vanity resides in the breast, and vanity is uttered by
the tongue. She wished to live, to make her peace with God: Ah! how few
dissipated, whether young or old, when lain upon their dying pillow, but what
feel the power of guilt, and a need of pardon and peace with God! -- Thus death
makes serious the young, the gay, the aged! I wish, my daughter, you had been
with Charlotte in her departing moments; perhaps her last words would have
deeply penetrated your breast; and, by God's blessing, received lasting
benefit. Dying words sink deep in the bosom of a friend!


Daughter. O! had I taken my last farewell -- I shall never see her more!


Mother. Submission to the will of God in removing choice friends from our
arms, is not all such providence demand. For US they sicken, and for US they
die. And I hope, my daughter, you will not suffer this event to be crased from
your breast, until you embrace those favors which poor Charlotte's dying
breath so earnestly desired.


Daughter. I hope I shall improve, and collect instruction from the spoils of
death.


Mother. Young persons are apt to trifle with the thoughts of death, and
imagine an horrid gloom to attend the practice of piety; and that it
necessarily excludes the christian from social pleasures; but such conclusions
are made by those only who love to gratify those depraved passions which the
law of God condemns, and who never yet tasted happiness in God. These, my
daughter, you must pronounce improper judges in the case. Persons of true piety
know that religion refines the grosser passions, creates a better relish for
social pleasures, and instead of introducing them to gloomy shades, it is the
only path by which they can escape that dreadful darkness which rested upon the
mind of your departed friend.


Daughter. I know, madam, we are too apt to be misled, and to suppress thoughts
of mortality; but I hope, from Charlotte's death, to be more solicitous for my
future life.


Mother. In this your own happiness and the comfort of your parents very much
depend. Before you quit my chamber, let me urge you to the duties of prayer,
and reading the scriptures. Prayer is the opening of the heart to God --
confessing our guilt, and imploring his mercy. This is the great duty which
enlivens every other, and fills the soul with the highest satisfaction; but it
is a duty to which, by sin, we are naturally averse. Beg the Lord to give you
an heart to pray. Never suffer yourself to be ashamed of this duty, however
others may despise it. If it be an honor to converse with a king upon his
throne, it is infinitely greater to have audience with the LORD OF GLORY, and
delight beneath his heavenly smiles!


Daughter. I know this is a very great duty, nor do I wholly neglect it; but I
have so many unruly thoughts, and I know so little of God, that it seems almost
useless for me to attempt to pray.


Mother. This then, my child, will convince you of the importance of the other
duty I recommended you, -- the reading of the Scriptures. This gives us just
thoughts of the moral attributes of God, -- shows us how, in Christ, sinners
are pardoned, and can have fellowship with God, by the aid of his Holy Spirit.
The mind being established in this, ten thousand other precious subjects will
unfold to your view, and give you the highest satisfaction possible. In the
language of an excellent writer I may tell you, GO, READ THE BIBLE TO BE GAY.
No pleasures are so refined as those which flow from the love of God upon the
heart; no supports are equal to those which the promises inspire; -- no
prospects of futurity are so rational and divine, as revelation opens to the
believing mind. Although this duty might be performed at any time, yet I
recommend you to attend to it in the morning, when the heart is free for
contemplation. Begin with the Psalms and the Evangelists, and read a chapter in
each; and after you have done, fail not to propose such questions as these --
What do I in these chapters learn of God? -- Which verse leads me to discover
the beauties of a Savior, and convinces me of my need of Him? Which Promise is
most suited to encourage my mind, and which Precept appears necessary for me to
obey? Persons in general read a chapter, close the book, and it is over; -- but
if such interrogations as I have proposed be made, they will never fail to
impress the Scriptures more forcibly on your mind, enlarge your views of God
and his grace, and consequently give you the highest encouragement to perform
the duty of prayer.


Daughter. I thank you for this advice, and hope it will be of real service. If
you choose, madam, as the servant waits, I will retire and prepare a few lines
of condolence to Maria Gay.


Mother. By all means, and present my sympathetic condolence to her parents.


(To be continued.) POETRY.
HOPE OF RESTORATION.
OFFENDED Majesty! how long
Will Thou conceal thy face?
How long refuse my fainting soul
The succors of thy grace?
While sorrow wrings my bleeding heart,
And black despondence reigns,
Satan exults at my complaints,
And triumphs over my pains.
Let thy returning Spirit, Lord,
Dispel the shades of night;
Smile on my poor deserted soul --
My God, thy smiles are light.
While scoffers at thy sacred word
Deride the pangs I feel,
Deem my religion insincere,
Or call it useless zeal:
Yet will I never repent my choice,
I Will never withdraw my trust;
I know Thee, Lord, a powerful Friend,
And kind, and wise, and just.
To doubt Thy goodness would be base
Ingratitude in me;
Past favors shall renew my hopes,
And fix my faith in Thee.
Indulgent God! my willing tongue
Thy praises shall prolong;
For oh! Thy bounty fires my breast,
And rapture swells my song.
ON PSALM XLII.
WITH fierce desire the hunted Heart
Explores the cooling stream;
Mine is a passion stronger far,
And mine a nobler theme.
Yes, with superior fervours, Lord,
I thirst to see thy face;
My languid soul would fain approach
The fountains of thy grace.
Oh! the great plenty of thy house!
The rich refreshments there!
To live an exile from thy courts
O'erwhelms me with despair.
In worship when I joined thy mints.
How sweetly passed my days!
Prayer my divine employment then,
And all my pleasure praise.
But now I Am lost to every joy,
Because detained from thee;
Those golden periods never return,
Or never return to me.
Yet, O my soul, why thus deprest,
And whence this anxious fear?
Let sormer favors fix thy trust,
And check the rising tear.
When darkness, and when sorrows rose,
And pressed on every side,
Did not the Lord sustain thy steps*
And was not God thy guide?
Affliction is a stormy deep,
Where wave resounds to wave;
Though over my head the billows roll,
I know the Lord can save.
Perhaps before the morning dawns,
He Will reinstate my peace;
For he, who bade the tempest roar,
Can bid the tempest cease.
In the dark watches of the night
I count his mercies over;
I Will praise him for ten thousand past,
And humbly sue for more.
Then, O my soul, why thus deprest,
And whence this anxious fear?
Let former favors fix thy trust,
And check the rising tear.
Here will I rest, and build my hopes,
Nor murmur at his rod;
He Is more than all the world to me,
My health, my life, my God!
WRITTEN IN A GARDEN.
FROM busy scenes, with peace alone retired,
And the warm ray of gratitude inspired,
For blessings past, and mercies yet to come,
Here let me praise my God, and fix my home:
With Isaac, in the fields, for grace implore;
With Moses, in each beamy bush, adore!
His providence for all my wants provides,
His arm upholds me, and his right hand guides:
His breezes fan me in the noontide hours,
Where coolness walks amid my shades and bowers:
His bounty in the silver current flows,
Smiles in the blossoms, in the fruitage glows:
His radiant finger gilds the vernal flowers,
Fed with his balm, and watered with his showers:
He bids the rose its crimson folds unloose,
And blush, refulgent, in the purple dews:
The lily he arrays with spotless white,
Rich in its mantle of inwoven light,
(Go, Solomon, and cast thy gems aside,
Nor glory in thy poverty of pride!)
The painted tribes their sunny beams display,
And lend a lucid softness to the day.
Grateful, each flower to heaven its incense pays,
And breathes its fragrant soul away in praise.
Oh, thither may they teach my soul to soar,
Confess my Savior, and his steps adore!
Contented let me live, submissive die,
And hope a fairer paradise on high!
W. A. THE CHRISTIAN's POCKET LIBRARY. No. VI. -- VOL. I.
AN ESSAY ON THE VIRTUES OF FAITH.
Oh! that I could but once by FAITH
Behold HIM on the tree;
And see him languish there to death,
And shed his blood for me!

WITHOUT faith it is impossible to please God, either in our thoughts, words,
or actions. Heb. xi.6. Faith is simply taking God at his word, as unbelief is
giving God the lie. The scripture testimony concerning mankind is, they are
children in whom is no faith. Deuteronomy. xxxii.20. and God has concluded all in
unbelief. Romans xi.32. We need not trace the black circle of atheists, deists,
and modern free-thinkers, and listen to their awful expressions against the
being, majesty, providence, law and gospel of God, to discover the baneful
fruit of unbelief; but, enter into our own breasts, where we are sensibly
convinced that from this bitter root spring those thoughts and evil passions
which are unworthy the true dignity of our nature, and bring us under the pain
of damnation. Mark xvi.16. In this state mankind would have lived and died;
and, in a future state of existence, been compelled to believe the justice of
God, and the evil of sin, in their own punishment, had not God, in the glory of
his grace, provided a way by which guilty men should be brought back again to
him -- a new principle of faith created in their unbelieving soul, and thus
their moral and eternal happiness secured.

The gospel informs us, that faith is the gift of God; Ephesians. ii.8. that it is
obtained through the righteousness of God and our Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet.
i.1. and produced in the heart by the operations of the Holy Spirit. Gal. v.22.
Col. ii.12. It is a constituent part of that new life which Christ communicates
to all his people, distinguishing them in their state, sensibility, obedience,
pleasures, and prospects, from other men; and those who have it are daily
taught practically to believe that the growth, strength, comfort, and lively
exertion of their faith, wholly depend upon Jesus, who is the author and
finisher of our faith. Heb. xii.2. As faith is of such infinite consequence to
our present peace and future happiness, I shall, in this essay, form a short
collection of its virtues, and wish that they may be more highly experienced in
every reader's breast.

1. It scatters the clouds of self-desception, which naturally cover the
depraved heart of man; shows his true character as a sinner, and reveals his
standing in Christ for eternity. Thus, he that believes has the witness in
himself. 1 John v.10. God's word is the ground of faith: in this, as in a pure
mirror, the enlightened sinner sees his own likeness, and is filled with
self-abasement. His heart gradually opens; its treachery, power, and vileness,
induce him, were it possible, to fly from himself. The immortality of the soul,
the consequence of transgression, his obligation to the law, the certainty of
death, the solemnity of judgment, and the necessity of forgiveness; these, and
many other important truths which before he either denied or neglected, are now
conveyed to his conscience, with the fullest demonstration from the Almighty.
He had often heard his character described by others; he had frequently felt
the convictions of his own conscience; he knew his heart was not altogether
right with God; but now, by faith of the operation of God, he knows his case to
be desperate, and to live and die in such a state fills him with grief. All
things within him, and around him, wear their true colors, and impress his
soul with that solemn weight he never felt before. Proud nature, aided by
satan, may devise ten thousand ways to recover itself; but such is the virtue
of that faith by which the work was begun, that the sinner finds a perfect
inability to amend his conscience and obtain peace with God, and firmly
believes, if ever he is saved, it must be by grace alone. The ear which once
turned from the charming voice of the gospel, now listens with attention. The
person of the God-man Christ Jesus, the perfection of his righteousness, the
fullness of his atonement, the riches of his grace, the freeness of his love to
sinners, the chief of sinners, his most inveterate enemies, engage the awakened
mind, and create a longing for a share in so great a salvation. The word
preached profits, being mixed with faith in him that hears it. He begins to
understand the truth, which before he despised, that, by the deeds of the law
there shall no flesh be justified in the sight of God, because they are
imperfect and vile, which the law condemns and not accepts; -- but now the
righteousness of God, without the law, is manifested, being witnessed by the
law and the prophets: even the righteousness of God by faith of Jesus Christ
unto all, and upon all them that believe; for there is no difference. Romans
iii.21 -- 23. This discovers the gospel to be worthy of its AUTHOR, and to
contain a suitable salvation for the sinner. There can be no greater ground for
faith in Christ than that the GOD against whom we have sinned, has set HIM
forth in the gospel, a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his
righteousness in the remission of sins that are past, that he might be just,
and the justifier of him which believes in Jesus. Romans iii.25, 26. Here rests
our faith: cut off from this we perish. The belief of it engages the heart and
soul most earnestly to pray for it. The same blessed Savior who said, All
things whatever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive, Matt.
xxi.22. in due time returns a gracious answer, by manifesting himself to the
trembling heart, saying, Fear not, I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by
thy name, thou art mine. Isa. xliii.1. This is enough; faith credits the
report, and brings the comfort of the promise. Christ dwells in the heart by
faith. Ephesians. iii.12. My beloved is mine, and I am his. Sol. Song ii.16. The
conscience feels peace with God, being satisfied with, and reconciled by the
blood of Christ. What joy and peace in believing! The soul casts itself into
the bleeding bosom of the Savior, and finds rest, pardon, comfort, hope and
happiness indiscribable. From what Christ is in himself, what he has done for
sinners, what he has done for me, and my entering into the love of his heart,
by faith; these are evidences to me of my interest in him, and I rest assured
he will love me to the end. This experience of the heart is called the work of
faith, 2 Thessalonians. i.11. because such are its soul reclaiming, saving virtues,
which never could have been produced by nature, the powers of reason, the
circle of the arts, nor all the objects of sense; and brings the highest honor
to Jehovah.

2. As the cross of Christ leads to communion with the Father, we will now
examine the virtues of faith, in enabling us to walk humbly and happily with
him. This is the substance of religion. We walk by faith, not by sight. 2 Cor.
v.7. By faith we see him who is invisible to the eye of sense; enjoy the
comforts of a covenant relation in God as our Father; exult in the glories of
his attributes in our redemption, and walk in the light of his countenance. We
know nothing of such a relation of grace but as it is revealed in the Bible;
and it is the virtue of faith to receive the truth as it is in Christ, and
enjoy the comfort of it. It is the object of unbelief to raise a cloud between
the christian and his God, to interrupt the pleasures of communion; but faith,
nourished by the Spirit of Christ, is stronger than unbelief fed by satan, and
therefore the darkness soon vanishes, and the light of faith cheers the heart.
-- All our communion with God is maintained by faith in the blood of Christ.
Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of
Jesus, by a new and living way which he has consecrated for us -- let us draw
near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith. Heb. x.19 -- 22. It is the
person and blood of Jesus, the great High Priest, that render our persons,
prayers, and praises, acceptable to God; and this is the way alone in which God
will meet and commune with us; nor can we enjoy any sensible, lively communion
with the Father, unless by faith we rest upon the precious blood of the Lamb;
guilt will stop our mouth, fears will arise in our breast, and our spirits will
stand at a sorrowful distance from God. -- As God has given us exceeding great
and precious promises, on which we may rest our prayer, enjoy communion with
him, and wait for the good things promised; so it is by faith that we embrace
the promises, view them in Christ, who possesses the grace and glory promised,
and who is engaged to make them good to all that believe. 2 Cor. i.20. It is
not possible for us to enjoy communion with the Father, separate from the
Redeemer. Truly, our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus
Christ. To them that believe, Jesus is increasingly precious in all the sacred
relations and offices he sustains; and it is the virtue of faith to lead the
christian, under all his necessities, to employ Christ as his Priest, Prophet,
King, and Shepherd; and thus, as he received Christ Jesus the Lord, so he walks
in him, and has the most solid peace of conscience, and happiness of soul in
walking with the Father -- Nor is it possible that faith should be unconcerned
about the influence of the Spirit of God, who implanted it in the heart. As by
believing we know we have nothing, nor can we do any thing to raise our hearts
to communion with God; so the be^iever rests upon the Spirit to help his
infirmities, testify of Christ, dictate his prayer, seal his conscience, and
shed abro^d the love of God in his heart. Lest we exceed the bounds allotted
for this essay, we will,

3. Proceed to enquire into the virtues of faith, in producing obedience. The
scripture speaks of faith that purifieth the heart, and works by love, Acts
xv.9. Gal. v.6. and that the gospel was preached among all nations for the
obedience of faith. Romans xvi.26. Faith creates new principles, affords the
sublimest motives, and proposes the most glorious ends, on which an immortal
soul can act before God and man. God is our most gracious, everlasting Father,
and we obey his will, not as slaves, but as his adopted children. Christ has
bought us with his precious blood, and we yield ourselves to him as our
Sovereign, Lord, and King. Introduced by grace into his spiritual kingdom, we
receive from his hand THE LAW OF FAITH, Romans iii.27. the gospel, sanctioned by
his divine authority, and enforced by his redeeming love. In this law is
contained every precept essential to our walk with God, the worship due to his
name, the government of ourselves, our conduct in the world, our conflict with
our enemies, and our fellowship with the saints. So far from the possession of
faith leading men into neglect and licentiousness, it is the spring to every
good word and work; for, as it has been often said, "He that has St. Paul's
faith will never fail to practice St. James's works." The christian firmly
believes that there can be no precept which the wisdom of his Savior enjoins
in the law of faith, that can be trivial and unnecessary; therefore his
obedience is universal, and, with David, he has respect unto all God's
testimonies. The virtues of faith produce the highest pleasures and
cheerfulness in obedience -- It is my Father's command -- my Savior's love
constrains -- it is connected with my character -- it may promote the happiness
of another, and display the honor of my Lord; therefore, with an enlarged
heart I will run the way of his commands, and think myself happy to obey. Let
us then hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering, for he is
faithful that promised: and let us consider one another unto love and good
works; for herein is our Father glorified, that we bear much fruit.

4. As the Lord's are a poor and an afflicted people, they need a Faith, whose
virtues shall bear them above their deepest sorrows. The believer has trials in
common with other men; and he has afflictions peculiar to himself, the chief of
which are found within his own breast. As a disciple of Christ, he believes his
Lord and Master has wisely allotted a cross, for the exercise of his faith, the
trial of his patience, and the proof of his sincerity, and therefore it is with
cheerfulness he takes it up. The word of God contains many salutary cordials
for suffering christians, and shows them, that, however severe, they spring
from a Father's love, and are designed to promote their real interest. Beloved,
think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is to try you, as though
some strange thing had happened unto you; but rejoice, in as much as ye are
partakers of Christ's sufferings; that, when his glory shall be revealed, ye
may be glad also with exceeding joy. 1 Pet. iv.12.13. We know that all things
work together for good to them that love God. Romans viii.28. Afflictions
brighten, manifest, and improve the virtues of faith; and faith makes
afflictions fruitful of real good, always to the soul, and frequently to the
body. It is as an anchor to the soul, keeping it quiet in the bosom of the
Father's love, that, however long and severe, the storm shall produce a
brighter sky, and make him more humble, patient, watchful, obedient, and happy.
He believes there is no rod held in his Father's hand without honey at the end
-- no cross without a crown -- nor crown without a cross. The darker the
providence, the more intricate the path; and the more violent the opposition,
the greater is the opportunity for faith to discover its intrinsic virtue. It
will hang upon Christ in the midst of a wreck -- it will trust him when he
seems to have forsaken -- it will always shine the brightest when there is the
least objects of sense to surround it -- it will draw consolation from the
ancient transactions of God in eternity, and look forward with transport to
futurity. It is impossible to enumerate or to estimate the virtues of faith! It
however shines brightest in the furnace: there can be no sight so honorable to
God, so gratifying to the beholder, and so convicting to the eye of infidelity,
as to see a christian stripped of the creature, yet full of love to the
Creator; surrounded with thick darkness, yet light in the Lord; walking on the
borders of despair, yet believing in hope against hope, that every event shall
terminate to the honor of God and the real happiness of himself!

5. If such are the virtues of faith to a christian in life, they must be
superior in the article of death. Of the long list of ancient worthies
contained in the 11th of Hebrews, it is said, these all died in faith! To
profess faith is easy; to possess faith is a blessing which none but God can
give; to die in faith, is to enjoy more peace, and more happiness than ten
thousand worlds can bestow; and which can only be exceeded by the full
possession of the glories of immortality! If by faith all things were
discovered in their true colors, and felt in their due weight of influence
upon the mind in life, much more so the nature, appendages, and end of death
become visible, and all things around now become truly solemn! By faith the
dying christian takes a view of Death, clad in all his native horrors, leading
mankind to an awful state of punishment due to their transgressions; feels the
sentence within himself, and drops the silent tear -- Then looks on Christ, who
has conquered Death, and perfumed the grave with his own blessed body, and from
a lively faith of interest in him cries, "This God is my God, and he shall be
my guide even through death! -- Though flesh and heart fail, the Lord shall be
the strength of my life and my portion forever! -- I am persuaded that neither
death nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present,
nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be
able to separate me from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus my Lord!"
Nor does faith yield its virtues only in the immediate article of dying: No --
" Faith builds a bridge across the gulf of Death,
To break the shock blind Nature connot shun,
And leads Thought smoothly on the farther shore.
Death's terror is the mountain Faith removes;
That mountain barrier between man and peace.
It Is Faith disarms Destruction, and absolves
From every clamorous charge, the guiltless tomb.


It brings to view the glories of immortality, and assures the conscience of
after bliss. He that believes on the Son has everlasting life. -- He knows it
is secured in Christ; that Christ has promised it; thousands have died in
anticipation of it, and he rests in hope the blessing shall be his. He dies in
faith; leaves a testimony of faith behind him for the comfort and establishment
of others: but O! who can describe the virtues of faith in bearing the soul
above the pangs of mortality? -- Who can paint the prospect which faith affords
beyond the vale? -- He drops his clay, and mounts on high, to be forever with
the Lord.

Dialogue between a Mother and her Daughter. (Continued from page 230, and
concluded.)
THE SEA SHORE.
Mother. WHAT a charming prospect is this! -- With what majesty yonder sloop of
war rides upon the rolling waves! -- What numbers of lesser vessels cover the
water! I never saw the sea exhibit a more pleasing sight.


Daughter. The scene is truly delightful; -- let us advance, and, if you
please, madam, set on the grass that covers yonder humble rock, which seems
almost designed by nature as a rural sopha for traveling spectators, while
surveying the wonders of the deep. One would think THOMPSON was favored with
such a seat when he wrote those admirable lines -- -- And thou majestic main,
A secret world of wonders in thyself,
Sound HIS stupendous praise, whose greater voice,
Or bids you roar, or bids your roarings fall.



Mother. Well might the elegant poet call the ocean, a secret world of wonders!
What an infinite number, and endless variety of animal and vegetable
productions are incircled within its bosom? What prodigious burdens it sustains
upon its surface! and therewith are staked the greater part of the wealth of
nations, as YOUNG beautifully says -- Who sings the source
Of wealth and force?
Vast fields of commerce and big war!
Where wonders dwell;
Where terrors swell;
And Neptune thunders from his car!
How advantageous is this great body of water in connecting distant nations for
exchanging produce, and cultivating art! and thus the great family of mankind
are made mutual sharers in the rich bounties of all-gracious providence. The
liquid element is the mean by which the servants of the Most High pass from
nation to nation, and penetrate the remote corners of the world, to publish the
glad tidings of salvation in the name of the Son of God, that the knowledge of
the Lord may cover the earth, as the waters do the sea.


Daughter. Yes, madam, we lose much by neglect of contemplation, especially
when we do not trace the finger of the Almighty, who has formed the great
deep, and separated the waters from the dry land; and who, invincible in power,
rules this roaring monster with all the facility of command: Hitherto shall
thou come, but no farther; and here shall thy proud waves be stayed.


Mother. True, my Eliza; and it is one of the distinguishing favors of my
life, that God has enriched you with a desire to contemplate the wonders of
his goodness. As you are now, my child, advancing to mature age, I will avail
myself of this retired spot, and employ the beautiful prospect before us, in
directing your attention to future life. The ocean is a just emblem of this
transitory world; always in motion; sometimes cast into foaming billows,
mountains high; then glides in peaceful waves; -- so is our life, and we need
the presence of that adorable Savior, whose prerogative it is to rule the
globe.

"He says; -- be calm; the sea obeys his will;
The storm is silent, and the waves are still."

Daughter. Sometimes I think of the wide world that unfolds to me its thousand
^^res. True, my days may be cut short, as were Charlotte Gay's; -- but should
they be prolonged, I have more than ever, since that mournful stroke, felt
conscious that I need an Almighty Guide.


Mother. Yes, my child, you may think so, and I am happy you have such
thoughts; but, myself and others, who have got midway the ocean of life, have
found the advantage of a guide for our youth, and a staff for our years. So
extremely short are many of the vicissitudes of life, one needs something more
than mortal to prepare us for them, and preserve us in a virtuous path. How
often does the mariner sit with ease at his helm, the gentle gale fills the
sheets, and his cheerful heart hails his port in view! -- but, the wind shifts,
the tide turns, the clouds lower, and, in a little while, his bark is dashed
with the storm, and naught but death appears! Such, such are the changes of our
lives, from health to sickness, pleasure to pain -- prosperity to adversity;
these frequently alternate, till, at last, arrives the great change from life
to death! O happy those who have stood the storm and tempest, at last, by faith
in Christ, arrive at the port of everlasting bliss! But these reflections have
somewhat diverted one from a particular piece of instruction, necessary to your
present stage of life.

In social life, next to be esteemed to the blessings of grace, is an
^onourable connection in marriage. Entering into such a relation, either
hazards, or promotes our happiness in passing over the ocean of time, and
generally has a very considerable influence upon our morals. To marry only for
beauty, is to purchase a house for the nose-gay in its window, which must soon
fade, and probably prove obnoxious to its possessor. To marry only for riches,
is to deceive our own passions, and eventually makes us poor indeed. Our own
affections too often deceive us in common things; and therefore, in such an
important connection as this, the utmost deliberation and care are absolutely
necessary, infinitely more so than that yonder mariner, who ploughs the ocean,
should first have ascertained the stability of his vessel, before he put to
sea. The safest way is to seek direction from that adored Savior, who
vouchsafed his presence at a marriage in Cana of Galilee; and we may be
certain, that marriage promises little moral felicity, where Jesus is not
invited as a guest; as pious bishop Hall says, "Those that marry IN Christ,
cannot marry WITHOUT him." This was the basis on which my connection was formed
with your honored father, and has often been to me a source of pleasing
reflection; -- it has supported us both under many severe domestic trials, and
still affords us the highest gratification. And you, my child -- Ah! here comes
your brother James -- I must therefore say no more upon this delicate subject.
-- Well, James, are you come to share with us in surveying the beauties of the
ocean?


James. My father has just arrived from the city, and has sent me to request
your return with sister Eliza, to tea; as the afternoon is so pleasant, he has
ordered the servant to prepare the table in the arbor on the mount.


Mother. With all my heart, James, -- come, let your mother lean upon your arm.


THE MINISTER's PRAYER BOOK.
A CLERGYMAN of an independent congregation, after many years labor among his
people, was supposed, by some of his members, very much to decline in his
vivacity and usefulness; accordingly two of the deacons waited upon him, and
exhibited their complaint. The minister received them with much affection, and
assured them that he was equally sensible of his languor and little success,
and that the cause had given him very great uneasiness. The deacons wished,
that if the minister was sufficiently free, he would name what he thought was
the cause. Without hesitation, the minister replied, THE LOSS OF MY
PRAYER BOOK. Your prayer book, said the senior deacon, with surprise, I never
knew you used one! Yes, replied the minister, I have enjoyed the benefit of one
for many years till very lately, and I attribute my ill success to the loss of
it. -- The prayer of my people was my prayer book; and it has given me great
grief that they have laid it aside. Now, brethren, if you will return to my
people, and procure me the use of my prayer book again, I doubt not but that I
shall preach much better, and you will hear more profitably. The deacons,
conscious of their neglect, thanked the minister for his reproof, and wished
him -- good morning.

NATURAL HISTORY.
THE LAMB.
OVIS, the SHEEP, in the system of MAMMALIA, a genus of the order of pecora,
the characters of which are these: The horns are concave, turned backwards, and
full of wrinkles; there are eight fore-teeth in the under-jaw, and no
dog-teeth. The species are, 1. Aris, or ram and ewe; the horns of which are
shaped like a half moon, and compressed. 2. The Guineensis, or Guinea sheep,
has pendulous ears, large hairy dew lips, and a prominence on the hind part of
the head. The wool is short, like that of the goat. 3. The Strepsiceros, or
Creton sheep, has strait carinated horns, twisted in a spiral manner. It is a
native of Mount Iola. The sheep is the most harmless, and yet most exposed to
danger of all other animals. It may be esteemed one of Nature's great gifts to
mankind; its flesh is excellent food, and its fleece highly, beneficial for
clothing. The property of the ancients principally consisted of sheep and
other animals! Job, after his affliction, had no less than fourteen thousand
sheep.

SHEEP, from their obedience to their shepherd, their patience under suffering,
their proneness to wander, their exposure to enemies, and their profitableness
to mankind, are used in the sacred scriptures to disignate those happy souls
who were bought with the blood, and called by the voice of Jesus Christ our
CHIEF SHEPHERD, and placed by him in the fold of his church to feed in the
pastures of his unsearchable grace. -- LAMBS, the young of the sheep, from
their tenderness, activity, meekness, innocence, and defencelessness, are
equally descriptive of those young converts whom Peter was commanded to feed;
and whom, according to prophecy, Christ, the good Shepherd, gathers with his
arm, and ^^rries in his bosom.

It is our intention, in this piece of Natural History, to contemplate the Lamb
which the volum^ of revelation exhibits as a lively emblem of Jesus Christ, the
LAMB OF GOD, who takes away the sin of the world; John. i.29. -- The Lamb
which Abraham told Isaac, his son, God would provide himself for a burnt
offering. Genesis xxii.7, 8. -- Under this emblem Messiah has been known in all
ages. He was the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world; decreed so to be,
and perpetually exhibited as such through successive periods, until he shed his
blood for men. Rev. xiii.8. This, probably, therefore, was the creature slain,
the skin of which the Lord God made coats and clothed our first disobedient
parents, to teach them the necessity of a sacrifice; and, that righteousness,
procured by HIM, who was to bruise the serpent's head, that they might be
justified with God.

It is certain, that the Lamb, selected by the express command of the Almighty,
to be the victim sacrificed, to secure the Hebrews when the destroying angel
was commissioned to smite the first born of Egypt, and to form the supper for
those who were to pass over the Red Sea, did, in a very circumstantial manner,
typify the blessed Jesus, and the rich benefits of his grace. An expositor, who
cannot be mistaken, has given us this interpretation of that remarkable
ceremony: Christ, our Passover, is sacrificed for us. 1 Cor. v.7. Declaring,
hereby, that Christ is a real sacrifice; that he was prefigured in this
capacity, by the Paschal Lamb; that the circumstances which distinguished it
met in him; and the advantages which resulted from it flowed through him.

The name of this celebrated feast Pascha, Passover, because the angel of the
Lord passed over the doors of the Israelites, on seeing the posts thereof
sprinkled with the blood of the Lamb; evangelically it points to the great
feast of the gospel. God, passing over the offenses of his people, through the
complete satisfaction by the blood of Jesus Chirst. -- The Lamb was to be taken
from the sheep, or from the goats; Jesus was made a partaker of flesh and
blood, and, in all things like unto his brethren; yet, separated from them in
his designation to the office of a Mediator, in the miraculousness of his
Incarnation, and in his performing the great work of redemption alone. -- The
Paschal Lamb was without blemish: such was the Lamb of God, free from all taint
of original sin, and from every spot of actual transgression; he was holy,
harmless, undefiled; and, through the eternal Spirit, he offered himself
without spot to God. -- A Lamb of the first year, in all the sprightliness and
beauty of youth; Christ also laid down his life, not when worn out with age, or
debilitated with sickness, but in the very prime of his days, amidst all the
bloom of health, and all the vigor of manhood, that this tender, precious Lamb
may prove the sweetest food for the believing soul; and to testify that his
sacrifice is of perpetual efficacy. -- Nor is it without meaning that the Lamb
was, for the space of four days, separated from the fold; for thus also it was
with Christ, if we reckon prophetic days for years. Ezekiel. iv.6. At his
thirtieth year he left his mother's house, as a fold, where he was born and
brought up, and was crucified the fourth after. But it likewise deserves
observation, that Christ came to Jerusalem to the feast, and to his last
passover, on that very day on which God had commanded the Lamb to be kept up in
Egypt, the tenth of the month Nisan. For six days before the passover, he came
to Bethany, John xii.1. that is, on the ninth of the month Nisan: the day after
he went to Jerusalem, ver. 11. to present himself to be offered to God. -- The
Lamb was to be slain in such a manner as might occasion the most copious
effusion of blood; and was not this very exactly fulfilled in our suffering
Savior? On sight of that CUP of indignation he came to drink, blood issued
from every vein, and fell in vast drops upon Gathsamane's ground! the rending
lashes of the scourge; the lacerating points of thorns; the rugged nails which
pierced his hands and his feet; the deadly spear which ripped his side, and
made way to his heart; these, these were the ways through which his most
precious blood flowed, to wash away our stains. -- Though the blood was to be
so copiously shed, a bone of the Lamb was not to be broken; a circumstance this
which a wonderful, interposing Providence directed. The soldiers had received
their commission to break the legs of the three crucified persons. When they
had actually broken the legs of each malefactor which hung on the right side of
our Lord and on his left, their minds were overruled to spare the blessed
Jesus, and to leave his bones untouched. -- The Lamb was to be killed before
the whole assembly; and did not the whole multitude of the Jews conspire
against our Redeemer to put him to death? Did they not all, with one voice,
cry, Crucify him, crucify him? Was he not put to death at one of their grand
festivals, and in the sight of the whole assembled nation? The blood was not to
be poured heedlessly upon the ground, but received carefully into a basin, and
sprinkled with the utmost punctuality upon the door posts. In like manner the
blood of this precious Lamb was to be realized in heaven, and to be received by
an humble faith, and applied to our consciences. -- The sprinkling of the blood
of that Lamb secured every Israelite from the destroying angel's sword; and the
blood of Jesus Christ cleanses from all sin, and saves us from the pains of
eternal death. -- The Lamb was to be roasted with fire, and the soul of Christ
suffered the fire of divine anger against sin; so that, according to David, his
heart was like wax, melted in the midst of his bowels! -- As the blood of the
Paschal Lamb was the peace and preservation of the Hebrews, so they were to eat
the whole flesh, and none of it was to remain until the morning: thus the Lord
Christ has not only made peace by the blood of his cross, but has given his
flesh for the life of the world; his flesh is meat indeed -- more nourishing to
our souls than the delicious flesh of the tender lamb is to our bodies; and,
whosoever eats thereof has everlasting life. Not a part only, but the whole
of this precious Lamb of God is embraced by faith: his person, obedience, life,
death, grace, and offices, form the delightful food of his ransomed people, so
that, emphatically, he is said to be all, and in all. It must not be forgotten,
that those who celebrated the Paschal Supper, eat the Lamb with unleavened
bread, and with bitter herbs; their loins were girt, their feet shod, their
staff in their hands, and to eat in haste; equally those who, by faith, feed
upon Christ, the slaughtered Lamb, keep the feast with the unleavened bread of
sincerity and truth; the bitter herbs of affliction are of real advantage to
enliven and preserve the appetite of their soul, that they may feed more
deliciously upon the Savior; for, if we suffer with him, we shall also reign
with him; their loins are girt about with truth; their feet shod with the
preparation of the gospel of peace; the staff of divine Promise is held in the
hand of Faith; and in their general deportment they testify that here they have
no abiding city, but seek one to come. The whole of this very remarkable
institution was from the Lord, without the solicitation, or the merit of the
Hebrew captives, to produce their temporal deliverance; infinitely more so the
gift of Christ, the Lamb of God, was the sole fruit of the Father's unmerited,
everlasting love; to procure our liberty from sin, the power of satan, the
sting of death, the curse of the law, to bring us the enjoyment of God in time,
and to lead us over the red sea of death to the mansions of glory in eternity.

We cannot omit citing that evangelic view which the prophet Isaiah had of
Messiah, the Lamb of God, who was to bear the sin of many. He was oppressed and
he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought as a lamb to the
slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb. so he opens not his
mouth. liii.7. How just, how pathetic the description! Had the prophet lived in
Jerusalem at the very period Jesus was betrayed, by a perfidious disciple, for
thirty pieces of silver, and taken to the bar of Pilate; had he stood by in the
prison while the Savior submitted to be scourged and spit upon; had he
actually crowded among the murdering Jews, and followed in the mouring train to
Calvary, he could not in colors more strongly have marked the solemn scene,
nor described the patience, humility, and submission of the blessed Jesus under
his crucifiers. But if innocence mark this distinguished Lamb, why these
extreme sufferings? Let the evangelic prophet himself reply. The Lord has lain
upon him the iniquity of us all, and he bears the sin of many; thou shall make
his soul an offering for sin; therefore, it pleased the Lord to bruise him, and
to put him to grief. He was wounded for our transgressions; he was bruised for
our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his
stripes we are healed. PHILIP, a preacher of the gospel, well understood this
prophecy; therefore, when the Eunuch asked him, Of whom speak the prophet this?
of himself, or of some other man? Philip began at the same scripture, and
preached unto him Jesus, with the most pleasurable success. Acts viii. JOHN,
too, when he saw Jesus, equally understood whom he was, when he exhorted his
two companions to behold the Lamb of God! John i.29. All that was designed by
the Paschal Lamb, and the bleeding lambs used in the daily sacrifice; -- all
that the prophets prophesied of Messiah, center in this lamb, emphatically
called the LAMB OF GOD; -- of his own nature, of his own providing, of his own
sacrificing, and of his own accepting! O for the light of faith, to behold this
adored Lamb in all the excellence of his nature, and to enjoy him in all the
virtues of his sacrifice! O for an heart to follow the Lamb whithersoever he
goes, in the vicissitudes of his providence, the institutions of his grace,
and the delightful precepts of his lips!

If the contemplation of the Lamb at the slaughter creates such solemn
sensations; let us, by aid of the scriptures, behold him glorified upon his
throne. JOHN was favored with this august sight, and he informs us -- In the
midst of the throne, and of the four beings, and in the midst of the elders,
stood a lamb as it had been slain. Rev. v.6. He that was slaughtered on Mount
Calvary, for sin, is now enthroned on Mount Zion, to reign in glory! O happy
subjects of his celestial dominion! -- They behold him worthy to open the seals
of the book of life, and of divine decrees. v.2. -- They stand before the
throne in spotless purity, having washed their robes and made them white in the
blood of the Lamb; and serve him day and night in his temple; they shall hunger
no more, neither thirst any more; neither shall the sun light on them, nor any
heat. For the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall feed them, and
shall lead them unto living fountains of waters: and God shall wipe away all
tears from their eyes. vii.17. etc. They no longer see through a glass darkly,
but face to face. No stormy cloud to fill their sky; nor do they dwell in
temples made with hands, but exult in that glorious state where no temple
exists; for the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb are the temple of it; the glory
of God enlightens it, and the Lamb is the light of it. xxi.22, 23. From such
high enjoyments, no wonder they are filled with rapture, crying, Hallelujah,
for the Lord God Almighty reigns! Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to
receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and
blessing, for ever and ever!

Thou dear Redeemer, dying LAMB,
We love to hear of Thee;
No music's like thy charming name,
Nor half so sweet can be.
Our Jesus shall be still our theme,
While in this world we stay;
We'll sing our Jesu's lovely name,
When all things else decay:
When we appear in yonder cloud,
With all thy favored throng,
Then will we sing more sweet, more loud,
And CHRIST shall be the song!
OF THE DIAMOND IT IS SAID,
INCIDIT Gemmas, sed non inciditur ipse:
Hircino tantum sanguine mollis erit.

That is, "It cuts other jewels, but is, itself, cut of none: nothing will
soften it, but steeping it in the blood of goats." -- Just emblem of man's
guilty, adamantine heart, which never can be softened to obedience and love to
God, but by being bathed in the precious atoning blood of the Lord Christ, the
true SCAPEGOAT.

THE REVOLTING CHRISTIAN RESTORED.
Almighty grace, thy healing power
How glorious, how divine!
That can to life and bliss restore
So vile a heart as mine.
Thy pardoning love, so free, so sweet,
Dear Savior, I adore;
O! keep me at thy sacred feet,
And let me rove no more.
STEEL.
HAVING attempted, in No. V. page 222, to describe the several stages of a
revolting christian, and the aggravations of his conduct; agreeably to my
promise I shall, in this paper, enumerate some of those means by which the GOOD
SHEPHERD restores his wandering sheep, and the sensibility which such
experience on their return.

It is an unspeakable mercy to us, that God has said, I will set mine eyes
upon them for good; -- I will build them, and not pull them down; and I will
plant them, and not pluck them up. And I will give them an heart to know me,
that I am the Lord; and they shall be my people, and I will be their God; for
they shall return unto me with their whole heart. Jer. xxiv.6, 7. Those eyes
pervade our path, and penetrate the inmost recesses of our hearts; not to
pursue us with deserved judgment, but to overcome us with his unbounded mercy!
That adored Savior who has purchased his people with his most precious blood,
devises means that his banished people be not expelled from him. 2 Samuel
xiv.14. These means are wisely adapted to the end, and never fail to bring the
wanderer home with tears.

The ministers of the gospel are commanded to go, and proclaim these words --
Return, thou backsliding Israel, says the Lord; and I will not cause mine
anger to fall upon you, for I am merciful, says the Lord; and I will not keep
anger for ever. Only acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou have transgressed
against the Lord thy God, and have not obeyed my voice, says the Lord. Turn, O
backsliding children, says the Lord, for I am married unto you. Jer. iii.12,
13, 14. The soul of disobedient David was brought to a sensibility of its
shameful guilt, and awful departure from the Lord, by a message sent by Nathan
the prophet -- Thou art the man. 2 Samuel xii.7. Ministers are faithfully to
declare unto revolting professors, that their own wickedness shall correct
them, and their own backslidings shall reprove them; -- that such should deeply
know, and see, that it is an evil thing, and a bitter, that they have forsaken
the Lord their God, and that his fear is not in them, says the Lord God of
Hosts. Jer. ii.19. By so doing God often conveys an arrow of conviction to the
heart, opens its guilt, produces repentance, and restores the backslider to the
sensible enjoyment of his smiles.

Affliction is another mean by which the wanderer is frequently restored. If
his children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgment; if they break my
statutes, and keep not my commandments, then will I visit their transgressions
with the rod, and their iniquities with stripes. Nevertheless, my loving
kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail.
Psa. lxxxix.3. God has many rods; and although they be held in a Father's
hands, and honey be at the end of every twig, yet they are calculated to make
the disobedient feel. According to the complexion of the mind, the wanderings
of the heart, and the errors of the life, will be the severity of the
chastisement; the fruit of all is to take away sin. Isa. xxvii.9. God's dealing
with Israel, recorded in the second and thirteenth chapters of Hosea, should be
solemn warnings to a revolting christian. Although in the midst of prosperity,
and reclining upon the lap of ease, God can, by a variety of providence, and
by unexpected means, hedge up your way with thorns, and make a wall, that you
should not find your path. God's furnace is in Zion, and his fire in Jerusalem.
Isa. xxxi.9. purposely to try and refine his own people from their dross.
Remember, it is not any fire, any furnace, nor any affliction, that will answer
the purpose of reclaiming a backslider; but it is God's fire, which he kindles
in faithfulness, love, and mercy; and which will, sooner or later, humble the
proud heart, and bring the transgressor to the Lord. Afflictions in themselves
do but irritate, harden, and produce rebellion; but God's chastisement shall
heal as well as wound; for, says the Lord concerning the revolting christian,
I have seen his ways, and will heal him: I will lead him also, and restore
comforts unto him, and to his mourners. Isa. lviii.18. For this very purpose
Christ sits as a refiner and purifier of silver; and he shall purify the sons
of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord
an offering in righteousness. Mal. iii.3. Remember he sits to watch the gold in
the furnace, and to regulate the heat. In proportion to the state of the mind
shall be the severity of the fire of affliction; and Christ frequently employs
satan, wicked men, and hypocrites, skillful to afflict, to bring fuel to the
furnace. Ah, Christian! sooner than your heart shall remain in a cold, stupid,
prayerless, disobedient state, the furnace shall be made seven times hotter
than it was wont to be made. Your being a subject of redeeming grace does not
screen you from suffering, nor gives you indulgence in sinful sloth; but, on
the contrary, God will not suffer you long to remain in this state: for, whom
the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he receives; and
those who are practically acquainted with a life of faith, know, that as sure
as they revolt from God in the frame of their hearts, and in the duties of the
gospel, an affliction of some sort awaits them, to convince them of their
folly. -- The Prodigal left his father with apparent satisfaction; but a famine
was produced, and brought him back again, weeping, to his father's arms.

Sometimes the very object, means, or temptation by which a person was induced
to revolt from God, is, by an overruling providence, made the means of
restoration. The very idols which may have engrossed your affections and
decoyed your feet astray, shall either be dashed in pieces before your eyes, or
they shall be suffered to remain as thorns in your sides, and spears in your
heart, to convince you of your folly in departing from the Lord. Spiritual
idolatry is one of the grossest sins, and never fails to lead the mind into ten
thousand evils, before we are aware. God is a jealous God over the people
loves; he will not suffer a rival to remain long in their hearts; and he will
cast them out, and make us mourn with bitterness for our folly. David loved
Absolam inordinately, therefore Absolam shall usurp his father's throne, and
prove an arrow in his father's heart. Solomon knew, by his own bitter
experience, that, the backslider in heart shall be filled with his own ways.
Prove. xiv.14. God can sufficiently punish his own disobedient children without
sending them to hell; for he can send an hell into them; -- he can open the
great deep of their own hard hearts; bring them to a recollection of their
conduct; show them the aggravations of their sin, and make them loath
themselves for their abominations against him. They are thus filled with
remorse; they arise in indignation against themselves; their wounds gape wide;
and they feel the need of a physician's balm. Repentance flows from a broken
heart, and faith again ventures upon the promise. He will turn again: He will
have compassion upon us. Thou will subdue our iniquities, and thou will cast
all their sins into the depths of the sea. Mic. vii.19. From this persuasion
the soul returns again by prayer; finds God faithful to his promise, and
receives the pledges of redeeming love.

It is not unusual with God to restore his wandering people, by the secret
communication of HIMSELF, without the use of any visible means. The Lord
turned, and looked upon Peter. Luke xxii.61. It was enough; his heart
dissolved; he remembered his sin; -- ashamed and confounded, he retired, and
wept. When the SUN OF RIGHTEOUSNESS arises upon the wanderer's mind, those sins
which were committed with little conviction, now keenly impress the heart. --
He feels the darkness of his mind; regrets his extreme distance from the
sensible presence of the Lord, and adopts the language of David -- Cast me not
away from thy presence; and take not thy HOLY SPIRIT from me. Restore unto me
the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free spirit. Ps. li.11, 12.
God secretly expostulates with the soul, -- O my people, what have I done unto
thee? and wherein have I wearied thee? testify against me? Mic. vi.3. All the
tender feelings of the soul are awakened; he approaches the Lord, who secretly
whispers peace, sheds abroad his love within the heart, and fixes its standing
more secure than it was before it fell.

The sensibility of a reclaimed Christian is extremely great. His soul abhors
the sins, and shudders at the path which led his feet astray; -- he deeply
laments his distance from God, and the spiritual decay which such perfidious
conduct has produced in his soul. He no longer triumphs over the imperfections
and miscarriages of others, but cultivates toward them the most tender
compassion. He now proves the sovereignty of grace, and the preciousness of
God's love, that preserved his soul from hell, and brought him back with joy.
He no longer trusts the seize of his mind, nor the feelings of his heart;
but puts his trust alone in the protection of the Almighty. His views of Christ
are more brilliant; his faith in him is more firm; and his love toward him is
more ardent. It is impossible fully to describe the fine feelings of such a
man's soul. Sufficient to say, it is the work of God, and worthy its Almighty
Author. We learn from it, that God hates sin even in his own people; and in
their restoration, he makes them feel its bitterness before he gladdens their
hearts with his smiles. Let none, therefore, presume; let none despair. Happy,
unspeakably happy are they who can sing of restoring mercy -- live in sweetest
union with a God of love; and, by faith, anticipate the bright prospect of
eternity, where they shall be admitted to the immediate presence of God and the
Lamb; never, never more to wander from beneath his shadow, but resound his
praise for ever. Amen.

POETRY.
THE FOUNTAIN.
-- Non diminitus largiendo.
IN various schemes my early days I spent,
To win that bliss, by mortals named CONTENT:
But every step I took successful proved
To reach the unknown something which I loved.
Youth, health, and friends, and pleasures, all were vain:
My heart still ach'd for what I could not gain.
I climbed, and climbed: but still the precious fruit,
So much desired, eluded all permit.
At last, heaven led my steps to CALV'RV'S mount,
On whose high top I saw a wondrous Fount.
To every comer, it free welcome gave,
To drink, if thirsty; or, if faint, to lave.
I drank -- then plunged -- and found, in Jesu's blood,
The wished for pearl, CONTENT, and every good.
ABDIEL. Leeds, March 12, 1776.
POETIC DESCRIPTION of the VIGNETTE upon the TITLE PAGE.
SAID JUSTICE, "Man, I Would fain know what you weigh.
"If weight, I spare you: if too light, I slay."
Man leaped the scale. It mounted. " On my word,"
(Said Justice,) "less than nothing! -- where is my sword?"
VIRTUE was there, and her small weight would try.
The scale, unsunk, still kicked the beam on high.
MERCY, the whitest dove that ever flew,
From CALV'RY fetched a twig of crimson hue:
Aloft it sent the scale on the other side.
MAN smiled: and JUSTICE owned, -- " I Am satisfied."
EUXENE. INDEX TO VOL. I.
AFFLICTED Mother, 219 Aspiration, 144 Awoke in a Storm, 127 Benevolence of God
in concealing from Man the Knowledge of future Events of Time, 204 Bookstealer,
129 Brush, Reverend Jacob 46 Crucifixion of Christ, 91 Day's Work at Sea, 10
Dialogue between a Father and Son, 30, 61, 122 -- between a Mother and
Daughter, 160, 230, 254 -- between Ridly and Sharpless, 110 Diamond, 272 Diary,
Specimen of a 168 Doddridge's Dream, 81 Dykern's Conversion, 15 Eagle, 22
Elephant, 73 Experience, 193 Faith, Virtues of 241 Felicity alone in Christ, 87
Fever in New York, 6, 40 Fighting Prelate, 153 Fountain, the 281 Fox, 173 Glory
of Christ, 180 Grace, its Influence upon Man, 97 Gurner, Mary, her Conversion,
159 Hamilton, Mrs. 185 Happiness, 1 Holy Trinity, Ode to 137 Hope of
Restoration, 236 Indian, 208 Justification, 49 King of Sweden, 155 King Henry
I. 172 Lamb, 261 Love of Christ, 131 Love to God, 145 Mistake, the Doctor's 121
Moulder, Miss Rebecca 94 New Year's Day, 37 Penitent restored, 183 Peter's
Imprisonment and Release, 44 Pleasing Reflection, 209 Population, 126 Praise to
Jesus, 45 Prayer Book, Minister's 256 Preservation of Sir James Thornhill, 104
Psalm 19th, 88 Psalm 42d, 237 Questions for Ministers, 156 Resignation, 86
Regeneration and Conversion, 153 Relief of a Clergyman, 202 Revolting
Christian, 222 Revolting Christian restored, 273 Reflections in a Garden, 239
Rose of Sharon, 210 Seeing a Lady's Closet, 78 Select Sentences, 129 Slothful
Worshiper, 117 Something New, 93 Spider and Toad, 41 Spring Improved, 181
Toplady, Rev. Augustus 67, 106 Walk with God, 35 Word in Season, 1^5 Vignette
upon the Title Page, poetic Description of the ^^2 Young Infidel reclaimed, 34
Zeuxis, the Grecian Painter, 163

