THE GENUINE EXPERIENCE, AND DYING ADDRESS, OF MRS. DOLLY TAILOR, OF READING,
(VERMONT,) Who departed this life, May 19 th, 1794.

Actually dictated by herself, and taken from her lips, but a little before her
DEATH.

Now Published, With her HUSBAND'S testimony concerning her, for whom he
mourns, but not without hope.

The fourth edition; -- Carefully revised by the author.

BENNINGTON: PRINTED FOR AMOS TAILOR, AND SOLD BY HIM AT HIS BOOK STORE IN
WHITINGHAM. 1796.

THE GENUINE EXPERIENCE, etc.
I DOLLY TAILOR, of Reading, being apprehensive that my dissolution draws very
nigh, have requested the following line to be published after my decease in my
name, as from a dying person.

I was born in Chelmsford, near Boston, June 16th, 1755; was brought up from my
infancy by a kind brother, who took care of my mother (as my father died one
month to a day before I was born, and had been deprived of his sight from his
childhood, so that he was stone blind.) -- My mother and brother gave me a good
education; but my mind, however was given to vanity and civil recreation, so
that I was introduced to the best of company among my young companions.

In early life I enjoyed my health, and a fine flow of animal spirits, but
lived without God in the world, and thought myself happy in the good esteem of
all my friends and acquaintance. -- I had no great concern about the welfare of
my immortal soul, until the day I was seventeen years of age. Having spent the
night before in company, I was looking that morning on the bright and rolling
flame of an heating oven, when the dreadful thoughts of a burning Hell struck
my mind with horror and amazement! -- I saw I had been dancing over the brink
of destruction. Having never before put this question home to myself -- What
would become of my poor soul? I was now convinced that my reputation among my
companions would never be any security for me, in the day of God's fiery anger.
I saw I had offended Almighty God, by giving myself up to vanity. My distress
of mind increased under this conviction, until I took to my chamber by myself
and must leave it to those whose terrors of conscience have been very great, to
judge of my case by their own experience. -- The same company I had been with
but a few hours before, in all the sprightliness of youthful vanity, made
application to me, to know when we should have another set dance; but I bid
them a final adieu, and never joined myself in such company since; and it is my
earnest desire, that all my young friends and acquaintance might be as
effectually weaned from the love of such soul destroying company, as I was at
that time, and have ever since been.

My distress of mind, however, continued for some considerable time -- the
friendly admonitions of my affectionate mother and kind brother, to whom I had
turned a deaf ear, from time to time, were now to me like so many thunder bolts
from heaven, so that I was almost afraid to cry to God for mercy, fearing that
I had, young as I was, sinned away the day of God's grace. The first gleam of
comfort I received, was in reading the fortieth Psalm, which I desire every
reader to turn to, and read for themselves. I then thought I could praise God
for his glorious excellency, and visited several godly ministers and christian
friends, with a view to discover what God had done for my soul; and in a little
time I began to scruple my easy state, upon which I concluded myself to be in a
more dangerous situation than I was before. Under these scruples, in the utmost
anguish of mind, I fell sick of a fever, and my life was despaired of. Being
asked one Sabdath day morning, if I did not desire to have prayers put up for
me, while it was though it I was just leaving the world? I answered, yes, but was
under strong temptations (...) prayers for me would prove ineffectual* ^hen I
suddenly perceived the purity of divine justice in casting me off forever; and
found an immediate sensible submission to God's will: Upon which I had a clear
discovery of my blessed Savior pleading and interceding for me at the right
hand of his Father; when there was a new song put into my mouth, so that I
called out to my friends to praise God on my behalf, as a monument of rich
grace and undeserved mercy. My bodily maladies were soon removed and I enjoyed
sensible communion with the Father of Spirits. From this time I was
established, and have never been exercised with like fears nor scruples since,
although I have often times let down my watch, and have reason to lament my
failings and imperfections, as an unworthy member of Christ's church on earth,
but still I have a strong hope, through the merits of my blessed Redeemer, that
I shall soon be out of the reach of sin and Satan, and shall have my garments
washed in the blood of Christ.

Having experienced, since that time, a great deal of God's goodness, in
carrying me through scenes of adversity, the most remarkable; I think I may
truly say, that had not God been pleased to bring me up out of darkness into
his mavelous light, I never should have been enabled (as I have) to endure my
temporal afflictions with that patience and submission which I ascribe to the
grace of God alone, and not to any virtue or goodness in my natural
constitution and temper; for I was naturally inclined to be thought of in this
world, as much as any other person; but God has taught me to be contented with
my lot and condition, and to suffer with my family as I ought to do, through
scenes of calamity, trials and afflictions of a (...) nature; those who are
acquainted with the circumstances of our family, are sensible, that by means of
an extraordinary infirm constitution on my husband's part, together with long
and repeated fits of sickness on my part, having been bedrid for a great part
of my time, for a whole year at once, several times, and wholly unable to do
scarce any household work for several years together; considering the
extraordinary expenses that have arisen, the oppressions and extortions that
have been practiced upon us with respect to our interest -- and the tongues of
wicked men let loose upon us, at a time when our whole family was dispersed --
a great number of emissaries endeavoring to prevent christian charity from
being bestowed upon us; certainly those who are truly sensible of these things,
must be led to adore the good hand of God upon me, that I have not been cast
down nor discouraged, but that I endured these trials with patience and have
now reason to expect they will all work for my spiritual good.

With humility, therefore, I desire the following address, together with the
above narrative, might be printed (as soon as may be) after my decease, not
having been able to rise out of my chair, nor get out of my bed, for several
months past, without assistance; and having no expectation of seeing my
relations in this world, I am therefore desirous of calling upon my friends,
and others, who read this narrative. -- All you that are young, and in the
bloom of life, more especially; and my prayer to God is, that my experience, my
sickness, and my sufferings, may have a proper effect upon your minds

And now dear reader, whoever you be, of what ever age, in whatever situation,
whether you be a familiar acquaintance of mine, or not so, I humbly entreat you
to see to it, that your peace is made with God. Let not the solemn truth if you
being unable to change your own hearts, prevent you from rational and laborious
attempts to call upon the Almighty God, for the gift of his holy Spirit to
accompany the means of salvation until you come to live in actual and daily
preparation for death and e^ernity.

I rejoice to leave many of my relations abounding in the good things of this
life, who have been very kind to me in my adversity, for which I desire God to
reward them with spiritual blessings. -- May those who are poor in this world,
see to it above all things, that they become rich toward God in good works:
For the poor may do honor to the christian religion, by cultivating all the
graces of divine Spirit, as well as the rich, by their deeds of charity.

I would further exhort all necessitous persons, in a particular manner, not to
neglect every lawful endeavor to support themselves by their own industry; but,
if after all their endeavors, they should still remain necessitous, let them
not be ashamed to make known their wants to those who are liberally and
charitably disposed -- for I have found relief from such christian benevolence
in times of extremity, while our family was dispersed. Remember that a graceful
and a becoming deportment, with a real disposition to hearken to the advice of
your best friends, is necessary in such cases.

My unusual afflictions have been a profitable school to me, and I wish the
remembrance of them may be so to many of my readers; for we must all appear
before the bar of an all perfect sovereign, to be judged according to our
works: Then, if we have fed the hungry, clothed the naked, visited the sick,
and those that are in prisons; and if we have been careful to entertain
strangers for Christ's sake, we shall meet with an open and abundant admittance
into the kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. I once more exhort you
that are parents, to cultivate the principles of humanity and piety in the
tender minds of your children, toward the poor and the needy -- and to put the
most favorable construction on the means and occasions of poverty and
wretchedness among your acquaintance, and especially among your relations; for
the heart of man is apt to be misled in childhood, by the example of wicked
parents, who are uncharitable and unkind.

Being desirous of dying in peace with all men, I heartily forgive and ask the
forgiveness of all that are concerned among my acquaintance; and now I commit
myself to God, hoping that he will provide for my children, whom I leave with
my husband, and with those who have the immediate care of them, by his
directions, under the protection of God's grace.

Such of my children as are able to read this narrative, and remember their
Creator in the days their youth; may they receive instruction from him who took
little children in his arms to bless them.

My brethren and sisters of this church will receive my last and best wishes,
that God would sanctify repeated instances of mortality among us, and
especially the death of our late Pastor -- for he had done his work, and
finished his course among us; and while I myself expect soon to follow him, may
those who survive me, ^ry fervently to the God of all (...) for (...) revival
of religion in this (...) peace among this people; which is the dying prayer of

DOLLY TAILOR.
January 21 st, 1793.
Living Testimony of AMOS TAILOR, of Reading, in respect to the foregoing
Narrative.
THIS is to testify, in the solemn fear of Almighty God, that some time in the
month of January, 1793, my tender and affectionate wife intimated a strong
desire that I would write a small narrative of her christian experience,
together with an address to all her friends and acquaintance; in which I
endeavored to answer her mind, as fully as if she had been able to write
herself.

She did not expect to live, at that time, and was earnestly importunate with
me, that I should do my endeavor to see that the same was sent to the press, in
her name, as soon as might be after her death.

It pleased God however, to continue her life until the 19th of May, 1794, when
she died with the pu^rid fever, about one fortnight after she was put to bed of
a living child, which is now alive and well. -- Her deportment, in her last
sickness, was as became her profession. she appeared to be wholly resigned to
the will of God, and to have the terrors of death removed.

I further testify, that in her life time, she was always so far from murmuring
and repining at any adverse dispensation of divine Providence, that she usually
calmed my temper, as an happy instrument in the hand of God, to a becoming
resignation.

She oftentimes expressed, and of late years more than ever, an earnest desire
to see professors of religion acquaint themselves more with the exercise of one
another's minds in spiritual things. She had a great value for the privileges
of private conferences, and family meetings, so called.

She wished to see a greater freedom among christians, in their enquiry into
one another's welfare. She frequently intimated the great necessity of being on
our own watch, lest we should go astray. She was sensible of her own
imperfections, and ready to forgive private injuries. She was very liberal, in
the latter part of her life, toward professors of other denominations;
although in her younger years she had imbibed a certain degree of rigidness and
uncharitableness toward those who were not of her sentiments.

She highly valued the privilege of a gospel ministry, although deprived, a
great part of her time, for several years together, from attending to the word
preached; which was, to her, grief unfeigned, although accompanied with a
resignation to the divine will.

May her example, wherever she followed Christ, be imitated by all professors
of religion, and may her address, which now speaks, while she is gone to
receive her reward, be the mean of quickening all to a becoming deportment,
through our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST.

The following Lines were composed a few hours after the Breath left her Body,
while I was beholding her pleasant Corpse.
MY wife has left a world of sin,
'Twas Christ that took away the sting --
'Twas Christ who gave her vital strength,
And Christ who took her sonl at length.
II.
Oh! may my soul with Angels join,
To sing with her in notes divine,
And when it is my turn to die,
May I rejoice that Christ is nigh.
III.
No more she feels oppressive rage,
While I the powers of Hell engage
In Christ my Lord I shall have strength,
And shall rejoice with her at length.
IV.
May I be more obedient, Lord,
That I might love thy holy word;
Oh! make me watchful while I live,
That I might no occasion give.
V.
May I improve this lesson well,
And so escape the pains of Hell;
Let me reform my life anew,
My Savior's merit still in view.
VI.
Retire, my friends! dry up your tears!
For she with Angels now appears,
Dressed in (...) ^obes of righteousness,
(...) prepared to be her dress.
A further specimen of the Author's ingenuity in poetry, may be seen in the
following lines; agreeable to his own experience, as an instructor of youth.
I.
YOU blooming youth, and children dear,
For whom these lines I now have penned;
It is with pleasure and with care,
I will invite you to attend.
The pleasing theme on which I dwell,
Shall fill your minds with sweet delight;
I Have learned your temper now so well,
I find encouragement to write.
With emulation have I seen,
Your tender minds impressed by love;
How faithful have my scholars been,
With sparks enkindled from above.
A beauty rare it is to be,
Such schools of love in this our land;
Grace so familiar and so free
It Is from our kind Redeemer's hand.
To publish what I have begun,
For rising ages yet unborn;
And teach the youth from sun to sun,
Till the last dread and glorious morn.
This is the end I have in view,
The prime of all my life and care;
This is the study I pursue,
Through my instruction every where.
I now emerge from all my woe,
Let nations rise in wealth and bliss
While Empires form around the globe,
There Is naught on earth compared with this.
May rising ages bless the Lord,
Young children sing their Savior's praise;
While youth prepare to read God's word,
And learn to walk in wisdom's ways.
Let christians learn to take the hint,
And parents join to form their youth;
May nothing else (...) in print,
But virtue's (...), with harmless truth.
FINIS.

