THE American in Algiers, OR THE PATRIOT OF SEVENTY-SIX IN CAPTIVITY.

A POEM, IN TWO CANTOS.

When God from Chaos gave this world to be, Man then he formed, and formed him
to be free. FRENEAU. New York: Printed and Sold by J. BUEL, NO. 153,
WATERSTREET, corner of FLY-MARKET. M, DCC, XCVII.

THE American in Algiers, OR THE PATRIOT OF SEVENTY-SIX IN CAPTIVITY.
ARGUMENT PROPOSED.
INVOCATION -- American Captive's address to his Countrymen -- His happiness at
home -- Commencement of the American Revolution -- Battle of Bunker's Hill --
Death of Genesis Warren -- Battle on Long Island -- Death of Genesis Mercer --
Surrender of Burgoyne -- The fatigues of war, and the American's return home --
His misfortunes -- He embarks for Genoa -- His arrival and debarkation for home
-- A storm -- Taken by an Algerine Corsair -- Sea Fight between the Corsair and
a French man of war -- Arrival at Algiers -- The American Captive is carried
before the Dey, and offered pardon upon renouncing his religion -- He rejects
the proposition -- Is sold at auction -- His sufferings.

THE AMERICAN in ALGIERS, etc, CANTO I.
BLESSED truth from heaven, descend in strains sublime,
To trump the ills of this despotic clime;
To rouse Columbia from her torpid dream,
And bid her every freeborn son reclaim,
The fate of Slavery's hapless sons to scan,
And haste the triumph of the rights of man.
While you my countrymen each blessing share,
I claim the generous sympathetic tear,
While free as wind you rove from pole to pole,
(No locks, nor bars, nor dungeons to control)
Trembling I bend beneath a tyrants rod,
Or meet the vengeance of an earthly god,
Whose pride and cruelty to Pluto equal,
Shall stand recorded in my story's sequel:
While you enjoy prosperity and ease;
Live without care and taste the sweets of peace,
From me that birthright of Columbia's sons;
Deserved by virtue and by valor won,
For which they bade their warlike thunders roar,
And drenched their native soil in kindred gore;
My much loved mistress, Liberty has flown,
And with her all the sweets of life are gone:
While unconsol'd the mighty loss I mourn,
A slave forgotten and a wretch forlorn.
Ye sons of ease, your ears attentive lend,
And while I sng of griefs, your joys suspend.
Attentive list while I a tale unfold,
"Whose lightest word shall harrow up the soul,"
Bolt upright set each scattering tuft of hair,
Chill the warm blood of each kind hearted fair,
And make each freeman with amazement stare.
That place where first fair freedom made her sstand,
And bade her genial rays over earth expand;
Whose hardy sons, first taught proud Albion's race
To turn their backs where they should turn their face, Toward their enemies.

Where numerous domes emit the lofty spire,
And social lasses grace the winters fire;
Thy pride Columbia, and thy queen O earth,
Britain thy scourge, fair Boston gave me birth;
Here joyful days and pleasant nights I spent,
Free from ambition, care or discontent;
Ceres with plenty crowned my father's board,
And Pluto's bounty well his coffer stored,
Days, months and years in swift succession move,
And doubly blessed I asked no more of Jove;
But when at Lexington the dread alarms,
Loud founding calls each citizen to arms,
And Britain's sons with brutal pride displayed
Their thorough knowledge of the butcher's trade:
I flew to guard my injured country's right,
And armed and mingled in the bloody fight;
There untaught striplings fought in freedom's cause,
And wondering nations crowned them with applause:
I saw that day Britannia's warlike sons,
Routed by sticks, by clubs and pebble-stones,
Surpassed in bravery, and in feats undone
By country boys, who scarce could weild a gun;
From crimson fields in haste they fled away,
Scattered by discord, terror and dismay,
Like hen-roost thieves, their flight was urged with speed,
And the best fellow had the foremost lead:
Then read vile scourges of the human race,
These lines the history of that day's disgrace;
For while I live my tongue shall loud proclaim
Columbia's triumph, and Britannia's shame;
Next on that day that led the tyrant Gage,
Against Charlestown heights, a flaming Charlestown near Boston, was burnt by
the British, June 17th, 1775.
war to wage,
Where Mars in triumph rolled his thundering car,
On Bunker's-Hill I braved the bolts of war;
Here I beheld destrustion hurld'd around,
And dying heroes strewn upon the ground;
Smoke and confusion veil the angry sky,
And deadly balls in swift succession fly;
Here WARREN fell, of all our host the pride,
In freedom's cause he fought, and bled, and died,
In private life, each virtue he possessed,
The first of heroes, and of men the best;
In him the world sustained a loss indeed,
And freedom's cause from every vein did bleed;
Oh had I found like him that day a grave,
I Would died a freeman, and not lived a slave,
Nor heard the direful clanking of my chain,
Insult the sacred long lost rights of man.
The heights of Brooklyn fresh to memory rise,
And fill my ears with wounded heroes cries,
There fell Virginia's patriotic band, At the battle on Long Island, a company
of Virginians chiefly planter's sons, were slain with a few exceptions.

Whose blood even fertiliz'd the barren sand;
Where Hudson's craggy shores enclose his flood, The battle of the White Plains.

I saw the earth besmeared with human blood;
The grim looked king of terrors stalk around,
And dying warriors bite the sordid ground;
Caecaria's crimson fields, full well I know,
Where often I faced the bold terrific foe;
Witness where Princeton's gentle ascents swell,
Close by my side the gallant MERCER fell,
Beloved like WARREN, and like him renowned,
He fell like him with deathless honor crowned;
Again where Monmouth's fertile plains are spread,
These eyes have seen full many a hero bleed:
Nor here alone, at Saratoga's field,
I saw the great Burgoyne compelled to yield,
To own the prowess of our rising States,
And lay his laurels at the feet of Gates.
To trace each scene of sufferings and alarms,
For eight long years amidst the din of arms,
Would swell my tale beyond its proper size,
And draw soft tears of pity from your eyes;
Suffice to say, exposed to cold and rain,
I suffered hunger, thirst, disftress and pain,
The earth's damp surface, formed my healthless bed,
And heaven's vast concave, canopy'd my head;
Full often a winter's march through ice and snows,
Have I performed, with neither coat nor shoes;
And often been placed thus on a midnight post,
Exposed to tempests and congealing frost,
That eight long years the threatening hostile flood
I braved, and purchased freedom with my blood;
This mangled body now with chains oppressed,
As wounds and prison-ships can well attest,
Whenever I fought, I fought for freedom's sake,
And hoped her promised blessings to partake;
Nor dreamed, I served my country eight long years
To end my days in slavery in Algiers.
When bravery broke the British tyrant's chains,
And hostile bands, forsook my native plains;
Weary of war I fought my native home.
Resolved abroad, henceforth no more to roam.
Prompted by love, I chose myself a bride,
Rosina fair, of all her fex the pride;
Who ever twelve months to crown my promised joy,
Dubbed me the father of a lovely boy!
A female pledge, of mutual love sincere,
Next graced our arms, before another year.
But now dread poverty drew on apace,
And stern misfortune star'd me in the face; --
Some daring villains with unfeeling soul,
Near all my father's property had stole;
My eight years' earnings in the hostile field,
Their real value scarce one tenth would yield;
Yet as no choice my wretched state could,
I sacrificed them to the (...)
And now embrace vile slavery's iron chains,
While splendour round the sunshine patriot reigns,
To see my wife and children thus distressed,
Filled with remorse my sympathetic breast;
I sought the means long time, but sought in vain,
To snatch them both from poverty and pain.
In Boston port a gallant ship was found
Well manned and laden, to Genoa bound;
A birth lucrative here I soon did gain,
And left my home to plough the raging main;
That home which sire nor husband saw not since,
Ten years ago the breezes bore him thence;
To aid my fortune, one kind hearted friend,
His little all in cash to me did lend:
For which (to pay in twelve months time) I pawned
My household furniture, and gave a bond.
The anchor weighed, the wide spread canvass sails
Receive the tribute of the western gales;
Full often I saw our ship with gallant pride
Over cloud cap'd waves majestically ride,
'Till past the realms of ocean's watery god,
We safely anchored in the wished for road;
One cargo sold, and strait another bought,
Our business to a happy issue brought:
The nimble seamen quick unfurl the fails,
And spread their canvass to the favoring gales,
Thus on we drove 'till past the narrow streights,
Over hung on either side with rocky height;
(...) urged our way, our native port to gain,
And thought ourselves secure from slavery's chain:
With fortune flushed, and free from all alarms,
I longed to fold Rosina in my arms
My new made treasure in her lap to pour,
And clasp my infant boy and girl once more;
My heart anticipated more than joy,
And future pleasure sparkled in my eye;
What secret pleasure in my bosom dwelt,
No one can tell, but who the like has felt.
But now head winds less rapid progress gave,
The ship hard laboring through the adverse wave,
A storm arose -- and just beneath the deck
Our mainmast went, and left our ship a wreck.
Rude Boreas blustering from the angry skies,
Caused vales to sink and mountain waves to rise;
Three days and nights heavens awful thunders roared,
Loud howled the winds, and all was grief on board:
Yet this was happiness, compared to those
Unhappy scenes my tale shall yet disclose.
The storm now ceased, the weather-beaten crew
Their wanted voyage preparing to pursue;
When from the fore-mast's tall top gallant height
A distant sail salutes the seaman's sight;
Wide from her yards her canvas wings were spread,
And western breezes waft her on with speed,
(...) and more near she wings her rapid way,
And full to view her bloody flags display;
Now consternation fills each mind with pain,
All cry for mercy, but all cry in vain.
(...) along side, the lordly pirate cries,
" Strike, or be sunk this instant, d -- n your eyes."
Nor had his tongue pronounced the threatening word,
(...) a full b^^adside on our ship be poured;
Swift came the boats with fierce barbarians manned,
Took full possession, and the crew enchain'd;
A barbarous wretch whose heart never sympathiz'd,
Than whom the tiger is more civilized,
A wretch through fear (and not respect) obeyed
This hoard of pirates trained to plunder -- led.
Meantime a torpid frenzy seized my mind,
While pious Musselmen my limbs confined,
Then as unfeeling butchers handle goats,
But with less care, they threw us in their boats;
Close to the lofty hostile frigate rowed,
And there in haste their fettered slaves unload.
When sense returned, I tried to contemplate
The fourfold mis'ries of my present state.
Broad on my back, and fettered to the deck,
Huge iron chains embraced hands, feet and neck;
While from the zenith Sol's bright burning rays
Poured unobstructed full upon my face;
Now two long days and nights a prey to grief,
Food, drink, nor sleep, never came to my relief,
'Till one more kind, with scanty crust of bread
My craving appetite in mercy led.
Thus three whole weeks I journey'd on the main
Scorched by the sun and deluged by the rain,
Until full fraught with wealth, toward Algiers
With flowing sails at length the frigate steers.
Now as we rolled, our grief afflicted eyes,
Which bolts and chains had fixed upon the skies,
Far in the east upon the azure tide,
In hostile pomp, a lofty ship espied,
From whose tall mizzen-yard, than snow more white
A Gaulic ensign was unsurl'd to sight;
Now transient pleasure beamed in every eye,
And whispered, wished for liberty was night;
Transient indeed -- sent only to prepare
Our hapless minds for more complete despair.
The boatswain's pipe conveyed the shrill alarms,
And called each bloody Mussulman to arms;
Urged by the gale the ships each other near'd,
Alike for battle, and for blood prepared;
In warlike pomp they over the billows ride,
And place anon their thunders side by side,
With mutual fury each the foe attacks,
And killed and wounded soon bestrew the decks,
Broadside on broadside, each incessant poured
And one continued peal of thunder roared,
Round, grape, and langrage, bar, and chain shot too
From cannon's mouths in swift succession flew;
Heads, legs, and arms in wild confusion lay,
And clouds of smoke obscured the face of day;
Each fore and aft the foe alternate swept,
And crimson tears the full fraught scuppers wept.
Here death in hideous aspect stalked about,
Reviewed the lines, and marked his victims out;
At length (by hell assisted) in the 'fray,
The pirate cut each Gaulic mast away;
And fore and aft for three long hours and more,
His utmost vengeance on the wreck did pour;
Whose boatswain's mate led on the gallant crew,
Amounting now to only thirty-two,
Who all resistance now conceiving vain,
And death preferring to a tyrant's chain,
Seized the last sad resource, that deep despair
Had left, and blew the frigate in the air.
Meantime confusion walked the pirate's deck,
His men half slain, his ship a scattered wreck:
Here lay a sail, and there a top-sail-yard,
And dying groans throughout the ship were heard;
While setter'd slaves grew frantic with the fright,
Exposed unshielded to this dreadful fight;
Of all our hapless crew to grief a prey,
Myself alone survived the dismal day;
And even I, since liberty has fled,
Would freely have been numbered with the dead.
But why should I the mournful tale prolong,
And tire the Muse thus with a pensive song?
Suffice to say, from all her rubbish cleared,
With rigging temporarily repaired,
For Barbary's coast once more the frigate steered.
The winds were prosperous, and within a week
In Algiers' port the pirates moored the wreck.
Now through the streets insulted all the way,
In rat'ling chains they led me to the Dey;
A wretch austere! whose haughty looks, denote
A soul more savage than the forest brute;
With scornful visage and insulting mein,
Vile wretch, (said he) my subjects rule the main;
My God commanded, and Mahomet gave
Full leave to make each Infidel a slave;
But if you will turn Mohammedan at once,
And all your former principles renounce,
Swear by that God who reigns in paradise,
You hate a Christian, and a Jew despise;
That Mah'met is the prophet of the Lord,
The blessed revealer of his Holy Word;
My princely favor shall to you extend,
And break the chains that over your limbs impend.
Proud Turk, (said I) ever I abjure my faith,
I dare the utmost vigor of your wrath;
Ever I the Savior of this world deny,
In chains, and racks, and gibbets let me die.
I Will curb thy insolence, the Dey replies,
Since you my proffered lenity despise:
Guards to the market bear the insulting slave,
That the best bidder may the villain have.
Followed by crowds, on change I next appeared,
Where boys huzza'd, and men and women jeered.
And as hogs, sheep, or oxen often are sold
To him who pays the weightiest mass of gold,
So was Columbia's son to market bro't,
And by a Moor at public auction bought;
In whose dark bosom all the vices reign,
The vilest despot and the worst of men.
Naked and hungry, days, and months, and years,
I Have served this thankless tyrant in Algiers;
My naked back often feels with keenest smart
The powerful lash that pierces to the heart;
Laborious days, and restless nights, in tears,
Chained in a dungeon, wear away my years;
My nightly cell is hung with cobwebs round,
A stone my pillow, and my bed the ground;
Absorbed in grief, I spend each hapless hour,
Sigh for lost friends, and my sad fate deplore:
My loved Rosina, and my infants, Oh!
My soul runs frantic when I think of you;
I rave with madness, and attempt in vain,
By dint of strength, to break my galling chain.
Thus to nocturnal woes I constant yield,
'Till daylight calls me to the busy field;
When locks refound, and bolts and massy bars
Bid me for toil and tyranny prepare;
Urged by the driver, whose unfeeling lash
Extorts the blood that trickles from the gash.
And does Columbia still disdain to own
A well-try'd Patriot and a free born son?
And has she means within her power to save
Her numerous offspring from becoming slaves?
She does -- and has -- and Oh! my country hear
Thy offcast son, prefer his humble prayer:
Where grows the lively oak or sturdy pine,
Or where are seaman half compared with thine?
Roufe! roufe! my country, from thy torpid dream,
Unsheath thy sword, let vengeance by thy theme;
Thy long triumphant flag once more unfurl,
And on piratic fleets thy thunders hurl;
Then steer the hostile prow to Barb'ry's shores,
Release thy sons, and humble Afric's powers.
Secure old Janus' doors with double bars, The shutting up the temple of Janus
by the Romans was the emblem of universal peace.

And free the world from massacres and wars.
If thou, my country, deign'st to hear my prayer,
I live to breath thy vivifying air;
If not, adieu my much loved native plains,
The curtain falls, and I expire in chains;
The silent grave shall hide me from thy sight,
And wrap me in the chaos of eternal night.
END OF THE FIRST CANTO.
THE American in Algiers, OR THE PATRIOT OF SEVENTY-SIX IN CAPTIVITY.
ARGUMENT PROPOSED.
ADDRESS to the Reader -- Effects of the SugarCane -- On the Declaration of
American Independence -- Address to the Congress of 1776 -- Inconsistency of
African Slavery -- A Tribute to Washington -- Domestic Slavery Delineated --
The African's Complaint -- His captivity -- His arrival in America -- Himself
and family sold -- Worn out with servitude -- Conclusion.

THE American in Algiers, etc. CANTO II.
NOW gentle reader, think thy task not hard
Awhile to listen to a sable bard,
Whose pen undaunted thus shall dare address
A world of critics, and her thoughts express,
The envenomed source of every ill to trace,
That preys incessant on his hapless race;
And trump the inconsistency of those
Feigned friends to liberty, feigned slavery's foes;
From that piratic coast where slavery reigns,
And freedom's champions wear despotic chains;
Turn to Columbia -- cross the western waves,
And view her wide spread empire thronged with slaves
Whose wrongs unmerited, shall blast with shame
Her boasted rights, and prove them but a name.
To call forth all the vices of the cane,
Confusion's sire, and friendship's mortal bane; If we trace matters to their
source, we shall find that the cultivation of the Cane has been productive of
more bloodshed and misery to mankind, than any other modern circumstance. In
order to attain this object, the thick settled Indies were depopulated, to make
room for a race of slaves obtained by exciting wars, massacres, and every
species of devastation among the quiet inhabitants on the coast of Africa.
Thousands of those have perished on their passage; other thousands after their
arrival; and' what was wanting to fill up the measure of iniquity, has been
supplied by whipping and starvation. And when to these, we add the numerous
instances of women being reduced to beggary, children to want, and men to
brutes, by the pernicious use of spirituous liquors, drawn from the same source
(the sugar cane.) Stoicism itself, must shudder. Of the legal trade of
kidnapping, the humane treatment on board guineamen, and the sympathetic
conduct of whippers, overseers, etc. I shall have occasion to speak hereafter.

To introduce luxurious rules of art,
To sink the genius and enslave the heart,
To make mankind in vicious habits bold,
By bart'ring virtue for the love of gold.
For these, old Europe's fleets first crossed the flood,
And bathed the coast of Africa in blood;
Far these, her sons have robbed the world of peace,
And sluie'd the veins of half the human race; Witness millions of the natives
of both Indies, wantonly sacrificed by the Spaniards, French, Dutch, Portuguese
and British. To say nothing of the unhappy Africans, whose seacoasts have for
more than two hundred years been the theater of wars, massacres, etc.
instigated by speculators in flesh and blood for the sole purpose of procuring
slaves, by purchasing prisoners from all parties; yet the perpetrators of those
enormities, their heirs and assigns, appeal to the mandates of heaven for
justification.

For these, Hispania's pious children hurled
Death and destruction round the western world; See the Spanish conquests in
America.

For these, Britannia loosed the dogs of war,
And poured her vengeance from Belona's carr;
For these, French, Dutch, and Portuguese, and Danes,
Have slaughtered millions on Columbia's plains;
And with our sable sons the place supplied
Of tribes less suited to sustain their pride. The natives of America are of so
turbulent a disposition as to render abortive every effort to enslave them and
it is this together with their inability of body to withstand the fatigues of
constant manual labor, that accounts why the Europeans chose to extirpate
them, and fill up their places with slaves brought 5000 miles.

Such are the boasted virtues that possess
These pious scourgers of the human race;
Their title such, to fair unsullied fame,
Which zones and climes, and distant realms proclaim;
Such are the murders -- such the deeds of blood,
Vile Christians perpetrate to serve their God;
Who never taught men his brother to enslave,
But died, they boast, all human kind to save.
A God of wisdom, justice, mercy, peace!
Whose word (construed by potentees of grace) Let the reader see the pious
conduct of the Spanish priests in America, and be will forgive the above
expressions.

Breathes death and vengeance to the human race.
I pause to freedom's sons -- my lays belong,
And hence to them I consecrate my song:
Rulers and ruled in turn, shall share my rhyme,
Well made, and suited to Columbia's clime.
Ye reverend Sages! who first framed the plan,
And reared the fabric of the rights of man, The Declaration of Independence.

To you I speak, in truth's undaunted tone,
And plead the cause of Afric's injured sons.
Say then, ye Sires! who, by a just decree,
O'erturn'd a throne, and made a nation free;
Does not that Sacred Instrument contain
The Laws of Nature, and the Rights of Man?
If so -- from whence did you the right obtain
To bind our Africans in slav'ry's chain?
To scourge the back, or wound the bleeding heart,
By all the base tyrannic rules of art?
Nature never gave it. -- Read that first of laws,
The Manifesto of Columbia's cause;
It Is your own act, on which you found your claim
Through endless ages to unrivaled fame;
Whose well formed sentences thus spread abroad
The Rights of Nature, and the Gift of God:
We hold these Truths self-evident to be,
All men are Equal and created Free;
Endowed with Rights, no Law can ever suppress,
Life, Liberty, Pursuit of Happiness. The precise words in the Declaration of
Independence are "We hold these Truths to be self-evident, that all men are
created equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable
rights; that among these are Life, Liberty, and the pursuit of Happiness."

Recall the feelings of each Patriot mind,
When first this mighty Instrument was signed,
Hear the loud echoes rend the distant sky,
And death, or freedom, was the general cry.
What then, and are all men created free,
And Afric's sons continue slaves to be,
And shall that hue our native climates gave,
Our birthright forfeit, and ourselves enslave?
Are we not made like you of flesh and blood,
Like you some wife, some fools, some bad, some good?
In short, are we not men? and if we be,
By your own declaration we are free;
Forbear then sires to boast your glorious deed,
While yet humanity in torrents bleed,
Turn to your kitchens recognize your shame,
And cease to stun our ears with freedom's name:
The Spaniards say, that he is a silly dunce,
Whose house is glass, yet 'gins at throwing stones;
So he who lords it over his fellow man,
Should never of wrongs or tyranny complain.
Great son of Mars, with deathless honor crowned,
Mount Vernon's pride over earth and seas renowned,
Freedom's first born, who stem'd the hostile flood,
And marched to liberty through fields of blood;
Oh how my bowels yearn to see the brave,
The worthy WASHINGTON possess a slave;
If you whose sword still reeks with despots blood,
Have drenched your fields with Afric's purple flood;
Sure some malicious fiend to blot your fame,
Has sanction'd usurpation with your name;
Look over your fields, and see them black with slaves,
Where freedom's flag in boasted triumph waves,
Nor let your soul despotic laws despise,
Since as despotic ones yourself devise,
And now convert to slavery's galling chain,
That sword you drew to aid the rights of man:
Such mighty chieftain is thy portrait drawn,
By one who knows not basely how to fawn.
I now address a much respected band,
And bid my lays to every heart expand;
You who have triumphed in the field of mars,
And led whole squadrons to the din of wars:
And you brave patriots who in private ranks,
Laid claims well founded to your country's thanks;
Who now the last, over trembling slaves extend,
And insult daily with oppression blend;
Kings of your kitchens, say tyrannic lords,
What impulse prompted to unsheath your swords,
'Midst toils and dangers eight long years to wield,
Each murderous weapon in the embattled field;
If love of liberty impelled the fight,
Why now deprive another of his right?
That very right for which you shed your blood,
And solemnly appealed to nature's God;
Where are the rights you once so fondly taught?
Or where the liberty for which you fought?
You say all men were first created free,
Whence then the right t'usurp their liberty?
Has not the African as good a right,
Derived from nature to enslave the white?
As whites to say the hue our climate gave,
Our rights shall forfeit and ourselves enslave?
Do we not see wherever we turn our view,
Throughout all nature's children different hues?
And do white hogs the unjust priv'lege claim,
To make the black ones root the ground for them?
Did ever the whites among the feathered brood,
Compel the blacks for them to gather food?
Think what an inconsistency 't would be,
Such usurpation in the brutes to see:
As inconsistent are the steps you trace,
You conquered tyrants to supply their place.
Thus freedom's sons, who once a despot spurned,
Now placed in power have equal despots turned,
Ruled by the Deamon of inconstancy,
They fought for freedom, yet enslave the free;
If in past ages steps you're now to tread,
In vain your vaunted heroes fought and bled;
In vain Montgomery, Warren, Mercer fell;
In vain the World their wondrous actions tell;
Because your fathers stole their neighbor's good,
Must you pursue the crooked paths they trod?
If rogues obtain our property by stealth,
Should that debar the owner from his wealth?
Your laws are strict -- and woe to he or she
Who dares infringe the right of property!
It Is a vast crime to steal man's worthless pelf,
But virtue rare to steal the man himself.
Such is your system which all good men curse,
The Theory is bad, the practice worse.
And now all you whose stomachs gorge in food
Obtained by tyranny, and steeped in blood,
Who boast of liberty and equal laws,
And crowd your fields with slaves to damn your cause,
In undivided mass, Slave-holders, all,
Jointly, and severally, to you I call,
And crave attention, while the bard recites,
The usurpation of his country's rights;
Daring each artful sophist to confute
The stubborn truths hit pen shall thunder out.
On yon wide plains, toward the rising sun,
(Lords of creation and the world their own)
Free as wild nature's self with guiltless souls,
Near where the Gambia's mighty current rolls,
My ancestors from immemorial time
Had lived contented in old Afric's clime;
Here on the summit of a verdant hill,
That smiled beneath his tender care and skill,
Facing rude Neptune's realm of azure hue,
Where skies join seas to circumscribe the view,
My father lived -- of all mankind the friend,
Whose constant care was virtue to defend,
And sweet relief to every want extend.
Of wealth possessed, and to the needy free,
His heart never knew ungenerosity.
Beneath this tender parent's fost'ring care,
My father's joy, my mother's only dear,
In youth's gay hours, I spent a joyous life,
Free from contention, 'care, or feudal strife;
Nursed in the lap of luxury and ease,
Nocturnal plealsures followed days of peace,
And life was one continued scene of bliss;
An only sister, virtuous, kind, and fair,
Partook my joys and all my pleasures shared.
To crown which pleasing scenes, love lent his aid,
And me a captive to fair Zephra made;
A lovely orphan by my father reared
Who with my sister half his favors shared:
Whose rare perfections every pen defy,
Nor can description half her worth convey;
(Nor here let scorn attempt the point to prove
That blacks never feel the soft impulse of love;
If actions speak the feelings of the mind,
Whites have the bluntest of the human kind.)
This heavenly maid on me bestowed her heart,
And pleased me well, although I felt the smart;
In courtship's hours on Gambia's verdant banks,
Often have we sat and played our artless pranks,
'Till that wished mark arrived to make her mine,
And me the happiest of the human kind.
The guests attend, the reverend priest appears,
The vet'ran cook the costly feast prepares;
All things in readiness, upright we stand,
And strait are linked in wedlock's holy band;
Eager, anon, we to the banquet hie,
And all was mirth, festivity and joy,
Swift flew the glasses filled with cheering wine,
And every guest seemed anx'ous to entwine
Venus' myrtle with old Bachus' vine.
But oh! what mis'ries tread on heels of joy!
How soon dark clouds often veil the beauteous sky!
Roses with thorns are twined by native art,
And he who plucks them must expect the smart.
Sudden over distant waves appears a fail,
Whose canvas wings arrest the western gale,
Borne on by which, she nears our peaceful shore,
(Which never beheld a hostile ship before,)
And here secure from every danger, moor;
Swift to the shore a band of ruffians came
And wrapped our peaceful mansion in a flame,
While unarmed warriors met the desperate clan,
And fought impetuous for the rights of man,
But skill or bravery here could naught avail
Against foes well armed, who every side assail;
Friends, children, lovers, age nor sex they spare,
But wife from husband, child from parent tear.
Fast locked in captive bands, the hapless few
Now bade to blythe festivity, adieu;
With burning rage I saw my lovely bride,
By ruffian hands, insulted, sciz'd, and tied;
Rage naught availed -- myself, and all my friends
Meantime were fettered by their impious hands;
In haste the monsters now their prisoners strip,
And with a lash more keen than phaeton's whip,
Drive them unfeelingly toward the ship.
My much loved sister and my new made bride,
Scourged by the hands of insolence and pride;
Fainting beneath the deep afflicting wound,
Victims to grief, fell senseless on the ground;
But soon revived to feel the lash again,
And recognize in tears their galling chain;
Welt'ring in blood and petrified with fear,
On board the ship at length we all appear.
A faint description of which floating hell,
Aid me, ye heavenly muses, to reveal.
Here groans of anguish, screams, and dismal cries,
Forth from the deep and noxious hole arise;
Lashes, and oaths, and threats, and clanking chains,
Form the hoarse music of those cursed domains;
Hundreds of human beings here confined,
In liquid torrents melt away their mind;
While savage seamen with ferocious pride,
Damn, huff, and beat, the slaves on every side;
For eight long weeks amidst this doleful scene,
I lived confined upon the boisterous main;
Parching with thirst, and threat'ned with starvation;
Nor in that time beheld the fair I prize,
Though often I heard her agonizing cries.
At length in sight Columbia's shores appear,
Where Baltimore her lofty turrets rear,
And Albion's flag in haughty triumph waved,
The proud insignia of a world enslaved.
Now moneyed crowds advance with eager pace
To cull this cargo of the human race;
With caution great, and scrutinizing eyes,
Each jockey views the slaves before he buys;
Tears from one family a tender mother,
A father, wife, or sisster from another;
My father, mother, sister, self, and wife,
To different ones were sold, and sold for life.
One short embrace we crave, this they refuse --
The drivers lash precludes all interviews;
By vi'lence parted, each reluctant moved
With tardy steps from objects so beloved.
Since which, the earth has round yon central sun
Full five and twenty times her orbit run;
Yet where those friends, to me than life more dear,
Drag out their wretched days, I never could hear.
Suffice to say, against me all ills combined,
Enerv'd my body, and unhinged my mind;
The galling whip unceasing greets my ears,
Wielded by savage brutes and overseers;
Its constant echo rends my bleeding heart,
Alike men, women, children, feel its smart.
To heat, to cold, and nakedness I yield,
And brave half starved the labors of the field;
When languishing with sickness no kind friend
With soothing hand his generous service lend:
In leaky hutt, all comfortless I lie,
Left there alone in solitude to die.
Eternal God! and is this freedom's land,
Where whip is law, and mis'ries wings expand?
Are these the men who spurned despotic power?
And drenched their swords in haughty Albion's gore?
Freedom, avaunt! your sweets I Will never crave,
If this is Liberty, oh! let me be a slave.
I Am now worn out with servitude and woe,
And patient wait for death to strike the blow
That ends each care, each suffering and dread,
Lets drop the curtain of oblivion's shade,
And sends me headlong to the silent dead.
Yet apprehensions haunt my wretched mind,
To think I leave so many friends behind.
And now base tyrants, who no mercy show,
I crave no sympathetic tears from you;
Callous to every feeling of the heart,
Language must fail, your baseness to impart.
But you, whose breasts with warm affections glow,
Whose ears are open to the tale of woe,
Whose softer bosoms feel paternal care,
Fraternal love or silial duty share;
And you whose hearts, a tender passion warms,
Who know the power of love's ten thousand charms.
To hearts like yours, which soft impressions feel,
Of Afric's race, I make the just appeal;
And leave the portrait which my pen has drawn,
A short, concise, and comprehensive one.
CONCLUSION. A WORD OF COMFORT TO THE AUTHOR.
HAPLESS descendant of old Afric's race,
Check the big tear that damps thy aged face;
See over the south, the Gaulic flag unfurled, The French have declared all
their negroes in the War Indies free.

Proclaiming peace and freedom to the world:
That splendid sun that gilds the Indian isles,
On tyrants frown, but on your brethren smiles;
Anon Columbia'll rouse, from prej'dice freed,
To share the glories of that godlike deed;
Ever long (to set no more) shall Freedom rise,
Emancipate the world, and glad the skies.
FINIS.
EXTRACT FROM A PAMPHLET, ENTITLED, "Reflections on the Inconsistency of Man."
[Printed and Sold by J. Buel.]

IN the first movements of the American Revolution, it was insisted, and
generally accepted as a given point, that all men by nature are equal; and this
truth is the foundation of all Liberty. It was upon this principle, that our
Conventions endeavored to form both the State and Federal Constitutions: But as
eminent a monument of human wisdom as the Federal Constitution may be, it yet
contains a certain clause, which the benevolent mind can never contemplate, but
with detestation.

"The migration, or importation of such persons as any of the States now
existing shall think proper to admit, shall not be prohibited by the Congress,
prior to the year 1808." A short paraphrase on this remarkable clause, perhaps
may read nearly as follows:

Although our Constitution is built on principles, which have for their basis
the perfect equality of man: Although we hold that freedom is the birthright of
every individual of the human race, whatever may be his country, or his color:
Although we maintain that no person has any legal authority over another, but
what is derived from the voluntary consent of the person over whom it is
exercised: Although we believe that when one person attempts to usurp authority
over another, that it is not only the right, but the duty of the injured person
to resist: Although we hold that tyranny is the greatest of curses and vices;
and that liberty is the greatest of blessings -- Yet we believe, that the
Negroes of Africa, because they are black, and we are white -- because it is
necessary for us to live in genteel refinement, at the expense of the misery of
the stupid negroes -- because liberty and property are our rights, and
necessarily extinguish theirs: We therefore maintain it to be perfectly right
and just, to keep them and their children to languish in hopeless bondage,
without the least right or title to the profits of their labor, or the liberty
of their persons; and that whenever they make the least attempt to resist our
authority, or to regain their liberty, to punish them, or put them to death, as
the case may require. And that whereas there are not enough of these wretched
victims in the United States, this land of liberty and equality; (Though there
are near seven hundred thousand) we will not prohibit, but will virtually
gurantee the slave trade, that is we will allow our merchants and our sailors
to go to the defenseless shores of Africa, and either by fraud or violence, or
whatever way you can, seize upon the wretched natives, (though as innocent as
to any injury they ever did us, as the angels are in Heaven) take fathers, aged
trembling fathers, from their wretched starving children! -- Weeping children,
from their agonizing parents! -- Husbands from their shrieking, distracted
wives! -- Wives from the embraces of their tender wishful husbands! Lover and
friend, from his wished for mate! Take them men, women and children, load them
with irons, and crowd them promiscuously into a stifled stinking hole. There
feed them on their passage with the bread of affliction -- if they are sullen
perhaps you may knock them in the head, and throw their mangled bodies to the
sharks! When you have arrived in the free zone of America, that assylum of the
oppressed, immediately advertise that you have a cargo of human beings for
sale; when the purchaser arrives, let him examine them as critically, and with
as much decency as if they were oxen, or cows, then let him take them to his
plantations, and assign to each his burden. Let them toil incessantly in in the
burning summer's fun. Let them shiver with nakedness in the rigorous and
inclement winter. Let the cruel the unfeeling task-master raise them by the
break of day, with the crack of his whip. Let its discipline be extended over
them during the day, and for a small fault or mistake, let their backs be
'whipt to a jelly. Let the aged female while bending over her spade, and worn
out with enormous hardships, be spurred on to a nimbler pace by the cruel whip.
Let a small portion of Indian corn, a few yams or potatoes, be their principal
food, whilst emaciated with hunger, and exhausted by ceaseless and
'nsupportable labor, 'til death the often implored 'and most welcome messenger,
preaches to them the principles of equality indeed.
