A(...) ORAT(...) PRONO(...) AT NEWIPSW(...) ON THE ANNIVERSA(...) OF
(...)MERICAN INDEPENDE(...) JULY 4. 1796.

BY SAMUEL WORCESTER, A. B.

AMHERST, NEWHAMPSHIRE, PRINTED BY SAMUEL CUSHING.

MDCCXCVI.

AN ORATION.
IT has, time immemorial, been the practice of nations to celebrate days of
public festival and solemnity. Notwithstanding human affairs are apparently in
a state of continual fluctuation; yet such is the economy of the world, that
single events are sometimes seen to involve the fate of millions, for
successive ages. Every nation has its illustrious achievements, its eventful
crises, and its important revolutions, which arouse the public mind, and
produce emotions, too violent, not to break forth in outward demonstration.
These emotions naturally return with the day, which gave them birth; and, of
course, introduce the practice of anniversary commemoration. Nor is this a
practice less useful, than natural. On such occasions the mind is
advantageously shaken and elevated. Emulation kindles in the view of great
actions; and a splendid celebration throws on an event additional luster, and
an air of importance, which operate, surprisingly, on the public sensibility.

In the annals of our country, no event, doubtless, is to be found, of greater
moment to our nation, or to the world, than that, which gave birth to our
independent existence. Nor is there, in our public calendar, a day more worthy
of festival observance, than the sacred anniversary, in the solemnization of
which we are now engaged. It is, therefore, well done, my fellow citizens, that
you have assembled on this illustrious occasion; and it is only to be
regretted, that you have not an orator to address you, with talents more
adequate to the importance of this conspicuous part.

But why, it may be asked, why is the day to be regarded as so eminently
auspicious? Why should it be commemorated with such solemnity and eclat? Why
should the memorials of its events be annually erected, amid the acclamations
of the States? Is it because they have made us an independent nation? No; but
because they have made us a free people. A state or nation may be at once
independent and miserable. Nay, its independent condition may be its greatest
calamity* the very reason of all its wretchedness. Independence is on no other
account valuable or desirable, than as it contributes to the security or
advantageous exercise of the rights of man. So far as it does this, it is
inestimable; but aside from this, it is but a mere name, for the convenience of
party, and the promotion of selfish and sinister designs.

Anterior to the institution of society, mankind are wholly independent,
severally, of each other. No one has a right to command; no one is under
obligation to obey. Each individual is the arbiter of his own actions, and may
claim it as his inviolable prerogative to do that, which is right in his own
eyes, responsible, only to the tribunal of nature or of nature's God. Every
exercise of authority, one over another, every attempt of coercion or coaction,
may, in this state, be regarded as an unwarrantable usurpation on the rights,
with which nature has endowed her offspring.

But is this the condition, toward which the transactions of this day were
directed? Are these the rights, for the exercise of which our fathers and
brethren contended unto blood, on the high places of our country? -- Certainly
not. It never entered the hearts of the virtuous assertors of American
Independence, to throw themselves and their compatriots back into the original
state of the savage, or the barbarian; a state of all others to be deprecated
by the enlightened mind.

Had ministerial measures never infringed the privileges of the subject, but
left to the Colonists the free exercise of those rights, which, by the voice of
nature and the constitution of the empire, were declared inviolable, this day
might have seen, these, now Independent States, the brightest jewels in the
Britannic crown. They rose in arms, not in opposition to all constituted
authority, not in rebellion against the principles of political subordination,
not, in fine, for an independent existence as an ultimate object. But they rose
to assert what they regarded as their constitutional birth right; they rose to
repel the wanton invasions of arbitrary powers; they rose in resistance to
unwarranted usurpations on the privileges of the subject, and in vindication of
those sacred and eternal principles, on which every legitimate government is
founded. In a word, they rose for a free constitution; and toward the
attainment of this, were all the revolutionary operations, in the cabinet and
in the field, directed. To this did the declaration and establishment of
national Independence bear the relation of means to an end: and it is from
their subserviency to this, that they derive their chief, or whole,
imimportance.

Here may we see on what account the day is auspicious. As the birth day of our
independent existence, it is the birth day of an event, which involved our
present political state, with all its happiness and all its glory. In our
colonial connection, we were as a ship confined to the strand upon an enemy's
coast; but by the transactions of this day, we were launched at large upon the
broad ocean, exposed, indeed, to the fury of winds and waves, but at liberty to
seek a safe and friendly port. This port we have found; a haven propitious,
peaceful, and happy; and therefore it is, that we exult in the stroke, which
severed our cable and set us under way.

CITIZENS OF COLUMBIA,

You glory in your Independence, you glory is your liberties, you glory in your
republican spirit. And well you may; for they have raised you to a pitch of
happiness, and an elevation of character, unparalleled in the history of
nations. You cannot place too highly in estimation the privileges you possess;
you cannot regard, with too lively a sensibility, the liberties you enjoy;
neither can you commemorate, with emotions too grateful, or eclat too exultant,
the great events, which brought you to this state.

But let it be remembered, that glorying, rejoicing, and commemorating, are not
the whole duty of a republican people. Heaven has suspended the happiness and
character of man, in every state, upon unremitting and well-directed exertion*
and in proportion as the condition is more elevated and happy, the requisite
exertion becomes more strenuous, assiduous, and direct. While, therefore, we
exult in the privileges and blessings, which distinguish us a people, from
every nation under heaven, we virtually acknowledge, that our every best effort
is due for their security and perpetuation.

The history of the world is replete with evidence, that liberty, though
dearest of every thing to the human heart, is of every thing the most liable to
suffer from the supine negligence, or wanton abuse of men. Look at the
republics of antiquity; look at those of modern times. Look, and triumph; look,
and tremble. Triumph, that all their glory is ours, and tremble, lest their
fate should also be ours.

As a constitution, founded on "free and benevolent principles," was the grand
object of the revolution, and is that, in which our Independence was gloriously
consummated; so is it the grand bulwark of the rights, liberties, and
blessings, which we now enjoy, and which we justly hold so dear. The
constitution, under which our Federal system is organized, is the sacred
palladium of all our national prosperity and glory. Preserve this inviolate,
and all is secure; let this be subverted, and all is lost. So long as we are
governed by this, we have all the freedom, which, as good citizens, we can
desire; but so soon as the supremacy of this is prostrated, we are no longer a
free people.

I say so long as we are governed by the constitution; for governed by it we
must be, or the social tie is dissolved, and our republican state at an end.

Nor let it be thought, that submission to constitutional authority is
incompatible with the character of independent freemen; for that is but
acquiescence, if I may so say, in our own best will? We have chosen not to
range at large in the wild provinces of nature; we have chosen society, which
is, beyond doubt, the state designed by Heaven for man; and we have bound
ourselves to the observance of such laws and governmental institutions, as may
result from the general sentiment. And in all this, have we not acted as freely
and as independently, as it is possible for a people to act? Is not the
constitution the result of our most enlightened reason, and the object of our
most deliberate choice? And are we not bound in obedience to it, by
obligations, as sacred as the first laws of morality, and as commanding as the
supreme sanctions of nature?

But is the constitution, like the laws of the Medes and Persians, irreversibly
fixed, and unalterable? And are we bound to abide it, in all its effects,
however injurious it may prove in its operation? This is by no means pretended.
Although we believe it an incomparable monument of the wisdom of man; yet, like
every thing else human, it is unquestionably stamped with the mark of
imperfection. It certainly is not sacred beyond the touch of scrutiny or
reform. Not only is it the right of the people to examine it for alteration or
amendment; but it is their indispensable duty to remedy, so far as may be
practicable, every inconvenience, which it may be found to involve. And the
constitution itself has not only made provision for this, but has marked out
the way, by which it may be done. But so long as it remains unaltered, it is to
be regarded as the best possible expression of the public will; and, as such,
it is inviolable. Every attempt, therefore, to subvert its principles, to
unnerve its energy, or to obstruct its operation, is an infringement on the
rights of community, and a treason against the sovereignty of the States, which
ought to be crushed by the people en mass.

Virtue and knowledge are the two main pillars* by which a government, like
ours, can be supported. Let either of these fail and the whole must fall,
inevitably, to the ground. As the great object of the social connection is
general happiness, it is plainly a fundamental maxim, that a smaller good must
give place to a greater, and that private emolument must be holden in
subordination to public interest. To deviate, practically, from this maxim is
to contravene the very principle of the republican state; and to practice in
conformity with it, is to be, in an eminent degree, virtuous.

Under our free constitution, every man of talents and ambition embraces,
within the compass of his hopes, the highest places in the state. Some,
however, must be disappointed. And as ambition, in a mind not fortified with
virtue, can but illy brook the mortification of a disappointment, it is
naturally led to meditate the overthrow of a successful rival, whatsoever
consequences it may involve. Hence slanderous surmises against men in place are
industriously circulated, and under the show of "exclusive patriotism," clamor
and cabal against measures of government are wantonly fomented. The public is
taught to believe its "servants" to be unfaithful or incompetent; violent
parties* in continual succession, are formed in the state; and the people,
harassed and distracted, with endless jealousies and apprehensions, lose, at
length, (...) the government, and, of course, (...) respect for its laws.
Unbounded licentiousness then prevails, and anarchy, the worst species of
despotism, inevitably ensues.

The only security against this (...) declension of things is a general
diffusion of knowledge. Knowledge will convince men that virtue is essential to
the existence of the republican state. It will enable them to discover in what
true republicanism consists, and what are the privileges, which belong to the
citizen. It will show them, that if power has its boundaries on the one hand,
liberty has its limits on the other. And, a foe equally to tyranny and
licentiousness, it will serve as a faithful sentinel over the designs of
ambition within the government, and the intrigues of faction without.

Confidence in government, and acquiescence in constitutional administration,
are among the first of the republican duties, and absolutely essential to the
well being of a free state. The best form of government, ever conceived by man,
can avail nothing, as to the great objects of the social connection, unless it
be carried into effective operation. In order to this, its administration must
be entrusted somewhere, and there must be subordination in the state. There
must be a supreme power concentrated, there must be officers in the several
departments, invested with the authority of the constitution, and to these the
people must confide the management of the commonwealth; or the (...) of
government is but a solemn farce.

Government is a machinery, the whole beauty of which consists in its
adaptedness to utility; and to love a government is to love its genuine
effects. It is preposterous, therefore, for men to pretend an attachment to the
constitution itself, so long as they are opposed to every principle of it in
operation: So long as they are assiduously endeavoring to destroy its
influence, by spreading the mania of disaffection through the public mind, by
arrogantly arraigning every measure of administration, and by a perpetual cry
of "tyranny and aristocracy" against men in the discharge of their official
duties.

To oppose the proper exercise of constitutional authority, is, virtually, to
oppose the constitution itself.

It were easy to raise clamor and complaints against the best administration of
the best government, which ever existed; and factious men know this to be the
most effectual way to sap the foundations of the state, and to throw the
political system into ruins.

The popular mind is always in a high degree, inflammable; and certain words,
pronounced with a certain tone or emphasis, are usually sufficient to kindle it
into a blaze. Tell the people that they are free* that they are independent,
that they have all power in their own hands, and they will be pleased, they
will love you, they will believe you. Then but point the finger, or cast an
oblique glance, at a man in power, or a measure of government, and, with one
voice, they will cry out, "TYRANNY! ARISTOCRACY! OPPRESSION! DOWN WITH
ADMINISTRATION! But this is not the way to preserve the republican state; and
the man, who would practice thus, ought to be branded as an enemy to his
country.

It is of dangerous tendency to tell the people, they are free; unless you tell
them at the same time, in what freedom consists. The multitude stops not to
deliberate, it acts from the impulse of the moment, and, therefore, extremities
excepted, ought never to be addressed with inflammatory harangues.

Let it not be supposed, that the speaker would inculcate implicit confidence
in public officers, or unconditional submission to measures of administration.
Far be it from his heart. This only is contended, that none ought to be elected
into office, in whom the people have not confidence, that they will be faithful
to the public interest, and competent to the duties of their trust; that while
in office, they should be respected, not as the menial "servants of the
people," but as the representatives of the nation, and promptly supported in
the exercise of their respective functions; and that so long as they continue
to "deserve well of their country," their characters should be regarded as
sacred, and their services should be rewarded with the ingenuous affiance and
the lively gratitude of the nation.

The right of election is the most important of any, which a people can enjoy.
It in fact, involves every thing, which appertains to the free citizen. It is
in the exercise of this right only, that the people can feel and act as
sovereigns; for as soon as they have elected their officers into place, they
step, as it were, into the subject, and have nothing further to do with the
government, so long as constitutionally administered, but to strengthen its
influence and submit to its operation.

It is farcical for the people to think, either by popular meetings or
otherwise, to dictate measures to men in office, or to take any share, either
in legislation or administration. They may petition and memorialize, and that
in the most forcible manner; yet have they no right to expect, that their
"servants" should act aside from their own judgment of what is right, even
should the popular voice be, unitedly, against them. Public functionaries, in
every department, taking the constitution and laws of the land for their guide,
must act, independently, according to their own best sense of the right and the
fit, or their oaths of office are violated, and all, but the bare name, of a
representative government is at once destroyed.

Every citizen, therefore, who glories in the character of a freeman, must feel
the importance of exercising his right of suffrage, with discretion and with
dignity. The characters of candidates for offices of trust ought to be
canvassed with the most dispassionate scrutiny. Every party consideration,
every personal prejudice, and every interested bias, is to be utterly excluded
from the business of elections; and the only enquiry should be, "which is the
man, who will fill the place to the greatest public advantage?"

Forbid it Heaven, that, on this sacred anniversary, a public orator should
suggest a sentiment to the prejudice of virtue or of worth. Perish the tongue,
which would cast the smallest blot on the luster of patriotism. Perish,
forever, the hand, which would pluck a single laurel from the brow of merit!
But it is a truth, which at a time like the present, ought not to be
suppressed, that violent enmity against tyranny is not an unequivocal
indication of warm friendship for rational liberty* Neither is it invariably
true, that he, who is the most zealous in promoting a revolution in favor of a
free government, is also the most firm in supporting that government, when once
established. There are men, dexterous at demolishing, who have no skill in
building. And there are men, who delight in perpetual revolution, who have ends
to answer by the destruction of the existing system, whatever it may be, and
whose principal design is to erect their own interest and aggrandizement on the
ruins of the state.

I venerate the patriots of SEVENTY FIVE; I venerate those, who stood forward
in the contest with Great Britain, and I venerate the men, who are, at this
day, truly engaged for the liberties of "the people." Yet I dare believe, that
some, not to say many, who distinguished themselves by their zeal and activity
for the revolution, who were ready to spend their fortunes and spill their
lives in the cause of Independence, who still retain such an enmity to the
British nation, that they would willingly see their Island sinking, "like a
millstone," in the depths of the sea, and who, on every occasion, talk it
"independently" and vociferously for "liberty," "equality," and "democratic
republicanism," are, nevertheless, enemies to the very principles of the
constitution, enemies to every system of regular government, enemies to the
best characters and best interests of their country; and therefore not only
unfit for any office of trust in the state, but of dangerous influence to the
community, even in their individual capacity.

Citizens of America, are we to be duped by clamor and declamation? Are we to
be governed by faction and cabal? Are we to believe, that the heat of the
revolution was the time, and the only time, "to try men's souls;" and that
every man, who was then a warm whig, is now a true patriot? Are we to believe,
that hatred against Britain, is the same thing as love for our own country; and
that he, who is loudest in clamor against British connexions, is warmest at
heart for our republican state? Are we to believe, that, because we have
preserved a neutrality, during the belligerency of Europe, our government is,
therefore, wholly corrupt; and that he, who does not join in execrating every
measure of administration, and in denouncing every officer in place, is,
certainly, a "tory," an "aristocrat," an enemy to the rights of "the people?"

Have we not already seen and felt the pernicious effects of doctrines like
these? Have we not seen the fire brands of sedition plentifully scattered in
every district of our country? Have we not seen associations, formed in
different parts of the community, for the manifest purpose of counteracting the
influence of government, and of destroying all confidence in administration?

"Ten thousand fools, knaves, cowards, lumped together,
"Become all wise, all righteous, and almighty."
Have we not seen the demon of faction rearing ing his head, and, with hideous
aspect, threatening to trample in the dust all authority and all law? Have we
not seen the best characters in the commonwealth, the boast of the nation and
the pillars of the state, overwhelmed with torrents of obloquy and abuse? Have
we not seen the daring, sacrilegious hand stretched forth to rifle of its
laurels that venerable brow, which nations have been emulous to crown, and
which ages will portray with irradiations of glory? Have we not seen our
national honor tottering on the brink of ruin, and our federal system just
ready to be wrecked in the vortex of party? Have we not seen our political
horizon gathering blackness, lowering, and thickening into a tempest, just
ready to burst over our heads with tenfold horror? Have we not seen -- But I
forbear. The storm is blown over, the clouds are dispersed, and the sun shines
forth in meridian splendour.

And, my fellow citizens, while we rejoice in the present happy state and
prospects of our country, let us unite in grateful acknowledgements to those
from supporters of the constitution, and of the rights of nations, who have
greatly stemmed the torrent of faction, baffled the designs of party, and,
under the auspices of Heaven, saved our nation from infamy, from anarchy, and
from war.

Favored, thrice favored land! Asylum of peace, liberty and happiness! Long
may thou continue the glory of nations and the admiration of the world. May
genial seasons crown thy fields; may prosperous breezes fill thy sails; may
radient science illumine thy paths; may universal love felicitate thy times --
May the smiles of thy daughters warm the heart to virtue; may the exertions of
thy sons be directed to true glory, and may all thy children unite, in
sentiment and effort, for the great interests of humanity, till this scene of
things shall be shut, and latest time shall lapse into vast eternity.

THE END.
APPENDIX.
THE ANNIVERSARY OF INDEPENDENCE, AS CELEBRATED AT NEWIPSWICH, JULY 4, 1796,
AT the dawn of day, the the Reveille was beat, and 16 volleys of Musquetry
discharged from an eminence -- Flags were displayed at Lieut. I. B. FARRAR'S,
and at the Academy.

At 2 o'clock, P. M. a troop of horse, commanded by Capt. GREELY, and two
companies of infantry, commanded by Captains HOAR and ADAMS, paraded at said
FARRAR'S. -- The citizens at large being assembled, a procession was formed,
and marched in the following order, to the meeting house.

MARSHAL, CAVALRY, MUSIC, INFANTRY COMPANIES, ORATOR OF THE DAY, CLERGY,
COMMITTEE OF THE DAY, STRANGERS OF THE CIVIL ORDER, OF MILITARY ORDER,
SUBSCRIBERS OF THE DAY'S EXPENSE, CITIZENS AT LARGE, SECOND MARSHAL.
Having arrived, and the audience being seated, a piece of music, and extract
from Handel's Oratorio of Saul and David, was performed by voices and
instruments. The following words were composed for the day, except those marked
with inverted commas: --

RECITATIVE.
"Already see the daughters of the land,
In joyful dance with instruments of music,
Come to" celebrate the jubilee.
CHORUS.
Welcome! welcome joyful day,
Richest blessings here display;
Patriot sons, we sing thy fame,
Tribute that thy virtues claim --
Despots here no longer rule,
Slavish chains no more control:
"Ten thousand" voices praise as one,
Fair Liberty and WASHINGTON.
When the recitative began, a procession of young ladies walked up the broad
aisle. At the finishing of the music, an ingenious and truly patriotic Oration
was pronounced by SAMUEL WORCESTER, A. B. -- After which, the following songs
were sung --

TO THE TUNE OF THE WANDERER.
Here let joy and mirth abound --
Here let festive songs resound,
While smiling nymphs and joyful swains
Assemble on our peaceful plains.
Tyrants here no more molest,
Nature's richest gifts we taste,
While CERES with profusion showers
Ambrosial sweets and golden flowers.
At singing of the two last lines, a young lady, representing CERES, walked up
the broad aisle, attended by two young misses strewing flowers.

One verse of the British hero,
sung to the tune of Trumpet.
Prepare, prepare your songs prepare,
Loud, loudly rend the echoing air;
From pole to pole let joy resound,
For virtue is with glory crowned.
TO THE TUNE OF VICAR OF BRAY.
Our yoke is broken we are free,
Our painful toils are ended;
No nation is so blessed as we,
Nor rights so well defended.
With grateful hearts let all rejoice,
With festive songs abounding;
We'll crown the day with cheerfulness,
And sweetest strains resounding.
CHORUS.
Then let us repair to yonder plain,
Partake of what is before us;
Where Liberty shall be our song,
And WASHINGTON the chorus.
May faction never rise again,
Nor Jacobins beset, sir,
Since old GENET and LIVINGSTON,
Have met with a defeat, sir.
May MADISON and SWANWICK too
With anti-resolution,
With PARKER, GILES, and GALLATIN,
Bow to the constitution.
Chorus, etc.
May antifeds be seen no more,
But join with heart and hand, sir,
Since peace is smiling on our shore,
And with true firmness stand, sir,
The wisdom of a Senate sing,
A President and JOHN JAY,
A TRACY, SEDGWICK, and an A^^^,
Who saved the British treaty.
Chorus, etc.
The procession then proceeded, in the order first mentioned, to the common,
where was erected a booth; table and seats, sufficiently spacious to contain
200 people. The Cavalry and Infantry were drawn up in military order, in front
of the same. The whole partook of an entertainment provided for the occasion,
and drank the following TOASTS.
1. The day we celebrate -- May it ever be remembered as the era of our
glorious emancipation from tyranny and slavery. 2. The United States of America
-- May their union under the federal government be perpetual. 3. The President
of the United States -- May his reason remain unimpaired, and his fame
untarnished by calumny. [3 cheers. 4. The Vice President -- May his patriotism
and firmness ever be remembered with gratitude. 5. The Congress of the United
States -- May the members of that honorable body share richly in the blessings
they secured to others. 6. The State of New Hampshire -- May her heroism and
federalism be first among the sister States. 7. Governor Gilman -- May his
federalism be imitated by all the Governors of the Union. [3 cheers. 8. The
memory of those heroes who watered with their blood, the tree of liberty. 9.
Governor Jay -- May his merit be made known throughout the earth. 10. The
Science of America -- May her sons shine as stars of the first magnitude, and
illumine the world. 11. Agriculture and Commerce -- May our citizens equally
venerate the fickle and the sail. 12. The Venerable Clergy. 13. The Republic of
France -- May the rights of man triumph over anarchy, terror, and the coalition
of despotism. 14. May no foreign politics ever contaminate our federal
councils. 15. Peace and rational liberty to all mankind. 16. The American Fair
-- May they never want a protector, nor find a seducer. [3 cheers.


In the evening, a bonfire was lighted, and the houses of the Village
handsomely illuminated. Thus ended, with the greatest satisfaction, the joys
and festivity of the Anniversary of Independence.


