THE SUBSTANCE OF A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED AT THE DEDICATION OF THE SECOND
PRESBYTERIAN MEETING HOUSE IN NEWBURYPORT, Dec. 22, 1796. By JOHN BODDILY,
Minister of the Gospel. PUBLISHED BY DESIRE.

NEWBURYPORT -- FROM THE PRESS OF William Barrett, MARKET-SQUARE. Jan. 1797.

A DISCOURSE, etc.
II. CHRONICLES vii.1. -- Now when Solomon had made an end of praying, the fire
came down from Heaven, and consumed the burnt offering and the sacrifice, and
the glory of the Lord filled the House.


UNDER the Mosaic Dispensation, offerings were made use of as a principal part
of the public worship of God by the Jewish Church: these were of two kinds,
Gifts and Sacrifices, wherein the life of the creature offered was taken away.
The design was to make an atonement for their sins, to express their gratitude
to God for mercies received, and to procure new favors from his hand.

IMMEDIATELY after the sail the Lord instructed Adam to offer sacrifice, Genesis
iii.21. When Abel was grown up, he offered the best of his flock in sacrifice
to God, Genesis iv.4, 10. When Noah went forth from the ark, he offered an
acceptable sacrifice, Genesis viii.20. At different places and upon different
occasions, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, offered sacrifices to the Lord by his
command. From these injunctions to the Patriarchs, the custom of offering
sacrifice spread through the world -- these sacrifices, when offered in faith
in reference to the Messiah, as the Lamb which was to be slain to take away
sin, were consumed upon the altar by fire from Heaven, as a mark of divine
approbation.

THEY were distinguished by various appellations: such as Burnt-offerings,
Peace offerings, Sin Offerings, Trespass offerings, Meat Offerings, and
Drink Offerings, together with various other kinds.

THE Offerings made use of by Solomon at the dedication of the Temple, were
Burnt offerings and Peace Offerings: upon which occasion he offered twenty-two
thousand Oxen, and an hundred and twenty thousand Sheep. When the beasts to be
offered were prepared and laid upon the Altar, and when the Congregation and
Elders of Israel were assembled, together with the Priests, the Levites, the
Singers and players upon instruments, the Lord gave them a token of his
presence, and that he meant to favor their design and bless the Congregation,
by filling the house with a thick cloud. Solomon laid hold on the opportunity,
and with the most profound reverence and solemnity, dedicated the house by
prayer and supplication, inviting the Almighty to make it the temple of his
abode; the substance of which prayer we have in the 6th Chapter of this Book.
The Historian informs us that when Solomon had made an end of praying (as a
mark of divine approbation) fire came down from Heaven and consumed the
Burnt-offering and the Sacrifices, and that the glory of the Lord filled the
House.

DID not this strikingly represent the Lord Jesus Christ, who offered himself a
sacrifice for sin, who alone builds the Spiritual Temple, the Church; who takes
poor sinners out of the ruins of fallen nature, forms them by his word and
spirit, and makes them lively stones in the Spiritual building, to offer
spiritual Sacrifice, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ; who consecrates the
Church by his matchless offering and all prevalent intercession; and who, by
the fire of his love, fills the hearts of his people with his glory, and
consumes the power of their sins and corruptions. It also reminds us of the
obligations we are under to dedicate this House, which has been erected under
the care of a kind and indulgent Providence to the Lord, for his worship and
service. I shall therefore,

I. CONSIDER the qualifications necessary for dedicating a House to the Lord,
with any prospect of success.

II. SHOW in what manner we should proceed in dedicating this House to the
Lord, or what kind of sacrifices we should offer which will be acceptable.

III. POINT out the tokens of our sacrifices being acceptable to God. The fire
came down from Heaven and consumed the Burnt-offering and the sacrifices: and
the glory of the Lord filled the House.

THE first things which now demand our attention are the qualifications
necessary for dedicating a House to the Lord with any prospect of success.

TO avoid the charge of hypocrisy brought against Israel -- This People draws
nigh to me with their mouth, and honor me with their lips, but their heart is
far from me, we should seriously enquire whether we have made a cheerful
dedication of ourselves to the Lord. In vain do we engage in the solemnities of
this day unless our hearts have been circumcised to love the Lord our God with
all our hearts, Deuteronomy. xxx.6.

UNLESS we have been humbled for our manifold sins, and been divinely
constrained to seek refuge in the atoning blood of justifying righteousness of
the great Redeemer of Mankind, who offered himself a sacrifice for sin; unless
we have received him as our Prophet, Priest and King, by faith, with
thanksgiving, and given ourselves up to him, to be ruled by his laws, led by
his Spirit, and to yield obedience to his commands; unless he has been made to
us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption, how can we set this
House apart for his worship with any prospect of success unless we are made
spiritual, and worship him in spirit and in truth; "^^r," says an inspired
writer, We are the circumcision who worship God in the spirit, rejoice in
Christ Jesus and have no confidence in the flesh. Phil. iii.3.

THIS act of dedicating ourselves must always precede every outward form of
worship similar to this, agreeable to the language of the Prophet, Isaiah xliv.
5. One shall say, I am the Lords: and another shall call himself by the name of
Jacob: and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and surname
himself by the name of Israel.

Secondly. WE should be well acquainted with the nature of that worship which
the Lord requires to be performed in his House, and only which can be
acceptable to him -- not the dry systematical form of words, however
beautifully arranged, and pleasing to the ear, can afford him entertainment,
nor be considered a sufficient substitute for the sincere devotion of the
heart. In vain did the proud boasting Pharisee enter the Temple with uplifted
eyes and hands: in vain did he in a lofty tone address the Almighty, saying,
God, I thank thee I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers,
or even as this Publican. I fast twice in the week, I give tithes of all that I
possess. While the Publican standing afar off, would not lift up so much as his
eyes unto Heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying, God be merciful to me, a
sinner. This man went down to his house justified; that is, he possessed peace
of conscience, which was to him an evidence that his sins were pardoned, and
his prayer was accepted. -- As no goodness or moral virtues of ours will merit
the favor of the Almighty, so neither will any sin or multitude of offenses
exclude a penitent sinner the benefit of his mercy. The great Parent of Mankind
and object of religious worship, requires the engagements of our hearts when we
approach him -- "My Son, says he, give me thy heart." -- When David was
instructed to seek the Lord, he replied, "My heart said, Lord, thy face will I
seek." Psalm xxvii.8. It is with the heart man believes unto righteousness,
then with the mouth confession will be made unto salvation. Romans x.10. Every
branch of our worship must correspond with the instructions of God's word, both
as to doctrine and experience. If these will not bear examination by this
infallible rule, We do err, not knowing the scriptures, nor the power of God.
Mat. xxii.29.

Thirdly. A PROPER attention should be paid to the object we have in view, and
the motives by which we are influenced in the act of dedicating this House to
the Lord. What is the object? Is it popular applause? Is it a mere conformity
to the custom of the day in which we live? Is it to gratify a spirit of
ambition, and to become respectable as partisans of a separate and distinct
Society? In short, whatever it is, if it is not the glory of the divine Three,
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, in the dispensation of the Gospel, the conversion
of sinners, and the consolation and edification of the People of God, yea, all
that is comprehended in the word salvation, we cannot expect it will prosper,
but come to naught, and in that case, the sooner the better.

THE second thing to be considered is the manner in which we should proceed in
dedicating a House to the Lord, or what kind of sacrifices we should offer,
which will be acceptable. Since it is not by the blood of Bulls and of Goats,
and the ashes of an Heifer, not by offering thousands of Rams, and ten
thousands of rivers of oil, nor by our prayers, our tears, or mere external
acts of devotion, that sin can be removed from the heart, or the guilt of it
from the conscience, but by the blood of Christ our Passover, who was
sacrificed for us. Let us therefore come boldly to the throne of grace, that we
may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. Let us follow him in
his victories and triumphs, and gather up the spoils.

First. WE should attend to his worship with revrence -- reverence becomes the
sanctuary, becomes every worshiper and is due to the object of worship: for,
the Lord is greatly to be feared in the assembly of his saints, and to be had
in reverence by those who draw nigh unto him. We are to serve him with fear,
and rejoice with trembling: for he is glorious in holiness, fearful in praises,
doing wonders.

Secondly. WE should come bowing at the footstool of his mercy, as poor, having
nothing but sin, and guilty, deserving nothing but misery: conscious that we
have no might to free our souls from the bondage of the law, or break the
chains of unbelief; dependant wholly on the riches of mercy and grace, through
Jesus Christ, we should cry, "Lord, save, or we perish." This is an acceptable
sacrifice, for the sacrifices of God are a broken spirit, a broken and a
contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise. Ps. li.17. To this man he will
look, and with such he will dwell, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to
revive the hearts of the contrite ones. Isa. lvii.15. These are the blessed
described in Matt. v.3, 4, 6, and to them the promises belong.

Thirdly. As a humble frame of mind is the mark of a true penitent, so by
prayer and supplication, we should make known our requests to God, resting upon
the promise of salvation, and wrestling, as Jacob did with the Angel, when he
said, I will not let thee go, except thou bless me; such will assuredly prevail
and get that new name, the name of Israel. Genesis xxxii.28. We should pray for
the light of his countenance, and teachings of his spirit, that his grand
purposes and designs in the covenant of grace may be more unfolded, the mystery
of redeeming love explained, and that the unsearchable riches of Christ may be
brought to view, that thousands may be effectually called to the knowledge and
enjoyment of the truth within these walls -- we should pray that he might
abundantly bless the provision of his House, and satisfy Zions poor with bread:
that he might clothe his Priests with salvation, and cause his saints to shout
aloud for joy: that he might teach his Ministers hands to war and their fingers
to fight against sin and error; that he might pour out his holy spirit upon all
his people, and dwell in this sanctuary, and in the heart of every worshipper:
that he might cause his goodness to pass before us, and fill the House with his
glory. We should pray for our enemies, persecutors and slanderers, that their
hearts may be changed, and they saved in the Lord, with an everlasting
salvation.

THIS is another acceptable sacrifice to him who has said, "In all places
where I record my name, I will come unto thee, and I will bless thee." Exodus
xx.24.

Fourthly, Gratitude of heart, and a public acknowledgement of his goodness and
mercy, is another sacrifice acceptable to the Lord. As a warning to us, and to
mark the ingratitude of Hezekiah, who had received so many and such great
favors at the Lord's hand, it is recorded, 2 Chronicles. xxxii.25. But Hezekiah
rendered not again according to the benefit done unto him; When the ten Lepers
were cleansed by our Lord, and only one turned back to glorify God, he noticed
their ingratitude by saying. Were there not ten cleansed, but where are the
nine? Luke xvii.17. In addition to the innumerable benefits we have received
from the Lord, both temporal and spiritual, we should not be unmindful of
these: that our eyes have seen his salvation; that our ears have heard and
continue to hear the joyful sound of the Gospel; that our feet have been
directed into the paths of righteousness, so that we can feed upon the word of
truth, and that now, under the direction of his kind Providence, this House has
been raised, without any material injury to any concerned therein, and under
the sanction of good and wholesome laws we are formed into a society, and
regularly incorporated, so that we can sit under our own vine and fig tree, and
worship God agreeable to the dictates of our consciences. Our sacrifices should
continually be offered upon that altar which sanctifies the gift and the
giver, even Jesus, who is our sacrifice, our Priest, and through whom only we
can approach the Father. His invitation and promise are the foundation for our
confidence, that whatsoever we ask we shall receive -- his honor is engaged to
make good the promises, and his praise is promoted by our reliance thereon; so
that his glory is inseparably connected with the salvation of those who believe.

THIRDLY I shall point out the tokens of our sacrifices being acceptable to the
Lord. The fire came down from Heaven and consumed the burnt-offering and the
sacrifices, and the glory of the Lord filled the House.

First. IN the days of old the Lord manifested his approbation in consuming the
sacrifice by fire from Heaven. When, by divine appointment Moses had anointed
Aaron and his sons to the office of the Priesthood, and Aaron had brought his
sin-offering, burnt-offering and peace offering to the altar, fire came down
from Heaven and consumed the sacrifices, Lev^ ix.24. as a token of his divine
approbation. When the Israelites were defeated in battle by the Midianites,
Gideon prayed, and offered a Kid and unleavened bread: in answer to his prayer
and to honor the gift he has offered, fire rose up out of the rock, and
consumed the flesh, and the unleavened bread, and Israel prevailed against
Midian. Judges vi.21. When David had displeased the Lord by numbering the
people, seventy thousand Israelites were slain by pestilence; he then built an
altar and offered burnt-offerings and peace offerings, and called upon the
Lord, and he answered him from Heaven by fire upon the altar of
burnt-offerings. 1 Chronicles. 21, 26. To reprove the Idolitrous worshippers of
Baal, and to expose the false prophets who had deluded them, Elijah built an
altar, and offered a burnt-sacrifice, while the false prophets cried in vain to
their Idol, the fire came down and consumed Elijahs sacrifice, and the wood,
and the stones, and the dust, and licked up the water that was in the trench. 1
Kings xviii.38. No sooner had Solomon made an end of praying before the whole
congregation of Israel, at the dedication of the Temple, but fire came down
from Heaven and consumed the burnt-offering and the sacrifices, as a token of
divine approbation.

THE consuming these offerings, was typical of the attention the Lord pays to
the prayers of his people, and the honor he confers upon those who put their
trust in him; he hearkens to the voice of their supplications, he hears their
cry, and saves them out of all their troubles: -- There is also a book of
remembrance before him, which contains every request, however imperfectly made,
if they are the requests of the soul, and which, in his own time, and in his
own way, will fully be answered. Mal. iii.16. The greatest desires of a soul
under the teachings of the spirit, are to have the mind preserved from guilt,
and the heart from the power and pollution of sin, that they may continually be
enabled to say, Whom have we in Heaven but thee, and there is none upon earth
that we desire besides thee.

WHEN the mysteries of Redeeming Love, manifested in the covenant of grace, in
the unspeakable gift of Jesus Christ, and in our effectual calling by the
spirit, whose favors are without repentance, when these, I say, are explained
and accompanied with an almighty and irresistible power to the soul, fear and
sorrow vanish, joy and peace succeed, and the holy fire of divine love warms
the heart with inexpressible delight, and consumes the power of our beastly
lusts and corruptions. When Jesus opened the understandings of the two
disciples, in their journey from Jerusalem to Emmaus, they were constrained to
acknowledge that their hearts burned within them. Luke xxiv.32.

Secondly. When Moses was upon the Mount talking with God, he said, "show me
thy glory!" The Lord answered him, Thou can not see my face, for no man can
see my face and live, but I will make all my goodness pass before thee, and he
proclaimed the name of the Lord, the Lord merciful and gracious,
long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth. Exodus xxxiii.18, 20.
xxxiv.6. The glory of God which filled the Temple when Solomon had made an end
of praying was the cloud and a visible brightness, like that of the Sun when
covered with a thick cloud, though it cannot be seen in its splendour and glory,
yet its brightness will be visible in a certain degree, and the beholder will
be satisfied that it is not removed, but veiled by the cloud, and that only for
a short period, when its power and influence will return. Incomparably more
easy would it be to behold the Sun, with the naked eye, in his brightness and
glory, without an interposing veil, than in our mortal and imperfect state, to
see the Almighty face to face. He is to be seen and known only through the veil
of Christ's human nature, For God is in Christ reconciling the world unto
himself. In Christ dwells all the fullness of the godhead bodily, and he is the
brightness of the Father's glory, and the express image of his person. The
glory which filled the Temple, produced a reverential awe of God's holiness,
wisdom, power, love and faithfulness, and influenced them to worship him with
suitable affections.

THEY were sensible he was present, though they could not see him with their
bodily eyes. So now in the act of religious worship, the token we should look
for, and are encouraged to expect, of the presence and approbation of the Lord,
is that glory which will fill the House and the heart of every spiritual
worshiper; if we have such views of his holiness as to say with Job. chap.
xlii.5, 6. I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear: but now mine eye
sees thee, wherefore, I abhor myself, and repent in dust and ashes. Such views
of his wisdom in the whole economy of redemption, as to admire and fall in
with his method of salvation; such views of his power as to fear offending him,
and put our whole trust and confidence in him; such views of his love; as to
feel our souls animated in his service, and such views of his faithfulness, as
to rejoice, with joy unspeakable, and full of glory. Then how precious will the
gospel be to us, we shall bind it as chains of gold about our necks. We shall
then behold the beauty of their feet who bring glad tidings of salvation; then
how delightful to be engaged in preaching, and profitable in hearing of the
unsearchable riches of Christ, that in such circumstances we may say with the
singer in Israel "Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God." As the
fountain of light, his rays penetrate the mind which was shut up in darkness --
Though faint when it rises, it shines brighter and brighter to the perfect day;
so does the divine glory upon the soul blessed with its quickening,
illuminating, cheering and fructifying influences; so powerful that its glory
is reflected in their profession and conduct; and when the veil of mortality
and human imperfection is removed, they will shine as the brightness of the
firmament, and as the stars forever and ever; -- then they will see eye to eye
and face to face, lost in wonder, love and praise.

I SHALL conclude this discourse with an inquiry, and a few observations.

HAS this great change passed upon us? Have we been constrained to dedicate
ourselves to God? If not, we have cause to tremble, considering what we are
this morning engaged in. As the Lord cannot be deceived, so neither will he be
mocked. May he who commanded light to shine out of darkness, shine forth,
through the preaching the gospel of his Son, in his glorious power, that those
who are dead in tresspasses and sins, may hear his voice and live; that those
who sit in darkness may see a great light; that the glory of our Immanual, as
God Man Mediator, may influence them to a cheerful dedication of body, soul and
spirit to the Lord; considering they are not their own, but are bought with the
price of the Redeemer's blood. May every Believer this morning renew the act of
dedicating himself to the Lord. Whenever we enter this sanctuary, may the fire
of divine love come down and warm our hearts, and consume the power of all our
corruptions; and may the glory of the Lord fill this house in the power of the
gospel, and the sweet enjoyment of his presence.

SOONER than this pulpit should be polluted with error, or the worship carried
on in this place, have for its motto, Ichabod, "the glory is departed" -- yea,
sooner than these walls should afford protection to a licentious Minister, or a
congregation debauched in their principles and corrupt in their worship, may
the whole fabric be levelled with the ground, or become the habitation of Owls,
and the haunt of wild Beasts.

MAY the Elders, Deacons, Church members, and every stated and occasional
worshiper in this place* unite in praying for the peace of our Zion, and in
celebrating the praises of God. As, the foundation THE Cornerstone was laid
May 16, 1796, and the frame of the building was raised the 2nd of June
following.
of this House was laid with prayer, and now it is so far completed as to
afford comfortable accommodations, may the praises of our God resound through
the whole assembly, and may every heart join in shouting Grace, grace unto it.

AMEN.
ERRATUM -- Page 6, 10th line from bottom, for blood of, read blood and, etc.


