INSTITUTION OF THE Boston Dispensary.
IT having been found by experience, both in Europe and in several of the
capital towns in America, that Dispensaries for the medical relief of the Poor
are the most useful among benevolent Institutions, a number of Gentlemen
propose to establish a public Dispensary in the Town of Boston, for the relief
of the sick poor, which they presume will embrace the following advantages.

First, The sick, without being pained by a separation from their families, may
be attended and relieved in their own houses.

Secondly, The sick can, in this way, be assisted at a less expense to the
public than in an hospital.

Thirdly, Those who have seen better days may be comforted without being
humiliated: And all the poor receive the benefits of a charity the more
refined, as it is the more secret.

For the promotion of the design, the following Regulations are established by
the Subscribers to this Charity, as --

RULES OF THE BOSTON DISPENSARY FOR THE MEDICAL RELIEF OF THE POOR.
I. Each Lady or Gentleman who pays annually into the hands of the Treasurer
Five Dollars, shall be entitled to the privilege of having two patients at one
time under the care of the Dispensary. -- Those who annually pay Ten Dollars
shall have four and so on, in the same proportion: And those who subscribe
Fifty Dollars, shall be entitled during life, to the privilege of having four
patients attended at one time by the physicians of the Dispensary.

II. A Board, consisting of twelve Managers and a Treasurer, shall be annually
elected on the second Thursday of January, by a majority of the Contributors
present at such meeting, and votes may at all elections be given either in
person or by proxy. Three Managers shall constitute a quorum. Their business
shall be to provide medicines for the sick, and to regulate all affairs
relative to the Institution.

III. Three attending and two consulting physicians and surgeons and an
apothe^ary of the Dispensary, shall be annually elected by the Managers of the
institution.

IV. Every case shall be duly at^ended if recommended by a contributor in a
written note, addressed to the attending physician, agreeably to the first
rule. The attending physicians and surgeons shall have a right to apply for
advice and assistance to the consulting physicians and surgeons, when they
think proper in all difficult and extraordinary cases.

V. As soon as the funds will admit of purchasing or tenanting a suitable
budding for the purpose, the apothecary shall reside at the Dispensary. His
business shall be to compound and deliver medicines, to keep an exact account
of the names, places of abode, diseases, times of admission, discharge, etc. of
the patients; for which he shall receive such a compensation as the Managers
shall judge adequate to his services.

Form of a RECEIPT given to each CONTRIBUTOR by the TREASURER. Boston Dispensary
A. B. is entitled to all the privileges of a Contributor to the BOSTON
DISPENSARY, having paid (...) subscription for (...) year

Treasurer.

Form of a Recommendation of a Patient, to the care of the DISPENSARY, and
Rules to be observed by the Patients.
To the PHYSICIAN of the BOSTON DISPENSARY.
I recommend (...) to the care of the Dispensary, believing (...) to be a
proper object of this charity.

Contributor.
Day of (...) 17
RULES to be observed by the PATIENTS.
1. THE Physicians are at the Dispensary every day, Sundays excepted, between
the hours of twelve and two o'clock, at which time all the patients, who are
able to go abroad, are to attend.

2. Those patients who are not well enough to come to the Dispensary, shall be
visited at their own houses.

3. No persons will be deemed objects of this charity, but such as are really
necessitous.

4. All such patients who, in the judgment of the Physician, are well enough to
go abroad, and neglect to attend at the Dispensary, for ten days, shall be
discharged, as disorderly, from the care and benefit of the institution.

5. All the vials must be returned to the Apothecary; any patients who neglect
to return them, shall be deprived of the benefits of the Dispensary.

6. Every patient must deliver in their letter of recommendation at the
Dispensary and, when cured, take a regular discharge to the contributor who
recommended them, or they must not expect to be again received.

Form of a Discharge.
BOSTON DISPENSARY, (...) 179
(...) is hereby discharged from the care of the Dispensary.

Physician to the Dispensary.

THE following rules, for the direction of the Physician and Apothecary, of the
BOSTON DISPENSARY, have been adopted by the Managers.
RULES to be observed by the PHYSICIAN of the BOSTON DISPENSARY.
First. THE Physician shall attend all such patients regularly recommended, as
are under confinement, and choose the Physician of the Dispensary, at least
once a day, if necessary, and shall also call at the Dispensary every day
(Sundays excepted) between the hours of 12 and 2 P. M. to see if any persons
are there waiting for med^cal advice, and to be informed what new (...) are
recommended to the care of the D^^^ensary.

Second. He shall keep a record of the names of the patients under the care of
the Dispensary of whom he is the physician, of the d^so^ders under which they
labor, their (...) occupy on, and with respect to (...) whose d^s^^ders shall
prove fatal, of (...) of the^r death and the number of (...) to ea^h, which
record hall be laid (...) the Managers semi-annually, or o^tener ^f demanded.

Third ^t shall be the duty of the physician to suggest and lay before the
Managers for their consideration any new regulations or improvements that may
occur to him, (...) will have a probable tendency to (...) the usefulness of
this institution, and make it more ext^nsively beneficial.

RULES to be observed by the APOTHECARY of the BOSTON DISPENSARY.
First THE Apothecary shall deliver no m^dicines to any person on the acco^^^
^f the Dispensary, who is not recommended be a contributor, agreeably to the
adopted printed form.

Second. When any person brings or sends a recommendation as aforesaid, the
Apothecary shall separate said recommendation from the rules to be observed by
the patient; the former he shall keep on file, and the latter shall be
delivered or sent to the patient.

Third. The Apothecary shall keep a fair record, in a book to be provided for
that purpose in separate columns, of the names of each patient, the contributor
by whom said patient is recommended, the date of the recommendation, the
physician attending him or her, the time when discharged, and the amount of
medicines delivered for his or her use, which book shall be laid before the
managers at each of their meetings.

Fourth. No patient shall be furnished with any medicines from the Dispensary,
unless from the advice or prescription of the physician of the Dispensary, or
some one of the regular physicians belonging to the town of Boston.

Fifth. No medicines shall be delivered to any patient recommended by a
contributor, if the said contributor has, previous to said recommendation, his
or her assigned number of patients under the care of the Dispensary, agreeably
to the constitution; and for the Apothecary's information herein, he shall be
furnished by the Treasurer with an attested list of the subscribers, and of the
sums respectively paid by them.

Sixth. The Apothecary shall semi-annually report to the Managers the state of
his accounts against the Dispensary, and oftener if thereto required.

AT a Meeting of the MANAGERS of the BOSTON DISPENSARY, March 10, 1797.
Voted, That the foregoing Rules be adopted for the Government of the Physician
and Apothecary of said Dispensary, and that they be furnished with fair Copies
of the same.

Attest, S. PARKER, CHAIRMAN.

THE following Gentlemen were chosen MANAGERS of the Boston Dispensary, the
second Thursday in January 1797, to continue in office one year.
Rev. Samuel Parker, D. D. Chairman, Rev. Samuel Stillman, D. D. Rev. Samuel
West, Stephen Gorham, Esquire John Andrews, Esquire Secretary, Hon. John Cossin Jones,
Esquire John Codman, Esquire Mr. John Parker, Mr. William Shattuck, Mr. William Brown,
Mr. Samuel Dunn, Mr. Thomas Brewer, Mr, William Smith, Treasurer, John Fleet,
M. D. Physician, Mr. Thomas Bartlett, Apothecary, Mr. Jacob Kuhn, Messeng^r.
The DISPENSARY is k^pt at No. 61, CORNHILL, at the Sign of the GOOD SAMARITAN.
Subscribers who have paid Fifty Dollars, and have a right to have four Patients
for life, under the care of the Dispensary.
Mr. Thomas Amory, John Codman, Esquire Andre^ (...), Esquire Mr. N^lboro (...), Major
Nathan (...), Mr. John (...).
LIST of CONTRIBUTORS to the BOSTON DISPENSARY.
HON. Samuel Adams, Esquire Mr. Seth Adams, Jeremiah Allen, Esquire Mr. Jonathan Amory,
Mr. John Amory, Mrs. Elizabeth Amory, Mr. John Amory, jun. Mr. Jonathan Amory,
jun. Mr. Francis Amory, Mr. Thomas C. Amory, Mr. Jonathan Amory, tertius, John
Andrews, Esquire Mr. John T. Apthorp. Nathaniel Balch, Esquire Capt. Tristram Barnard,
Mr. Thomas Bartlett, Mr. Samuel Blagge, Mr. Kirk Boot, Mrs. Elizabeth Bowdoin,
10 Dollars. Mr. Thomas Brewer, Mr. Peter C. Brooks, Mr. William Brown, Mr.
Benjamin Bussey, Mr. Joseph Callender, jun. Mr. Gardner L. Chandler, Mrs. Mary
Coffin, Mr. Joseph Coolidge, Mr. James Cutler, Mr. George Deblois, Mr. Thomas
Dennie, Mr. Ebenezer Dorr, Mr. Samuel Dunn, Mr. Joshua Eaton, Major General
Simon Elliot, Mr. Joseph Field, His Hon. Moses Gill, Esquire 10 Dollars, Mr.
Nathaniel Goodwin, Mr. Samuel Gore, Mr. John Gore, Stephen Gorham, Esquire Mr. John
Gray, Mr. Richard Green, Mr. Benjamin Green, Mr. Joseph Green, Mr. David
Green, Mr. John Haskins, Mrs. Elizabeth Haskins, Mr. Moses M. Hays, Stephen
Higginson, Esquire Mr. Stephen Higginson, jun. Mr. Oliver Holden, Mrs. Abigail
Howard, Mr. Jonathan Hunnewell, Henry Jackson, Esquire Hon. John C. Jones, Mr.
Thomas K. Jones, Mrs. Susanna Kneeland, Mr. William Lambert, Hon. John Lowell,
Esquire John Lowell, jun. Esquire Thomas McDonough, Esquire Mr. John Marston, Rev. Jedidiah
Morse, D. D. Mr. William Newman, Rev. Samuel Parker, D. D. Mr. John Parker,
Samuel Parkman, Esquire Mr. Gorham Parsons, Mr. William Pain, 30 Dollars. Miss
Sarah Pain, Mr. David Pierce, Mr. Levi Pierce, Mr. Samuel Penhallow, Mr.
Thomas H. Perkins, 10 Dollars. Mr. Joshua Pico, Mr. William Pratt, Mr. Joseph
Roby, Mrs. Hannah Row, Est. of Hon. Thomas Russell, Esquire 20 Dollars. Mr. Samuel
Salisbury, James Scott, Esquire Mr. William Shattuck, Mr. William Shaw, Mrs. Anne
Smith, William Smith, Esquire Mr. Samuel Smith, Mrs. Elisabeth Sparhawk, Rev.
Samuel Stillman, D. D. Mr. Benjamin Morgan Stillman, Hon. James Sullivan, Esquire
Mr. Joseph Tailor, Mrs. Elisabeth Temple, Mr. Joshua Thomas, Mr. John Thoreau,
Mr. Samuel Torrey, William Tudor, Esquire Mr. Edward Tuckerman, Charles Vaughan,
Esquire Mr. James Vila, Mr. Henry Wainwright, Hon. Oliver Wendell, Esquire Rev. Samuel
West, Mr. David West, Mr. Robert Wier, jun. Mr. William Woods.
THOSE without any sums affixed to their Names are Subscribers of 5 Dollars per
annum.

NUMBER of SUBSCRIBERS to the BOSTON DISPENSARY.
6 Subscribers at 50 Dollars, 300 1 ditto at 30 1 ditto at 20 Doll. per ann. 20
3 ditto at 10 Doll. per ann. 30 100 ditto at 5 Dollars, 500 111 Subscribers,
880


