FOUR SERMONS, ON THE Second Coming of Christ, AND THE FUTURE MISERY OF THE
WICKED.

BY J. B.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by ORMROD and CONRAD, No. 41, Chesnut-street. 1797.

SERMON I.
2 Thessalonians. i. 8, 9. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his
mighty angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and
obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from he glory of his
power.


1. THE second coming of our Lord, and the am^^ing scenes which will th^n be
opened, to the everlasting confusion of his enemies, and the perpetual joy of
his saints, are the frequent subjects of holy writ* The Prophets and Apostles,
Christ and his Evangelists, speak often and largely on these matters; and
though with some variety of phrase and manner of representation, yet without
any contradiction. And they all treat them, not as points of more speculation,
the contemplation of which has a tendency to increase our knowledge, elevate
our conceptions, enlarge our views and exalt our minds, (which is doubtless the
case) but also and chiefly as discoveries of the utmost importance and concern
to us all, which when cordially believed and attentively considered, have
(through divine grace) the most happy influence on our temper and conduct. And
I have often thought that Christianity would flourish much more than it does
among us, if the Ministers of the Gospel imitated in this, their example, and
led both saints and sinners to the more frequent and serious consideration of
those events which will soon take place.

2. Would we successfully call sinners to repentance? Like Paul preaching at
Athens we should testify, that God will appoint a day in which he will judge
the world in righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained. -- Would we make
the sinners in Zion afraid? Would we wish to see fearfulness surprise the
hypocrites? with the Prophet we must demand, Who can endure devouring fire? Who
can dwell with everlasting burnings? Would we persuade the delicate and
effeminate to self-denial and mortification, to cut off the right hand and to
pluck out the right eye, which off^nd? We must, with our Lord, remi^d them,
that it is better one of their members should perish, than that their whole
body should be cast into hell, where the worm dies not and the fire is not
quenched. Would we fortify the timorous against the fear of man, which always
brings a snare, and often leads into sin? We must exhort them in the words
of Jesus, not to fear those who can only kill the body, but rather (...) fear
him who can destroy both body and soul in hell.

3. In short whether we would rouse the careless, or excite the indolent, or
reclaim the back slider, or comfort the distressed, or succor the tempted, or
encourage the faint-hearted, or animate the faithful soldier of Jesus Christ,
patiently to endure hardships, courageously fight his enemies, valiantly
conquer the powers of darkness, and seize the crown of everlasting life; -- we
should bring the day of judgment in view, with the terrors of hell and the joys
of heaven, and fetch our arguments, motives and encouragements thence. -- Thus
will the s^ou^-h^a^^^d, and those who are far from righteousness, tremble, with
Felix (who was alarmed at Paul's reasoning concerning a judgment to come) and
enquiring what mast we do to be saved, will repent and be converted, that their
sins may be blotted out. And thus will the true believer rejoice in hope of the
glory of God; and while for the joy that is set before him he endures the cross
and despises the shame, he will give all diligence to be found of Christ at his
coming in p^, and without spot and blameless.

4. Since then these are such necessary and fruitful subjects of discourse, and
so repeatedly offered to our consideration in the sacred scriptures, it may be
profitable for us, frequently to employ* our thoughts upon them. That we may do
it for a few moments at this time, I have made choice of this most alarming
passage of Scripture, in which the Apostle, with a view to their comfort and
support under their sufferings, puts the persecuted Church of God at
Thessalonica in remembrance of the very different state of things which would
soon take place, with regard to them and their persecutors. God (says he) will
recompense tribulation to those who trouble you, and to you who are troubled
rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed with his mighty angels in
flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the
gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who (adds he) shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of his
power.

In these words we have, I. The certainty and manner of our Lord's second
coming. II. The character of them who shall then be the objects of his wrath.
III. The nature and duration of the punishment which he will inflict upon them.


These are all very important points, and well deserve our most serious
consideration.

I shall confine myself at present to the first of them, viz.

1. The certainty and manner of our Lord's second coming.

1. As to the certainty of his second coming, they who read and credit the
Oracles of God, can entertain no doubt at all concerning it. It is there
foretold and described so frequently and clearly, and with such a variety of
method and expression, that the most careless reader can hardly avoid observing
and understanding it. If therefore I produce some scripture-testimonies of this
truth, it is not so much with a view to illustrate and confirm it, as to
impress so useful a subject more deeply upon our minds. For it is too manifest,
that it may be believed and understood, where it has, by no means, its proper
influence.

2. I observe then, that this event was foretold by the ancient Prophets as
well as by Christ and his Apostles. Even Enoch of old prophesied, saying,
Behold the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints, to execute judgment
upon all. A truth this of which the Psalmist was not ignorant, for in the 50th
Psalm, he testifies, " Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence; a fire
shall devour before him, and it shall be very tempestuous rround about him: he
shall call the heavens from above and the earth, that he may judge his people.
These predictions, so clear and express that their sense must be obvious to
all, are confirmed and illustrated by the testimony of Daniel, chap. vii. ver.
9.10. I beheld (says he) till the thrones were cast down and the Ancient of
Days did sit, whose garments was white as snow, and the hair of his head like
pure wool; his throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burning fire;
a fiery stream issued and came forth from before him: thousands ministered unto
him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him: the judgment was
set, and the books were opened! What a sublime and inimitably grand description
which we have here, mixed with admirable simplicity! How far does it exceed, in
these respects, every thing to be met with in merely human compositions! How
plainly does it appear to have been the effect, not of genius and art, but of a
mind through the influences of the divine spirit, elevated with the grandeur,
awed with the majesty, and struck with the terror of the subject.

3. These ancient prophecies of our Lord's second coming have the sanction of
his own authority, not only as being inspired by him, but as being confirmed by
most express declarations, delivered by himself as well while upon earth as
after his ascension into heaven, and that both before friends and enemies. I
shall produce only two or three of these as a specimen of the rest. Thus when
Caiaphas, the Elders and Scribes, had the boldness, or presumptuous wickedness
rather, to call their Creator and final Judge to take his trial at their
tribunal; before these he testified, Hereafter shall ye see th^^ Son of Man
sit^ing on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven. To his
friends and followers, he often foretold the same event, though with a
different view, not merely to convince and alarm, but also and especially to
comfort and encourage them. Thus, when predicting and describing the
destruction of Jerusalem, and the ruin of the Jewish church and polity, he
slides, (as it were) insensibly into the important subject typified by that,
declaring, After the tribulation of those days, the sun shall be darkened and
the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and
the powers of heaven shall be shaken; and then shall appear the sign of the Son
of Man in heaven; then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall
see the Son of Man coming in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory.
And in the next chapter, (Matt. xxv.) which, it seems, contains the last public
discourse that our Lord delivered before he was offered up, he declares to all,
When the Son of Man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with him;
then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory, and before him shall be
gathered all nations.

4. To these express and particular declarations delivered by our Lord, while
he tabernacled upon earth in his state of humiliation, we may subjoin his
testimony from heaven, after he entered upon his state of exaltation, and was
invested with all power in heaven and on earth. The faithful and true witness,
the Alpha and Omega, when he takes his solemn leave of us, in the conclusion of
the records of truth, testifies, both to friends and foes. Behold I come
quickly, blessed is he that keeps the sayings of the prophecy of this book.
And again, Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give unto every
man according as his work shall be. And yet again, He that testified these
things, says, "Surely I come quickly," To which the church replies, Amen; so
come, Lord Jesus. Thus by three testimonies from the lips of Eternal Veracity,
is this glorious truth established.

5. But that a doctrine so superior to reason and yet absolutely certain and
deeply interesting, might want to kind of evidence calculated to gain it
credit, messengers were sent immediately from heaven to bear witness to it.
Thus when our Lord had given his apostles their last commission, and while they
beheld, was taken up from them, a cloud receiving him out of their sight; while
they looked steadfastly toward heaven as he went up, behold two men stood by
them in white apparel, who also said, "Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing
up into heaven? This same Jesus who is taken up into heaven, shall so come
again in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven.

6. This testimony of the holy angels, or of the spirits of the just made
perfect, is frequently confirmed by that of the Holy Spirit in the mouths of
the Apostles. But as I would not be tedious, I forbear to quote any particular
passages, choosing rather to refer you to their sermons, as recorded by St. Luke
in the Acts, and to their various epistles, where you frequently meet with many
glorious descriptions of this grand event. The testimonies already produced are
more than sufficient, not only to establish us in the firm belief of this
comfortable truth, but also (which is most wanting) to impress it deeply upon
our minds. Good reason have we to settle it in our hearts, that as our Lord is
gone before to prepare a place for us, so he will come again to receive us to
himself, that where he is we may be also; and to those who look for him he will
appear the second time without sin unto salvation. Yes, "At the destined period
shall return
"He, once on earth, who bled for human guilt,
"And with him all our triumph over the tomb."


For then will he change our vile bodies and render them like unto his glorious
body. Then will he be glorified in his saints, and admired in all that believe.

7. Let us rest assured then, though the vision is for an appointed time, yet in
the end it shall speak and shall not lie. When the exact period shall arrive
indeed we know not, nor can we expect to know, since (as our Lord assures us)
it is kept a secret not only from all the men upon earth, but likewise from all
the angels in heaven. But this we know, it will only be deferred till the
mystery of God shall be finished; till the prophecies shall all be fulfilled,
and a sufficient number redeemed from among men. -- If therefore any scoffers
arise in these last days, walking after their own lusts, and saying, Where is
the promise of his coming? for ever since the Fathers fell asleep, all things
continue as they were: we reply, One day is with the Lord as a thousand years,
and a thousand years as one day. No time is long or short with him who is
Eternal: He can do the work of a thousand years in one day, and a thousand
years, nay, the longest time, is no delay to him. He is not therefore slow
concerning his promise of coming again, though some men count it slowness, but
he is long-suffering to us ward, not willing that any should perish, but rather
that all should come to repentance.

8. But the day of the Lord will come, and when it comes it will come suddenly
and unexpectedly, as a thief in the night, so that when men shall say "peace
and safety," then sudden destruction comes upon them as travail upon a woman
with child, and they shall not escape. For behold (says Jesus) I come as a
thief at unawares, and at such an hour as ye think not the Son of Man comes.
-- Blessed is he, therefore, that watches and keeps his garments, lest he
walk naked, and they see his shame. Watch we therefore, for ye know not at what
hour our Lord does come. For if ye will not watch, he will come as a thief, and
we shall not know what hour he will come upon us. If, like the evil servant, we
say in our heart, Our Lord delayeth his coming, and begin to smite our
fellow servants, and to eat and drink with the drunken, our Lord shall come in
a day when we look not for him, and in an hour that we are not aware of, and
will cut us asunder, and appoint us our portion with hypocrites and
unbelievers. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

The certainty of our Lord's second coming (which it seems, will not long be
deferred and whenever it is, will be sudden and unexpected, even as the
lightning comes out of the Fast and in an instant shines unto the West) I
say, the certainty of his coming again being evident beyond contradiction or
dispute to all who credit the holy scriptures, I proceed as was proposed, to
enquire further into the manner of his coming, according to the representation
given of it in our text. For this too is doubtless a subject of enquiry well
worthy the attention of all who love the Lord Jesus in sincerity, to whom
nothing that particularly concerns him will appear trivial o^ unimportant.

Consider we then,

Secondly, In what form, with what attendants, and in what circumstances he
will appear?

1. Will God's Eternal Son again for our sakes divest himself of his glory,
relinquish his felicity, assume our nature and suffer in our stead? Being made
flesh, will the Creator of all again become destitute of every earthly
accommodation, so as not even to have a place where to lay his head, though the
very foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests? Will he again
endure hunger and thirst, cold and nakedness, weariness and hardship of every
kind? Will the sovereign Lord of the Universe, and the final judge of Angels
and of Men, again suffer himself to be apprehended by his creatures, arraigned,
tried, and condemned; to be insulted, spit upon, scourged and crucified? Will
the ever-blessed Jesus again groan under a mountain of guilt, and sustain the
wrath of incensed justice, till he is constrained to confess, My soul is
exceeding sorrowful, and sweats, as it were, great drops of blood? In short,
will the Prince of Life, and the Light of the World again suffer the pang of
death, and go out in darkness?

2. Oh, no! These days of his humiliation and sorrow are past, and will return
no more. For having vanquished his and our enemies upon the cross, and led them
in triumph at his chariot wheels, when be ascended far above all heavens, in
reward of his victorious sufferings, he is invested with power and dominion
irresistible and eternal, and is raised to a throne of glory at the Father's
right hand. Because when he was in the form of God, he emptied himself of his
honor and happiness, taking the form of a servant, and being made in the
likeness of men; and being found in the fashion of a man, he humbled himself,
becoming obedient unto death, even the death of the cross; wherefore God also
has highly exalted him, and given him a name above every name, that at the
name of Jesus every ^nee should bow, of those in heaven, and those in earth,
and those under the earth, and every tongue shall confess that Jesus Christ is
Lord to the Glory of God ^he Father. And now he reigns in bliss and glory
independent and supreme, sovereign of angels and of men, King of kings, and
Lord of lords. The government of ^he universe rests upon his shoulders, and all
persons and things are at his disposal and under his direction.

3. This dignity and glory of our exalted Lord is, however, hid from the world;
and hence their disobedience (...) his commands, contempt of his authority, and
neglect ^f his salvation. But at his second coming he shall be manifested and
discovered in all his excellent majesty and perfections, and therefore it is
called the revelation of Jesus Christ. For then it will be revealed, to the
eter^^l confusion of his foes, and the perpetual joy of his re^^emed, what he
is, and will forever be. Then will be ^^ze forth "In all the splendor of the
Deity
"Darken the sun, confound the brightest star,
"The Father's image perfectly expressed,
"The nations then shall own him for their God,
"And the whole world confess the almighty Judge."
^en will it be seen whom they insulted and reviled, ^en they said, "Hail, King
of the Jews," and "He ^ed others, himself he cannot save." Then will it appear
for whose blood they clamoured, when they cried out, "Away with him, away with
him; crucify him, crucify him." Then will Pilate see who it was that he
condemned to die, and Caiphas whom he charged with blasphemy. Yea, then will
the whole race of impenitent transgressors acknowledge, however reluctant, the
dignity and power of that man, whom they refused to reign over them. For then
will he be revealed as the effulgence of his Father's glory, and the express
image of his person, even as God over all, blessed forever, possessed of
infinite and unlimited authority, and all possible perfections! -- "Ah, how
unlike
"The Babe of Bethlehem! how unlike the man
"That groaned on Calvary! Yet he it is
"That man of sorrows! Ah, how changed!"


4. Concerning this matter we can have no doubt at all, the scripture is so
full and express upon the head. The passages above quoted, and which I need not
here repeat, are a sufficient confirmation of it. Our Lord there speaks of his
sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven; and
again of his coming in the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory; and
yet again of his coming in his glory with all his holy angels with him, when he
will sit upon the throne of his glory. I shall only add here, just such was the
representation St. John had of his second coming, when he saw heaven opened,
and beheld a white horse, and he that sat upon him was called Faithful and
True, and in righteousness does he judge and make war. His eyes were as a flame
of fire, and on his head were many crowns, and he had a name written which no
man knows but himself, and he was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood, and
his name is called The Word of God. And out of his mouth goes a sharp
two-edged sword, that with it he may smite the nations, and he shall rule them
with a rod of iron: and he treads the winepress of the fierceness of the
wrath of Almighty God. And he has on his vesture, and on his thigh, a name
written, KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS.

5. What a glorious discovery was here afforded the Apostle! What a grand and
most sublime description does he give us! What an august personage is here
represented to our view! But, ah! how much more will the representation strike
us when it is made by Christ in person, and we shall see him as he is! -- Shall
see heaven open, and the Son of God in the pomp of Majesty ineffable
descending! -- Shall see, "On an empyreal, flying throne,
"Awfully raised, heaven's everlasting Son!
"Virtue, dominion, praise, omnipotence
"Support the train of their triumphant Prince;
"Night shades the solemn arches of his brows,
"And on his check the purple morning glows."
And now what is all the fulsome pride of human greatness, and the affected
pomp which decorates worms of the earth, to this inherent dignity and ineffable
majesty of the glorious Redeemer! Ah, how does this refulgent Sun of
Righteousness, thus beaming forth in his meridian glory, eclipse all the
borrowed brightness of feeble mortals! Surely all the renowned Statesmen,
victorious Generals, famed Conquerors, powerful Emperors, and mighty Monarchs
which have ever dignified the annals of human history, and shone with faint
rays during the dreary night of this world, shall disappear in the presence of
this God of Glory, when at the morning of the resurrection, the day of Eternity
dawns upon us, just as the stars vanish before the rising sun! Ah! how will all
the Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief
captains, and the mighty men, ^e then ashamed of that vain grandeur, on account
of which they valued themselves, and confounded at their foolish and
unreasonable pride, while they who pierced him, and neglected his great
salvation, shall wail because of him!

6. But further. To give us a still clearer view of the dignity of our exalted
Savior, and the glory of his second coming, besides his personal excellencies
and divine majesty, which will be then fully displayed, his attendants are
likewise mentioned in our text, and in other parts of Scripture, and therefore
should not be passed over in silence, for they will yet more illustrate that
glorious day of his triumph. -- We have already seen how he shall be revealed
from heaven, which shall (as it were) unsold its crystal ports, or cleave its
starry plains asunder, and discover instantly to our view a great white throne
and him who sits upon it, from whose face heaven and earth flee away, and there
is no place found for them, and at the sight of whom, consternation, terror and
dismay shall overwhelm the ungodly, and eternally extinguish every gleam of
comfort and ray of hope. But the Apostle further tells us in our text, that he
shall be attended with his mighty Angels, a circumstance which is attested by
our Lord himself in the predictions he gave while upon earth of his second
coming (as quoted above) and which he likewise included in the representation
of that event made to his servants Daniel and John. The latter of whom tells
us, he saw the armies of heaven following him upon white horses, clothed in
fine linen white and clean; and the former beheld thousand thousands
ministering unto him, and ten thausand times ten thousand standing before him.
What a glorious retinue have we here! How different from the twelve poor
fishermen who attended, (shall I say?) or rather deserted him in his days of
humiliation! Ah me! in how different a character, and in what different
circumstances, does the Savior now appear!

"How changed from him who meekly prostrate laid,
"Vouchsafed to wash the feet himself had made;
"From him who was forsook, betrayed, denied;
"Who languish'd, prayed, bled, thirsted, groaned, and died;
"Hung, pierced and bare, insulted by the foe,
"All heaven in tears above, earth unconcerned below."
7. These his holy angels will not only accompany him as attendants upon his
person, to manifest his divine power and authority, and to display his royal
grandeur and magnificence, but likewise as ministers of his will, to execute
his purposes of love to his people and of wrath to his enemies. These, as
harbingers of his glory, shall prepare the way before him, and make ready for
the appearance of the Universal Judge! I saw (says the Apostle John) a mighty
Angel come down from heaven, clothed with a cloud, and a rainbow was upon his
head, and his face was (as it were) the sun, and his feet as pillars of fire,
and he set his right foot upon the sea and his left foot upon the earth, and
cried with a loud voice as when a lion roareth, and when he had cried, seven
thunders uttered their voices. And he lifted up his hand to heaven, and swear
by him that lives for ever and ever, who created heaven and earth and the sea,
that there should be time no longer; but the mystery of God should be finished,
as he had declared to his servants the Prophets.

And now before, "In grandeur terrible all heaven descend,
"A swift archangel with his golden wing,
"As clouds and blots, that darken and disgrace
"The scene divine, sweeps stars and suns aside:
"And thus, all dross removed, heaven's own pure day
"Full on the confines of our Either flames."


8. Preparation being thus made, the Son of Man appears in his glory and all
his holy angels with him. And now he sends these his angels with a great sound
of a trumpet, and they shall gather together his elect from one end of heaven
to the other. And as they are employed, as the instruments of his good will and
condescending grace to his redeemed, whom they will separate from the world,
and gather as wheat into his garner; so likewise shall they be the ministers of
his vengeance to the wicked, whom at the time of the general harvest, they
shall gather together like tares, and bind in bundles to burn them. Yes, at the
end of the world, the Son of Man shall send forth his angels, and they shall
gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them who do iniquity, and
cast them into a (...) of fire, there shall be weeping and wailing and gnashing
of teeth.

9. Another circumstance mentioned in our text attending our Lord's second
coming (and the last I shall now take notice of) is, that he shall be revealed
in flaming fire. This particular wa^ also represented to Daniel, in that
prophetic vision which God gave him of this grand event. He saw (as he tells
us) his throne like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burning fire, while a
fiery stream issued and came forth from before him. -- As of old the Lord
rained upon Sodom and Gomorrha, brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven,
and overthrew those cities and all the plain, and all the inhabitants of those
cities, and that which grew upon the ground, so at the consummation of all
things, when he arises to shake terribly the earth, with that fiery stream
which issues and comes forth from before him, he will burn up the earth with
its increase, and melt down the foundations of the mountains; yea, a fire shall
be kindled in his anger, which shall burn to the nethermost hell, shall burn
and shall not be quenched. -- We know that the heavens and the earth which now
are, are by the word of God kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day
of judgment and perdition of ungodly men. And when that period arrives, while
the heavens pass away with a great noise, and the elements melt with fervent
heat, the earth and all its works shall be totally burnt up.

-- "At that destined hour,
"By the loud trumpet summoned to the charge,
"See all the formidable sons of fire,
"Eruptions, earthquakes, comets, lightnings, play
"Their various engines; all at once disgorge
"Their blazing magazines, and take by storm
"This poor terrestrial citadel of man."
10. To add the greater terror to this most terrible period, the Scriptures
represent it as happening at midnight. -- At midnight (says Jesus) there was a
cry made, Behold the bridegroom comes, go ye forth to meet him. And perhaps
the Apostle, in his first Epistle to the Thessalonians, intimates the same,
where he says, Of the times and seasons ye have no need that I should wr^te
unto you, for ye yourselves know perfectly, that the day of the Lord so comes
as a thief in the night. -- It Is true, this cannot be the case with respect to
the whole earth, it being always day in one part or other of it: But it may be
the case with regard to those parts of the earth which are most inhabited, and
have been most favored with the light of the Gospel. Whatever happens to the
deserts of America in the West, the unenlighten'd Indies in the East, and the
immense Pacific Ocean lying between them, though it should be broad day there;
yet it may be night at our Lord's second coming with respect to the most
populous and considerable parts of the earth; I mean Europe, Asia, Africa, and
the eastern parts of America. The inhabitants of those parts may be inveloped
with the dismal shades of darkness, when this awful day suddenly blazes forth.
So it seems our Poet, whose sentiments on this subject are always as just as
they are striking, and whom, therefore, I can hardly quote too often, supposed
when he said "At midnight, when mankind are wrapped in peace,
"And worldly fancy feeds on golden dreams;
"At midnight, it is presumed, this seen will burst
"From tenfold darkness, sudden as the spark
"From smitten steel, from nitrous grain the blaze;
"Man starting from his couch shall sleep no more."


11. Then, as was represented to St. John, shall there be a great earthquake,
and the sun shall become black as sackcloth of hair, and the moon shall become
as blood, and the stars of heaven shall fall unto the earth, even as a figtree
casts her untimely figs, when she is shaken of a mighty wind. And the heavens
shall depart as a s^^^l when it is rolled together, and every mountain and
island shall be moved out of their place: And the kings of the earth, and the
great men, and the rich m^n, and the chief captains, and the mighty men, and
every bondsman, and every free man, shall hide themselves in the dens and in the
rocks of the mountains, and shall say to the mountains and rocks, "Fall on us,
and hide us from the face of him that s^teth upon the throne, and from the
wrath of the Lamb: for the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be
able to stand." Who, indeed, when "Above, beneath, around, amazement all!
"Terror and glory joined in their extremes,
"Our God in grandeur, and our world on fire!"


12. And now let us turn aside and see this great sight. Let us stand still and
consider this solemn scene here opened to our view! By the help of that faith
which is the evidence of things not ^een, let us contemplate the awful majesty
and terrible grandeur of that day, if our weak senses can endure the dreadful
glory of it is light, or our feeble faculties sustain the effulgence of its
over-powering brightness and astonishing terrors. -- ^h! how ^st it surprise
and alarm the secure sinner, and how must it strike all men with amazement and
awe, in the dead of night, to be suddenly awaked out of the repose of their
last sleep, by the confused noise and deafening rour of trumpets sounding,
thunders grumbling, stars rushing, elements melting, waves dashing, the sea
tossing, and the earth quaking! Ah! how will the stoutest heart fail for fear,
and sink with horrible dread, to hear the sudden ^rush of worlds, and behold
the wreck of universal nature! To see -- "Each mountain height
"Outburn V^snvius; rocks eternal pour
"Their melted mass, as rivers once they poured;
"Stars rush, and final ruin fiercely drive
"Her plowshare over creation."


How will the stubborn infidel, who treated these discoveries as the inventions
of fancy, and the hardened sinner, who despised and neglected them; ah! how
will they start from the slumbers of midnight, the bed of debauching pleasures,
or the couch of riot and revelling excess, in wild affright and disorder, when
they shall be obliged to behold with their eyes (and that by a dismal light!)
and feel, to their sorrow, what they would not once believe, or wilfully
forgot! Now they can disbelieve and forget no longer. The great and terrible
day of the Lord is arrived.

"The fatal period, the great hour is come,
"And nature shrinks at her approaching doom;
"Loud peals of thunder give the sign, and all
"His terrors in array surround the ball:
"Sharp lightning; with the meteors blaze conspire,
"And darting downward set the world on fire."
Now the day is actually come which burns as an oven, and all the proud (all
infidels) and all that do wickedly (all impenitent sinners) shall be as
stubble: the day is come that shall burn them up, and leave them neither root
nor branch.

13. Blow ye the trumpet of Zion, sound an alarm in the holy mountain; let all
the inhabitants of the land tremble, for the day of the Lord comes, for it is
nigh at hand: a day of darkness and of gloominess; a day of clouds and of thick
darkness! Jesus descends (...) his holy angels; a fire devoureth before them,
and (...). For behold the Lord makes the (...), and makes it waste, and
turns it upside down, and (...) the inhabitants thereof! The earth mourns
and sadeth away, the world languisheth and s^deth away, the h^ughty people of
the earth do languish! Fear, and the pit, and the snare, are come upon thee, O
inhabitant of the land; for the windows from on high are opened, and the
foundations of the earth do shake! The earth reels to and fr^ like a drunkard,
and is removed like a cottage, for the transgression thereof is heavy upon it,
and it fails to rise no more! See, ye blind, the victorious blaze of
irresistible and all-conquering fire! It rends the rocks, consumes the forests,
melts down the mountains, lays cities, yea whole kingdoms in ashes, and
invelopes the whole earth! Behold, it rises, swells, spreads, and overwhelms
all with an universal deluge! While, in the mean time, "Black rising clouds the
thickened either choke,
"And spiry flames shoot through the rolling smoke,
"With keen vibrations cut the sullen night,
"And streak the darkened sky with dreadful light."
Hear, ye deaf, the re-bellowing growl and aggravated roar of hoarse-muttering
thunder, the mighty voice of the great archangel, and the all-alarming trump of
GOD! Feel, ye stout-hearted, the earth quaking and opening, the mountains
trembling and removing, the hills reeling and sinking, the valleys heaving and
rising! Feel, or be forever hardened, the shock of conflicting elements, and
the dash of ruined worlds!

14. Awake! awake! y^ sleepy sinners! shake off you fatal slun^bers! Arise from
the bed of (...), and the lap of enchanting pleasures! Haste, haste, and flee
for shelter from this day of wrath and unrelenting fury! If you delay till this
day overtake you, then, alas! whither can you flee? The earth quakes, trembles,
and opens under your feet; the storm of divine vengeance lowers and bursts upon
your guilty heads, and ruin and perdition surround you on every hand! The
frowning Judge, whose just indignation you have provoked, and whose almighty
wrath your sins have kindled, fixes his piercing eye upon you, and marks you
out as the butt, at which he will shoot his fiery arrows, and direct the
thunderbolts of his everlasting indignation. And now it is in vain to cry to
the rocks and mountains to fall upon you and hide you: the rocks and mountains
rend and eleave asunder, yea, flee away and leave you destitute and forsaken,
exposed to all the artillery of ^omnipotent fury, and in the midst of dark and
fiery torment.

15. Oh, that men were wise, that they understood this, that they would
confider their latter end! Oh! that they would lay these things to heart, and
take heed lest at any time their hearts he overcharged with surfeit^ng and
drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and so that day come upon them
unawares, for as a snare shall it come upon them that dwell upon the face of
the earth! Oh, that they would watch and pray always, that they might escape
those things which are coming upon the earth, and stand before the Son of Man
with joy and not with grief.

SERMON II.
2 Thessalonians. i. 7, 8. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his
mighty angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and
obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.


IT being absolutely certain that our Lord will come ^ain, and when he comes,
will be revealed in all the ^ory of his majesty, and in all the terror of his
justice; ^t properly in the character of a Savior, but in that (...) a Judge,
to examine into the conduct of all mankind, ^d pass a final sentence upon them
according to their ^orks, -- it surely concerns all men to lay these things to
^art, and to prepare for his appearing. And it equally ^cerns us not to defer
this business, not only because ^at is always reasonable and fit to be done,
cannot be ^ne too soon; but because a delay may be of the most ^ngerous
consequence, for at such an hour as we think ^t, the Son of Man comes; and if
when he comes, he ^ds us unprepared, we are undone for ever.

2. And yet (dreadful to say) almost all mankind live ^m day to day in entire
forgetfulness and total neglect (...) this matter! While every thing else,
however trifling ^d impertinent, is studiously and eagerly pros^outed, this is
almost universally disregarded. The toy of business is diligently attended, the
phantom of honor unweariedly pursued, the enchantments of pleasure assiduously
courted, the dream of amusement solicitously sought; in short, the things of
time and sense, though transitory in their duration, uncertain in their stay,
unsatisfactory in their nature, and even perplexing in their enjoyment; these
engage the attention and engross the affection of high and low, young and old,
rich and poor. -- In the mean time, our immortal interests, the favor of our
God, and the eternal advantages and pleasures of religion, are generally buried
in oblivion and neglected. Unreasonable is this conduct indeed, but too
certainly may it be laid to the charge of the generality of mankind, whose
whole behavior clearly demonstrates that they are more intent upon providing
for their momentary abode on earth, than their everlasting existence in heaven;
and on securing the favor and applause of their fellow-worms, than the
good will and approbation of their final Judge! But in this respect, let us not
follow the multitude to do evil, to offend our God and throw away our own
souls! nay rather, through grace, let us take care to be those persons whom the
Lord will acquit and reward at his coming, that we may make our appearance at
his bar with joy and not with grief.

3. In order hereto, we should enquire who they are whom the Lord will condemn
at his appearing, and whether we are found of their number, that if we are, we
may hasten to escape from among them, and rank with those who shall stand
approved before the Son of Man. For satisfaction on this head, we need only
consider and compare ourselves with the character described in the words of our
text, where we are, briefly indeed, but at the same time very clearly and fully
informed respecting this matter. The Apostle tells us very expressly that
Christ, when he is revealed, will take vengeance on them that know not God, and
obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Having then already considered
the certainty and manner of our Lord's second coming, I proceed now as was
proposed,

Secondly, to enquire into the character of those who shall be condemned at his
coming to misery and perdition. The Apostle informs us, 1st. They know not God,
And, 2dly. They obey not the gospel. And, 1st. They know not God.


1. There is hardly any subject within the whole compass of religion,
concerning which people in general are so grossly mistaken as the knowledge of
God. All men profess to know God, though alas! the generality, by unholy tempers
and wicked works, contradict that profession, and prove themselves to be entire
strangers to him. -- If a man have but heard or read a little about the Author
of his being, if he believe his existence and perfections, he forthwith
concludes that he knows God, and is very much offended if you presume to call
it in question; though, at the same time, this pretended knowledge has no happy
influence upon him, but his spirit and behavior are just the same, one might
suppose they would be, if he were a mere atheist in the world.

2. Though he professes to be persuaded of the infinite glory and ineffable
majesty of the eternal Jehovah, yet does he not inwardly reverence and humbly
adore him but is light and trifling, stupid and insensible, perhaps, even in
his immediate presence, and during the solemnity of his divine worship. Though he
declares his assent to the immaculate holiness and inflexible justice of the
Governor and final judge of the world, yet is he not abased and confounded
under a sense of his sinfulness and guilt, nor does he abhor himself as in dust
and ashes; but he is proud and impenitent, presuming upon the goodness of his
heart, if his life has not been altogether blameless, and laying his own
righteousness as the foundation of his acceptance with God. Though (he thinks) he
has no doubt at all of the boundless mercy and incomprehensible love of God in
Christ; yet does he not cheerfully trust him with humble confidence, and
joyfully praise him with grateful acknowledgements; the pure flame of divine
love does not glow upon the altar of his heart, nor does he devote his body and
soul as a living sacrifice to God by Jesus Christ. But, on the contrary, he
desponds and repines under dark and afflictive dispensations of Providence,
while he ungratefully admits the vain world, Jehovah's rival, to share, yea,
engross his affections, and most treacherously harbors sin and satan, the
Lord's enemies, in the inmost recesses of his soul.

3. So little is he benefited by the knowledge of God. But, in truth, what he
has is not the knowledge of God, for if it were, it would infallibly produce
the effects ascribed to this principle in the word of God. It would beget in
him deep humility before God, entire confidence toward him, fervent love to
him, and universal obedience; in short, holiness and happiness, a pledge and
^^etaste of eternal life. So we learn from the sacred scriptures. I have heard
of thee (says Job) by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye sees thee;
wherefore I ab^or myself, and repent in dust and ashes. They that know by name
(says the Psalmist) will put their trust in thee. He that loves not (adds
Saint John) knows not God, for God is love. And hereby we know that we know
him, ^f we keep his commandments. He that says, "I know ^im," and keeps not
his commandments, is a liar, and the ^uth is not in him. From hence it appears,
where these ^ffects are not, the true knowledge of God is not: An ^mpty shadow,
vain resemblance, or fleeting idea of it ^here may be, but that no more
deserves to be called the knowledge of God, than the shadow, picture, or idea
of (...) man, deserves to be called a man; and it can no more ^liven, comfort,
or purify our souls, than a painted fire ^n refine metals from their dross, or
revive and warm our ^dics; or than the notion of a candle can illuminate a ^ark
room.

4. No: the knowledge of God is an endowment far superior to what the
generality imagine; more noble in ^s origin, excellent in its nature, and happy
in its consequences. It is born from above; it is the fruit of the spirit of
God, shining within us and enlightening our ^inds. For though all the divine
perfections, especially his wisdom, power and love, beam forth with effulgent
glory (...) all his works, particularly in the redemption of the ^orld by our
Lord Jesus Christ; yet the eyes of our understanding being blinded, we still
remain destitute of ^e true and saving knowledge of God, till he who commanded
light to shine out of darkness shine into our hearts, (as the Apostle expresses
it) to give the light of the knowledge of his glory, in the face (or person) of
Christ Jesus. Then, and not before, can we testify with St. John, We know that
the Son of God is come, and has given us an understanding to know the True
One, and we are in the True One, by his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God
and eternal life.

And as the knowledge of God is descended from heaven, so is its excellent
nature equal to its divine original. It is such an impression of God upon the
soul, and such a clear, full and affecting discovery of him as transforms us,
more or less, into his divine likeness. It is the beholding, (as St. Paul says)
with unveiled face the glory of the Lord, in such a manner that we are thang'd
into the same image, from glory to glory, by the Spirit of the Lord: It is
through the teaching of his word and spirit, such an acquaintance with God in his
being and attributes, together with those relations in which he is pleased to
stand toward us, as produces a correspondent temper of mind and conduct of
life in us toward God.

6. To be a little more particular. 1st. The knowledge of God never fails to
humble us before him. For it implies such a view of his nature and perfections,
his self-existence, independence, sovereignty and eternity; his omniscience,
omnipotence, justice and purity; his greatness and goodness, as manifests in
the clearest light our own ignorance and weakness, guilt and misery, and lays
us in the very dust in his presence. Woe is ^e, for I am undone (said Isaiah)
for I am a man of unclean lip^, for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of
Hosts. Behold I am vik (said Job (...) a like occasion) what shall I answer
thee? (...) will ^^y mine hand upon my mouth. -- We never see su^^rior
excellence but we are aba^ed by the comparison: We never reflect on the
perfection and happiness of an ^oly angel or glorified saint; nay, we never
come into ^e company of an eminently holy man, though he is still ^compassed with
infirmity, but we are more or less ^umbled. How much more then, must we be
humbled (...) the sight and in the presence of that Being, who is the ^ne
source of perfection and happiness to all his creatures, and in comparison of
whom the whole circle of created ^xcellence is no more than a drop to the
immense ocean. And though we only see him through a glass darkly, while in ^his
world, and therefore cannot feel such a depth of self^basement, as they feel
who see him as he is, and who, ^overing their faces with their wings, fall
prostrate in his ^resence, and rest not day or night, crying, Holy, holy, ^oly,
Lord God of hosts, the whole earth is full of thy glory." Yet in proportion to
our acquaintance with him, we shall be ashamed and humbled before him,
especially considering our sine against him, and the corruption and depravity
of our whole nature, which renders us utterly unfit for converse with him, and
deserving of his eternal displeasure: Surely a sense of this, at least, must
lay us at his feet, and make us own with the Prophet, It is of the Lord's
mercies we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not.

"I loath myself when him I see,
"And into nothing fall:
"Am lost and swallowed up in thee,
"My God, my all in all!
"My humbled ^ul when thou art near,
"In dust and ushes lies:
"How shall I in thy sight appear,
"Or meet thy purer eyes."
7. Another never-failing fruit of the knowledge of God, i^ confidence in him.
They that know thy name (says the Psalmist) will put their trust in thee. The
reason of this is evident. They that know him, know him to be infinite in
wisdom, and power, and goodness. They know him to be so wise as to be perfectly
acquainted with all their want, so powerful as to be well able to supply those
wants, and so gracious, that he will withhold nothing good from those that walk
uprightly. And though their fins against him might g^ve them just cause to dread
that wrath which they see they have merited, and beget in their mind many
painful suspicious and distressing fears; yet when they know tha^ he has so
loved the world as to give his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in
him, may not perish but have everlasting life: When being truly convinced of
sin, they believe in Christ with a faith of the operation of God, and are
justified by the faith of Christ; When they know God i^ Christ reconciling them
unto himself, and not imputing their trespasses to them: -- then does their
dread of God's displeas;ure give place to a sense of his favor, and their
doubts and fears respecting his goodness, yield to a con^dence in his mercy,
manifested in the pardon of all their sins through Jesus Christ. And then -- "All
the ^louds
"Which conscious guil^ spread over their shudd'ring souls,
"Vanish before his recon^iling eyes."


Thus knowing God as a reconciled father, who has accepted them through the
Beloved, and made them his children by adoption and grace, they trust in him
for direction in all difficulties, protection in all dangers, succor in all
temptations, comfort in all troubles, and a supply of all their wants, and though
they know they shall not be without chastisement (for what son in he whom his
father chasteneth not?) yet do they know that their heavenly Father chasliseth
them, not willingly, but for their profit, and are persuaded that, all things
shall work together for their good, as they are conscious that they love God.

8. This leads me to mention another particular, never to be separated from the
knowledge of God, which is, the love of God. For so says St. John, love is of
God, and every one that loves is born of God and knows God: He that loves
not knows not God, for God is love. When the Apostle says, God is love, he
means both that God is lovely in himself, and also that he is loving to us. In
his own nature he is amiable, excellent, yea absolutely perfect, and to all the
creature^ he has made, to mankind in particular, he is infinitely gracious and
beneficent: Therefore it is in the nature of things impossible to be acquainted
with so much beauty and goodness, and not to love it. Nor shall our love to
this greatest and best of Beings be merely alove of esteem due to his infinite
perfections, or even a love of desire ^rising from a sense of our want of his
presence and blessing; but over and above this, we shall also love him with a
love of delight. We shall take complacency in his divine attributes, and in
those relations in which he is pleased to stand to us a^ our Father and our
friend, and find our happiness in his favor and fellowship. We shall be able
to adopt the words of Jeremiah saying, The Lord is my portion says my soul,
therefore will I hope in him; or of the Psalmist, The Lord is the los of mine
inheritance, and the portion of my cup: the lines are fallen to me in pleasant
places, yea, I have a goodly heritage.

9. One thing more I shall particularize here as a constant fruit of the
knowledge of God, and that is obedience. For he that says he knows God, and
keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him. So
testifies the beloved Disciple, and also adds, that hereby we know that we know
him, if we keep his commandments. And the same is the most sure and infallible
proof of our love likewise, for this is the love of God, says the same A
postle, that we keep his commandments; and he that has my commandments, and
keeps them (declares the faithful and true witness) he it is that loves me.
So that a conscientious care to keep all the commandments of God, even those
which flesh and blood dislikes most, and to walk in all well-pl^asing before
him from day to day, is a never-failing consequence of our knowledge of God,
and love to him; and then, and only then, shall we not be ushamed of professing
these endowments when we have respect to all his commandments, and keep a
conscience void of offense toward God and toward man.

10. And here I cannot but observe upon the whole, how well the scriptures
guard the knowledge of God (which is only another word for true religion) on
all sides against the false claims which deluded men put in for it from
opposite quarters. The self-righteous Pharisee, who lays his own works of which
he has a mistaken opinion, as the foundation of his acceptance with God, is cu^
off by the two first of the particulars I have mentioned, for he is neither
abased before God for his sins, nor has he an humble confidence in the Divine
mercy. The third of these remarks, shows the emptiness of the Formalist's
boast, whose luke warm heart and trifling spirit testify against him, that he
has not the love of God in him. And as for the Antinomian, who makes void the
law through says, and continues in sin because grace abounds, he finds his
reproof and condemnation in the last particular. For though he says he knows God
(and indeed he has need to say it, for no one would have inferred it from his
life,) yet because he keeps not his commandments, we are sure he is a liar,
and the truth is not in him.

11. From this account of the knowledge of God, and its inseparable effects, it
is easy to see who they are that know him not, and of consequence who they are
upon whom Christ, at his second coming, will take vengeance. They are those who
have no higher and better acquaintance with God, than that which they have
attained by the exercise of their natural faculties and rational powers, in the
consideration of his word and works, having never received the spirit of wisdom
and revelation (as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. i. 17.) in the knowledge of him.
They are those who have indeed heard of God by the hearing of the ear, but have
^ever (as it were) seen him by faith, or been inwardly enlightened with a
discovery of his glorious perfections, and therefore do not abhor themselves,
and repent as in dust and asbes: They are those who do not know God in Christ
reconciling them unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them; and
therefore not being persuaded that he is pacified toward them, after all they
have done, they do not trust in him as a tender Father and a faithful Friend,
in covenant with them through Jesus Christ. They are those who do not behold
with open face (the veil of unbelief being removed) what manner of love the
Father has bestowed upon them, and therefore do not consciously love him, who
has first loved them. They are those, lastly, who perhaps profess to know God,
but by works deny him, not keeping his commandments, or keeping them merely in
external things, and that with reluctance, from a principal of slavish fear, as
though God were an hard master, and obedience to him a task enjoined, which it
would be our interest and happiness to be excused from performing. -- Upon all
such will Christ, when he is revealed, take vengeance.

I now proceed to the other particular mentioned in our text, concerning the
character of those whom our Lord will condemn.

2dly. They obey not the Gospel of Christ.

A few observations on this, will greatly illustrate what has already been
advanced, and enable us still better to judge concerning our true state and
condition. I mean to pursue the same method I did under the former head,
showing positively what is implied in obeying the gospel that we may infer from
thence who they are that disobey it.

1. It will be easily understood what is meant by obeying the gospel, if we
consider what the gospel is. And this may be learnt, in some measure, even from
the original word (translated gospel in the New Testament) which, it is
well-known, signifies good news or glad tidings. Accordingly what is termed
gospel in the 4th of St. Luke, is translated good tidings in the 51st of
Isaiah; and the preachers of the gospel are represented in the same chapters
(ver. 7th) as bringing good tidings, as publishing peace as bringing good
tidings of good, as publishing salvation, This then is the every essence of the
gospel, good tidings or tidings of good, even of peace and salvation, of peace
with God, and salvation from sin and misery. To explain this a little,

2. The gospel brings us tidings of forgiveness of sins and acceptance with
God, of free and full justification, through faith in the Lord Jesus. It allows
indeed, nay testifies, that there is none righteous (by nature) no not one,
that all have sinned and come short of the glory of God, that the whole world
is guilty before God, and that the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against
all the ungodliness and unrighteousness of men. And in consequence of this, it
declares, that by the deeds of the law shall no flesh living be justified in
his sight. But then at the same time it assures us, that God has set forth his
Son to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness
(both his justice and mercy) for the remission of sins that are past, through the
forbearance of God. It affirms, that God was in Christ reconciling the world to
himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them; and that he has committed to
his servants the word of reconciliation. And hence they agree to offer
pardoning mercy to all penitent sinners, and to bear witness, that whosoever
believes on Christ does receive forgiveness of sins; yea, that by him all that
believe are justified from all things, from which they could not be justified
by their own obedience.

3. Hence it appears what it is to obey the gospel in this view of it, as it is
a manifestation of pardoning a^y through a Mediator. It is, 1st. to see and feel
ourselves guilty before God, and therefore to renounce all co^dence in our own
righteousness, from a conviction of its insufficiency for our justification. It
is, 2dly, to apply to the all-sufficient merits of our Redeemer, with p^^tent
hearts, forsaking our sins, and putting our whole trust in him for salvation
present and eternal. It is, 3dly, firmly to believe and appropriate to
ourselves God's gracious promises of pardon and everlasting life made to us for
his sake. This is implied in believing in Christ, and all who thus believe, are
justified by the faith of Christ, and, in this respect, obey the gospel.

4. Indeed we cannot thus believe ourselves; but then for our comfort the
gospel is further a dispensation of the Spirit of God given to work this faith
in us, witness this justification to our souls, and sanctifying our nature, to
restore us to that image of God in which we were originally created. It
supposes that our sins have separated between us and God, and caused him to
hide his face from us, whence we are alienated from the life of God, and even
dead in trespasses and sins. It takes for granted (and well it may, for it is
matter of daily and universal observation, confirmed by experience,) that we
are altogether depraved and polluted through sin, insomuch that every imagination
of the thoughts of our hearts is only evil, and that continually: from which
corrupt fountain the most pernicious streams are perpetually flowing; so that
we are earthly, sensual, and devilish, all our tempers, words, and works being
in direct opposition to the law of God. -- But then, notwithstanding, yea
because of this depravity and ruin of our once pure and perfect nature, and,
with a view to its removal, it informs us that as Christ died for our sins, and
rose (...) for our justification, so being exalted to the Father's right (...),
he has received the promise of the Holy Ghost, which he sheds forth abundanily
on the children of men, inviting all that thirst, yea, and whosoever will, to
come and partake of it.

5. Now this spirit is an universal remedy for all the disorders of our fallen
nature -- Hereby the darkness is removed from our minds, and the hardness from
our hearts; our understanding is enlightened, our will subdued, our assections
set upon things above, and all our unholy tempers and corrupt inclinations
purged away. Hereby we die unto sin, and live unto righteousness; put off the
old man, and put on the new. By this, the divine nature is communicated to us,
and the divine image stamped upon us; we are transformed into the likeness, and
conformed to the will of God. Here wisdom lights her lamp, and from hence love
kindles her fire: This feeds the flames of devotion, and without this, prayer
and praise are cold and languid. By this, the lise of God is opened in the
soul, and the kingdom of God set up in the heart. Being joined to the Lord, we
become one spirit with him, and we dwell in him and he in us. In a word, heaven
is brought down upon earth, and an earnest of our future inheritance is given
us, until the full redemption of the purchased possession.

6. But be it observed, though this spirit more or less enlightens and strives
with all, (as appears not only from scripture, but also from experience, all
men, the most abandoned not excepted, having, at one time or another, felt some
remorse on account of sin, and some desire after holiness) yet in these his
saving influences, he is only imparted to those who follow his drawings, and
comply with his design. For this spirit of light and love does not operate upon
us as if we were inanimate matter, lifeless and inactive, but as rational
creatures, endowed with a power to yield to, or resist his sacred operations.
Accordingly, we are exhorted not to grieve or quench the holy spirit of God, by
opposing his work; but, on the contrary, working with him to mortify the deeds
of the body, that we may live. And living in the spirit, we are further
directed to walk in the spirit, that is, to suffer ourselves to be led by him
into all truth, holiness, and happiness, that we may bring forth all his
blessed fruits, and abound in every holy temper, word and work. -- And this is
the very thing implied in obeying the gospel in this second view of it, as it
is a dispensation of the Spirit.

7. Thus shall we be obedient to the gospel in every other respect. We shall be
delivered (as it were) into the mould of its doctrine^ every feature and (...)
of it being inscribed upon us. We shall revere (...) threai^ings, and steadily
guard against that temper and conduct which would expose us to them. We shall
obey all its commands with ^delity and cheerfulness, rejoicing hereby to show
our love to our glorious Redeemer. We shall cordinally embrace its exceeding
great and precious promises, earnestly desiring and expecting their full
accomplishment. And, in the mean time, we shall calmly, yea and joyfully,
suffer all the obloquy, reproach, and persecution to which our profession may
lay us open, knowing that our reward is great in heaven. Lastly, for this
reward, with all the bliss and glory prepared for the children of God, we shall
patiently wait, longing and looking for the Lord Jesus Christ from heaven, to
put a final period to our time of trial and suffering, and receive us to
himself, that where he is we may be also.

These particulars might have been enlarged upon for the further illustration
of this head; but as this would open up too much matter to be comprised in one
sermon, I beg leave to sum up what has already been advanced by way of enquiry,
and so conclude this plain but interesting Discourse.

1. And I ask thee, then, whosoever thou art that read these lines, Have
thou the foundation of all true religion, do thou know the only true God? Has
he been revealedto thy inmost soul by his holy Spirit in all his divine
perfections? And has this manifestation of him been effectual to transform thee
(in some measure at least) into his image, and render thee a true follower of
God? Has it humbled thy pride and covered thee with shame, scattered thy fears
and inspired thee with considence, destroyed thy idols and united thy heart to
the source of all beauty and goodness? Do thou know him in his holiness and
justice, and art thee convinced of sin? -- In his mercy and love, and art thou
reconciled to him? Has he discovered himself to thee as thy friend, who is
pacified toward thee after all thou have done? As thy Father, who has made
thee his child, and given the^ the spirit of adoption in thy heart? And as thy
God, who has taken thee into covenant with himself, through Christ, and is
become thy portion and treasure in time and in eternity?

2. I ask further, Do thou not only know the only true God, but Jesus Christ
also whom he has sent, the only mediator between God and man, in whom dwells
the fullness of the godhead, and in whom alone there is salvation for a lost
world? In other words, Do thou obey the gospel, and is it become the power of
God to thy salvation? Have thou seen and felt thy absolute need of the
incomparable blessings it offers, free justification through the blood of
Christ, and entire sanctification by the spirit of God? And have thou accounted
tidings of these unsearchable riches of Christ, glad tidings of great joy? Have
thou beheld thyself to be a guilty, helpless perishing firmer, condemned by thy
own conscience, accursed by God's holy law, exposed to his fierce wrath, and
obnoxious to eternal misery? -- In this wretched situation, last thou eagerly
heard, and joyfully believed, the most gracious proclamation of pardon, made by
the Ambassadors of Heaven? Have thou believed in Christ, that thou might be
justified by the faith of Christ? And do^t thou daily evidence the truth of thy
faith by thy works? Professing to be justified by Christ, art thou not sound a
sinner continuing in sin, but being made free from sin, art thou become a
servant to righteousness? Have thou received the Holy Ghost since thou
believedst, and has that spirit of grace enlightened, quickened, and purified
thy soul? Do thou live and walk in the spirit, and is thy conversation such
as becomes the gospel? Do thou walk worthy of the Lord, unto all pleasing,
being fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God?

3. Be it known unto thee, whosoever thou art, of whatever sentiment, of
whatever denomination, of whatever party, if thou can not answer these
questions in the affirmative, if thou do not know God and obey the gospel, as
has been described, thou art at present most certainly one of those upon whom
Christ, when he comes, will take vengeance. But, blessed be God, thou do not
need to remain such. Thou have it in thy power, through the tender mercy of our
God, to acquaint thyself with him and be at peace, that after all, good may
come unto thee. Only let there be no delay: forthwith come out from among the
wicked, be separate, and ^ouch not the unclean thing, and he will receive thee,
and will be a Father unto thee. Draw nigh to God, through Christ, in that new and
living way of faith, which he has consecrated for thee, and he will draw nigh
to thee: he will show thee his glory: will manifest himself to thee as he does
unto the world; and thou shall know him, whom to know is lise eternal, while
the gospel of Christ is the very gate of heaven to thy believing soul.

SERMON III.
2 Thessalonians. i. 7, 8, 9. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his
mighty angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and
obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power.


1. IT is remarkable, that in the account here given us, by the Apostle, of the
revelation of Jesus Christ, and the eternally awful consequences of it, he
represents our Lord's second coming to be rather in order to the salvation of
his own people, than the punishment of the wicked. For though he mentions his
taking vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the gospel, yet it
seems this shall be done, as it were, by the by, since (as he declares in the
10th verse) the end, the principal end of his coming is, that he may be
glorified in his saints, and admired of all that believe.

2. How plain is it from hence, as well as from a thousand other
considerations, that mercy is our Lord's darling attribute, and that judgment
is his strange work. He delights to dispense pardons and confer rewards; but it
is with reluctance that he passes sentence of condemnation, or inflicts
punishment on any. From the Apostle's manner of representing the matter, one
would conclude that he would much rather pass the poor wretches by, did not the
unchangeable perfections of his nature, the divine authority of his laws, and
the unalterable rights of his government, oblige him to take notice of them.
But inasmuch as all his other attributes must be manifested and honored, as
well as his love, his law magnified, and the equity of his government
maintained; therefore he must and will render to every man according to his
works: to them who, by patient continuance in well doing, seek for glory,
honor, and immortality, eternal life; but to them that are contentious, and do
not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath,
tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man who works evil, of the Jew
first, and also of the Gentile, for there is no respect of persons with God. As
certainly as he will account his saints worthy through the worthiness of
Christ, of the kingdom for which they suffer, so certainly, when he is
revealed, with his mighty angels, in flaming fire, will he take vengeance on
them that know not God, and obey not the gospel.

In two former discourses on these words, the certainty and manner of our
Lord's second coming, as also the character of those he will then condemn, have
been particularly considered. I now proceed, as was proposed, to show

III. The nature and duration of their misery. But that we may justify the ways
of God to man, and prevent any abuse which might be made of this doctrine to
the disparagement of the divine goodness, I think it proper to premise a few
words concerning the reason of their condemnation and punishment.

1. This is signified in the words of our text which speak of Christ's "taking
vengeance on them," and "punishing them." The expressions (especially in the
Greck, "(...)," "(...),") intimate an unbecoming and injurious conduct in them
toward God, which being examined into, they now receive the due reward of
their deeds. Enquire we then what their conduct has been, and we shall easily
see the reason of their misery. And here I do not mention their violation of
the law of innocence or covenant of works, made with our first parents before
their fail, because the scripture no where that I remember) represents this as
the cause of the condemnation of any at the day of judgment. But with our Lord,
I observe, This is the condemnation (the reason of the condemnation of those
who perish) that light is come into the world, and men love darkness rather
than light, their deeds being evil. They rejected the council of God against
themselves; they neglected the gospel salvation; they would not come unto
Christ that they might have life; they refused him to reign over them; they
buried (instead of improving) their talent of light and power, slighted the
divine mercy, counted the blood of the coven^ a common thing (i. e. they
trifled with and abused it) and did final despite to the spirit of Grace, and,
there ore, they are condemned; or, in the language of our text, Christ takes
vengeance on them because then knew not God, when they might have known him,
and obeyed not the gospel, whereas they might have been obedient to it. In
plainer words still, he dooms them to everlasting sire; not because he
appointed them to wrath, and decreed their damnation before they were born, but
because he would have saved them, and they would not, choosing death rather than
life, and cursing rather than blessing!

2. And that you may be able to form some idea, (though after all it will be
faint and inadequate) of the divine justice manifested in their punishment,
consider both the conduct of God toward them, and theirs in return toward
him: Consider the love of the Father in giving his only begotten Son, and
exposing him to the most dreadful sufferings and ignominious death for those
wretched sinners, who had abused his mercies, broken his laws, trampled under
foot his authority, and rebelied against his government: Consider the Son of
God emptying himself of his glory and happiness, assuming our frail nature in
its meanest form, and at last submitting to pain and shame in their greatest
extremities; and all this for his bitterest enemies, who slighted his dying
love, refused his mild government, and even embraed their hands in his most
precious blood, or daily crucisied him afresh: Consider the holy Spirit of
grace operating in various ways, and at different times; enlightening,
awakening, convincing; alarming with fear, alluring with hope, drawing with
love; comforting in trouble, strengthening in weakness, succouring in
temptation; and this with a view to beget repentance, faith, and holiness in
the soul, as a spirit of adoption to cry in us "Abba, Father," to seal us to
the day of redemption, and give us an earnest of our future inheritance in our
hearts: Consider him as persisting in these kind offices, notwithstanding all
the neglect, contempt, and contumely wherewith we treat him; notwithstanding we
shut our eyes against his light, stop our ears to his calls, slight his love,
reject his favors, and quench his motions; inviting the most impure lusts and
diabolical tempers, to supply the place of his spiritual graces, and
entertaining the soul fiend of hell in the inmost recesses of our souls, which
should be kept sacred to the heavenly inhabitant. In short, consider the
amazing plan of our redemption from first to last, in all its wonderful
variety, in all its mysteriou^ grace: Consider the abyss of guilt and misery
where it finds us, and from whence it delivers us; the height of bliss and
glory to which it advances us; and in which it establishes us; together with
the astonishing process of divine love in the accomplishment of this great and
good work. In a word, consider the greatness of this salvation provided for us,
and offered to us in the gospel; and then say what punishment, what torment do
they deserve, and from an holy and just God must they meet with, who neglect
and reject it!

3. From a just God I say, for they have doubtless nothing further to expect
from his mercy and goodness. The sun of divine love is now for ever set upon
them. It shone indeed with refulgent brightness during the whole day of life,
though it was never suffered to enlighten their minds or warm their hearts,
clouds of prejudice, exhaled from their sensual souls, obscuring its beams, and
the thick vail of unbelief excluding its light; but it will now shine no more!
It has now resigned them to the scorching fire of divine wrath, which (however
reluctant they may be) will effectually enlighten and warm them; but, ah! with
how different a flame! with how dismal a light! The streams of divine grace,
which long watered their still-barren souls in vain, are now run out, or rather
diverted into a more fruitful soil, and streams of indignation are directed, by
infinite justice, to flow in upon and eternally overwhelm them.

4. Being awakened out of the long sleep of death by the tremendous sound of
the trump of God, they are summoned to appear before the awful tribunal of the
Universal Judge. A great white throne is erected, and he who is the desire of
nations and the joy of angels, sits upon it. His head and his hair are white as
snow, and his eyes as a flame of fire; his feet like unto fine brass, as if
they burned in a furnace, and his voice as the sound of many waters. In his
right hand he carries seven stars, out of his mouth goes a sharp two-edged
sword, and his countenance is as the sun shining in his strength.

"Wherever serene, he turns propitious eyes,
"We find a newly opened paradise,
"But if resentment redden their mild beams,
"The Eden kindles, and the world's in flames;
"On one hand knowledge shines with purest light;
"On one the sword of justice fiercely bright."
Before this glorious person, to whom the father has committed all judgment,
and who has all power in heaven and on earth, trembling and reluctant they
make their appearance, and receive their final sentence at his bar.

5. The books being opened, and every secret thing brought to light, all their
thoughts, words, and works pass in review before him, and undergo a severe
scrutiny. -- And thus all their transgressions and defects being discovered in
all their aggravations, they are recompensed in exact proportion to their
demerits. For since they rejected the sati^faction made by Christ, and there
remains no other sacrifice for sin, divine and infinite justice arrests their
guilty souls, and confines them in the dark prison of hell, till they have
^tisfied all its demands by their personal sufferings, which alas! they can
never do. They must therefore sink forever under the enormous weight of that
dreadful curse; which, with respect to them, Christ bore in vain, and must
reimburse (if I may so speak) by an increased misery, all the expense which
divine goodness has been at with them. The love and mercy which was shown these
wicked wretches, the blood which was shed for them, the grace which was
conferred upon them, shall all be considered, and as they will demonstrate in
the blackest light, their ingratitude and obstinacy, so will they greatly
inhance their condemnation, and aggravate their torment! Having thus manifested
their desert of the punishment provided for them, that it is a debt owed them
by impartial justice and despised mercy, I proceed, as was proposed, to show,

Secondly, The nature and duration of their misery. On this I shall 1st, make
some general observations, by way of explaining the text and establishing the
doctrine.

2dly, I shall take a more particular view of this misery.

3dly, Shall conclude with an carnest address to saints and sinners.

And 1st, I am to make some general observations, by way of explaining the text
and establishing the doctrine.

1. The Apostle calls their misery destruction, by which it is plain he does not
mean "the extinction of their being," or "the annihilation of their nature,"
because this sense of the word is contrary to the general tenor of the
scriptures, which represent the wicked as not only existing after the day of
judgment, but as suffering the most exquisite torture. But by this expression
we are plainly to understand what is infinitely worse than annihilation, viz.
1st, The utter ruin of their once holy and happy nature, with the final death
of all their comforts and their hopes; and 2dly, The entire perversion of all
their powers and faculties, which are now only employed in rendering themselves
most completely wretched. Meaning to enlarge on these two particulars, when I
come to take a nearer view of this misery, I say no more of them at present,
but observe,

2. Their destruction is said to be from the presence of the Lord. This
intimates to us what is the chief source of their ruin and misery, viz. their
banishment from the gracious presence of God, their exclusion from his favor
and fellowship. -- In consequence of original sin, and because they rejected
the garments of salvation, provided by Christ, and offered in the Gospel,
therefore they are found, at the day of judgment destitute of the divine image,
that splendid and comely apparel which is the glory of the holy angels, and
which was once the chief ornament and happiness of man in his primeval state.
The rotten and filthy rags of their own righteousness, which they had taken
pains to patch together and throw over their sinful souls, only serve to
increase their deformity, and manifest still more their sin and shame. They
cannot hide their polution and defilement. In spite of all their endeavors,
they appear polluted with the guilt of innumerable transgressions, and all over
defiled with iniquity, whose fatal leprosy has spread its loathsome influence
throughout their whole souls, and woefully enfeebled all their powers.

3. They are, therefore, objects of divine disapprobation and abhorrence. The
God who made them will not have mercy on them, and be who formed them will show
them no favor. They are excluded the favor of Jehovah, which is better than
life, which diffuses light and joy through the happy regions of immortality, and
banishes every shadow of evil far from their peaceful dwellings. They are
debarred all communion with, and access to, the Father of their spirits, and
the God of all consolation and good hope, who is the only true and lasting
source of feicity to his intelligent off^pring. They are even shut out of the
blissful city, denied all fellowship with saints and angels, and banished far
from the dwellings of liberty and joy, into the dreary territories of misery
and anguish.

4. Thus being immensely removed from all that is holy and happy, and deserted
of the Sun of Righteousness, the light and life of the spiritual world;
midnight darkness overwhelms their minds, a furious storm is raised in their
passions, and wandering about in endless perplexity, and abanioned to
everlasting despair, they are tossed to and fro by the tempestuous hurricanes,
and raging flames of those sulphurous regions; and to complete the ruin of
their once holy and happy nature, the hedge of their souls being broken down (I
mean, the divine protection being withdrawn) they are exposed to the desolating
ravages of the devil and his angels, those wild beasts of the infernal forest,
who ranging forth in these inhospitable realms, overspread with a gloomy and
perpetual night, lay the garden of the Lord utterly waste, and root up and
destroy whatever of excellence may remain.

5. But this phrase -- destruction from the presence of the Lord, may be also
understood in another sense. It seems not only to signify the misery
consequent, in the nature of things, upon their banishment from God's gracious
presence, their separation from faints and angels, and their exclusion out of
the heavenly city (generally termed their punishment, of loss concerning which
I cannot now speak particularly:) It likewise may be considered as intimating,
if it does not chiefly intead, that God himself, as he is present in heaven in
all his love and goodness, as an inexhaustible source of fclicity to his
people, as a never-failing river of pleasure, where they may take large and
repeated draughts of bliss; -- so is he present in hell, in his infinite
jostice and almighty wrath, as an unfathomable sea of liquid fire, where the
wicked must drink in everlasting torture. For as it is the presence of God in
his goodness, which diffuses light and joy through the happy regions of
immortality, so it is the presence of God in his vengeance, which scatters
(...) and woe through the dreary realms of misery. As heaven would be no heaven
if God did not there manifest his love; so bell would be no bell if God did not
there display his wrath. It is the presence and agency of God, which gives
every thing virtue and efficacy, without which there can be no life, no
sensibility, no power. -- God is, therefore, himself present in hell, to see to
the punishment of these rebels against his government, that it may be adequate
to the infinity of their guilt. His fiery indignation kindles, and his incensed
fury blows the flames of their torment, while his powerful presence and
operation maintains their being, and renders all their powers most acutely
sensible; thus setting the keenest edge upon their pain, and making it cut most
intolerably deep!

6. Nay further: it seems implied in the next expression in our text, from the
glory of his power, that he will exert all his divine attributes to the utmost,
to make them as wretched as the capacity of their nature will admit. He will
especially glorify his power, and render it illustrious in their damnation. --
Gladly would be have glorified his rich grace in pardening their complicated
guilt, and his almighty power in restoring them to his image, that they might
have been raised to a share in his throne: But despising his great salvation,
they would not come unto Christ that they might have life. And now, nothing
remains but that he glorify himself in their misery, since they refused that
happiness which he would have conferred upon them, to the manifestation of his
own glory. For he must and will be glorified one way or another in all his
creatures; and with respect to these ungrateful and disobedient wretches, he
has but one way left in which he can be glorified, and that is, to reward them
according to their works, by recompensing their ingratitude and disobedience
upon their own guilty heads.

7. Thus (as the Apostle testifies) Romans 9. while he makes known the riches of
his glory in the vessels of mercy, which he has before prepared unto glory, he
will also show his wrath, and make his power known, in the vessels of wrath,
fitted (by their own wilful and unnecessitated impenitence) for destruction,
after he has first endured them with much long suffering. Show his wrath and
make his power known! dreadful expressions! what an unfathomable depth of woe
do they imply! Ah! miserable creatures, in whom God will show how severely he
can punish, and what a fierce fire of wrath his almighty power can kindle!
Surely as the condition of the saints must be inconceivably joyful, in whom God
will make known (as the Apostle has it) the riches of his glory, i. e. display
how gloriously rich he is in goodness, and to what a pitch of honor and
happiness his omnipotence can raise the objects of his love! so, on the other
hand, the state of these wretches must be equally lamentable! Unhappy
creatures! from what an height of glory and felicity, into what a depth of
infamy and misery have they knowingly and wilfully plunged themselves! And now
"Their dire punishment is ever strong,
"Their constitution too, forever young;
"Gurst with returns of vigor still the same,
"At once to bear and satisfy the flame:
"Still they are caught, and still they are pursued;
"They Yuffer still, and still they are renewed."


8. For the Apostle tells us, their destruction will be eternal; a declaration
which is confirmed by many other passages of Scripture. One or two I shall now
produce as a specimen of the rest. Thus Daniel assures us: They shall (viz. at
the general resurrection) awake to everlasting shame and contempt, even as the
saints shall arise to everlasting life: they shall go away into everlasting
punishment, says the faithful and true witness, even as the righteous shall go
into life eternal. And indeed the eternity of their misery seems a natural
consequence of what has been advanced in the two last paragraphs. For if God
will display in them (as has been observed) the infinity of his justice, the
severity of his wrath, and the omnipotence of his power, then must their
punishment be everlasting, because their nature being finite, it does not
appear how he can do this in any limited duration of time, however long. And
thus what is wanting in the degree of their misery, is made up by its
continuance. And for the same reason, among others, we conclude, the happiness
of the righteous shall be eternal, because in them God will manifest the
infinite riches of his love and goodness, which considering the finite capacity
of their nature, he cannot do in less than a boundless eternity.

9. If need were, I might add in confirmation of this doctrine, disputed by
few, that as the holiness and obedience of the saints, still continue and
increase in heaven, and therefore there must be the same and greater reason for
their being rewarded with bliss and glory, when they have been millions of ages
in happiness, than when they first entered the gates of Paradise; so, the
depravity and disobedience of the wicked still continuing and increasing, there
must be the very same, yea, and greater reason for their punishment, when they
have been millions of ages in torment, than when they first departed accursed
into everlasting fire! They must be perpetually swelling their enormous sum of
guilt, and still running deeper, immensely deeper in debt to divine and
infinite justice; God having as much right to, and as certainly claiming their
obedience in hell, as the obedience of his saints in heaven. For it is, in the
nature of things, impossible he should dispense with the allegiance of any of
his creatures. -- Hence, after the longest imaginable period, they will be so
far from having discharged their debt of punishment, that they will find more,
infinitely more due than when they first began to suffer! Dreadful this indeed!
but too true!

10. Indeed, the comparison drawn from the happiness of the saints, is not
altogether suitable; but alas! the impropriety of it falls on the unfavourable
side, and only strengthens my argument the more. For whatever proofs may be
brought from other quarters in favor of the eternity of their bliss, which do
not equally evince the eternal misery of the wicked; yet, in this point of view
(sure I am) more may be said for the latter than the former. For the righteous,
however obedient, do no more than is their duty to do, and therefore (strictly
speaking) merit nothing at the hand of God. They can make no claim upon his
justice, but all their hopes of happiness and a continuance therein, are
founded upon his gracious promises, which he was free to make or not to make,
as he thought good. -- But the case is different with the wicked; they have
strictly and properly merited or deserved eternal punishment, and are, in fact,
obnoxious to it. And hence their apprehensions of it are founded, not barely on
his threatenings, but also and chiefly on the unchangeable perfections of his
nature. -- So that it appears, if this reasoning is just, they have more than
double that cause for fearing an eternal hell, which the saints have for
expecting an everlasting heaven!

11. (...) reason of the divine conduct in giving them this twofold pro
(arising from his threatenings and the perfections of (...) nature) of a
doctrine which, above all ^^^ers, they hate and wish to disprove, seems to be
his compassion for these infatuated creatures. He means, by this double
battery, to silence their evil reasoning unbelief, which, as an impregnal fort,
defies the whole force of divine truth and too often detains the poor soul a
captive of sin and satan, till the judgment of the great day! May his blessed
spirit give the desired efficacy to these engines, which infinite wisdom has
planted against the perverseness of unthinking men! May they level all the
strong holds of Satan, and bring into captivity every unbelieving sinner to the
obedience of Christ, before sad experience convince them, that in hell the worm
of their anguish dies not, and the fi^e of their misery is not quenched, but
its flame ascends up for ever and ever!

But it would be needless, had I both time and inclination for it, to enter
upon the formal and particular proof of a doctrine which you do not disbelieve,
and therefore I forbear to enlarge on this head. You are (I have reason to
think) fully persuaded, that the torments of hell are eternal, according to the
testimony of Scripture, and of consequence by the destruction mentioned in our
text, we are not to understand the extinction of the being of the wicked, but
(as I said) "the utter ruin of their once holy and happy nature, with the final
death of all their comforts and their hopes, and also the entire perversion of
all their faculties, which are now only employed in adding to their misery, and
rendering them most completely wretched." This would lead me, as was proposed,

2dly, To take a more particular view of their misery in these respects, but as
this is too extensive a subject to be diseassed at present, your time being
gone, I shall defer it to another opportunity, and now conclude with a short
improvement of what has been said, by way of inference and application.

And 1st, We may infer from what has been said, the infatuation and misery of
those who know not God, and obey not the gospel. Whether they promise
themselves an exemption from this eternal destruction, from the presence of the
Lord, and the glory of his power; or whether they flatter themselves it will
not be so dreadful and intolerable as it is represented to be; or whether they
indulge a vain hope of being some time or other released from this infernal
prison, it is evident, if what has been advanced be true, that they are most
miserably blinded by the God of this world, and deceived by the deceitfulness
of sin. -- Oh ye that know not God, and obey not the gospel, we test^fy to you,
upon the authority of the lively oracles of eternal truth, that you are the
very persons who are now exposed to this dreadful storm of divine indignation;
which already gathers black over your guilty heads, and threatens a desolating
downfall of misery and woe! The lowering clouds, surcharged with fiery vapors
of wrath, at the command of incensed justice will, ere long, pour a whole
deluge of ruin upon your perverse and ungrateful souls. Yes, if your speedy
repentance prevent not, upon you, even you, an offended and inexorable God will
rain fire and brimstone, storm and tempest, and this shall be your portion to
drink. Let not then that subtle serpent, in whom you trust, beguile you,
saying, "You shall not surely die;" for as the Lord lives, if you persist to
know not God, and obey not the gospel, you shall surely and eternally die. You
shall drink the very dregs of this cup of trembling and wring them out God is
not a man that he should lie, or the son of man that he should repent. Has he
spoken, and shall he not do it? Has he threatened, and shall he not make it
good? As sure as he is a being of immutable truth and inflexible justice, and
as sure as you have broken his law and rejected his gospel, so sure must you at
the morning of the resurrection awake to everlasting shame and contempt, and at
the day of judgment depart accursed into everlasting fire.

2. And suppose you that the empty and uncertain applause of worms of the
earth, or the vain and momentary pleasures of sin, or the unsatisfactory and
fleeting glitter of golden ore, can recompenfe you for the shame and contempt
which will then overwhelm you with eternal confusion, and that pain and ^nguish
which the scorching and fiery lake will pour like water into your bowels, and
like oil into your bones? Unthinking and deluded mortal! The praises of thy
fellow-sinners will then be turned into insults and hisses, thy cup of pleasure
into a draught of wrath, and thy glittering treasures into fiery streams of
brimstone and torture: Streams these, which will sorever deluge thy desolated
nature; a draught this, which will intoxicate thy soul with eternal horror; and
hisses and insults those, with which, as, with whips and scorpions, the fiends
of hell will perpetually lash thy guilty and self-accusing conscience! Believe
me, my poor fellow-mortal, thou can not, indeed thou can not bear this
devouring fire! Thou can not dwell with these everlasting burnings! If thou
think otherwise, it is because thou have not counted the cost, but have
rashly credited the devil and thy own deceitful heart which were both liars
from the beginning, and have not abode in the truth. They have agreed to make
thee drunk with sensuality and sin, to put out thy eyes, and then to lead thee
blindfold into endless ruin, a ruin from whence thou shall never escape.

3. Oh! think, man, before the intoxicating cup of sin renders thee incapable
of thinking, in what a wretched condition thou art soon likely to be, if divine
grace prevents not! Oh! look, before the God of this world has, closed thy
eyes in eternal darkness, into that tremendous ocean, of fiery and unfathomable
wrath, into which the stream of time will soon hurry thy frail and leaky
vessel! How intolerable and lasting thy misery! Oh! think of eternity; can
thou number the stars in the firmament, the drops of rain or the sand on the
seashore? Make the experiment; and when thou have finished the calculation, fit
down and reckon up the ages of thy woe! And see that thy account be just. Let
every star, every drop, every grain of sand represent one million of tormenting
ages. And when thou have ascertained the sum, know that as many more millions
still remain behind, and yet as many more behind these, and so on without end!
Poor infatuated wretch! My heart bleeds for thee! -- Gladly would I warn thee
that thou come not into this place of torment. Oh! that at length thou would
take warning! Oh! that thou would imitate the example of Noah, who being
warned of God concerning things (...) seen as yet, was moved with fear, and
prepared an ark for the saving of his house.

4. I warn thee, thou unholy and ungodly soul, who do not know God, nor obey
the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, of things not seen as yet: of the glorious
coming of that adorable Savior, whose salvation thou have rejected, whom thou
have refused to reign over thee, and whom, by fin, thou have crucified afresh:
I warn thee of an approaching and inexorable Judge, who (if thou repent not)
will summon thee, with all thy sins about thee, to his bar, and pass an
irreversible sentence upon thee. I warn thee of a descending deluge of divine
and infinite wrath, which will speedily drown an impenitent and unbelieving
world with a fiery and unfathomable sea of misery! I call upon thee without
delay to prepare an ark for the saving of thy soul. Nay, for thy encouragement
I tell thee, the ark is already prepared. The almighty love of God, directed by
infinite wisdom, has prepared it: An ark this, which will defend thee against
all the storms of wrath, and which will bear thee up above all the waves of
misery. Yes, we point thee to that man who is an hiding place from the storm, a
covert from the tempost, as rivers of water in a dry place, and as the shadow
of a great roch in a weary l^^d. We bid thee look to Jesus and be saved!

5. Oh! hide thee, by faith in him, from the wind of temptation and fin; let
his blood sprinkled upon thy guilty conscience, and his righteousness put upon
thy naked soul, cover thee from the tempest of divine indignation: Let his
spirit flowing into thy heart as a river, refresh and water thy scorched and
barren soul, and rest thee under his cooling shade, till the burning sun of
persecution shall go down, and the fiery heat of pain and affliction shall
cease! Flee for refuge to this hope set before thee, and all shall be well. --
Forsake all known sin, use every appointed means of grace, and be also careful
to maintain and excel in good works, but yet rest not there. Oh! tarry not in
all the plain of duty, but escape to this mountain lest thou be consumed. And
thus like just Lot, thou shall be delivered from the common overthrow of the
impenitent and unbelieving, and shall sing the praises of thy Deliverer and
Savior world without end.

SERMON IV.
2 Thessalonians. i. 9. Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord and the glory of his power.


1. HOW infallibly certain, and how astonishingly grand and striking, are the
events presented to our view by the Apostle in this alarming passage of holy
writ! How well worthy the serious attention and devout contemplation of all who
love the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, yea, and of all mankind! And yet
(amazing it is!) they are in general overlooked and disregarded even by those
who profess to be assured of them!

2. The revolutions which are continually happening in the petty states and
fluctuating affairs of this world; the accession of temporal princes to their
transitory dignities and corruptible crowns; the poor and insignificant
conquests obtained by worms of the earth over their fellow-reptiles; the
approach of earthly judges, and the trial, condemnation, and punishment of the
violators of human laws, these are events which short-fighted mortals deem of
consequence enough to occupy their thoughts in private, to employ their tongues
in conversation, and to dignify the annals of history. They think, they talk,
they write of these.

3. In the mean time, the grand revolution of universal nature; the glorious
exaltation of the Prince of the kings of the earth; his complete and
everlasting triumph over principalities and powers, and all the potent enemies
of his government; the coming of the final Judge of angels and of men; the
decisive trial of the whole world at his bar; and the infinite and eternal
rewards and punishments then to be dispensed to immortal souls, united to
incorruptible bodies; -- these subjects, though interesting beyond thought, and
grand beyond comparison, are, alas! too generally treated with indifference and
neglect! These are judged unfit for meditation in secret, lest they should make
us melancholy; unworthy of a place in polite and genteel company, for fear they
should damp their mirth and spoil their pleasure; and sure it is, he who means
to gain either honor or profit by his pen, must take care not to emyloy it on
these dreary and puritanical (not to say methodistical) subjects, for which
this light and airy age has no relish.

4. Blessed be God, that these soul-exalting and heartimproving subjects have
any place left whither to retire! Blessed be God, that they are not yet quite
banished out of the world! They are still (thanks to Divine Providence!)
allowed to remain in our Bibles, and now and then (though not often) to ascend
the pulpit, and give serious instructions to a few of the poor and illiterate,
who are not yet arrived to such a pitch of refinement as (...) think it beneath
them to attend their lectures. But who knows how soon they will be forced from
this their last retreat? Who knows how soon this jovial and licentious age,
will forbid us to mention death and judgment, heaven and hell, even in the
pulpit, and confine us to discourse on subjects which have less tendency to
alarm their sears, and make their minds uneasy? However, as this is not yet the
case, let us not neglect to improve the liberty wherewith we are indulged, and
in pursuance of our subject, let us as was proposed in our last discourse,

Secondly, Take a more particular view of the nature and duration of the misery
of the wicked, as proved and explained in the preceding Sermon.

1. But here I coufess my mind recoils. I feel a sensible reluctance to enter
upon the consideration of so dark and dismal a subject; a subject which yet I
believe very necessary to be considered, and not less profitable. For doubtless
our Lord, and his Apostles, would never recommend such painful meditations to
us, if they were not needful, and calculated to yield us much fruit. To say
nothing of their tendency to restrain us from sin and prompt us to duty, to
excite us to diligence, and awaken our sleepy souls to watchful care and
fearful circumspection; reflections upon that future and eternal misery, which
is reserved for the impenitent and unbelieving sinner, and is the just desert
of us all, may be of great use to increase our patience under all the
afflictions and troubles of this life, so light and momentary in comparison of
it. And, at the same time, to consider this misery in contrast with that
exceeding great and eternal weight of glory, which is the free gift of God
through Jesus Christ, will tend to enlarge our conceptions of that great
salvation which Christ has wrought out for us, and, of consequence, to endear
the Savior to us, to whom we owe our redemption from the curse of the law, and
our deliverance from the wrath to come.

2. Away then with this reluctance! with this "foolish, this treacherous
compassion," (as the benevolent and meek Doddridge calls it,) which chooses
rather to leave men to be consumed, than disturb their slumbers. Let us
seriously address ourselves to the consideration of a subject which, though
dreary and unpromising in appearance, is notwithstanding productive of much
wholesome fruit. Oh, that it may prove such to us all! -- Sorry should I be, by
discoursing on this head, only to torment some of you before the time; and yet,
if you seriously attend to what shall be delivered, and after all still resolve
to remain in your sins, it cannot be expected to produce any other effect. If,
therefore, that is your resolution, if you are not disposed to bid adieu to all
iniquity, and give yourselves up to the service of God without reserve, I would
advise you to withdraw, and forbear hearing a discourse which, while that is
your disposition, can only distress you. Withdraw, however, with this
persuasion, that you are knowingly and wilfully plunging into an abyss of
misery, which you have not courage to open your eyes to behold; and this
thought, if I mistake not, will be as a thorn to disturb your beds of indolence
and pleasure, and as wormwood and gall intermixed with your cups of riot and
excess! Oh, that it may after all rouse you from the one, and make you nanseate
the other, before you make your bed in hell, and drink the flames of endless
torment!

3. In the former discourse on this subject, in which the text was explained
and the doctrine established, it was observed, that the destruction here spoken
of, signified, 1st, The utter ruin of their once holy and happy nature, and the
final death of all their comforts and their hopes; and 2dly, the entire ^sion
of all their powers and faculties, which are n^w only employed in dishonouring
God, and rendering themselves most completely wretched.

Let us enlarge on these two particulars, and then, as was proposed, 3dly,
earnestly address both saints and sinners, on this important subject. And 1st,
their once holy and happy nature is now utterly ruined, and all their comforts
and hopes finally dea*

1. Indeed their holiness and happiness was in reality lost in this world, though
not irrecoverably. Even here, where the true light enlighteneth every man that
comes into the world, they were unholy and unhappy, depra^ed by sin and
immersed in misery, but they knew it not. Being laid fast asleep by the opiates
of Satan (which are sin) and amused by many pleasing dreams of worldly vanity,
invented in great variety to employ and entertain them, they wist not what had
befallen them. But intoxicated with the enchanting cup of pleasure, and in the
midst of their midnight slumbers, though plunged in the filth of iniquity, and
fast bound by gigantic lusts, they talked much of the purity of their nature,
the freedom of their will, and the light and liberty in which they walked. --
Though the Devil's captives, confined by him in the prison of sin, bolted and
barred by unbelief, and in the territories of hell; yet were they as easy and
unconcerned, as if they imagined themselves to be possessed of all possible
honor and felicity.

2. At times, indeed, the stormy blast of adversity, the painful smart of
affliction, or the thunder of God's threatenings, disturbed their repose, and
almost awakened (...) ^py souls: but another draught of Satan's cup ^ying their
senses, and the agreeable song of "Peace, peace," sounding in their ears,
lulled them to sleep again, while sin silently doubled their fetters and chains
and unbelief, stopping up every avenue of divine light, added fresh locks and
bolts to their prison doors. -- And now they sleep more securely, and dream
more ^^adly than ever. -- No sooner do they end one dream than they begin
another. Scenes of business and amusement continually open one behind the back
of another, that they may not awake out of their fatal slumber, till the
of^cers of divine justice break open their infernal prison, and bring them
forth by death for execution, when the time of their probation being ended, the
things which make for their peace are forever hid from their eyes.

3. Then their sleeping and dreaming end together. They suddenly awake to a
most keen and dreadful sense of the ruin of their nature, and the final death
of all their comforts and their hopes. -- They now feel in a manner words
cannot describe, from what an height of holiness and happiness, into what a
depth of guilt and misery they are fallen -- Destitute of their maker's image,
and confounded at the discovery of their nakedness and deformity, they fly from
the presence of the light, and the sight of saints and angels, now intolerable;
and o'erwhelmed with shame and everlasting contempt, seek for refuge from the
anguish they suffer under the shades of infernal darkness. But alas! the flames
of hell, though black and dismal, afford light enough to demonstrate their
folly and depravity, while the arrows of almighty indignation, prepared by
inexorable justice, and directed by unerring wisdom, pursue and overtake them,
and piercing them through with unknown sorrows, lay them low at the bottom of the
fiery lake, which, fed with streams of brimstone, and blown by the breath of
Jehovah, swells, overflows, and torments their ruined souls.

4. Their once holy and happy nature is now ruined, utterly and finally ruined,
without any remedy, or the most distant hope of recovery. Their frail vessels,
though built of the best materials, yet corrupted by the worm of sin, being
conveyed by the ebb of time, down the smooth river of life, are now hurried,
beyond the bar of death into the fiery and unfathomable sea of divine wrath. In
this most tempestuous ocean, tossed by the furious winds of almighty
indignation, upon the raging billows of insupportable torment, they suffer a
speedy and an eternal shipwreck. Dashed upon the rocks of ruin, or swallowed up
in the gulf of despair, they are entirely lost; and not one broken piece of
holiness or happiness remains, nor so much as a single plank of hope, upon
which they may expect, though after millions of ages, to escape to some land of
rest. But, -- "The hopeless soul,
"Bound to the bottom of the flaming pool,
"Though loath, and ever loud-blaspheming, owns
"'It Is justly doomed to pour eternal groans;
"To talk to fiery tempests, and implore
"The raging flame to give its fury over;
"To writhe, to toss, to pant beneath its load,
"And bear the weight of an offended God."
And now they have no sleepy opiates to make them forget, for one moment, their
misery; no amusement to divert their attention from their intolerable pain, and
no consolation left to lighten, in any degree, the dreadful weight of their
sufferings!

5. In their most distressing situation here, some alleviating circumstances
rendered their affliction tolerable. -- Some remaining good, in part relieved
them under their greatest losses; some cordial, timely administered, supported
them under their severest troubles, and some sympathising friend, kindly
interposing, took a share of their cares upon himself, and helped them to bear
the burden of their woe. Or if these things all failed, and they were reduced
to the very extremity of distress, yet even then hope, flattering hope, which
in this world "Springs eternal in the human breast," Darting a ray of comfort
through the gloom, prevented their case from becoming desperate. But now there is
the reverse of all this. All, all is lost, entirely lost, and nothing of good
remains! Every possible evil has befallen them, and with every possible
circumstance of aggravation! No condoling friend lightens their load of sorrow!
No beam of hope promises any advantageous change! But on the contrary,
tormenting fiends and malicious spirits add to their weight of sufferings, by
cruel upbraidings, and black despair, hovering over their desponding souls,
flaps his raven wings and foretells an eternity of woe! In those "Regions of
sorrow, doleful shades, where joy,
"Where peace can never come, hope never comes,
"That comes to all; but torment without end
"Still urges, and a fiery deluge fed,
"With ever-burning sulphur unconsum'd."


But farther (if we have courage to venture further into these dreary
territories of the prince of darkness) the destruction spoken of in our text
implies,

2dly, The entire perversion of all their faculties, so that they serve only to
increase their torment and render them most completely wretched. Let us
consider them briefly and in order.

1. The imagination, freed from every clog, wherewith its motions were once
impeded, when it was incumbered by flesh and blood, being now rendered quick
and active as a disembodied spirit, is perpetually traversing, with incredible
speed and unwearied diligence, the gloomy regions of Hell in quest of woe. And
having collected together every consideration of horror, it clothes them all in
the most hideous forms, and thereby keeps the poor affrighted soul in continual
terror and dismay. -- The understanding, cleared of al^ the mists of ignorance,
and fumes of prejudice, wherewith it was obscured in this world, and now
discerning every thing in its true light, is ever unhappily busied in comparing
the joys of heaven with the torments of hell, and contrasting the happiness
they have lost, with the misery they have incurred. It remonstrates, in terms
which wound and pierce their inmost souls, upon their ingratitude, folly and
perverseness, in rejecting a felicity so valuable in itself, so dearly bought,
and so freely and repeatedly offered; while in contradiction to reason, to
duty, and interest; against the clearest light and the greatest love;
notwithstanding the most solemn warnings and earnest entreaties, the
exhortations, prayers, tears, and blood of the Son of God himself, they
knowingly and wilfully plunged into a depth of woe, from whence there is no
redemption.

2. In this work of torment, the understanding receives no small assistance
from the memory, now strengthened to an amazing degree. This faculty brings in
review their whole life, and presents to the active mind an endless variety of
circumstances, which only tend, like oil poured into the fire, to feed the
flames of their misery, and make then burn with more unabating sury. -- It
reminds them, on the one hand, of the many and undeserved mercies of a kind
Creator, a patient Preserver and a gracious Redeemer, which might have warmed
the coldest breast with servant gratitude and love, and on the other, of the
various and alarming judgments executed by the righteous governor of the world,
for the terror of evil doers, which might have broken in pieces the most rocky
and adamantine heart. But their breasts re^^ined, after all, still cold (...)
ice, and their hearts hard as a nether millstone. It brings to their
remembrance the superintending care of a kind and watchful Providence, which
perpetually and wisely ordered all for their good, removed their hindrances,
afforded them helps, and put them in the most favorable circumstances for
their restoration. But they perversely, by a diabolical skill in spiritual
chemistry, extracted a bitter out of every sweet, turned their helps into
hindrances and their good into evil!

3. By the help of the memory they recollect the many free and gracious offers
of reconcilation which were made them by the Ambassadors of Christ, accompanied
with repeated and pressing invitations, to accept those offers and faithful
warnings of approaching misery if they neglected them. They remember how all
these were, time after time, attended by the influences of the spirit,
disposing their minds to consider and improve them. At times they were inclined
to comply, and almost persuaded to be Christians, especially when an alarming
providence, cut off by a sudden and unexpected stroke, some relation or dear
friend, or laid an heavy hand of affliction upon themselves; But alas! some
hurry of idle business occupied their minds, some phantom of empty applause
engaged their pursuit, some intoxicating draught of the cup of pleasure,
unhappily taken, drowned their convictions, or some frothy company or vain
amusement, diverted the^ attention from the one thing needful! And thus they
have forever lost that exceeding great and eternal weight of glory, which they
had once so fair an opportunity of attaining, and sunk into an unfathomable
depth of woe, out of which there is no deliverance!

4. In the mean time conscience is not idle. Once indeed "She seemed to sleep
"On rose and myrtle, lulled with siren song:
"Once she seemed, nodding over her charge, to drop
"On headlong appetite the slackened rein,
"And gave them up to license unrecall'd."
But it was all deceit. Even then she registered all their thoughts, and words,
and works, and kept a faithful and circumstantial account of their whole
conduct. No temper of mind, no action of life escaped her observation; but "The
sly informer noted every fault,
"And ^^r dread diary with horror filled:
"Unnotic'd marked each moment misapplied
"On leave^ more durable than those of brass:
"Wrote their whole history, which now she reads
"In every pale delinquent's private ear."
For being no longer bribed by sin, nor stupefied by excess, conscience now
^ells them the truth, the whole truth, and that in accents most dreadfully
severe, from which they can no longer turn away their ears.

5. They are now obliged to hearken, however reluctant, to the tormenting
history which conscience minutely gives them, of the fabbaths they have broken,
the ordinances they have profaned, the oaths they have swore, the lies they
have told, the acts of uncleanness, intemperance, fraud, and oppression they
have committed, the mercies they have abused, the judgments they have slighted.
She gives them a partioular detail of all the instances of their ingratitude
and disobedience to him, who was at once their most indulgent parent and
bountiful benefactor; and enlarges much upon their hypocrify before an
heart-searching God, their formality in the worship of him who is a spirit, and
their lukewarmness in the pursuit of immortal honor and eternal gain. In
short, this long-neglected, and now implacably revengeful power, perpetually
holds out to their view the glass of God's holy law, which confounds and
torments them with the discovery of their filthiness and deformity. Look which
way they will their sins, the children of their folly, summoned by conscience,
in all their number and aggravations, dressed in the most frightful forms, and
armed with the most dreadful instruments of torture, stare them in the face
with looks of vengeance, and fly upon them with insatiable fury. Thus like an
infernal fiend, she lashes their souls with whips and scorpions, while as a
worm she gnaws and consumes their inwards, or like an hungry vulture preys upon
and devours their undecaying vitals.

6. And if the rational faculties, the most noble of our nature, are thus busy
in executing upon them the indignation and wrath of an offended God, for their
depravation and abuse of those faculties, surely the inferior powers, which are
but servants to the superior, will not be suffered to remain unemployed. -- The
passions have a considerable share in this work of vengeance assigned them, and
that justly, for they bear a chief part in soliciting man to sin. Indeed, some
of the passions, which imply happiness in their very nature, such as esteem,
and hope, and joy, never visit these dreary regions, but take up their abode in
purer climes, and under the influence of a milder sky. But all those which sin
has debauched and made pregnant with woe, are banished to these inhospitable
realms, far from the dwellings of light and liberty, where they are continually
employed in digging deep into mines of misery, and forming of hellish metal
instruments of punishment, wherewith to torture damaed spirits.

7. Thus those unhappy creatures feel insatiable desires after objects
infinitely and eternally removed from them, while to objects ever present and
before them, they have an infinite hatred and an unconquerable aversion. A
deluge of remediless sorrow perpetually overwhelms them on account of the
torment they already suffer; but as if they suffered nothing in comparison of
what was yet to come, they are ever terrified with the most dreadful fear of
unknown waves of woe, which they see continually rising in tremendous
mountains, one behind another, and ready to burst upon their hopeless soul with
a fresh flood of affliction!

8. And, ah! what they suffer from the mortification of their pride, and the
everlasting shame and contempt wherewith they are loaded! Proud as Lucifer,
they deem themselves worthy of the highest dignity, when behold! they are sunk
to the lowest point of degradation, and only noticed to be hissed and despised.
Hence they fret, rave, and tear; they swell with resentment and rage toward
God and one another. The rancour which boils in their breasts vents itself in
revengeful looks, horrid imprecations, and impotent efforts of disappointed
cruelty. Discontent, restless and impatient; anger, loud and boisterous; envy,
pale and ghastly; malice, implacable and fierce; In short, all the passions
(capable of misery) like so many dogs of hell, let loose and enraged, at the
beck of the prince of darkness and his malicious crew, with infernal howlings
and barking rage, surround, attack, and rend their wretched souls, crying out
for help in vain, with piteous wailings and loud laments! Such is "Woe's wide
empire, where deep troubles toss,
"Loud sorrows howl, envenomed passions bite;
"Ravenous calamities their vitals seize,
"And threatening fate wide opens to devaur."


9. What has hitherto been said, refers only to the misery arising from the
abused and corrupted faculties of their souls; but I must not forget to
mention, on this occasion, the sufferings peculiar to the bodies, wherewith the
wicked will be punished at the morning of the resurrection. -- And here, to say
nothing of that siery lake, to the bottom of which they will be chained by
despised mercy, converted into inexorable wrath, and which surrounds their
whole body with its scorching flames, and insinuates itself like water into
their bowels, and like oil into their bones: All their senses, which were
formerly excitements to lusts and inlets to sin, together with all their
members, employed on earth as instruments of iniquity, are now, by the
appointment of insinite justice, become inlets to misery, and instruments of
punishment. Their eyes, accustomed to behold scenes of pleasure and objects of
delight, are now terrified with the sight of hideous forms and frightful
shapes. Their ears, wont to be entertained with wanton songs and melodious
music, are now shocked with doleful groans, lamentable shrieks, and horrible
howlings. Their nostrils, formerly revived with fragrant odours and rich
perfumes, are now offended with the intolerable stench of sulphur and
rottenness, while their taste, used to be regaled with the most generous wines
and richest dainties, is now tormented with the mauseousness of brimstone and
putrefaction. In the mean time, their hands, their feet, their heads, their
hearts, their whole body, in short, with all its members, shares in the woe,
and contributes to the punishment of these miserable wretches. Thus "All those
powers heaven gave them to supply
"Their soul with pleasure, and bring in their joy,
"Rise up in arms, against them join the foe,
"Sense, reason, memory, ^ucrease their woe;
"And there their voice, ordained on hymns to dwell,
"Corrupts to groans, and blows the flames of hell;
"There they must look with terror on their gain,
"And with existence only measure pain."


10. Such is the destruction where with Christ, when he comes, will recompense
those who know not God and obey not the gospel, I mean, this is a faint picture
of it. For as to their misery itself, so far have I been, while attempting to
describe it, from dipping my pencil in too deep colors, that the whole
creation affords none deep enough to represent a thousandth part of its
greatness. For as eye has not seen, nor car heard, neither has it ener ed
into the heart of man to conceive what God has prepar^d for those who love
him; so the same may we affirm concerning the torments reserved for those who
hate him. Eye has not se^m, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the
heart of man to conceive these: our most enlarged conceptions fall infinitely
short of them. However, we see enough of them (one would suppose) to awaken our
fear, and arm our souls with watchful care to avoid them.

11. This is the end I have had in view, in discoursing on this disagreeable
subject. I mean hereby, through the grace of God, to prevent your ever sharing
these unknown sufferings and proving, to your eternal sorrow, how infinitely my
description falls short of their reality. And that I may not miss my aim, I beg
leave to address you a moment by way of application and improvement, before I
conclude. -- Indeed, there is the more necessity of doing this, not only lest
Satan (who is never wanting to seek occasion against us) should render this
bitter medicine ineffectual, intermixing it with counter-working ingredients of
his own, and so should defeat the salutary purpose intended in administering
it; but likewise, lest he should turn it into downright poison. For be assured,
ye that know not God, and obey not the gospel, if what has been advanced is not
instrumental in bringing you to repentance, it must tend to harden you in sin,
and fit you as a vessel of wrath, for containing a greater degree of this
misery. If it is not a savor of life unto life, it must be a savor of death
unto death, to you.

1. Let me then, 1st, exhort you, whoever you are, to enquire ere yet it be too
late, whether you are exposed to this eternal destruction from the presence of
the Lord. Doubtless, you are (if the oracles of divine truth are to be cre
dited) while you know not God and obey not the gospel; while this is the state
of your souls, you are perpetually liable to all the unknown and unfathomable
horrors of eternal misery. Yes, this great gulf which Christ and his apostles
have unveiled to your view, and advised you to cast a look toward, before you
plunge headlong into it, where there is "Darkness on darkness, hell
"On hell, where torments behind torments dwell."
This abyss of misery, beneath your very feet as it were, "Expands its jaws how
dreadful to survey!
"And roars outrageous for its destined prey."
Ah, my friends! be not so childish as to think the ba^e shutting your eyes
against its dismal gloom, piere'd with shafted lightning, and streaked with
spiry flames, will make it cease to exist, prevent your falling into its depth
of horrors, or render it in any degree the more tolerable. As well might you
think to extinguish the sun by closing your eyes, or to avoid a cannon ball by
looking another way. You may indeed turn away your sight from this perdition,
fix your attention on some more agreeable subject, and so avoid the present
pain which such reflections, might produce. But alas! you will gain little by
this; for to shun the consideration of this misery now is the way to continue
in sin and suffer it eternally hereafter.

2. And will thou then shut thine eyes and leap wilfully and obstinately into
ruin? Ah finner, thinks what thou do! And have thou then counted the cost?
Can thou indeed bear this devouring fire which yet will not consume thee?
Can thou dwell with these everlasting burnings, for which thou will be the
everlasting fuel, where "Thy torment must transe end
"The reach of time, despair a distant end,
"With dreadful growth shoot forward and wise
"Where thought cannot follow and bo^d fancy dies."
Poor unhappy wretch! how infatuated must thou bed -- If thy mind was not
totally blinded by the God of this world, and thy very senses drenched in
sensuality, and stupefied by the opiates of sin, if thou had any power of
discerning or feeling left, I would ask thee how thou could bear to be
suddenly stripped of all thy earthly poslessions, totally deserted of all thy
friends arrested by merciless creditors, confined in a dark dungeon, loaded
with heavy irons; and in this condition, starving with hunger and cold, and
destitute of every necessary accommodation and attendance, to be visited with
torturing pain or some loathsome disease? Sure thou have love enough for thy
money, thy credit, thy friends, thy liberty, thy health, and in fine, thy life,
to see that all these calamities befalling thee at once, would be indeed
intolerable, to thee (at least) who have no interest in God and heaven. But
surely thou do not think that all these calamities put together, and ten
thousand timesmore a^nd greater can give an adequate representation of that
dolefulp^ace, which infinite wisdom has contrived almighty power prepared, and
inexorable justice destined for the punishment of incorrigible transgressors?

3. Believe me, all the evils thou have ever beheld with thine eyes, heard with
thine ears, or conceived in thy heart, nay, all that thou could ever
conceive, if thou wast to spend an eternity in doing nothing else, but devising
forms of woe and changes of misery, if all collected together and appointed to
befall thy wretched self in one moment of time, would not furnish thee with an
adequate idea of that future and everlasting ruin, in which (if thy speedy
repentance prevent not) thou must ere long, list up thy ghastly eyes, begging
in vain for a drop of water to cool thy tongue, because thou will be tormented
in that flame. -- And then, Eternity! Eternity! ah, to spend a never-ending
eternity in such anguish! To be "ages and ages, and succeeding still new ages,"
westering in that lake of fire, burning with brimstone, and after millions of
ages are past and gone, still to have the wretched consolation of thinking that
thy misery is no nearer an end, but all, as it were, to begin again! Ah! who
can bear even to think of this! The very thought of such woe is enough to make
one's blood run chill, and fill one's soul with horror! It is enough to make
one's head giddy with fear, to look down that dark and fiery pit into which
poor sinners are perpetually plunging, blinded and insensible, till the
penetrating fire make them feel, and the glaring flames of Tophet open their
eyes to behold themselves undone for ever!

4. Ah! flee sinner! flee from this wrath to come! -- But stay, and first
falling down on thy knees, solemnly praise God, that it is not yet too late.
Thank him from thy inmost soul, that he has not yet cut thee down, and assigned
thee thy portion in this place of torment! Bless the riches of that goodness
and forbearance and longsuffering, which have so long permitted thee to live,
and waited to lead thee to true repentance! But oh! dare not, at the peril of
thy soul, tempt it any longer! -- Do not persist to provoke that fierce and
almighty wrath which thy sins have already kindled against thee, and which (had
not the precious blood of Christ been poured upon the flame) would long, ere
now, have utterly consumed thy unholy soul, and made thee a monument of
vengeance to others! Do not, I say, persist to provoke an angry God, lest
Christ should cease to interpose, and his fiery indignation should, in an
instant, blast all thy hopes, and devour thee as his adversary! Oh! beware!
after thy hardness and impenitent heart, of treasuring up unto thyself wrath
against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God!
Consider how many years the Lord Christ has already interceded for thy barren
soul, Let him alone this year also. But alas! hitherto he has prevailed in vain
for thy reprieve, for to this day thou have borne no good fruit. Still, still
thou art only a cumberer of the ground! And who knows whether he has not
already put up the last prayer for thee, and commissioned me by these terrors
of the almighty, to dig for the last time about thy roots! -- If thou bear
fruit it is well, but if not, if even this earthquake of God's judgments do not
shake thee; if after this Christ come seeking fruit on thee and find none, what
remains but that he say, Let no fruit grow on thee from henceforth and forever,
or, Cut it down, why cumbereth it the ground.

5. Therefore, delay no longer, but while thy glass of time is not yet run out;
while the sun of divine love is not yet gone down upon thee; while the
long-suffering of God the Father still waits to be gracious; while the
compassionate friend of sinners still intercedes for thee; while the
ever-blessed Spirit is not yet provoked to bid thee an eternal adieu, but still
continues to strive with thee; -- in short, while there is yet any hope
concerning thee among the blessed Inhabitants of heaven, that thou may,
after all, be saved; or any fear concerning thee, among the fiends of hell,
lest after all thou should escape that place of torment; before the door of
salvation is forever shut against thee, before yawning Tophet has devoured and
closed its mouth upon thee. -- Flee, sinner I flee; at the peril of thy soul,
flee! -- But whence and whither shall thou flee! Flee from thy sins, thy
lukewarmness, thy unbelief; flee to Calvary, to the Cross, to Jesus; flee to
the fountain opened in his side, to the blood and water which issue thence, and
arise, wash away thy sins, calling on the name of the Lord. Apply by faith his
blood, his merit, to thy guilty conscience; receive by faith the sanctifying
graces of his spirit. Embrace and ever hold fast the blessed hope of
everlasting life. Let thy conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ.
Thus believe, and show thy faith by thy works, and as sure as he is the
resurrection and the life, so sure though thou wast dead, yet shall thou live,
and living and believing in him shall not die eternally.

FINIS

