AN ORATION.

AN ORATION, DELIVERED IN THE BENEVOLENT CONGREGATIONAL MEETING HOUSE, ON THE
FOURTH OF JULY, A. D. 1797, IN COMMEMORATION OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

BY GEORGE R. BURRILL, ESQUIRE

Ecce Spectaculum dignum! PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.

PROVIDENCE: PRINTED BY CARTER AND WILKINSON, AND SOLD AT THEIR BOOK-STORE 1797.

AN ORATION.
FELLOW-CITIZENS,
ON this day is exhibited, throughout the United States, a new and interesting
spectacle -- a great and enlightened people assembled to celebrate their
freedom and independence* and to commemorate the day which rendered them free
and independent. It was that event which fulfilled the prophetic hopes of
patriots, poets and philosophers, in elder times. It is that spectacle which
they desired to behold, but could not. They beheld in deed from the
mountain-top, and afar off, the promised scene; but to enter upon it, to take a
nearer view of the sublime and glorious spectacle, and to participate in the
feelings and joys of that highly favored people, was forbidden: a broad and
impassable gulf, the immaturity of events, separated them from that felicity
which has been reserved for us. Yet they sung and prophesied the certain advent
of this day. They scattered in silence, but in confidence, the seeds of truth,
liberty and glory. They saw their labors successively flourish, mature, and
scatter their seed with increase of a thousand fold; and seeing, exulted in the
persuasion, that though the harvest might not be theirs, it was sure and
certain. The germ thus planted in secret, spread and communicated, till the
world was full of its influence, and expected the moment when the desire of
nations should be accomplished. But who should step forth the vindicator of
man, and become the ma^k, and perhaps the victim, of confederated despotism?
Impatient of further wrongs, and alarmed at the insatiable and continued
encroachments of British power upon their dear and boasted privileges, the
United States of America, on the Fourth day of July, 1776, declared themselves
free and independent. This was the glorious consummation, prophesied, hoped
for, labored for. To the world it was a day of incalculable importance.
Empires had risen, and had fallen: these events however were not the concern
and cause of the people, but of their masters. but this was the cause of man,
and interested the feelings of mankind. Every fondest hope, every trembling
anxiety, every ardent wish and fervent prayer, rushed to that point as the
blood to the heart. The talisman had been touched, and the shock was felt and
answered through the universe. That day was a great era in the history of man;
it was to decide the question between the people and their oppressors; upon the
turning of the balance depended, whether Liberty should quench her torch in the
ocean, or whether it should burn forever; whether she should dwell with men, or
fly to her wonted caves, and hide herself in her deep recesses. To the
immediate actors it was a day of inexpressible anxiety. Unpractised in policy
and blood, their hands and their exertions had been employed in domestic
offices, and in the arts of peace. Her gentle voice alone had echoed in their
fields; their ears could not endure the discordant clarion of war; they
shuddered at the prospect of burning cities, and fields empurpled with kindred
blood. How could they meet the onset of British valor and discipline? where
were the resources to balance the British treasury? The heart strings of
ancient loyalty were burst by a separation from the once honored
mother country, the birthplace of their fathers. But the dread resolution had
passed; the eyes and the hopes of mankind were upon them: it was shameful to
look back, it was dangerous to proceed. Before them was the power of an ancient
and formidable kingdom, instigated by thirst of domination, and encouraged by
community of cause with the powers and potentates of the earth. The prospect
was blackened with the revulsion of man to accumulated bondage, the renovation
of ancient abuses, the extinction of hope, and the curse of disappointed
humanity. But hope lighted their way, and the remembrance of former wrongs
strengthened their hands, and fortified their bosoms. The emancipation of a
world, the termination of the minority, and the completion of the full age of
mankind, the name of the eldest-born of freedom, brighter suns, unclouded skies
and fairer fields, were the prize -- heavier chains and deeper dungeons were
the forfeit!

That day, so desirable, so important, so pregnant with events, we now
celebrate. It is indeed no ordinary occasion. As every thing until the
fulfillment of all hope is but secondary at most, so afterward it is even less.
The sun has risen today, and will set; but such another occasion mankind never
have celebrated, and never will celebrate. We see that day, we enjoy those
privileges, so much and so long desired; for the attainment of which so much
labor has been sustained, so many miseries have been endured, and so much
blood has been shed. How little do they who have always enjoyed the high
privileges of the free, know how to esteem them. Many of us, who now sport in
the pavilion of freedom, hardly know how, or by whom, it was raised. Many of
this assembly, who have borne their part in the successful struggle, now repose
in the shade of their laurels, and enjoy the reward of their labors. But how
many are they who have opposed their breasts to the battle, who have toiled,
hungered, thirsted and sorrowed, and at last perished in the cause; who never
tasted the rest provided for the well-deserving; who fell while the conflict
was doubtful; who heard not the shout of victory, and died in the bitter
apprehension that their country might yet be enslaved. How great the price
which they have paid for this. They sleep almost forgotten in the earth. They
taste not of the festivity of this day. They are not with us, to behold their
children in the possession of all earthly good. Let us not run heedlessly over
their graves, but remember them in our joy with a holy and grateful
remembrance. The birth of a prince, and the coronation of a king, have
heretofore been celebrated with clamorous mirth; but the present occasion,
exciting more pure, dignified and consolatory feelings, demands expressions
correspondently decent and dignified. Our annual incense arises to the God of
harvest, the giver of peace and prosperity; let this be our annual thanksgiving
to the God of Liberty, and therein, of every good and every perfect gift.

The United States have indeed established their freedom and independence. They
have given a lesson to nations, worthy of imitation, and which they shall
follow, as they attain to the degree of preparation necessary to profit by it.
They will require new examples as they advance, and require them of their first
instructors. They will claim a share in the hoarded experience of those who
have gone before them. The attainment of independence is but the beginning of
labor, and the foretaste of its blessings; to secure and preserve it, is the
toilsome consummation. The prejudice of the age is not an adherence to ancient
institutions; it is rather a passion for novelty and improvement. This passion,
which operates so universally, finds an inexhaustible subject in government, in
systems of policy, and hypothetical constitutions. It would well become the
American people, as they have shown mankind the way to freedom, to teach them
how to use and to enjoy it; to continue still foremost in the course of
political improvement, to light as well as to lead the way, and produce the
first model of a perfect form of government. The Constitution of the United
States operating upon subjects of general administration, is a great point
gained in this flattering purpose. It has refuted its enemies, and satisfied
its warmest advocates; and without driving them to abstruse disquisitions upon
its properties, has enabled them to refer their opponents to its manifest
consequences, and to their own experience and consciousness, for its
vindication. But the Constitution of the United States extends not to the
particular and internal policy of the individual States; though the force, the
purity, the beauty and efficacy of its operation, depend upon the perfection of
that particular and internal policy. If the State governments, which are the
fountains of the general government, are corrupt, the representation from the
States, which is the stream, and the general government, which is the great
reservoir, will also be corrupt. The fountain should therefore be kept pure,
and this is not merely a concern of the State, but of the United States.
Something better than a void, or at most an imaginary Constitution, was to have
been expected from the State of Rhode Island. We inhabit a crazy and
comfortless mansion, shaken by the winds, and pervaded by the storm. The
materials are around us, of a stable, commodious and magnificent edifice, such
an one as might invite the stranger to dwell in it, and be honored and
imitated by distant people. The foundation is laid in the independence of our
country; let the superstructure, the Constitution, perfected from the models of
our sister States* and the experience of our own numberless necessities, be
raised and fixed upon it. The small extent of territory in the State, will
render unnecessary that complexity which is found in the Constitutions of most
States. In fine, we might enjoy a Constitution, more simple, efficacious and
cheap, than that of any other free government.

But if, in a representative government, the greater number of the people
choose only the minority, and the smaller number choose the majority of the
Legislature, how shall a Constitution, or a change in the Constitution, be
effected? Equal representation in such a case will be the consequence of a
Constitution, and will deprive this majority of that precious power, of which
men are so tenacious, and which, when they are once in possession of it, they
will strive to render perpetual. To petition this Legislature for equal
representation, is to require the majority to surrender their power, a
requisition which it is not in human nature to grant. But is this evil to be
perpetual? Is there not in every free government the principle of amendment and
accommodation, a radical health-giving principle, a natural Constitution,
paramount to all positive institutions? If there is not, there may then be, in
a given case, a free people, who neither are nor ever can be governed by their
representatives; and the government, thus corrupt and absurd, may exist with
all its errors and abuses for ever -- exhibiting this paradox, a free,
sovereign and independent people, desirous of changing their form of
government, without the power of doing it. This power is certainly to be found
somewhere. Such a perpetuity is absurd and repugnant. The power exists in the
State, and in every free State, and that of necessity, and independently of any
human provision. Representation always supposes proportion. An hundred
inhabitants in one place cannot be represented by one man, while an equal
number in another place are represented by ten men. Either, in the first
instance, there are ninety who are not represented; or there are, in the second
instance, nine persons in the Legislature who represent nobody. Such a
disproportion always constitutes a tyranny, active or dormant, and severe or
not, according as the disproportion is great or small. The minority, and their
constituents, are absolutely in the power of the majority. If this
disproportion may consistently exist in any degree, however small, the
principle is admitted, and it may exist in any degree, however great. It is
certainly impossible to justify such a government in the understandings of that
minority, or their constituents. It is absurd to maintain, that the people are
free in a despotic government, or that the government may be so constructed, as
that it never can alter or improve, and that its errors and abuses must be
perpetual. Yet this doctrine, so absurd, so repugnant and contradictory, has
found its advocates. If there is any convenience or advantage in equal
representation, it becomes a right, and rights are equally sacred, and to
withhold them is equal injustice, whatever may be the subject to which they
relate, whether pecuniary or political. To withhold this right, may be the
triumph of petty ambition, the jest of those who trifle with justice, and
indifferent to those waxen consciences which may be molded to every feature of
circumstance; but to the upright and liberal mind, and public spirit, it is
matter of serious concern, and, measured on the scale of moral justice, it is a
high-handed wrong.

The whole Constitution of a free government is not a positive institution,
neither is it or can it be written upon paper. No machinery can destroy the
force of gravity, neither is there need of machinery to precipitate bodies to
the earth. No law can make that right, which is morally wrong. As in natural
philosophy and in morals, so also in government, there are certain fixed and
unchangeable maxims, which enter into the very essence of it, which no written
Constitution can vary, or needs, or ought, to explain or declare. The existence
of this Constitution paramount is so true, that there can be no free government
where it is not acknowledged. It is the rectifying principle, which enables
government to effect the purposes of its institution. It is like the operations
of nature, which in the natural body repair the waste of age, disorder and
injurious impressions. When these operations are weakened, the body decays;
when they cease, the body is dead. It is the standard and regulator of every
function, continually correcting and improving. Whenever any authority
supersedes the Constitution paramount, that authority becomes absolute power.
In a free government, no majority, even among the people, who alone are the
makers of the written Constitution, can prevail against it. The power of such a
majority, is but the power of the strongest, and not a legitimate or
constitutional power. Much less can the Legislature, to which even the written
Constitution gives law, control the Constitution paramount, to which all other
authority is subordinate. Whenever a court of law exceeds its jurisdiction, the
judgment is illegal and void, and the ministerial officer executes it at his
peril. All laws enacted by the Legislature contrary to the Constitution, are
also void, and not binding upon the court of law or the citizen. In like
manner, whenever the written Constitution contravenes the Constitution
paramount, or in other words the principles and immutable maxims of free
government, it is void. Rebellion therefore, or resistance to law and order, is
not to be imputed to those who maintain this supreme authority, although they
act in opposition to a written Constitution, because, wherever the two
authorities interfere, the subordinate is void, and must give place to the
supreme authority. Still less can the charge be alleged, where there is no
written Constitution, or where it was never ratified by the people, but imposed
on them by an authority which they have in the most solemn manner renounced.
Equal representation is involved in the very idea of a free government; it is
accordingly, and consequently* provided by the Constitution paramount, that
every citizen shall be represented. When and how this equal representation
shall operate, is left to the written Constitution to provide; but that it
shall operate, is already provided for by the Constitution paramount.
Resistance to this supreme authority, is that act of domestic violence, against
which the government of the United States is to protect the individual States.

There are three principal branches in government; that is to say, the makers
of the written Constitution, the lawmakers, and the administrators of the law;
or, in other words, the people, the Legislature, and the courts of law. All
other branches are collateral and ministerial. The making of the Constitution
paramount is no act of government; it always exists; it is the immediate work
of God, and a part of nature itself. These three branches are distinct and
separate. A court of justice cannot create a Legislature, or enact a law, since
it exists after the law, is created by the law, and acts under it. Neither can
the Legislature create a Constitution, since the Legislature itself is the
creature of the written Constitution, is posterior and subordinate to it. The
court of justice cannot judge of the necessity of passing a law, or dictate
when or how it shall be made. Neither can the Legislature judge of the
necessity of forming a Constitution, or dictate when or how it shall be formed.
To the court is referred to pronounce judgment, to the Legislature the enacting
of laws, and to the people the forming of a Constitution, and to each distinct
branch, every question appertaining to its respective function. In petitioning
the Legislature therefore for a Constitution, we are guilty of deserting from
principle, and of abandoning our rights. We might as well petition the Superior
Court for a law. The question is referred to an incompetent tribunal. It is
coram non judice. The determination of it rests with the people. It is that
sole and transcendent act of authority which resides in the people, and that
not by representation, but personally and numerically. The Convention which
forms the Constitution, is but a Committee of the People. This is a
jurisdiction which cannot be transferred. The exercise of it is the resumption
of delegated power, and a recurrence to the elements of government.

From every light in which we can view a free republican government, it seems
to follow incontestibly, that an inherent perpetuity in the form of it, is
abhorrent and repugnant; that it must contain within itself the principles and
means of amendment and accommodation; and that these purposes are effected, by
an acknowledgment of the existence of the Constitution paramount, and of the
exclusive jurisdiction of the people, in all questions relating to a
Constitution.

These are subjects which have lately occupied your thoughts and feelings: but
at present, a subject of more importance, even as the existence of your
independence is more important than the form in which it shall be enjoyed,
obtrudes itself upon you, in common with your fellow-citizens of the United
States. Though we inhabit a crazy and comfortless mansion, it beho^es us rather
to see first of all that it is our own, and that we are not merely tenants by
sufferance, than to concern ourselves with the form, or even the conveniences
of it. An overbearing claim, inconsistent with our title, and the professions
of the claimants, is made upon our independence.

How is the sacred name of Liberty* that name which should scarcely be
pronounced but with uplifted eyes, profaned and abused! It fills the mouths of
millions, who little understand its high import. There is a charm in the sound,
which delights the heart, but eludes the understanding. It is not a blind
madness, which lets loose the infuriate passions; it is not a Moloch, pleased
with the worship of the crimson altar, and rioting in the blood of the human
victim: it is a guarded, collected and restraining spirit; moderate, though
firm; and gentle, though impracticable. The enjoyment of liberty is not for
all, at all times. It is an instrument, too delicate for a clumsy performer; it
is safe only in the master-hand. To distinguish between the boundaries of
rational liberty, and mad licentiousness, requires a temperature of soul, and a
preparation of sentiment, which they only possess, who have long considered the
question, and rendered the subject familiar. Bursting from the darkness of
ancient abuses, into the full splendor of liberty, the eye is dazzled, and the
object is lost in the new effulgence. There is large room to suspect, that
though the French nation have undergone the severest discipline, they have not
yet acquired this necessary preparation. They long pursued a visionary phantom,
dressed in the garb and bearing the name of liberty; a spirit of darkness, in
the semblance of an angel of light, which abused them to damn them. But the
rending of the veil discovered their ancient despotism, returned and reinstated
with accumulated horrors. Yet the time of this delusion was considered as the
reign of freedom; the whole nation pursued the dancing meteor; liberty was the
theme of every song, and the only object of their adoration. In the
intoxication of the moment, their hands were bound with chains unseen. A new
convulsion effected their release, and now again they worship the unknown
goddess. The period which shall decide, whether they are yet to obtain the
knowledge and fruition of their object, or whether they are to be scourged back
to their former oppression, is not yet arrived. It has become a serious doubt,
whether the French government are in fact, according to their professions, the
friends of universal liberty, struggling solely for their rights and
privileges, or whether they are not rather the enemies of liberty, striving for
universal dominion. Encouraged by the victorious progress of their arms, the
possession of unwonted power, and the facility with which they have penetrated
and directed the councils of certain states in Europe, they have attempted the
councils of the United States, and the integrity of public opinion. Secret
influence and corruption have been employed, to detach the people from the
government, and the government from the interest of the nation; that, divided
and weakened, we might more easily receive the impressions of foreign politics.
The success of these artifices was truly alarming. How great must have been the
perversion, when the interest of our country was but a secondary object; when
the proceedings of our government were measured on the scale of French
politics, and reprobated or approved, as they thwarted or accorded with the
views of the French government; when the tried patriots of our country, not
excepting even the late President, had become objects of suspicion and
shameless obloquy, and when the name of an American seemed forgotten in the
contest for European interests. But the great body of the people of the United
States, awake to the advantages of peace and neutrality, have had the wisdom to
shun the approach of foreign influence, and the virtue to give their rulers
credit for the purest motives and the wisest measures, both in regard to the
interest and honor of the nation, and in most perilous and critical
circumstances.

The machinations of secret influence having been detected and exposed, the
French government have not abandoned their object, but have come forth in a
more open and dictatorial manner. They have prescribed the most humiliating, as
the only terms, upon which they will receive the Minister from the United
States. They have driven him from among them, as though he was not the
representative of a great, a brave, and a high-spirited people; as though he
had no wrongs to complain of, or his nation no power, or no spirit to resent
them. When from the fear of offending a foreign nation, any one measure shall
be adopted or rejected -- when one hand more or one hand less shall be held up,
we are more or less a dependent people. When at the requisition of any foreign
nation, we shall have violated the faith of treaties, and abrogated the solemn
acts of our general Legislature -- when we shall have extended our complaisance
even to the administration of our laws, and reversed the decrees of our
judicial courts, what remains? what form or shadow of independence can we
boast? Though we may say that we are independent, though we may even think so,
and though there may be no visible force at hand to control us, yet we are
from that moment a subjugated people. There is equal reason for a second
instance of compliance, as for the first; and when we shall have complied in
two instances, we shall have relinquished all right to refuse a third. We shall
have become a cheap and an easy conquest. It would be vain to resist invincible
power, but we should certainly know what degree of power is employed against
us. Let us at least receive one volley, before we throw down our arms. The
first attempt at usurpation, whether limited or extensive, is pregnant with the
principle, and demands unequivocal resistance. The American stamp act itself,
which set the British monarchy in a flame, might have been so modified and
employed, as to have answered many beneficial purposes: but the power which
might impose a stamp act, might have imposed any other act; and submission to
that badge of servitude, was a surrender of every thing. It is difficult to
discern the object, it is impossible to foretell the issue, of the injuries to
the citizens, and indignities to the government of the United States, which the
French government are in the habit of offering: it becomes us, however, to
resolve that we will know the issue of it, and to prepare for it, whatever it
may be; to rally round the common standard, to exert the ancient unanimity and
resolution, and in celebrating our independence, to resolve that we will be
independent. The shades of our departed heroes speak from the ground -- or if
already in possession of their merited beatitude, look from their seats above,
and take a part in the various considerations of this day. They bare their
bosoms, marked with many scars, and conjure their countrymen, by the wounds,
the toils, and the sorrows which they endured, to preserve unimpaired that
liberty for which they have paid so great a price; nothing less than life, its
hopes and prospects, the light of heaven, and the converse of men; nay more,
the enjoyment and participation of that liberty. Are they of so little account,
have they fought and died in vain, is the purchase of eight years war to be
tamely relinquished, and have not we in these days the spirit to maintain the
acquisitions of their valor? Is this to be one in the miserable catalogue of
nations, who have suffered the net to be drawn over them, and submitted to the
officious guardianship of republican ambition? Trust not to kings, nor people,
nor monarchies, nor republics; for all are men, and subject to like passions.
Your dependence is on your own arm, and the unconquerable mind. Ask favor of
the conflagration which prostrates your cities in ruin, and of the wind which
provokes it; but ask it not of nations burning with ambition, and thirst of
power. This devouring and inextinguishable flame rages in the bosom of man, and
consumes the obligations of friendship, gratitude and humanity. The
emancipation of a kingdom, is not the regeneration of man; his heart finds no
change, he is still the same being, only his power is increased, and his
ambition more excited.

Though in the convulsions which rend the world, the United States have
suffered in their property, their feelings, and their national dignity, yet we
have abundant reason to congratulate ourselves that we are yet at peace, that
the government and people of the United States are one, having one object and
one interest, neither seeking for unconstitutional power on the one part, nor
fearing it on the other; but above all, that we are yet free and independent.
The increasing unanimity in the United States augurs well to the common cause,
and though the wisdom, the virtues and vigilance of our late beloved and
illustrious President, are withdrawn from the immediate service of his country,
yet its honor and safety are well confided to the hands of his enlightened and
patriotic successor.

In our own State, we are authorized to expect a speedy revision of the laws.
The urgency and benefit of the measure, will ensure its completion. The
long-neglected militia of the State, has assumed a respectability which may vie
with the military establishments of neighboring States, and under the
protection and encouragement which the officers have been accustomed to
receive, and probably will continue to receive from the Executive, in the
energetic and impartial execution of the militia laws, we may flatter
ourselves, that the State of Rhode Island will be among the first to evince a
readiness to answer the calls of our country, and the earnest recommendations
of the President of the United States. But what confidence, what honest pride,
what hope and what determination, must every spectator feel, at the brilliant
display of military discipline and promptitude, this day presented. While
speaking of our country's wrongs, we behold her vindicators; while deprecating
the horrors of war, we behold her defenders. How honorable and how prudent is
it, to provide in peace for the exigencies of war; for, like death, it comes at
an hour we think not of.

The privileges and resources of this country are too great to be abandoned,
and too well understood to be in danger of it. Every attempt upon our
independence, whether secret or open, will be detected and resisted. We will
hold the flaming sword at the gate of our Eden, and guard the Tree of Life from
the assaults of the Adversary. This, we trust, is not the last anniversary of
their independence, which the citizens of the United States will celebrate. The
friend of freedom and of man shall on this day shed annual tears of unspeakable
joy; his secret but inviolable oath shall on this day be annually renewed, and
the Day be celebrated and hallowed forever.

Finis.

