SOLITUDE and SOCIETY contrasted.

AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED AT THE ANNUAL MEETING OF THE PHILOLOGICAL SOCIETY, IN
MIDDLEBOROUGH, ON WEDNESDAY, THE 7th OF JUNE, 1797.

By TRISTAM BURGES, A. B.

Nemo adeo ferus est, ut non mitescere possit,
Si modo culturae patientem commodet aurem.
Q. H. FLACCIUS. PROVIDENCE: Printed by CARTER and WILKINSON. M,DCC,XCVII.

At a Meeting of the Philological Society, June 7, 1797.
Voted, That Nathaniel Morton, Esquire Dr. Thomas Sturtevant, and Nehemiah Cobb,
Esquire be a committee to wait on Mr. Tristam Burges, and present him with the
thanks of this Society for the Oration by him pronounced to them this day; and
request of him a copy of the same for the press.

Attest. THOMAS BENNET, Rec. Sec'ry.

GENTLEMEN,
I feel myself honored by the request of the Philological Society; and do
therefore deliver to them the copy which they have solicited.

TRISTAM BURGES.

AN ORATION.
Each loves itself, but not itself alone.
POPE. Great Nature spoke, observant men obeyed,
Cities were built, societies were made.
POPE.
DIFFIDENCE ever troubles its possessor. It gives him most perplexity when he
perceives himself the object of public attention. The orator must feel
extremely anxious while he beholds a numerous audience, whose concourse, whose
countenances, whose very eyes, seem to mark him out as the source of their
present amusement.

Besides this inconvenience, common to all public speakers, he, who now
addresses you, has peculiar embarrassments. His theme is appropriate: he must
speak on the nature of society. This subject is far from being the most
brilliant. It does not glitter with the splendor of military achievement; nor
is it shaded by the bays of academic fame. Might the fields of nature and art
be ranged, themes could be found, whose native beauty would eclipse the want of
embellishment, and lure the approbation of an audience, in defiance of every
oratorial imperfection.

In addition to this, he cannot feel that ardour of occasion which inspires the
orator of some important era. We this day celebrate the birth of the
Philological Society. The duration of this society is but short; the number of
its members is yet but small. The anniversary of its institution, therefore,
cannot be an event which very extensively interests the world. It is not like
the celebration of conquests and revolutions, where the splendor of triumphal
heroism arrests the attention of gazing millions; or where the recollection of
national emancipation hurries the soul into ecstasy, and drives the loud echo of
acclamation round the sky.

Before this day have you listened with silent admiration to the oratorial
allurements of those, who, on similar occasions, have appeared in this place.
After them, to gain applause, to please, or even to pass without censure, must
require all the powers of eloquence.

Forgive me, then, my fellow-citizens, if, trembling with diffidenee, on such a
theme, on such an occasion, and after such predecessors, I attempt to amuse
you, by a short delineation of the evils and benefits of social intercourse.

We were nurtured in the bosom of society, and are, therefore, quite
incompetent judges of the goods, or ills, of a state of solitude. Let us,
however, for a moment, banish hereditary prejudice, and contemplate the goods
of solitude, in contrast with the ills of society; we can then better determine
why man forsook the solitary state, and mingled with his fellow-man.

The solitary man has entire fruition of natural liberty. He is arbiter of his
own actions. He knows no other law than that which the hand of nature has
inscribed on the pages of his own mind. Instructed by this, he takes without
fear or control that portion of heaven's munifactions which the wants of his
nature require. He draws the fish from any lake; lures the beasts and birds of
any grove; plucks the fruits and flowers of any heath, and slakes his thirst at
the crystal wave of any gliding stream.

This liberty must be dear to man; for the very child bursts into tears at the
first approach of control; and men draw their swords, fight, bleed, and die
for freedom. Indeed, heaven has vivified the human breast with a certain spirit
which spurns at the approach of subjugation, and bids its possessor do homage
to no being but his God.

This native liberty, though dear to man, must be immerged in the tide of
social intercourse. Man there relinquishes that freedom, which made him lord of
his own actions; and learns to obey the dictates of extraneous sovereignty. He
exchanges the umpirage of his own controversies, the vindication of his own
wrongs, for the tardy decisions of social opinion, and the lingering
reparations of public justice. For his share of the undivided earth, he accepts
that narrow portion of land, which the laws of his country have deigned to
assign him. While a mere citizen of the world, he was no where a stranger, no
where a foreigner; but, when he throws off the allegiance of nature, he
instantly becomes an alien, an outcast, a barbarian, in every land but his own.

A nearer view of the several kinds of society, will give their peculiar evils
a more striking appearance.

The first society, perhaps, was conjugal. This is not entirely exempt from
evils. The domestic state is a state of cares and perplexities. These
perplexities irritate the mind, and excite contentions between the fondest
partners. Contentions are sharpened by reiteration; till mutual hatred corrodes
those hearts, which, before, nurtured the softest passions; and reciprocal
reproaches echo from tongues, once invoking the ear of heaven to witness the
tenderness of mutual attachment.

Human imperfections soon blast the unlimited confidence of nuptial lovers. We
fear to lose the objects of our fondness; and that fear originates suspicions
of infidelity. Trifling accidents convert those suspicions into jealousy, and
jealousy plants a thorn in every path, infuses a bitter in every cup of life.

But had this passion been forever unknown, and had contention never disturbed
domestic happiness, still would mankind have felt enough of conjugal
infelicity. It is a sad truth, that the ills attendant on the objects of our
love, are felt with a severity equal to our own. Wedlock gives its partners
each another self, equally the subject of misfortune; and thus unhappily
doubles the sources of human wretchedness. Care for the health, education and
prosperity of children, perpetually throw the minds of parents on a rack of
anxiety. These cares and attachments, softening and dilating the heart, expose
it as a mark broader and more vulnerable to the arrows of calamity.

All these evils are peculiar to the social state. The votary of solitude shall
never feel them. He, by accident, meets the counterpart of his nature in some
sequestered grove. That God, who gave them hearts attuned to the emotions of
sympathy, with a smile of approbation joins their hands. Short is the duration
of their social intercourse; too short for evils to disturb the concert of
their bliss. Contention and reproach stand afar from their happy grove, and the
black fang of jealousy never wounds their tender bosoms. The next day's sun
beholds them, separately, roving on their native hills. Their offspring, like
his parents, is the offspring of nature. Nourished from the bosom of his
mother, and fed on the unsolicited growths of the earth, he soon becomes
independent of parental aid; and, like the mountain roe, -- "Forsaken the dam's
warm side;
"Bounds over the lawn, or seeks the dewy glade;
"And finds a home in each delightful shade."


Civil society succeeded conjugal. This his given birth to many calamities. Men
were no sooner collected, than they felt the consequences of aggregation. Power
produced ambition and avidity: and these impelled men to war and rapine. United
invention supplied them with arms; they swiftly advanced beyond the line of
justice; while crimson carnage, and pale devastation, stalked behind them
through the land. Slavery and despotism were the effects of conquest. These
calamities have been nurtured by those causes which brought them into the
world; and every species of society has been tormented by them, since first old
Nimrod collected a nation of robbers, and, by the tie of common wickedness,
united those whom God had scattered over the face of the earth. Yes, from that
fatal era to the present moment, the hand of tyranny has shaken the iron
scepter of slavery and oppression over the prostrate nations. Through Afric's
sultry realms, over Asia's fertile plains, and back to the icy regions of the
north, we now behold the forlorn inhabitant the unresisting slave of lawless
sovereignty.

Even where tyranny is banished; where the empire of laws is established, still
oppression cannot be entirely excluded. No code of general laws can equally
embrace the multifarious rights of variously circumstanced individuals. Some
rights must be left undefined, and without defense. This is one source of
oppression. Though judges are learned, and attentive, and unprejudiced, yet
still will human imbecility often betray them into error. In such cases the
unfortunate object of their decisions is entirely ruined. He has lost even the
privilege of complaining, that last sad consolation of the wretched. This,
then, is another source of oppression. If judges are ignorant, or partial, or
perfidious, the weight of a single bribe may turn the scale of justice, and
condemn innocence itself to the scaffold. Is not this another source of
oppression? And are not war, slavery and oppression, fearful calamities? Surely
they are.

These also are calamities peculiar to the social state. Man in solitude has
neither the means, motives, nor disposition, necessary for war. No hostile
weapons glitter in his hands; no neighbor's field offers a rich harvest to his
rapacity; and no ambitious thirst for glory has learned his soul to sigh for
martial devastation. He calls no man master. The yoke of vassalage has never
bent his neck; he has not felt the scourge of oppression; nor ever trembled at
the austere frowns of tyranny. Awed by no menace, controuled by no command, he
passes through the world; and, as he goes, he sets his foot on that spot of
earth which most delights him.

Men had no sooner felt the evils of civil and conjugal society, than they
sighed for relief from these calamities. To remedy the inconveniences of these
establishments, and to advance themselves nearer to their God, they formed a
combination, which they called ecclesiastical. This, however it may have
removed the ills of the other kinds of society, has been so managed, as to be
productive of many calamities of its own.

The church has preached, that God had promised never to forsake any who stand
within the pales of nominal righteousness. A most exuberant licentiousness has
been produced by this one article of faith. Those, who call themselves saints,
have dared to transgress with greediness; because their creed had taught them,
that they could not transgress beyond the reach of mercy.

A right to sell indulgences has been another article of ecclesiastic
combination. This, while it has encouraged wickedness, has, by gratifying
avidity, produced a most enormous avarice. So great has been this thirst for
gain, that the same ecclesiastic, who fulminated damnation at the sinner, has
commenced auctioneer, and publicly sold absolution for every species of
wickedness.

By thus amassing wealth, the church soon became powerful. She then shut the
doors of honor and emolument; she barred the gates of heaven, and unsheathed
the dreadful sword of persecution, against all who refused to join her family,
or dared to withdraw themselves from her communion. What though the wretched
object of her resentment may have escaped the ax, the rack, and the flames;
yet, feared with the dreadful bolt of excommunication, he stands the forlorn
outcast of earth and heaven. Human cunning could never have devised a scheme
more productive of hypocrisy. For, while admission to the church offers men all
they desire; while exclusion from it exposes them to all they fear; they will
be constrained to profess a belief in doctrines, which they never believed, and
to promise the practice of virtues, which they never intend to practice.

To all these calamities the solitary man is a stranger. No avarice bids him
lure a brother into wickedness; and no fell ambition tempts him to hide the
movements of his heart behind the curtain of hypocrisy. Though he has no page
of scripture but the hook of creation; no object of adoration but nature's God;
yet is his soul not void of faith, nor uncharmed by the smiles of devotion. He
believes his Creator gives the woods their verdure, and the birds their songs.
He views the sun traveling through the fields of heaven, and calls him the
messenger of God. When the stars look from the blue battlements of the sky, and
the serene majesty of midnight awes the world into stillness, his soul falls
prostrate before that power who bids the wheels of nature roll in silence, and
lull his children to repose.

Such are the goods of solitude. Such are the evils of society. If, then,
social intercourse has given birth to domestic contention, jealousy, and
anxious care; if it has originated war, slavery and oppression; if it has been
the source of avarice, licentiousness and hypocrisy, why did man, forsaking his
native liberty, native pleasures, and native religion, mingle with his fellow
man, and expose himself to all these calamities? A solution of this
interrogation induces a necessity of contemplating the disposition of man, and
his condition in the present state of things, together with a few of the
benefits of social intercourse.

Man has an irresistible propensity to associate with his fellow beings. He
endures nothing with more pain than he endures solitude. When alone, his heart
is sad; and the clouds of melancholy settle on his countenance. This propensity
is too violent to be allured by any solitary pleasure, or restrained by the
anticipation of any social calamity. To throw himself into the arms of society,
man leaves his native solitude, barters his unviolated liberty, and encounters
all the hazard, toil and danger of social intercourse. If, then, it be enquired
why men associate, each one of us has an answer in his own bosom. It is not
because in solitude we are destitute, fearful and defenseless; it is because we
are social beings: we love to congregate.

More association, then, aside from all consequential benefits, affords man a
high degree of gratification. It makes him happy, by removing the pain of,
solitude; it makes him happy, by gratifying a wish, of all the most impatient.
If, therefore, man received no other good from society than merely the
gratification of this one propensity, it would more than compensate the loss of
solitary good; more than balance the acquisition of every social evil. If, in
addition to this, we view the beneficent consequences of associating, we shall
find they afford all which man can reasonably expect or desire. For his nature
forbids him to expect unsullied greatness of mind; nor can his condition afford
him complete and inviolable felicity; because reason and folly, virtue and
frailty, good and evil, are united, and travel through the world as the
companions of man. The best, therefore, which he can do, is to improve his
reason, and retrench his folly; to confirm his virtue, and guard against
frailty; and to follow that road through life which affords the most benefits,
and is infested by the smallest number of inconveniences.

Social intercourse we say is this road; because it produces the highest
improvement of man's faculties, together with the greatest number of
enjoyments. How society can do this, is now the subject of enquiry.

Society, by multiplying his wants, calls into action the industry and
invention of man; and thus enables him to produce all the great works of
utility and ornament. Men had not long been collected, before they felt the
necessity of increasing the productions of the soil. While a tribe was
scattered over a thousand hills, the fruit of those hills supplied them with
food; but when the same number drew themselves within the limits of one valley,
or pitched their tents on the face of one plain, their narrow territory left
half its inhabitants unsupplied with provisions. This want immediately evinced
the necessity of soliciting from the earth, by labor, those productions which
she would not yield spontaneously. Here was the origin of agriculture. Men
removed the rock, extirpated the oak, plowed up the plain, and clothed the
field in the livery of harvest. All this could not be performed without the aid
of machinery.

The mine must be dug, the forge must be raised, the smith must blow the
coals and swing the sounding hammer, before the ax, the plowshare and the
scythe, could brighten in the hand of labor. The same wants, therefore, which
originated agriculture, originated all those arts necessary for its practice.

Men, enriched by their toil, were not long contented with those habitations
which subserved their wants, while they roved the woods in a state of
indigence. They pulled up their tents, demolished their cottages, and erected
buildings more durable and elegant. Here architecture had its origin. But
architecture, without auxiliary arts, could not have erected the magnificent
palace. Without the sawyer, the carpenter and the statuary, the arched rafter
had never left its native hill; the pine's rough trunk would always have
inveloped the polished cieling; and the marble column had forever slept in the
quarry, nor raised its white capital to heave aloft the gilded dome.

Nations had not advanced thus far in wealth, arts and refinement, without
feeling wants which they could not satisfy by the productions of their own
climate. They, therefore, began to exchange their own superfluities for the
conveniences and elegancies of foreigners. To perform this commercial
intercourse, caravans traveled the desert, and ships sailed over the ocean.
These journeys and voyages introduced the necessity of new inventions and new
labor. The section of an oak, by thunder splintered from its parent trunk, and
thrown floating down on the bosom of a stream, doubtless first suggested to man
the possibility of journeying over the waves. From this rude hint, to form a
ship, with all its appendages of cordage and sails, required much toil, much
invention, and the united productions of many arts. The brake, the wheel and
the loom, must employ the hand of industry; the ax, the saw and the hammer,
must be heard to resound in the forest, before the oak of the mountain, hewn
into a keel, shall cleave the seas; before the hemp, now green in the field,
shall, twisted into cables, hold the ship against the fury of the tempest; or,
spread out in sails, collect the winds, and hurry the fleet over the ocean.

After the production of all these wonders in the ways of art, we shall,
doubtless, find man advanced to an elevated grade of improvement in his reason,
his taste, his passions, and in the disposition of his heart. The perfection of
all these depends on his connection with the sciences; and the sciences sprang
from the practice of those arts, which we have traced up to their source among
the wants originated by social intercourse. We had never known the philosophy
of animal, vegetable and fossil productions, had not that knowledge been
connected with the gratification of our thirst and hunger. The arcana of
mathematics had never been explored, if commerce had not rendered its
investigation necessary. The first botanist, therefore, doubtless was a farmer;
the first chemist, a blacksmith; and the merchant and sailor first discovered
and applied arithmetic, astronomy and navigation.

These rude essays opened the avenues of philosophy, and disclosed on the mind
a region of science, where reason, by exercising her powers, has acquired
almost inconceivable acuteness and energy, in all her operations. By forming
society, men produced the necessity of government and laws. These afforded a
new field for the exercise of reason; in which the philosophy of morals and
jurisprudence offered new subjects of contemplation, which gave additional
force and subtlety to the exertions of the mind.

The improvement of taste is so closely connected with the improvement of
reason, that what perfects the one, may be considered as the cause of
perfection to the other. The same social necessities, therefore, which,
originating the sciences, gave reason its improvement, have refined taste into
an accurate standard of decision in all the arts of ornament; and by this means
furnished the mind with pure sources of exquisite delight. Taste has thus
become the unerring director of the architect, painter, statuary and poet; and
while it has guided the hand of the artist, it has taught the ear to listen
with pleasure to the melody of the poem, and learned the eye to gaze with
rapture on the teints of the picture, the expressive features of the statue,
and the sublime grandeur of the palace.

The improvement of taste and reason refines the passions. Besides this, their
refinement is an immediate consequence of social intercourse. Society, by
producing new relations, gives us new objects of attachment, and raises in the
heart new passions, more tender, more generous, and more prolific of delight.
In society men commence citizens, neighbors, friends, parents, children,
brothers; and, united by these cords of affection, their hearts vibrate in
harmonious unison with the emotions of patriotism, friendship, parental, filial
and fraternal fondness.

The very exercise of these passions meliorates and improves the disposition of
the heart. This improvement is advanced still farther by gratitude and
benevolence. These are grafted on that mutual dependence which springs up in
society, as its native soil. In society no one is independent. For while a man,
in one respect, has the power of granting relief, in another, he himself may
need assistance. Reason, therefore, directs every man to benevolence; because
every man knows he may be an object of it. He is also impelled to it by
compassion; because compassion renders him wretched until he grants relief to
him who solicits his charity. Gratitude is a kind of counterpart to
benevolence. It is the offspring of that gladness of heart which we feel on the
reception of a favor; and which very naturally induces a wish to reward our
benefactor with reciprocal kindness. Gratitude, therefore, as well as reason
and compassion, urges men to benevolence, that most exalted of all human
virtues, which elevates us to a resemblance of Deity, and qualifies our souls
for ineffable fruition.

All these improvements are produced by social intercourse. For without social
intercourse, men's wants had never been increased beyond the spontaneous
productions of the earth; without these wants, labor had not been excited, nor
invention called into activity; without the exercise of labor and invention,
there had been no cultivated fields, no fruitful orchards, no ornamented
gardens, no lofty palaces, no hallowed temples, no magnificent cities, no
commerce traveling the desert, or sailing the ocean, to pour the wealth of one
climate into the bosom of another; without any of all these, there had been no
science, no improvement of reason, no perfection of taste, no refinement of
passions, no benevolence of heart; but the world, to this moment, had remained
an undivided wilderness; and man, solitary man, had roamed on the desolate
mountains, with no other social amusement than howling at the stillness of
midnight, and listening to the dismal responses of echo.

If, therefore, all these improvements of mind, all these advancements in the
arts of utility and ornament, are produced by social intercourse, may we not
say, that social intercourse offers men the greatest number of enjoyments? Do
we derive no felicity from the fine arts, from knowledge, and from refinement
of feelings? Is no pleasure felt while we listen to the strains of music; while
we read the majestic numbers of poetry, or while we gaze on the landscape,
ornamented by the hand of cultivation? Who will say there are no pleasures in
knowledge? Surely not he who has felt the influence of one ray of that
profusion of science which beams on the mind of the philosopher, who has
realized the force of moral truth, and enjoyed the luxury of mathematic
demonstration. Do we derive no felicity from refined feelings? Is there no
delight in sociability, no charm in friendship, no rapture in love? Is there no
blessedness in beneficence, when, by a reciprocation of benefactions, the heart
is warmed with gratitude, and dilated with benevolence?

What solitary pleasures can compare with these? Can the gross fruition of the
anchorite equal the refined felicity of conjugal intercourse? Can the wild
savageness of natural liberty afford a delight like the sober undisturbed
satisfaction of civil freedom? Can the faith and devotion of the solitary, who
"sees God in clouds, or hears him in the wind," swell the soul with such
exalted beatitude as glows in the bosom of the Christian, who, illumined by the
full blaze of revelation, looks beyond the mountain, beyond the lurid cloud,
and, raptured, beholds a God of boundless mercy seated on the circuit of the
heavens? No; even the happiness of a solitary angel must sink below the reach
of computation, when once contrasted with the felicity of those on earth, who
stand within the embrace of social intercourse, and feel their souls enlarged
by knowledge, refined by reason, illumined by revelation, warmed by devotion,
and united by the ties of friendship and love.

AN ADDRESS TO THE PHILOLOGICAL SOCIETY.
Mr. President, and Philological Brothers,
ON the anniversary of our Society, it cannot be improper to call into
recognition the final causes of its institution. We associated for mutual
improvement; for increasing our knowledge, and mending our hearts; and thus
advancing our own felicity, and assisting our brothers of the human race.
Important duties are the consequence of this association. It is in our power,
and we are therefore obligated, to be more knowing, and better disposed, than
those who are not of our fraternity.

Our institutions are calculated to forward these purposes. Our library, our
dissertative correspondence, our quarterly disputations, and our public
anniversary, are all well devised to call up emulation, and diffuse knowledge.
A punctilious attention to these articles of our institution will rapidly
advance us in science, and soon demonstrate to the world that our pretensions
are not merely nominal.

Something, however, besides science, is necessary to constitute a good
philologian. He must improve in virtue, as well as knowledge; nor neglect the
felicity of others, while he attends to his own. Much of all this is constantly
within our power. We know a habit of doing well results from the practice of
virtue; and this habit, confirmed by reiteration, will be the guardian of our
souls, when vice hangs out her fascinating lure; and the whisper of frailty, or
the clamor of passion, bids us follow her seducing charms.

Every day affords us opportunity to increase the joy, or diminish the grief of
a fellow mortal. Some one may want our counsel, our instruction, our charity,
our assistance, or our consoling sympathy. We may direct inexperience, relieve
want, support infirmity, and pluck the thorn of grief from the pillow of
wretchedness.

There is not one of us but whose example is influential in the world. All this
influence we ought to enlist on the side of virtue. We should patronize
industry, as a source of wealth, ornament and knowledge; we should banish
indolence, as the prolific parent of poverty, ignorance, vice and misery. Our
conduct should evince that we measure our actions by the rules of virtue, and
revere the awful sanctions of religion. We should never look with approbation
on fraud, or deceit, or treachery; nor, without the most sovereign indignation,
behold the blasphemous snear of infidelity. We ought to regard religion as the
source of national peace, prosperity and happiness. We know its sanctions give
energy to the public voice. We know its promises add a new delight to present
joy, and bid wretchedness anticipate a region where she shall never hear a
sigh, nor see a tear. We ought, therefore, to regard him, who would lessen the
influence of religion, as one disposed to relax the laws, to diminish the
pleasures and multiply the miseries of life.

We should constantly labor for a removal of those calamities which are the
imperfection of society. Though we cannot pluck out the fang of jealousy, nor
unlock the chain of slavery, nor soothe the rage of war, nor break the wheel of
persecution; yet can we often hush domestic contention, often lighten the load
of oppression, and often tear away the mask of hypocrisy, and show the world
the distorted visage of sanctified wickedness.

To these things we are urged by the most interesting motives. Virtue and
knowledge delight the mind, and elovate the character. They not only confer a
dignity and reputation on their possessor, which converge the beams of glory
round his head; but they also approximate him toward the nature of those
celestials that stand in the presence of Him whose knowledge is omniscience,
whose goodness knows no limitation.

We are this day, my brethren, surrounded by a numerous concourse of our
follow-citizens. For this honorary attention, we owe them a tribute of
gratitude, which we cannot discharge unless by the most vigorous exertions for
the benefit of our common country.

In Europe, and in the United States, are many institutions similar to our own.
Let us emulate them, in science, in virtue, in religion; and, uniting our
exertions with those of our sister institutions, improve the genius of our
country, and elevate Columbia to a model for the world.

The infancy of our institution calls on us for more than parental care,
anxiety and ardour, to nurture its tender growth into an athletic maturity.
While we feel this, let us remember, that the greatest things, both in the
natural and social world, have originated from the smallest. Yes; the oak,
whose trunk stands unbent against the tempest, whose branches are the
habitation of the eagle, was once an embryo in the acorn. The Nile rolls down a
copious stream, and fertilizes the fields of Egypt, while mountain showers, and
solitary fountains, are its source. Rome and Greece, whose philosophers,
orators and poets, have held aloft the glory of their country, and arrested the
gazing eyes of admiring posterity, were, at first, but wandering hordes of
hunters and shepherds. The primitive followers of that religion whose precepts
Give men such dispositions as they will possess in the millennium. This word is
coined according to the direction of Demetrius Phalerius on Elocution, sec. 96.
millennialize the world; whose promises break up the iron bedchambers of
death, and emancipate the buried nations; whose votaries shall escape the
depredations of ages, and shine in renovated glory, when the sun shall have
lost its splendor; the followers of this religion were, once, but few in
number, but small in power, and past the world without a shelter from the
storms, or a pillow for repose. Let us, my brothers, think on these things; and
if we support our institution by pursuing science, by practicing virtue, by
feeling religion, we may anticipate the time when the name of Philologian shall
be the panegyric of greatness.

ODES, SUNG ON THE ANNIVERSARY OF THE PHILOLOGICAL SOCIETY, JUNE 7, A. D. 1797.
ODE I. ON SOLITUDE.
1.
WHEN all the earth was but one grove,
And man ranged through the world alone,
Taught but by nature's law to move,
And bow to no will but his own;
2.
Then, undisturbed by care, he stood
On flowery bank, or sunny hill;
At morn, he sung along the wood,
At evening, listened to the rill.
3.
No offspring waked his eyes to woes,
No hatred cankered in his breast,
No jealousy forbade repose,
But each new day, and night, was blessed.
4.
He had not forged the hostile sword,
Nor seen the bloody face of war;
The clang of chains he would never heard,
Nor drawn oppression's iron car.
5.
In dark dissimulation's shroud
He wrapped no wish with guilty fear;
His prostrate soul adored that God
Whose cloud rains plenty round the year.
6.
O Solitude! thy joys, though few,
Are sweet as undisturbed repose;
Why did men bid thy shades adieu,
And, mingling, swell the tide of woes?
ODE II. ON SOCIETY.
THAT Power, who warmed the human breast,
Bade each man mingle with the rest,
Nor pass the gloomy world alone;
He gave each heart a wish to know
And feel another's joy or woe,
And tell some kindred soul his own.
2.
Man's social wants waked him at first,
And bade him plow his native dust,
The city build, and sail the main;
Hence forests fall before his toil,
His plowshare brightens in the soil,
And harvest waves upon the plain.
3.
Hence sullen streams, whose gloomy floods
Once rolled along the desert woods,
Now slowly move, and stop to gaze,
While cities on their margins rise,
Heaving their turrets to the skies,
And hallowed temples echo praise.
4.
Hence Ocean views the swelling sails,
And bids his tempests shrink to gales,
While commerce passes his domain:
Thus wealth rolls round from shore to shore,
Nations are friends who fought before,
And realms disjoined unite again.
5.
Hence science reared her laureled brow,
Refined the soul, and gave the glow
Which sparkles in the eye of bliss;
While all those worlds which thought surveys,
Where reason toils, or fancy plays,
Lie circled in the heart's embrace.
6.
Such goods Society bestows,
Thus swells our joys, softens our woes,
And bids new arts and knowledge rise;
Then hail, ye Philologian band,
By these may your young fame expand,
Till day shall cease to light the skies.
FINIS.

