AN ORATION DELIVERED IN THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH. AT NEWARK, ON THE FOURTH OF
JULY, 1797.

At the request of the Citizens of Newark. IT BEING THE TWENTY-FIRST
ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

By Isaac Watts Crane, A. M.

Published at the request of a respectable number of the auditors.

"A nation despicable by its weakness, forfeits even the privilege of being
neutral."

"Divide et impera," divide and command, is the motto of every nation that
either hates or fears us."

Publius. In union there is strength. Common observation. NEWARK -- PRINTED BY
JOHN WOODS -- 1797.

AN ORATION DELIVERED ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, 1797.
WE are now convened, to commemorate the day on which America dared to announce
her Independence; a day ever to be had in remembrance by freemen, and which,
with honest pride, we may consider as the harbinger of freedom to the world.

We are assembled, my fellow citizens, not for boasting, but for reflection;
not pompously to relate the achievements of our Senators in the cabinet, and
of our Heroes in the field; but from a view of the causes of the revolution, of
its effects and of our present political situation, to familiarize our minds to
the duties we still owe our country.

No sooner had our oppressed and fugitive parents, the puritans of England,
found an asylum in the new world, where they hoped to enjoy uncontrouled, their
civil and religious rights, than under a pretense of a right of the crown, and
the more (...) pretense of regard and protection, proud and ambitious Britain
began to interfere in their political concerns, and to claim a sovereignty over
them -- the claim was at first small, our ancestors enjoyed privileges denied
them in their native country, they cultivated their fields unmolested, the soil
was improved, it amply rewarded their labors -- the arbitrary spirit of the
crown began however gradually to increase; court favorites and ministerial
dependents were constantly making demands of them for services of little value,
and performed without their request -- our fathers oppose every arbitrary act,
and for many years previous to the revolution, discover an uniform disposition
to govern themselves -- the unhappy contentions between the Governors and
Legislatures, between the proprietors and those who held their land by an
Indian purchase, between the Magistrates and the People, and the partialities
shown toward the members of the established Church, as they proved a material
defect in our colonial government, tended to pave the way for a new and a
better system -- these evils, in addition to the grievances which followed,
would naturally excite a wish for independence, and in the exercise of that
wish, reason and justice would naturally dictate, that Americans had a right to
their independence, free from all discontent.

The famous stamp act passed in 1764, excited universal indignation in America;
this act forbade the admission in the courts of justice, of any instrument not
written on paper stamped and sold for the benefit of the British Treasury --
Americans agree to renounce the consumption of all articles furnished by
Britain till this illegal and oppressive bill be withdrawn -- the stamp act is
revoked, but some time after, the parliament ordain, that the revenue which
could not be obtained by means of stamps, shall be raised by taxes on the
glass, the lead, the pasteboard and the paper hangings, carried from England to
America -- this act proves equally inefficacious with the former -- Americans
not only refuse compliance, but demand a formal renunciation -- a renunciation
is obtained, the tax on tea only excepted. Afterward, the ministry, deceived
by their delegates, conceive Americans humbled into submission, and order the
collection of the duty on tea -- an increased indignation seizes the colonies;
masters of vessels agree not to suffer this production to make any part of
their cargo, and merchants to whom it is consigned, refuse to receive it. The
use of tea is solemnly renounced in many provinces -- in others, they burn what
they have remaining -- the inhabitants of Boston, famed for its republican
spirit, destroy three cargoes of tea which had arrived from Europe. This as
might have been expected, drew upon them the vengeance of a selfish and haughty
ministry -- a bill is passed for blocking up the harbor of Boston; this act
involving the citizens of Boston in one common calamity and distress, excited
the compassion of their sympathising brethren, from New Hampshire to Georgia.
It was called inhuman, cruel, bloody. The native dignity of man here broke
forth with luster in the American character -- Americans show they have not the
servile spirit tamely to crouch and submit to insult and degradation; that they
have not that unmanly softness which fears to barter its repose for honorable
danger. When threatened with all the horrors of war, a powerful and a
disciplined army in battle array before them, to enforce a cruel and oppressive
edict, mark, my fellow citizens, with what prudence and courage they proceed;
assemblies are called for the respective states, a congress of delegates from
all the states is convened. They consult, they deliberate, not like the minions
of despotism, not like slaves awed by fear, but like virtuous men, acquainted
with the principles of rational liberty -- their discussions were cool and
candid, their determinations just and upright; their conduct such as became men
deciding the fate of millions; they address their fellow citizens by appeals to
their reason and understanding -- the inhabitants of Great Britain, of Ireland,
of Canada and of Jamaica, are respectively addressed by arguments the most
forcible and persuasive, by appeals to their real interests in the cause of
liberty. The King is twice petitioned in modest, but in bold and manly
language, calculated to make an impression on any heart not of adamant. The
venerable Franklin, having solicited in vain, the addresses to the King proving
ineffectual, and the colonies receiving fresh insults and injuries the most
outrageous violence; they resolve, that Great Britain has forfeited every claim
to her colonies, they determine to be free and independent, [as has just now
been read to us,] they resolve to conquer or die in the attempt.

It was not the quantity of the tax, it was not the mode of appropriation, but
it was the right to tax us, without our consent, which was called in question;
it had been a principle of the British constitution, that representation and
taxation should go together; this principle was well understood in America, the
consequences which would result from a violation of it, were also well
foreseen; if it were allowed in one instance, it might in another, and as in
general there would be no bounds to the rapacity of the imposing power, so
there would be no limits to the rule, beyond its exigences and caprice. It was
hard indeed, that the burden should be said by those who could not feel its
weight. Accustomed to view dangers future as well as present, they see the
lurking designs of Great Britain to reduce them to a state of degradation,
little preferable to slavery. The principle of independence, instantaneous as
lightning, pervades all classes of citizens, all hearts are united in the cause
of repelling force by force, and of freeing their country from the power of
tyranny, and from the threatened yoke of bondage.

Through innumerable difficulties, through seas of trouble, through oceans of
blood, exposed to frequent losses from British rapine, and from a depreciation
of our continental paper currency, have our fathers gloriously struggled and
gained us freedom and independence.

Hail independence hail! Heavens next best gift
To that of life and an immortal soul!
The life of life! that to the banquet high
And sober meal gives taste, to the bowed roof
Fair dreamed repose, and to the cottage charms,
Of public freedom, hail, thou secret source.
We will not forget those heroes who have purchased our independence with the
price of their blood, they have erected monuments, to their memory more solid
than marble, more durable than brass. Yes, ye worthy patriots, whose names in
long catalogue, swell the shining page of history, your virtues and your
patriotism shall never be forgotten, but always mentioned with gratitude on
every return of this glorious anniversary. Nor will I withhold the tribute of
respect due to our present Chief Magistrate, for the conspicuous part he took
in our revolution, and in obtaining the character we now enjoy of an
independent nation.

"When heaven resolved Columbia should be free
And Independence spoke the great decree,
Lo! Adams rose, a giant in debate,
And turned that vote which fixed our empire's fate;
In Europe next, the minister behold,
Who treaties formed and melted hearts of gold,
Maintained the honor of our rising name,
And as a nation gave us rank and fame.
When allied armies triumphed in the field,
And full plumed victory made proud Britain yield;
When Washington commanded wars to cease,
He crowned our triumphs by a glorious peace;
For these his country pours its honors down,
And ranks him next her first, her darling son;
Long may they live in sentiment allied
Columbia's safeguard, glory, boast and pride."
Our Independence was achieved, but to secure our independence, government was
necessary, an efficient government which should unite these states by ties much
stronger than the feeble ties of the confederation. Fear arising from danger,
which stared us in the face, during the revolution, naturally tended to promote
a temporary union -- in the midst of a common calamity, local interests and
prejudices, were made to yield to the means of its removal, to general and
public interests of much greater moment. But war being removed and our fears
subsided, it was necessary that union should be established on a more permanent
basis. A very material evil, incident to the confederation, resulted from the
dependence of the revenues on the intermediate agency of its members; a power
of providing for the pecuniary wants of the union, had been intended, but that
power was frustrated; there being no power of coercion, individual states
treated with neglect, the most necessary measures and requisitions of Congress;
the necessity of a general power of taxation in the federal government, was
acknowledged as essential to the existence of the union -- the delinquencies of
some of the states, in consequence of which, treaties and laws, on which
depended our honor, credit and safety, proved the necessity of vesting this
power in a federal head. -- The inducements to union appeared more strong, on
considering the policy of foreign nations to divide and weaken us; disunited we
were unable to repel foreign attacks, we were liable to be broken to pieces by
the inroads of foreign influence; it was considered that the different states,
subject to various foreign attachments and animosities, would be governed by
the caprice of the respective foreign nations, and exposed to constant broils;
but all agreeing to repose sufficient authority in a federal head, discord
among the members would frown aghast, foreigners would be deterred from
exercising the arts of corruption, and the power of corruption would be too
feeble to withstand the vigilance and energy of a government thus powerful; in
short it was considered as necessary for our safety and defense against foreign
attacks and internal convulsions for our strength, for our national dignity and
character, for the favorable regulation of commerce with other nations, for
the superintendence of our intercouse with them, political and commercial; that
there should be a consolidation of the states, that they should form a cordial
union under an efficient national government. The union was effected in a
manner which does honor to our nation. The federal constitution, with some
opposition, was adopted by all the states. Allow me to say, it is the fairest
fabric of political perfection ever erected by human skill. The majesty of the
people, the fountain from which all authority flows -- the election of the
different officers, the pivot on which the wheel turns, provided with
sufficient checks and balances, wisely subjected to amendments, calculated, in
short, to promote and to preserve the safety and happiness of the people, it is
a government entitled to our warmest attachment and our most decided support.
You remember, my fellow citizens, with how much deliberation this government
was devised, with how much unanimity it was established. Let the citizens of
America then ever cherish it as the gift of heaven.

Being thus united and happy under our federal union; our commerce, our
agriculture and manufactures flourishing with rapid progress; cities and
villages rising every where to view; the wilderness blossoming as the rose;
religion, learning and the arts, which civilize and polish society, diffusing
their benign influences far and wide; plenty with her full horn carrying every
where joy and gladness; possessing all the blessings of peace and independence,
fortified by a firm and an indissoluble union; our population rapidly
extending, our country advancing space to strength, wealth and fame; indulgent
providence smiling upon us; while nothing was to be heard in Europe but the
tumult of destructive war, and the horrid din of arms; we wanted nothing to
complete the pleasing scene, but gratitude and praise to the beneficent author
of our felicity. But in the midst of this plentiful effusion of blessings, when
the cup of our happiness seemed full, our peace and tranquillity, were
endangered from foreign wiles and artifices to invoice us in European broils. A
foreign incendiary appeared among us, breathing discord, contention and war --
commissions were granted by him for fitting out privateers in our ports, and
for enlisting men in South Carolina to assist the French; the whole force of
our federal government now became necessary to ward off the danger and to
preserve our peace and neutrality; the President issues a proclamation of
neutrality prohibiting these proceedings; this proclamation is opposed, and our
beloved Washington is decried as the enemy of liberty, as the enemy of the
French, and as making war upon the French nation; the seeds of sedition are
sown throughout the United States. In the midst of these difficulties, while
from the warmth and violence of some of our deluded brethren, government is
scarcely able to avoid taking an active part in the wars of Europe, and to
preserve our internal peace and tranquillity, orders are issued from the British
to seize our vessels; England is apprehensive that Americans will side with
France, and France is displeased because we are determined to remain neutral --
we were in a very serious dilemma -- we now felt the want of a navy to protect
our commerce, to prevent insults and depredations and to cause our neutrality
to be respected. -- Our commerce received repeated insults from both nations --
an embargo only tended to increase the general calamity -- it was now debated,
shall we sequestrate the British debts? Shall we cease to import' Or shall we
negociate? The first was conceived derogatory to our national faith and
character and as leading to certain war. The second as involving multitudes in
distress, and as destroying the revenue. The third, as an expedient, which
possibly might terminate favorably to the peace and honor of our nation, and
which, if unsuccessful, would justify an appeal to the dernier resort and
promote an union of sentiment among ourselves -- The voice of every good man
was in favor of this measure; the hydra of antifederalism and of faction alone
raised its forky head against it; those only who had labored to inveigle us in
the war, opposed this pacific system. Our envoy, the man whose life had been
devoted to the independence, the union and the interests of his country, is
calumniated as a man under the influence of British gold, as one who would sell
his country -- the treaty was condemned before it was seen, it was said to
contain a thousand errors with which it had not the most remote relation; the
truth was, the friends of opposition were sensible that by any treaty whatever,
their schemes would be defeated. The differences between England and America
were happily settled on principles of mutual concession and reciprocity; an
honorable treaty of friendship and commerce is made and ratified beween the two
nations, much more favorable See Mr. Kitchell's reasons in favor of carrying
the treaty into effect, in his letter dated April 23, 1796, to Silas Condict,
Esquire. by which it will appear that he did not vote for the appropriations,
merely because the President and Senate ratified it.
to us, than our best friends in England thought we had any reason to expect; a
treaty by which among other things, (...) the one part, we are promised
indemnification for all our injuries, and the peaceable possession of the
western posts, so necessary for the security and general interests of our
frontiers -- on the other, we agree that all honest debts due to the
inhabitants of GreatBritain shall be paid, and contain rules respecting neutral
vessels and contraband articles are agreed upon, about which the writers on the
laws of nations differ, but which in any view it was not in our power to
prevent.

During these difficulties, others more disagreeable arise. A violent
insurrection breaks out in the Western countles of Pennsylvania, occasioned by
combinations of men, who had been encouraged by the enemies of America;
ignorant and discontented men, in the western parts of Pennsylvania, and for
the honor of our revolution be it said, not Americans, but mostly emigrants
from Europe, who were educated in habits of calumny at home, vent their spleen
and their venom against the mildest government on earth. They trample the laws
under their feet, and attempt to break in pieces the ark of our political
safety. The authority and energy of our federal government were called forth on
the occasion -- the lawless and disobedient are taught obedience to the laws --
thus, through the interference of our beloved WASHINGTON, and to use an idea of
the French minister, through the ingenuity of Col. Hamilton, the meditated
explosion of our government received a timely check. The public aspect of
American politics is more favorable, the Indians have laid down the hatchet,
and our country experiences the calm joys of peace and domestic tranquillity
(...) this situation of affairs, our beloved President, makes known his wishes
to retire from office.

O Washington, thou great good man! Language is too feeble to express our
sentiments of regard on the present occasion -- view him, my fellow citizens,
in the midst of danger, foremost in the field of battle -- view him at one
time, when want, discontent and mutiny threatened to disappoint all our fairest
prospects of independence, cheering the drooping spirits of his desponding
troops, using his private fortune for their support -- view him at another
time, nobly rising to victory and independence. When peace was proclaimed and
his country, with one voice, acknowledged that he had done his duty -- view him
humbly resigning the insignia of office, and like Triptolemus and Cincinnatus
of old, seeking the calm pleasures of a farmer's life. When called by the
unanimous suffrages of his fellow citizens, to fill the Presidental chair,
under the federal government, at a time when crowns and sceptres were to him as
"sounding brass and as a tinkling eymbal," view him again obedient to the voice
of his country, and skilfully and safely conducting the helm of state, amidst
the rocks of foreign influence and of internal faction -- when overcome with
the increasing weight of years, view him bidding adieu to public honors, again
soliciting the retirement of private life, addressing his fellow citizens, in
the language of a departing friend, leaving a valuable legacy to the lovers of
freedom, of union and of independence to the latest generations -- faction!
Avaunt, fell monster! nor show thy hideous front, nor dare attempt to tarnish
the immortal glory of Washington! Farewell illustrious hero, statesman, friend!
Live long to cem^^^ our union, live long in a retirement which was (...)
voluntary choice in the happy enjoyment of the love, the gratitude, the esteem,
the veneration and applause of an admiring world.

Washington having declined, Adams and Jefferson became candidates for the
Presidency -- the sons of faction now make another struggle. A successor to the
President is even dictated by France -- her minister publishes a repetition of
a long catalogue of charges against our government, most of which had been
discussed years before -- our government is traduced and vilified in the most
insulting, manner -- recourse is had to the most barefaced effrontery, to the
most mean and contemptible interference in our political and private concerns
-- having recalled their own minister because we were not subject to his will,
when reason and arguments, supported by laws, treaties and facts, proved his
complaints to be unfounded, See the instructions to General Pin'kney
they now seize our vessels, and pretend they are justifiable in breaking the
Treaty of 1778. When an Envoy Extraordinary is sent to France, to make
explanations and accomodate differences, he is most insultingly rejected and
ordered to depart. Mistaken France! is this the conduct of rational men
struggling in the cause of liberty? No -- it is not the mild voice of
republicanism; it is the voice of tyranny -- France, mistaken France, correct
your errors! As long as you pursued the principles of liberty, your old
American friends, the western sons of freedom, gave you their prayers and
^^^^ed you success in the glorious cause; they vie^^^ with pleasure your
emancipation from the shackles of despotism; they mourned over the convulsions
which distracted the vitals of your republic, and earnestly panted for the
restoration of order. -- But when you began to hold the rod and proudly to
dictate to the free sons of Columbia, you took the ground of tyrants and
forfeited your right to republican esteem! Call not the President's
proclamation of neutrality insidious! Americans have a right to their
independence and they are determined to support it. Yes, France, by the
insidious wiles of a Genet, a Fauchet and an Adet, you have done more injury to
the cause of liberty and independence in America, than you ever were of service
by your fleets and armies. Mistaken France, correct your errors -- listen not
to the councils of our enemies, who tell you our government and people are
divided -- we have resisted British tyranny, and we are determined to resist
tyranny in whatever garb it appears -- the present crisis affords you
opportunity to convince America and the world, that you can be magnanimous as
you are free -- let not two free nations by their dissentions afford a prop to
the cause of expiring tyranny.

Fellow Citizens of America,

You have a free and a happy government; guard it from abuse; see that the
legislative, the executive and the judicial departments, encroach not on each
other; the duration, the existence of your government, depends upon preserving
the proper balances pure and distinct -- remember that the tendency of federal
governments, is rather to anarchy among the members, than to tyranny in the
head. It was not from the encroachments of the Amphyctionic Council, but from
the jealousies and dissentions of the various members, Athens, Sparta and
Thebes, that Philip made himself master of the confederacy, and that Greece was
obliged to wear the chains of Macedon. It was not from the powers of the Achean
league, but from its weakness, and the arts of division, practiced among the
members, that it became a prey to the artifices and the arms of Rome. The
Romans proclaimed universal liberty throughout Greece, but it was to the
astonishment of those who confided in their sincerity.

My fellow citizens, the despotic Philip is at the door. Beware of the inroads
of foreign influence, of the men who carry liberty in their faces, but tyranny
in their hearts; outwardly as harmless sheep, inwardly as ravenous wolves, they
are the more dangerous from their hypocrisy. Remember that faction is the rock
on which republics have always split -- ever keep in mind the admonition of our
beloved Washington, that all foreign attachments and animosities should be
equally disclaimed -- that selfinterest is the ruling principle of nations, and
that it is in vain to expect national favors. Let not an enthusiastical zeal in
the cause of any foreign nation, lead us to sacrifice the right of private
judgment, the independence of our country and the dignity of our own free
government. By our union and the stability of our confederate republic, we have
it in our power to thwart the jealous hopes of the minions of tyrants, who have
boldly pronounced on the insufficiency of republics to govern themselves.

Fellow Citizens,

The principles of antifederalism are false and dangerous; the original and
secret abettors of these principles have for eight years been using every
artifice and stratagem, which human invention could devise, for the destruction
of our federal government. The enemies of administration are enemies of
government, of that government, which from the beginning many of them opposed,
and which others have since opposed, from motives of jealous envy and
disappointed ambition. Why else have they invariably opposed every attempt to
put ourselves in a state of defense either when threatened by Britain or by
France? Why else have they opposed the best system for sinking our public debt?
It is a fact that Col. Hamilton's system for discharging the public debt, was
much more just and likes to attain the object, than any other proposed.
Cast your eyes to the Eastern States, famed for their knowledge, their virtue
and their federalism -- to the Southern States, famed for the opposite
character acquaint yourselves with the manners, with the real character of the
respective divisions -- Will any man in his sober senses, conclude, that in
New England, they are friends to tyranny and an oppressive government; while in
Virginia and the Southern States, the principles of liberty and republicanism
alone prevail? Let him view the industry and equality of the former, the luxury
and proud distinctions which reign among the latter; let him view the liberty
founded on the law in the one case, and the slavery founded on no other law
than a tyrant's will in the other, and candor will force from his lips a
contrary acknowledgemt. When, my fellow citizens, you espouse the cause of
antifederalism, you espouse the cause of men who are governed by opposition,
and who have no steady principles; you launch into an ocean of uncertainty,
into a dangerous labyrinth where every thing is confusion. Antifederalists,
like deists, find fault with the government, without proposing a better system,
and like deists they have a similar diversity of sentiment. Blind faction leads
the van, followed by envy, foul ambition and her baneful retinue; but the cause
of federalism is the cause of reason, every thing is calm, steady and uniform
-- security is given to life, liberty and property -- encouragement is given to
the arts of industry, the arts of peace and civilization; virtue and honest
merit afford the path to preferment. How striking the contrast! The one
breathes disunion and war -- the other breathe; the mild spirit of union and
peace. This last section was omitted in the pronunciation, the variety of the
airs of music having protracted the time beyond all expectation.


To preserve our union, we should not only be republicans, but we should be
federal republicans; it becomes Americans who were united in times of the
greatest danger, and who by their union, have established their common liberty
and independence, to prove to the world, that their reason is equal to their
courage, that they have wisdom to discover every attempt to break their union,
to discover secret and political dangers, and to unite under the federal
standard in their destruction.

On a subject of such importance, the duties which our country requires from
the fair part of my auditory, ought not to be forgotten. On the industry and
patriotism of the fair daughters of Columbia, much depends for the support of
our government, for the continuance of our political union and happiness. Ye
bright ornaments of American independence, who nobly assisted in the
revolution, bravely partook of the dangers, and whose presence now adds to the
joys of our common anniversary, your country looks up to your virtues.

By impressing sentiments of patriotism and magnanimity in the minds of your
children, in the early stage of their education, they become furnished with
weapons of defense more powerful than the sword, the bayonet and all the arms
of war. Just political principles, planted in the tender minds of your children
will never die, but will grow up with them to manhood, and acquire an influence
co-extensive with the government; in this way, happy in your domestic
retirement, free from the noise and bustle of the world, you may have the real
honor of being the rulers of America.

To the virtuous, the generous, and the magnanimous Isabella, an ornament to
your sex, the admiration of ours, and an ornament to human nature, America was
in a measure indebted for its discovery. That its discovery may prove the
happiness and glory of the world, much depends on your conduct and exertions.
In despotic governments, women have been considered merely as toys and as the
slaves of passion; in free governments they are justly considered as rational
beings; you will make it your pride as you ever have done, to support this
character, and bid defiance to the slanders of despotism, by cultivating the
charms of your minds, as much as the graces of form and the improvements of
your persons. Convince proud and unfeeling despots, that woman is calculated to
move in the sphere of reason and government.

To perpetuate your union, fellow citizens, diffuse among all classes of
citizens, principles of knowledge and virtue: had I the character and influence
of a Washington, had I a voice which could be heard from New Hampshire to
Georgia, my constant admonition should be, Americans, make the promotion of
knowledge and religion the first, the principal (...) of your lives; these
constitute the chief barriers, the strongest defense of your republic; these
will promote your union, by making your jarring interests and your discordant
passions to subside. No more will the South be jealous of the North, the
husbandman will no more envy the merchant the prosperity of the union will be
acknowledged to be the prosperity of its members. From the evils, from the
dangers, which have for four years past, convulsed our republic, and which now
threaten (...) destruction; I conjure you to rally round your own good sense,
and hasten to the standard of union United we stand, divided we fall -- "Why
quit our own to stand on foreign ground?" Where can we stand so safe as on the
firm ground, and under the banners of our federal government?

Let us all, my fellow citizens, remember the duties our country requires of us
as citizens and as christians; let union be our polar star to direct us in our
political course; let our fathers be the patrons of religion, and our mothers
the nurses of virtue; let that principle of benevolence which regards the
happiness of future ages, dictate the conduct of all, and America shall survive
the ruin of her enemies, and remain and flourish, until GOD shall call her sons
to happier abodes, where all is UNION, HARMONY and LOVE.

ANTHEMS SUNG ON THE OCCASION.
WITH songs of honor chanting high,
Your grateful voices raise;
Fair Freedom lights the western sky,
And claims your tuneful lays.
No more beneath the oppressive hand
Of tyranny we groan,
Behold, a smiling happy land
That Freedom calls her own.
Come, celebrate with songs and praise
The day which makes us free;
Let harmony her notes upraise,
To sing our Jubliee.
All hail the blessed auspicious day,
And every heart agree,
To praise, and joyous honors pay
To this our Jubilee.
HAIL! the first, the greatest blessing,
God has given to man below;
Hail to Freedom, Independence,
Boundless, boundless may they flow!
Favored people, blessed Columbia, happy nation,
Freedom, Peace, be ever thine.
Give to God the power and glory,
Own 'twas his almighty hand,
Which from Britain's Isle conducted,
Patriot heroes to this land;
Then a desert, waste and howling, then a desert,
Now the asylum of the earth.
Who subdued the warlike savage,
Nimrod hunter of the wood?
Who amid the storm of battle,
In the cloud of pillar stood?
'Twas Jehovah, 'twas Jehovah, 'twas Jehovah.
Universal nature's Lord.
When a parent to the children,
Scorpions gave instead of bread,
Who educing good from evil,
Hungry babes with plenty fed?
Shout Jehovah, sing Jehovah, shout Jehovah,
Praises, praises be to him.
High exalted, firmly seated,
Independent, sovereign, free,
May Columbia's grateful millions
Glory, glory give to thee.
Might, dominion, praises, blessing, glory, glory,
All the glory, Lord, be thine.
Every nation, all the kingdoms,
Bless, oh bless, eternal Sire!
Man adoring, angels hymning,
Love and gratitude inspire.
Rapture feeling, transports shouting, praises sounding,
Hail, they cry, amen, amen.
HYMN ON WAR.
WHILE sounds of War are heard around,
And death and ruin strew the ground --
To thee we look, on thee we call,
The Parent and the Lord of all.
Thou, who have stamped on human kind,
The image of a heaven-born mind,
And in a father's wide embrace
Have cherished all the kindred race.
O see! with what insatiate rage
Thy sons their impious battles wage;
How spreads destruction like a flood,
And brothers shed their brothers' blood!
See guilty passions spring to birth,
And deeds of hell deform the earth;
While righteousness and justice mourn,
And love and pity droop forlorn.
Great God! whose powerful hand can bind
The raging waves, the furious wind,
O bid the human tempest cease,
And hush the madd'ning world to peace
With reverence may each hostile land
Hear and obey that high command,
Thy Son's blessed errand from above,
"My creatures, live in mutual love."

