THE DYING PROSTITUTE. A POEM.

BY CHARLES CRAWFORD, Esquire

Behold the house of incontinence: the mark of infamy is indelibly stamped on
the threshold, and on the posts of the door. At the window sits misfortune
forcing a smile; and within are remorse, and disease, and irretrievable misery.

Whole Duty of Woman. By a Lady. A NEW EDITION.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED, 1797.

PREFACE.
THE prostitution of women, (...) prevails to a high degree in all large
cities, might be considerably lessened by giving them encouragement to enter
into various occupations which are suitable to them. An appeal should be made
to the delicacy and the prudence of ladies of fortune, not to employ any but
their own sex, as milliners, and as stay-makers. A man twirling a cap, or
bending a pair of stays, should be an object of ridicule, because he is an
instrument of mischief. He does harm by taking the bread from those who cannot
get it but by such means, while he can get it by innumerable other means.
Women, however, I think might be employed in many more occupations than are
usually given to them. There are some good observations on Schools of Industry
for girls in a valuable little work, by Mrs. Sarah Trimmer, called "The Economy
of Charity." See from page 61 to page 80.
Some think their modesty might be hurt in taking measure for a suit of
clothes. They might, however, sew the clothes together, as is the custom in
some places, after they were cut out by the tailor. The making stuff shoes for
their own sex, might not be an improper employment for women. Some of the Dutch
and Germans who settle in America; make their daughters do several parts of the
work of their farms, even as far as ploughing. The work of a farm might be
thought by some too laborious an occupation for women; but the advantages
arising from thus employing women might be very considerable. It might be of
great use to agriculture, as well as to the women themselves, by giving them
health and cheerfulness, Dr. Fothergill, in his excellent Treatise on Health
and Longevity, recommends the being a considerable part of the day in the open
air.
and by preventing their living in large cities (which are very mischievous to
a country) where, through the want of bread, they might be tempted to
prostitution.

The best preservative, however, from the prostitution of women, especially of
the lower class, may consist in the institution of First Day or Sunday schools.
If you are so fortunate as to give people a sincere regard for Christianity,
you will make them chaste. There are some who talk of the morality of the
Deists. I can safely say, however, though I have known many Deists, that I
scarcely ever knew one moral character among them. It is the constant delight
of almost very unbeliever, to ridicule that chastity which is revered by
Christians. St. Paul, by what he says in the 24th verse of the 1st chapter of
the Epistle to the Romans, and in what he say in the following part of his
First Epistle to the Thessalonians, seems to justify these notions. For this is
the will of God, even your sanctification that ye should abstain from
fornication; That every one should know how to possess his vessel in
sanctification and honor; Not in the lust of concupiscence, even as the
Gentiles, which know not God. I. Epistle, chap. iv, ver. 3, 4, 5.

To those who have never been in large cities, it may appear improbable that
women of the town should die in any of them through want. This fact, however,
may be ascertained beyond the possibility of doubt. A true story is told of the
celebrated Dr. Johnson, which makes him, in this particular, greatly to
resemble the good Samaritan in Scripture. It is said, that once in London, when
he was going to his house, he saw a woman lying prostrate in the street. Upon
inquiry he found it was a woman of the town, who had become weak and incapable
to move through want. He nobly took her upon his back to his house, gave her
food and lodging until she was perfectly recovered, and then with sensible
admonitions to reform, dismissed her. This glorious act of humanity, might make
some atonement for the unjust severity with which he sometimes treated others,
for which he expressed his remorse and his repentance a little while before his
death. Seneca says, that Cato composed in bad fortune, was a spectacle, which
heaven might look down upon with pleasure. Ecce Spectaculum ad quod respiciat
operi suo intentus Deus! Ecce Catonem inter malam fortunam compositum! Might
not this be said of Jonson with a poor helpless female upon his back, whom he
was going to relieve, not for the purposes of lust, but charity? -- "Go thou
and do likewise."

The cities of London and Philadelphia are both famous for the humane and
charitable institutions which they contain. I think that London may adopt a
society for the alleviation of the miseries of public prisons, in imitation of
Philadelphia. (The celebrated Mr. Howard said he would have given five hundred
pounds sterling, upon the spot, for the furtherance of such a society in
London.) And in return, Philadelphia may in time, imitate London in the
erection of a Magdalen Hospital. The following is taken from a London paper of
February 20th, 1791. Since the institution of the London Magdalen Hospital in
the year 1758, more than 2650 women have been admitted; and we can with the
greatefst authority say, from a very minute inquiry, that near two-thirds of
that number have been effectually reformed, and become useful members of
society.


THE DYING PROSTITUTE.
COLD blew the blast with hollow shrieks,
And dreary was the night;
In which the hail ungenial dropped,
Diffusing baleful blight.
'Twas then beside the common path,
Her head on earth reclined,
The poor deserted Lucy lay,
And shivered to the wind.
No house had she, sad wretch, forlorn,
Wherein to shield that head;
And hunger, cold, and fell disease,
And guilt upon her preyed.
Like rav'ning eagles void of food,
They fastened to her corse;
They lacerated all her heart,
And drank of life the source.
A fierce and withering disease,
By heaven in terror sent,
Of unconfined unhallowed love,
As the dread punishment,
Had desolated all her form,
Where youthful loves once played,
Her full delicious hair had mowed,
Her breath had fetid made.
Ah! how unlike to what she was,
Of virtue when approved,
When in her father's house she dwelt,
By all her village loved!
The lily which luxuriant grows,
In some sequestered vale,
Near some pure stream, and sheltered round
From every ruder gale;
Which nature's fragrant favorite blooms,
Scenting the ambient air,
That lily was not sweeter then,
And was not half so fair.
Nor was that most unhappy sire,
Whom his loved child's disgrace,
To death had immaturely given,
Of an ignoble race.
But now no poisonous weed obscene,
Of cursed malignant growth,
Could torture more the aching sense,
And cause it more to loath.
And as the wretched outcast lay
Upon the chilly earth.
In still low sounds she falt'ring breathed
These plaintive accents fortb.
"Daughters of virtue! I will own,
"Here while I grieve in dust,
"Your indignation to be wise,
"Your censure to be just.
"I mourn the loss of virtuous fame,
"As for blithe rose-cheek'd health,
"Languish the sick, or famished poor
"For comfort-giving wealth.
"Ah how I rue my hapless fall!
"How curse the black-wing'd day,
"Which gave me (ah! could hell do worse?)
"A prostitute to stray!
"Yet did your mild ingenuous hearts,
"Our various mis'ries know,
"Our lonesome days, the grinning scorn,
"Which mocks wherever we go;
"Though ye would still detest the offense,
"Yet over the offender's head,
"Soft pity, for it dwells with you,
"A tear would make you shed.
"But men are unrelenting, harsh:
"Night wolves which hunt for prey,
"Through long-corroding hunger, wild,"
"Are scarce more fierce than they."
As thus she spoke, a churlish watch,
Who her lamentings heard,
With many a sharp and brutal taunt,
Her ghastly form uprear'd.
Which unto prison as he dragged,
Through pain and woe out-tir'd,
From his rude grasp she fell, and groaned,
And at his feet expired.
The generous bard, thou gloomy shade!
Who married wast to woe,
Gives, while he reprobates thy crime,
A tear for thee to flow.
For many a dark flagitious scheme,
And many a treacherous art,
Did thy seducer practice, ere
He lured thy gentle heart.
Then flushed with youth, and fortune's smile,
Thy fall and ruined fame,
As if it wreathed his brow with bay,
Dared wontonly proclaim.
But heaven his ill-weav'd happiness,
In ire arous'd shall blast;
And on his head, in warning wrath,
Its vengeance-bolt shall cast.
O Chastity, salubrious gift,
Sent from the power above,
As guardian of our sweetest bliss,
The bliss of wedded love!
The woman who thy law contemns,
What feral ills annoy!
Thou spare and icy-bosom'd nurse
Of hallowed love and joy!
For though she 'scape the cruel woes,
The pensive muse has sung,
Yet shall her grace decay through grief,
And her mid-heart be wrung.
But the unspotted virgin pure,
Whom thou vouchsaf'st inspire,
Who checks, ere it dilates, each spark
Of Love's unhallowed fire;
Laments exquisite remorse,
No rude pernicious care,
Which makes, even in the spring of youth,
The leaf of beauty sear.
To her in purity refined,
Alone to live it is given,
That she from all distraction free,
May form herself for heaven.
Or by her lover with delight,
To marriage she is led,
With deathless wreaths of laughing flowers,
He decks the genial bed.
A train of fair-ey'd pleasures wait,
In beautiful array;
And smiling hours with pinions white,
Succeed the auspicious day.
And the glad fire, in the eve of life,
When cheerful joys are few,
Feels at her bliss those transports warm,
Which in blithe youth he knew.
THE END.
Lately published by this Author, A Poetical Paraphrase on our Savior's Sermon
on the Mount; The Progress of Liberty, a Pindaric Ode; The Christian, a Poem,
in six books; Observations upon the Revolution in France; etc. etc.


