RULES OF DISCIPLINE AND CHRISTIAN ADVICES OF THE YEARLY MEETING OF FRIENDS FOR
PENNSYLVANIA AND NEW JERSEY, FIRST HELD AT BURLINGTON IN THE YEAR 1681, AND
FROM 1685 TO 1760, INCLUSIVE, ALTERNATELY IN BURLINGTON AND PHILADELPHIA: AND
SINCE AT PHILADELPHIA.

Alphabetically digested and Printed by direction of the said Meeting.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY SAMUEL SANSOM, JUN. 1797.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IT is necessary to observe that ^he Dates at the end of the Minutes and
Advices, denote the years in which they were issued by the Yearly Meeting --
And the Letters E. D. refer to the English Discipline, and N. E. D. to that of
New England.

CONTENTS.
INTRODUCTION Page 5 Acknowledgments for offenses Page 9 Appeals Page 10
Arbitrations Page 11 Books Page 15 Burials Page 16 Certificates and Removals
Page 18 Charity and Unity Page 22 Children or Youth Page 24 Civil Government
Page 32 Conduct and Conversation Page 34 Convinced Persons Page 38 Days and
Times Page 39 Defamation and Detraction Page 48 Discipline and Meetings for
Discipline Page 50 Donations and Subscriptions Page 56 Families Page 57 Gaming
and Diversions Page 58 Grave Stones Page 59 Indians Page 60 Law Page 62
Marriages Page 64 Meeting Houses Page 72 Meeting for Sufferings Page 73
Meetings for Worship Page 77 Memorials Page 81 Ministers and Elders, and
Meetings of Ministers and Elders Page 82 Moderation and Temperance Page 8^
Mourning Habits Page 9^ Negroes or Slaves Page 91 Oaths Page 99 Overseers Page
101 Plainness Page 102 Poor Page 106 Priests Wages or Hireling Ministry Page
108 Queries Page 109 Schools Page 114 Scriptures of the Old and New Testament
Page 121 Sorcery Page 123 Stock Page 124 Taverns Page 125 Trade or Trading Page
127 War, and Taxes therefore Page 130 Wills Page 136 Yearly Meeting Page 137
Yearly and other Meetings for Discipline of Women Friends. Page 139
INTRODUCTION.
WHEN it pleased God to manifest the glorious Dispensation of his blessed Son,
our Lord and Savior, in the Flesh, Apostles were called and sent forth in his
service, and numbers believed in his name. These were to receive Power from on
high after that the Holy Ghost had come upon them, for which they were commaded
to wait, and accordingly they were endued with the Holy Spirit.

In the early times of Christianity it was found necessary for the Apostles,
Disciples, and Believers, to meet often together for the consolation and
strengthening one of another, when pursuant to the very nature and design of
the Gospel, which brought Peace on Earth, and good will to Men, a Care arose
for the establishment and edification of the Church, and their labor was, that
all should be of one mind and become as one Family.

But in succession of time the simplicity and good purpose of such Meetings
declined, and a particular set of Men, for worldly and carnal ends, assumed an
authority, exercising Lordship over the Flock (observing the command of our
Lord so far only as to retain the name of Servants, when nothing was less in
their view) pomp and power were assumed, and they made a distinction of
themselves by the aggrandizing name of the Peculiar Heritage of God, and then
social Good, and Charity in Mind and Practice was very much lost.

And as it has pleased the Lord in these latter days, to call a People to
freedom, and from under that unwarrantable Yoke of Bondage, so he has been
pleased to raise in the Hearts of his Servants that primitive Love and Good
will which eminently distinguished his Disciples; wherein they have been
persuaded and directed, by his wisdom and power, to have Meetings established
for like good purposes as in the primitive times, therein to worship him, and
have oversight, care, and compassion one over another, and to endeavor that
all may walk humbly, decently and honestly, and be of one mind, as becomes the
Servants and Followers of our holy Lord.

This is called our Discipline, in the exercise whereof Persuasion and gentle
Dealing is and ought to be our practice; and when any, after all our Christian
endeavors cannot be reclaimed, the extent of our judgment is Censure, or
disowning such to be of our religious Communion. And as this authority and
Practice is Christian, so it is laudable and reasonable in Society; for the
good and reputation of the whole Body ought to claim our greatest regard,
subordinately including that of every Member. Hence arises a care and concern
for Decency and comely order in all our Meetings for Worship and Discipline, as
well as honesty, plainness and orderly walking in all the Members of our
religious Society, that others seeing our good works may be induced to glorify
our Father who is the Author of them, and thereby be brought into that Faith
which works by Love to the purifying of the Heart.

And for the worship of God, and the more regular and easy proceeding in the
service and discipline of the Church, Meetings have been by Divine assistance,
as above hinted, set up and established, serviceable and subordinate to each
other, as particular Meetings for worship, one or more of which constitute a
Preparative Meeting. Monthly, which mostly take in several particular or
Preparative Meetings, who are to meet together once a month. Quarterly,
including so many monthly Meetings as may under right direction most usefully
meet together once every three months. And Yearly, which is composed of so many
Quarterly Meetings as may most conveniently attend the same; each of which have
their respective Powers and Service for the well ordering of Society, and
advancement of Truth and Righteousness.

And whereas it has been experienced, that in these Meetings great comfort,
support, and satisfaction have been received and enjoyed, when the members have
attended them in awe, humility, and love, with no other views but the service
of God, and the help and assistance one of another, all friends who are, or
would be, accounted members of those Meetings, are, in brotherly love exhorted,
that they come together in uprightness and singleness of heart, suitable to our
calling, and the dignity of that power, which, as we rightly and meekly so
demean ourselves, will preside and govern in all our Meetings; and there we
ought to wait for the spirit of Meekness and Charity, which is the essential
adorning which God will beautify and cloth his true Church with, without which
none can be truly Members thereof, nor really serviceable therein. This will
divest of Partiality, stiffness in opinion, and high thoughts of ourselves, or
of our own strength and abilities, and raise in us Patience and condescension,
according to that excellent admonition of our Blessed Lord, who knows the
secrets of all Hearts, But he that is greatest among you shall be your Servant.
Matt. XXIII. 11.22.26. 1719

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS FOR OFFENSES.
IT is the sense of this meeting, Offenders to attend with their
acknowledgments.
that offenders making acknowledgments, or offering papers of condemnation for
offenses, do attend the monthly meeting with such papers, where it is
practicable. 1743.

APPEALS.
Liberty of appeal.
IF any persons are dissatisfied with, or do think themselves aggrieved by the
testimony or judgment entered against them in a monthly meeting, they may have
liberty at the same, or the next, Notice of appealing to be given to
monthly meeting;
or the third monthly meeting, but not after, to notify their intentions of
making application to have the cause heard at the next quarterly meeting; which
notification the said monthly meeting should enter on their minutes, and
appoint four, or more Friends (not excluding others) to take a copy of the
meeting's records in the case, signed by the clerk, and therewith attend the
said quarterly meeting; and there on the monthly-meeting's behalf, show their
reasons for what is done, submitting the same to the said quarterly meeting.
And the said quarterly meeting is to hear and consider, and confirm or reverse
the same, as they in the wisdom which God shall afford them may see most just
and necessary. and to quarterly-meetings of appeal to yearly meeting.
And if the parties should be dissatisfied with the judgment of the said
quarterly meeting, and do notify the same, or the next quarterly meeting, but
not after, their intention of making application for a hearing at the next
yearly meeting; the said quarterly meeting shall in like manner make entry
thereof, appoint four, or six Friends to attend the yearly meeting, with the
records of both monthly and quarterly-meetings in the case, signed as
aforesaid, and speak to the matter, where the same is to be finally determined.
1719.

Notice of disownment of a member to be given.
And in all cases where a meeting finds itself under the necessity of disowning
any member, let such member have notice thereof, either by the meetings
acquainting him or her thereof, if present, or, if absent, by sending a Friend
or two for that purpose. Likewise, Copy of judgment to be given.
when the judgment or testimony is made, let a copy thereof be delivered, or,
by two Friends, sent to the party, with notice of the privilege of appealing,
if he or she is dissatisfied.

Publication of testimony, where deferred.
Where persons testified against, incline to appeal to the quarterly or
yearly meeting, the publication of the testimony of the monthly meeting should
be deferred, till the judgment of such superior meetings be had thereon. 1752.

ARBITRATIONS.
WHERE any difference arises between Friends about their worldly property, in
which there appears, to overseers or other active judicious Friends, to be
cause of dispute, or diversity of sentiment, let all proceed in the following
manner: -- 1719.

1st. The party thinking he has reason of complaint is himself calmly to
speak, Differences about property, how to be determined.
or if he lives at a distance too great to do it in person, write to the party
by whom he thinks himself injured, and endeavor by gentle means, in a
brotherly manner, to obtain his right; but if that does not prevail, then let
him, or if they live at a distance, as aforesaid, some Friend whom he may write
to and empower on his behalf, take one or two of the overseers or other
judicious and discreet Friends, and in like manner make his claim, and they
unitedly are to labor for a just and expeditious settlement of the matter.

2d. If this step fails of success, Advice to refer them to arbitrators.
the Friends accompanying are to persuade and admonish the parties to choose a
suitable number of Friends as arbitrators, and engage themselves to each other
in a proper manner, to stand to, and abide by, the determination of such
arbitrators. If either of the parties refuse complying with such advice, he or
she so refusing ought to be complained of to the preparative meeting, by one of
the overseers, or by the party complainant, on neglect of the overseers, of
which, when intended, the other party is to have notice, that he or she may be
present, as he or she ought to be. The party complained of to be notified when
to be carried to monthly meeting.
And if the parties cannot there be brought to an agreement to refer the
difference by choosing arbitrators, the complaint is to be carried forward by
that meeting to the monthly meeting, with previous notice also to the party
complained of, and a desire to attend; where the first inquiry should be,
whether the abovementioned Gospel order has been duly observed? if not, the
complainant is to be referred back thereto, and no notice taken thereof on the
minutes; but if it has, the monthly meeting is to advise the hearing and
determination thereof out of meeting; and in order thereto, the parties should
each nominate one or more Friends for determining the difference, and bind
themselves to abide by their decision, as may be agreed on.

Arbitrators to be chosen.
3d. If the parties, or either of them, neglect to attend the meeting, without
sending a sufficient reason, or refuse to nominate and choose arbitrators as
aforesaid, the meeting, after laboring with the party so neglecting or
refusing, should testify their disunion with such offender, if he or she cannot
be brought to comply with what is above advised and required, or to settle the
difference without; and where arbitrators are chosen in any case, they ought,
as speedily as may be, to appoint time and place, and duly attend the business,
by giving the parties and their witnesses a full and fair hearing, Hearing of
the matter.
in the presence of each other, using all caution and care to avoid unnecessary
delay, and to make the determination within the time appointed.

Party refusing to appear before arbitrators, to be disowned.
4th. If either party refuse to attend the arbitrators, and submit his or her
case, or to stand to and abide the award when made, such party must be dealt
with as disorderly, and regardless of peace and unity; and after due
admonition, if he or she persists therein, let such be disowned.

Re-hearing, when to be allowed.
5th. And where bonds or other engagements are entered into by the parties, the
award ought to be final, unless the dissatisfied party do make it evident to
the satisfaction of the monthly meeting, that there is manifest error or
injustice in the same; and when that is made thus to appear, the matter is to
be re-considered by the same or other arbitrators, as in the judgment of the
said meeting may seem best; and such correcting judgment shall be final.

Suing without taking these steps to be disowned.
6th. It is the sense of this meeting, that if any person in religious
membership with us shall arrest, or sue at law, any other Friend, in such
disputed matters, not being under a necessity so to do, in the judgment of the
monthly meeting, or of a few solid, active, judicious, concerned Friends,
consulted in cases of emergency, before he has proceeded as herein before
directed, that such person does therein depart from the principle of truth, and
the known way thereof, and ought to be dealt with by the meeting he belongs to
for the same; and if he or she does not immediately discontinue such legal
proceedings, and condemn such disorderly conduct, to the satisfaction of the
meeting, he or she ought to be disowned. E. D. and 1719.

And whereas there may be some circumstances, Cas^ (...).
even in disputed matters, wherein the foregoing wholesome method of proceeding
cannot be complied with; such as, 1st, The party absconding or leaving the
country with design to defraud his or her creditors; or, 2d, That the going
through the meetings, by the time it must necessarily take up, might be a
manifest damage to the creditor or claimant, by other people's postponing him
or her, as in cases of apparent danger of bankruptcy, or the party being
overloaded with debts, and other creditors generally coming on; or, 3d, That
there may be danger of future damage to such as submit thereto, as in the case
of executors, administrators, or trustees; it may therefore be necessary, and
it is advised, that the monthly meeting where such cases happen, do hold
excused such as shall, in the two first mentioned circumstances in this
paragraph, appear to them to be really necessitated to proceed at law; and in
the latter case of executors, administrators or trustees, where it shall appear
to the meeting that our friendly way would be unsafe, such may be permitted to
have the matter tried at law, with this caution, that the parties on both sides
do behave toward each other in brotherly love, decency and moderation, without
anger or animosity, which will be as a becoming testimony even in courts, and
show that nothing but the nature of the case, and our common station with our
neighbors, under the laws of the land, brings any of us there. 1719.

And as i^ ^ur duty to seek peace with all men, Caution against suing others,
or obliging them to sue us.
and avoid giving provocation or offense to any, it is advised, that Friends be
careful not to go to law with others without urgent necessity, nor in a
vindictive disposition of mind, nor give them just occasion to sue or implead
us; endeavoring, in both cases, to show a becoming temper of justice and
uprightness, by a pacific disposition, to refer our differences with such, to
prudent and just arbitrators, where it may safely be done, rather than contend
at law. -- Hear the causes between your brethren, and judge righteously,
between every man and his brother, and the stranger that is with him. Deuteronomy. i.
16. And where it appears that any of our members do, after this advice, persist
in a conduct clearly inconsistent with moral justice, and refuse to take the
advice of their Friends in concerns with others not in membership with us, such
disregard to equity and Christian unity ought to be testified against.

Public Friends not to be chosen arbitrators.
It is the advice of this meeting, that persons differing about worldly affairs,
do, as little as may be, trouble public ministering Friends with being
arbitrators in such cases.

Arbitrators may take legal counsel.
Where arbitrators are at a loss for want of legal knowledge, it may be
justifiable, at the expense of the parties, to take the opinion of council
learned in the law, in order to their being enabled to come to a just and
lawful judgment on the matter submitted to their determination. 1751.

Arbitrators not to be advocates;
In order that arbitrators may be more truly useful, they should not consider
themselves as advocates for the party by whom they were chosen, but men whose
incumbent duty it is to judge righteously, fearing the Lord. They should shun
all previous information respecting the case, to stand unbiassed;
or, having heard any, should stand unbiassed in their judgments, before they
hear both parties together fully, to hear both parties fully;
whilst either has any fresh matter to offer, until a certain time limited by
mutual agreement. Let no evidence or witness be rejected or withheld. not bound
to give the reasons of their award.
The arbitrators are not bound to express in their award, or otherwise, their
reasons for their decision. E. D.

BOOKS.
IT is recommended to the meeting for sufferings to take the oversight and care
of all writings which may be proposed to be printed, affecting our Christian
testimony; Meeting for sufferings appointed overseers of the press.
and it is advised that such be dealt with as offenders, who print or publish
any pieces tending to excite contention, or occasion breach of unity among
brethren; or any other work or writing which the meeting for sufferings shall
judge derogatory to our Christian principles and profession. 1771.

This meeting does earnestly exhort all parents, Advice against reading
pernicious books.
heads of families and guardians of minors, that they prevent, as much as in
them lies, their children, and others in their service, and under their care
and tuition, from having or reading books and papers tending to prejudice the
profession of the Christian religion, to create in them the least doubt
concerning the authenticity of the Holy Scriptures, or of those saving truths
declared in them; lest their infant and feeble minds should be poisoned
thereby, and a foundation laid for the greatest evils. Play-books, romances,
etc. to be discouraged.
And being sorrowfully affected under a consideration of the hurtful tendency
of reading plays, romances, novels, and other pernicious books; it is earnestly
recommended to every member of our religious society, to discourage and
suppress the same; Printers not to print, sell, or lend them.
and particularly to caution printers and booksellers under our name, against
printing, selling, or lending such books; entreating them to avoid a practice,
for the sake of gain, so inconsistent with the purity of the Christian
religion. And Friends are desired to be careful in the choice of all books in
which their children and families read, seeing there are many under the
specious titles of promoting religion and morality, containing sentiments
repugnant to the truth in Christ Jesus. E. D.

It is agreed, Meeting for sufferings may print and distribute good books.
that the meeting for sufferings have authority to print and distribute, in
such manner as they think proper, the writings of such Friends as have been
approved and published, or may be offered for inspection. E. D.

BURIALS.
Friends advised against going with the dead of other societies into their
worship houses.
FRIENDS are exhorted to be careful themselves, and to keep their children from
going with the dead, at the burials of those not in communion with us, into any
of their worship houses; and to avoid as much as may be the hearing any of
their sermons, that so Friends may discharge their conscience in the sight of
God, and wait for wisdom and counsel from him, and so act, that truth in all
things may be honored by us, and no offense justly given to those not of us.
1711.

Excess at burials cause of dealing.
Whereas at some burials, where persons come from far ^^ere may sometimes be
occasion of some refreshment, let i^ (...) ^one, where necessary, with such
moderation, and the b^ (...) of Friends be with such gravity, as becomes the
occasion; (...) any appear otherwise, let such be dealt with and reproved, as
is advised in case of misbehaviour at marriages. And it may further be
observed, that any excess on these occasions, and the making such solemn times
as these ought to be and are, to appear as festivals, must be burdensome and
grievous to the sober Christian mind, which will be under a far different
exercise at such times: Friends are therefore desired, with care, to use their
best endeavors every where, to avoid and break off that expensive and
offensive custom of making provision of strong drink, and the extensive serving
of it about, which has often led to intemperance, and made interments, which
ought to be attended with a becoming solemnity, appear as noisy festivals,
which has been a grief to many sober-minded amongst us, and is a bad example
to others. 1719.

Friends to be appointed to attend burials and move for timely interment.
And it is advised that solid Friends be appointed by monthly-meetings, to
attend at funerals, to move for bearing out the corpse seasonably, about an hour
after the time appointed to meet at the house. 1729.

Births and burials to be recorded.
It is recommended to the several quarterly and monthly-meetings, to consider
the expediency and services of keeping a regular record in each
monthly meeting, of births and burials. 1757.

It is the solid sense of this Meeting, Meetings not to be appointed on account
of the Burials of those not in membership.

No invitations in meetings to Burials in other Grounds than our own.

Care respecting invitations to Burials in our own Grave Yards.


that Meetings should not be appointed on account of the interment in our
burying Grounds of persons who are not in membership with us; and that
invitations to the burials of such who are not interred in our burying grounds
should not be made in our religious Meetings. 1792.

And also that Friends be religiously g^arded in publishing invitations to the
burials of such who are admitted to be interred in our Grave Yards, not having
a right of Membership with us.

And in order that Meetings may not be held at the interment of our deceased
Members in a customary or formal way, the proposal for holding such Meeting be
previously submitted to the consideration of the Elders and Overseers, or other
solid Friends, Religious guard and Caution respecting the appointment of
Meetings at the interment of deceased members.
either of the Meeting in the compass of which the deceased resided, or of that
in which the interment is to take place, that so the counsel o^ mind of Truth
may be waited for and followed.

And to prevent the introduction of improper interments amongst us -- i^ i^
recommended that two or more Friends be appointed to the (...) our several
burial Grounds by Preparative or Monthly Meetings as the case may require, Two
or more Friends to be appointed to the care of Burial Grounds.
and that no Person who is not in Membership be buried therein without a permit
in writing to be signed by one or two of those Friends, who should also take
care that our Burial Grounds be properly enclosed and kept in decent order.

It is further recommended that at the times of Interment, both before and
after the Corpse is put in the Ground, time be allowed for a solemn Pause.

CERTIFICATES AND REMOVALS.
Certificates for traveling Ministers to be returned.
RECOMMENDED to the Quarterly and Monthly Meetings to take Care, that all
Certificates or Minutes which may be given to any traveling Friend, shall upon
the return of such Friend, Certificates of Removal to be lodged where accepted.
be called for and delivered back; and that all Certificates of Removal brought
by any Friend intending to reside amongst us, shall be lodged in the Monthly
Meeting where the same is accepted; Copies of Certificates to be kept.
and also that every Meeting do keep copies of all Certificates which they give
out. 1718.

For the preservation of Friends from wounding themselv^^ and Families, Friends
not to remove without consulting their Prep. or Mon. Meeting.
or the Body, we do advise, that when any F^^ends have thoughts of removing
their Habitation, more especiall^ (...) Places, that they be careful not to let
wrong motives influ^^ce their conclusions; but in a timely manner acquaint the
Preparative or Monthly Meeting whereto they belong, in order for their
Brotherly advice and Counsel, on the propriety of such their removal, and pay a
due regard to their sense thereon; for want of which, some have suffered loss
both in their Temporal and Spiritual Concerns; and hurt the religious Youth of
their Families. Certificates of Removal to be granted, no objection appearing.
And if no material objection appear against it, they ought to have a
Certificate of their Life, Conversation, and Circumstances, according to Truth
and Justice, to be produced to the Monthly Meeting where they are going to
reside. And Elders, Overseers, and other concerned Friends, When they hear of
any Friend inclining to remove, are to consider it as their duty, in brotherly
Love, to advise such to consult their Preparative or monthly Meetings agreeable
to this necessary Rule. 1719. 1764. 1769.

Certificates, how to be signed.
All Certificates for Women Friends, after the usual inquiry made by the Women,
shall be approved by the Men's Meeting, on whose behalf their clerk shall sign,
and then send such Certificates to the Women for signing by their Clerk, when
they are directed to any Place within our own Yearly Meeting. And all
Certificates given on account of marriage, or removal, or to Friends of the
Ministry traveling in that service, which are directed to places beyond the
extent of our Yearly Meeting, should be signed by the Monthly Meeting at large.
And we direct, A Friend appointed to draw all Marriage Certificates.
that every particular Meeting with the approbation of their Monthly Meeting do
appoint a Friend to draw all the Marriage Certificates which are to be used
there; which Certificates shall be agreeable to the form prescribed in this
Book (page 67) and it is the Judgment of this Meeting that Women Frie^^^, Women
to take Certificates home with their Husbands.
on their removal home with their Husbands after Marriage, should take
Certificates as aforesaid, notwithstanding the Marriage Certificate. 1723. 1724.

When any Person of full age removes without applying for a Certificate, the
Meeting from whence he or she removed, should, Friends removing without
certificates how to be proceeded against.
as speedily as they can, acquaint the Monthly Meeting within whose limits he
or she resides, of the circumstances in which he or she left them, in order for
their knowledge of, and care in dealing with him or her for such neglect, or
for any other offense committed before such removal; and if, after their fully
discharging a christian (...) toward him or her, he or she cannot be brought
to a proper (...) of his or her irregularity so as to comply with what is
dire^^ (...) ^^ch cases, that then, upon information thereof being received by
the Meeting from whence he or she removed, said Meeting has liberty given them
to make a record in their Minutes, letting forth their disapprobation of such
conduct, and that the said Person having disregarded the good order of our
religious Society, has thereby rendered him or herself unworthy of Membership
amongst us; a copy of which Minute should be sent to the Monthly Meeting where
he or she resides, to be delivered to him or her, with an information of his or
her privilege of Appeal, after which, if no Appeal is proposed or made, the
Testimony, if the case requires it, may be published, and a Certificate should
be sent for the Wife and children of such Person, as the case may be.
Nevertheless full power is given to the Monthly Meeting within whose limits any
Person may so remove, and afterward misbehave, to deal with and testify
against him or her, whether he or she produce a Certificate or not, unless he
or she condemn the same to their satisfaction. And it is to be understood,
Infants removing, their Parents etc. to apply for Certificates.
that where Apprentices or Persons under age, are under a necessity of going
from one Place to another, that their Parents, Guardians, Masters, or
Mistresses, do apply for a certificate for them, in order to recommend them as
Members, to the care and oversight of such Monthly Meeting whereto they are
removed. 1744. 1769. 1783.

Persons no delivering Certificates to be dealt with and disowned.
This Meeting is of the Judgment that where it appears any person removed,
neglects to deliver his or her Certificate to the Meeting to which it is
directed, it is the duty of the Meeting granting such Certificate to send a
copy thereof to the said Meeting, and as soon as the same is received, the said
meeting ought to deal with such person in order to bring him or her to a sense
and acknowledgment of his or her misconduct herein, which if he or she refuses
to make he or she ought to be disowned. 1750.

Friends removing falling to want, who to relieve them.
It is the Judgment of this meeting, that when a Certificate from one monthly
meeting to another is received by the meeting to which it is directed, the
Friend or Friends recommended thereby shall be deemed members of the meeting
removed to, so far as (...) under their religious care; but if any such Friend
shall fall (...) ^^ce^^^ous circumstances so as to need relief within one (...)
the receipt of such Certificate, such Friend shall then be com^^^^d to belong
to the meeting from whence he or she came, yet the meeting removed to ought to
assist such Friend, and speedily give notice thereof to the meeting which
recommended him or her, and upon that meeting receiving such notice they ought
immediately to take due care of such Friend, and repay the charge which the
meeting so relieving has been or may be at on account of such Friend; and if
the meeting from whence such necessitous person came after consulting the
meeting within which he or she resides, shall desire him or her to return, he
or she is required so to do, as soon as health and ability of body will admit
(this injunction not being understood to extend to the wife of a person not in
membership, or to their minor children, who are nevertheless to be assisted by
the meeting from whence they have removed, if they should need help within one
Year after receipt of their Certificate as above mentioned) and the Friends
where they reside are desired to advise and assist them in such return -- But
if such necessitous person shall refuse to return, being required so to do as
aforesaid, the monthly meeting removed from are to deal with them, and if they
cannot be brought to comply with their advice, they are at liberty to issue a
Testimony against them: This minute is not to extend to any Friend who by Fire
or other sudden unavoidable losses is reduced in his or her circumstances
within the time herein mentioned and limited. 1792.

See Ministers and Elders etc. page 82.

CHARITY AND UNITY.
Charity and Love recommended.
WE recommend fervent Love and inward Charity one toward another, and to all
men, having always in view the good of mankind generally, and zealously
endeavoring to promote peace on Earth and good will to men; this will greatly
tend to preserve Unity. Where Charity abounds there is Love to God, and Love to
man, but where that is wanting, zeal toward God fails, and the Love of other
things prevails, tending to cool that cementing Disposition which makes Friends
and Neighbors dear to each other. It is for want of Charity, that men speak
(...) of Dignities, detract, and lessen the name of their Neighbor (...).

Friends at variance are to be reconciled.
It is advised that such be dealt with, who are at (...) one with another about
their interests in worldly affairs, or other resentments, admonishing them to
agree, and be speedily reconciled, as becomes the followers of Christ, so that
no troublesome Business may be brought to meeting, which can be satisfactorily
ended without. 1719.

Love and Unity recommended.
Love and Unity is the true ornament and band of our society, under our heavenly
head Christ Jesus, without which Formality will take place of substance, and
the life and power of true Religion will be withdrawn. Let every one therefore
watch over his own heart, and often examine whether he finds Love to God, and
to the brethren really established there on all occasions, but more especially
when we meet together for Worship or Discipline; and let not the enemy of our
souls by any means rob us of this Badge of Discipleship, or tarnish its beauty.
He yet goes about seeking whom he may devour. He knows that our strength is in
the Lord, and consists in our being united in Love, and bound together in an
humble dependence upon our God, and if he can by any invention, break those
cords, and destroy that Union, Waste and Desolation will come upon us like a
Flood. Let us therefore, dear Friends, be ever on our guard, and suspect him as
the author of all evil, and of every evil suggestion of our own heart or
others; and let us unite and be strong in the Lord against all our adversaries,
and their attempts to divide us, and against the enemies of our own house. Our
interest as men, and as christians is one, and every true member must and will
endeavor to preserve that interest entire and unhurt. 1727.

CHILDREN OR YOUTH.
Youth not to do any thing to wound their Parents minds.
IN much Love to the rising Generation, we feel a Freedom to caution and exhort
them to avoid the many Vanities and ensnaring Corruptions to which they are
often tempted and exposed. Ever remember, dear Youth, that "the fear of the
Lord is the beginning of wisdom," and that "a good understanding have all they
who do his commandments." Psa: CXI. 10. -- Take the advice of Godly parents,
Guardians and Friends, for disobedience to parents was Death by God's Law, and
must bring Death now upon the innocent Life in those who are found in evil
practices, (...) ^ver fashionable or high their authority may be, and you are
(...) made sensible that these things give pain and anguish to (...)
^eligiously concerned parents and friends. Not to keep Company in the Night etc.
-- It is an evil thing to go from one Woman to another, keep Company, and sit
together in the night season, spending your precious time in idle discourse,
drawing the affections, and inflaming the passions one of another. And it is
hateful to God and all good people, Not to answer their Parents frowardly etc.
for children to answer their parents frowardly or crossly, although they may
think them out of the way; they ought to answer soberly and modestly or not at
all, for parents ought to be obeyed next to God, nor ought you to act for
yourselves against them; they have taken pains and care for you when you were
young and helpless, and how can you bear to wound their minds by a conduct,
which, in any respect, you know they do not approve, and which the testimony of
truth is against.

Parents etc. to be good Examples and to watch over and reprove them for evil.
And it behooves all Parents, Masters and Mistresses, to be good Examples in
their Families, and to watch over them for good; for it is a great Grief to
many of us to hear and see Friends Children, as well as others who profess
Truth, so frequently use the Worlds language, as, you, to a single Person,
which is a certain Token that they are not even brought up in the form of
Truth, which Corruption and Neglect it is our Duty, in the wisdom of God, to
reprove and bear Testimony against, as well as all other Evils. -- A faithful
performance of the Obligation which lies upon us to Educate our Children in the
way of Truth is well pleasing to God, as may be seen in Abraham, of whom the
Lord said Shall I hide from Abraham the Thing which I do, for I know him, that
he will COMMAND his Children, and his Household after him, and they shall keep
the way of the Lord to do Justice and Judgment, that the Lord may bring upon
Abraham that which he has spoken of him, which indeed was to Bless him, and to
make of him a great Nation. But it was not so with old Eli, who had a sort of
easy way of reproving his sons, but did not restrain them, when he had power,
which brought the wrath of God upon them. I. Samuel II. For dear Friends and
young People, let us consider the Example of our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, who in the Days of his Flesh, on Earth Suffered for us, that, through
him we might receive remission of Sins, but whosoever would receive thi^ (...)
must be such who live not to themselves, but to him wh^ (...) them, as says
the Apostle, "For he died for us that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and
purify unto himself a peculiar People zealous of good works."

Advised, Children not to be placed out but to Friends.
that Friends be careful not to put their Children Apprentice to such who are
not Members of our Society, whereby they are often led out of the purity of our
plain way into a disregard of our Religious Principles; but as much as in us
lies take 'special Care to place them with sober, exemplary Friends, that they
may be preserved in the way of Truth, Friends to give the preference to Friends
Children.
and in the Love of it. And the Professors of Truth would do well to give the
preference to the Children of Friends, and on moderate Terms, that so a mixture
of manners may be avoided, as hurtful in our Families, and the Complaint
existing of difficulty in getting young People placed with faithful Friends on
easy Terms may be removed. 1706. 1787.

Dear Friends, as the Lord has been pleased in his infinite Love, Youth to be
educated in plainness, and guarded against vain Fashions, evil Company keeping
etc.
to raise up many Testimony bearers against the corrupt and vicious Customs,
Practices, and vain Fashions of the world, let us be very watchful over
ourselves, and daily seek for wisdom and strength to educate our young people
in all plainness of Apparel and Speech, habiting them thereto from Infancy,
nipping in the Bud every appearance and desire to the contrary, raising in
them, as much as in us lies, a love therefore, informing their tender minds, as
an understanding is unfolded in them, with our reasons for this Godly
circumspection, that it is a Barrier against the loose, vicious, and immoral
part of mankind; reminding them that our worthy Predecessors in the truth
suffered much for these things, by which they unshackled themselves from the
vain Antic modes, Customs, and Fashions of the Times, which are often Indecent
and Immodest, and lead into hurtful company, pernicious diversions and
entertainments (and purchased for them, an invaluable privilege) which even
many of those who are in the use of these things acknowledge to be
inconvenient, expensive, and not consistent with the blessed truth. -- Thus our
children and young people may in sincerity be induced to walk in the steps of
the Righteous who have gone before, and follow them as they followed Christ,
who has prepared a resting place in Joy and Peace for all who thus Testify to
a degenerate world, their Love and obedience to him, that so the Lord may have
a succession of faithful Servants from (...) Age and Generation to another.

Friends to act wisely toward the Youth.
And that this great work may be advanced by us, we earnestly entreat all
Friends who desire the Prosperity of the Church, that they act in the Wisdom of
God, that it may appear they are clothed with his Spirit, whereby they may be
good examples to the Youth, and helpful to qualify them to act, in due time, in
the Discipline of the Church, and encourage them to come forward therein, by an
early Devotion of themselves to the Lords service, and become Dedicated
thereto. But where this Godly care and exercise of Friends has not the desired
effect, and the young people unwisely crave after a conformity in dress and
manners with the People of the World, by which they put themselves not only in
the way of evil Communication, which corrupts good manners, but lay themselves
open to designing Persons to entangle their affections, and sometimes produce
unequal and unhappy Connections, in Marriage, Youth to be dealt with for
Disobedience etc.
and otherwise; let such, where the labor of Parents and Guardians fail, be
tenderly admonished by a conjunction of solid Friends, who may set before them
the dangerous tendency of such a conduct, and the sin of disobedience, which
they naturally bring upon themselves, with its affecting Punishment: and if the
offenders cannot be prevailed on to amend their ways, let them be further dealt
with in the wisdom of Truth, and a Testimony of Disownment issued. If the Eye
of Friends is watchfully opened, and they faithfully and timely discharge their
duty toward such in a truly Christian, kind, and solid manner, good will be
the Fruits; they will at least stand clear of the Blood of those who will not
hear and forbear, and lay their destruction on themselves; and will secure the
Blessing of peace in so doing, Parents etc. to be dealt with for neglect of
duty.
and in like manner Parents or such as have the Tuition of Children ought to be
cautioned and dealt with if they neglect their duty, and willingly indulge the
Youth in extravagancies and superfluities.

And it is further advised that all Parents and Masters of Families, Youth to
be kept to Meetings and not permitted to wander about.
do use their utmost Endeavors to keep their Youth duly to Meetings, and to
prevent the indecent straggling abroad of their children and servants,
especially on First Days of the Week, and to keep them out of all tumultuous
crowds or gatherings of rude people. And in order to strengthen the Hands of
such who are entrusted with the care of the Youth in a faithful discharge of
their duty (...) th^se respects, Select advices to be revived and read.
it is recommended to Quarterly and Monthly Meetings, to revive on suitable
occasions some of the salutary advices which have been given forth in former
Years by this Meeting, on this important subject, by reading them at Meetings
appointed for that purpose by direction of Quarterly or Monthly Meetings. 1721.
1723. 1724. 1726. 1729. 1776.

Dear Young Friends, we beseech you, Obedience recommended to Youth on which a
Blessing attends.
by the meekness and gentleness of Jesus Christ, to pay a dutiful and tender
regard to the experienced and tender advices of your Parents and Elders, and
obey the divine manifestations in the several degrees thereof; it was the
message and means whereby they have obtained Peace with God, and a good report
amongst Men, and there is no other way. Let the Cross of Christ prevail in you.
-- Depart not from that plainness of Garb, Language and manners which becomes,
and is dictated by the purity of our Doctrine, and the simplicity and
spirituality of our worship. -- We entreat you, be not ashamed nor afraid to
own the Testimony of our worthy Ancients herein, they were led into pure self
denial in these things, and we, by following their examples have enjoyed peace
and satisfaction; and you by acting with the same Christian resolution may
witness the like; the other parts of your conduct corresponding, will hold up a
light to other professors, who on due reflection do agree, that the contrary
customs are vain and deceitful, subject to many inconveniences, and that the
plain manners of the sincere and humble are much to be preferred. Our Blessed
Savior, who was the greatest pattern of plainness and self denial, forbad his
disciples to receive human honor, or to call Men, Master etc. in way of
Ceremony; and it is only by his precious Blood and Spirit that we can be
redeemed from a vain Conversation, Against attending plays etc.
which includes Plays, Sports, Pastimes, an unnecessary resort to Taverns,
Places of Public Diversion, and all other gratifications of the senses, which
deprave the Mind, and are inconsistent with that Modesty, Gravity, and
Seriousness which the Christian Religion dictates, and with those truly
rational and noble Pleasures of the soul, set forth in a strong light by the
holy Apostle. The Fruits of the spirit are Love, Joy, Peace, Long suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, and Temperence. Gal. V. 22.

Friends to be religiously circumspect to prevent the Evils attendant on
neglect.
Let us who are advanced in years and experience, like wise Builders lay the
foundation deep in the minds of the Youth, by manifesting to them that we look
beyond our dissolution, and are engaged for their present and future
Prosperity; and by our uniform regard to an inward Piety and Virtue, let them
see that we really value it, let us labor in the fear of the Lord that their
innocent minds may be preserved from Corruption, that they may understand their
true interest, may consider the uncertainty of temporal things, and above all,
have their Hope and Dependence settled on the Blessing of that almighty Being
who inhabits Eternity, and dwells in the Light, and yet condescends to regard
those, whose Hearts are contrited before him, and tremble at his Word; and not
by any Conduct or Omission of ours frustrate the intentions of Providence
concerning them. Much depends on the execution of the important Trust; and as
on the one hand a winning Affability is most likely to awaken and engage their
attention, the better to convey and fix such Instruction as we at times may be
furnished with for them; so on the other an inflexibility to wrong Desires, and
a firm restraining Hand is sometimes necessary; for want of this many promising
Youth have been caught in unguarded Moments by the repeated solicitude of the
Enemy, or his Emissaries in some or all of the Modes, Recreations, Vanities,
and Allurements above cautioned against, and have been not only infected,
Sorrowful effects of Parents neglect.
but sometimes ruined thereby. And it is an obvious Truth, that where Parents
and Heads of families have not restrained those under their Care from undue
liberties, but suffered a deviation from that plainness and simplicity of
Appearance and Behavior which might have been a guard to them, the Evil rarely
stops there, one step of degeneracy giving birth to another, till they have
arrived to such a degree of obstinacy, that it has not been in their Power to
curb or reform them; so that many under our Profession have lost, not only the
Life but the very appearance of Truth, to the grief of all such who are truly
concerned for the Glory of God, and increase of the Government of his Son, Our
Savior and Blessed Redeemer. 1724. 1729. 1737. 1759. 1760.

It is earnestly desired, Not to make Riches a chief view in Marriages of
Children.
that Parents and Guardians may not make earthly Riches a chief view or cause
of consent in the Marriage of their Children; but in all our Cares about
worldly Treasures, let us ever bear in Mind, that Riches possessed by Children
who do not truly serve God, are likely to prove Snares that may more grievously
entangle them in that Spirit of selfishness and exaltation which stands in
opposition to real Peace and Happiness, and render those. Enemies to the Cross
of Christ, who submit to the influence of it; and let those to whom God has
given riches take the Apostle's advice, Be not high minded but fear, and trust
not in uncertain Riches, but therewith be rich in good Works, willing to
communicate, ready to distribute, and therein be good examples to their
children. E. D.

As to the Rights of Children whose Parents have been married contrary to the
Rules of our Discipline. Children of Friends who married out, and either remain
disunited not Members until received.
It is agreed that where either of those Parents remain out of Membership with
us, their children should not be esteemed Members of our religious Society,
until by application made, either by themselves, their Parent, Parents,
Guardian etc. they be received as such; wherein Monthly Meetings are to
exercise their solid sense and judgment in respect to the fitness of such
application. -- The rights of Children born of Parents who have been Married
agreeable to the Rules of our Discipline, or of such who have both condemned
their outgoing in Marriage, and either of them retaining a right of Membership
at the time of the birth, not being hereby intended to be affected. 1762. 1782.

The religious Education of our Youth, Care of Youth recommended.
and their advancement in the Practice of Piety and Virtue, claiming the
unremitted Labor and care of Quarterly and Monthly Meetings, and of all
faithful Friends, in order for the promotion of purity and selfdenial in Life
and Conversation, it is earnestly and affectionately desired, that Parents and
all others who have the very important Charge of forming the Minds, and
regulating the Conduct of the rising generation, would deeply and seriously
examine how far they have exercised a steady watchful care to restrain and
preserve them; not only from the vain Customs and Fashions of the World, but
also from hurtful Company, tending to corrupt their Morals; and from
associating with each other in an unseemly manner, and at unseasonable times,
whereby great inconveniences have been observed to arise in some Places, to
their own real injury, the Grief of well concerned Friends, and wounding the
Profession of the Truth; so that some who have been promising, and under the
tender visitation of Divine regard, Bad effects of the want of care.
have gradually fallen into a Spirit of Levity, and at length into disgrace;
the consideration of which if duly impressed on the Minds of those who have the
Guardianship of Youth, would excite them to a watchful care for the prevention
of those evils, by encouraging them in a grave and solid Deportme^^ And being
persuaded that the ancient and edifying Practice of ^re^^ently collecting our
Children and Families in order for the benefit of Religious retirement would be
profitable; Friends are exhorted to seek after Strength, and a right
qualification, under which they may be enabled to revive, First day afternoon
sittings in Families recommended.

Reading the Scriptures.


and continue it, especially in the Afternoon the First Day of the week, in
such Places where Meetings for Public worship are not held at that Time, the
performance of which commendable Duty, and reading the holy Scriptures, and
other Religious books with a diligent care over our young People, to discourage
their visiting and rambling about on that Day, and mixing with unprofitable
Company; as Heads of Families are piously circumspect herein themselves, may be
a means, under the Divine Blessing, for their preservation out of those
ensnaring Temptations to which they are liable to be exposed. And by thus
cherishing an anxious concern for their lasting welfare, an injudicious
indulgence and allowance of wrong Liberties would be avoided, and a constant
care maintained to train up our Youth in a course of Industry, Steadiness, and
Sobriety, and, As much as in us lies, prepare their Minds to receive the power
of Truth, without which they never can be happy. 1781.

Early religious instruction.
The Importance of an early instruction in the Law of God is set forth with
peculiar Strength, clearness and solemnity in Deuteronomy. VI. 4, etc. Hear O Israel!
the Lord our God is one Lord. And thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Might. And these words which I
command thee this Day shall be in thine Heart, and thou shall teach them
diligently unto thy Children, and shall talk of them when thou sit in thine
House, and when thou walk by the Way, and when thou lie down, and when
thou risest up. And restraint.
It is requisite also that Restraint be added to Instruction, it being much
easier, as well as more prudent, to be exercised upon the first appearances of
an inclination to dangerous or hurtful Liberties than afterward; for where
Children, through the prevalence of fond affection, have been accustomed to
improper Indulgences, when they are grown to such a dangerous degree of
ripeness, that the exertion of Authority has become absolutely necessary, the
strength of their Passions, so habituated, has often proved unconquerable, or
very difficult to overcome, to the great hurt of the unhappy youth, and the
unspeakable Grief of the imprudently indulgent Parents. E. D

Some explanation respecting the authority of Monthly Meetings to disown our
Youth or others who depart from that simplicity which Truth requires, and who
run into, Those who deviate in their dress and address, if irreclaimable to be
disowned.
and copy after the vain and extravagant fashions of the world in their dress
and address, being necessary, and coming under solid and weighty consideration,
it appears to be the sense of this Meeting, that if after patient Labor in the
Spirit of meekness and wisdom, such cannot be reclaimed, Monthly Meetings may
give forth Testimonies of Disownment against them. 1792.

CIVIL GOVERNMENT.
Give no offense to any, but pray for all.
ADVISED, to walk wisely and circumspectly toward all Men, in the peaceable
Spirit of Christ Jesus, giving no offense or occasion to those in outward
Government, nor way to any Controversies Heats and Distractions of this World
about the Kingdoms of it, but to pray for the good of all, and submit to that
Divine Power and Wisdom which Rules over the Kingdoms of Men.

Opposition, or combinations against those in power, not consistent which our
peaceable principles.
Believing that we are called to show forth to the world in Life and Practice,
that the blessed reign of the Messiah, the Prince of Peace, is begun, and we
doubt not but it will proceed till it attain its completion in the Earth, when
according to the Prophecies of Isaiah and Micah Nation shall not lift up Sword
against Nation, neither shall they learn War any more; and influenced by these
Principles, we cannot consistently join with such as form Combinations of a
hostile nature against any; much less in opposition to those Providentially
placed in sovereign or subordinate Authority; nor can we unite with or
encourage such as revile and asperse them, for it is written, "Thou shall not
speak Evil of the Ruler of thy People, Acts. XXII. 5. E. D.

As the maintaining inviolate that liberty of conscience which is essential to
our union and well being as a religious society, evidently appears to be our
indispensable Duty; this Meeting does with fervent and sincere desires for the
present and future Prosperity of Truth among us, caution, advise and exhort
Friends, to beware of accepting of, or continuing in the exercise of any Office
or Station in Civil society or government, by which they may in any respect be
engaged in, or think themselves under a necessity of violating any branch of
our Christian Testimony, or of enjoining, or enforcing the compliance of their
Brethren or others, with any act which they conscientiously scruple to perform.
Friends in office oppressing tender consciences, to be disowned.
And if any in religious Membership with us, should after the advice and loving
admonition of their Brethren; thus manifested, act so repugnant to true self
denial, and the benignity of the Gospel, notwithstanding any such Station, the
Judgment of Truth must go forth against such, until they are brought to a sense
and acknowledgment of their Error. And it is also the sense and judgment of
this Meeting, that Friends ought not, in any wise, to be active or accessory in
electing, or promoting to be elected, Electing or encouraging our Brethren to
such Offices, and vindicating the same discouraged.
their Brethren to such Offices or Stations in civil Government, the execution
whereof tends to lay waste our Christian Testimony, or subject their Brethren
or others to suffering on account of their Conscientious Scruples. -- see Oaths
Page 1762.

A solid and weighty concern being revived at this Meeting for the Prosperity
of Truth, Honors of the world not to be sought or accepted.
and the Preservation of Friends on the ancient Foundation of Unity and Gospel
fellowship; and a Spirit of concord and Unanimity prevailing; it is earnestly
and affectionately recommended to the Quarterly and Monthly Meetings, and to
Friends individually, to bear in Mind the Spirituality of our Profession, that
by living near the divine principle of truth, our Testimony thereto may be
preferred to every temporal consideration, that the Offices of profit or Honor
of this World may neither be sought after, nor readily accepted by any of us
when solicited thereto. 1764.

After a time spent in the Consideration of the Proceedings of the Meeting for
Sufferings, Not to join in commotions prevailing.
and the seasonable advice given forth to admonish Friends against entering
into Associations and Measures proposed by some of the Inhabitants of these
Colonies, for the asserting and maintaining our civil Rights and Liberties,
which are frequently productive of Consequences inconsistent with the nature of
the Gospel; this Meeting finds an engagement earnestly and affectionately to
desire, that Friends in all Places may be particularly careful to Live near the
Divine Principle, which if faithfully attended to, will preserve us in a
conduct becoming our holy Profession, and teach us to avoid mixing with those
who are not convinced of our religious Principles, in their human Policy and
contrivance, and to seek after stillness of Mind, in order that under the
direction of true Wisdom, we may be enabled to administer advice to any of our
Brethren who may be inadvertently drawn aside to join with or countenance the
commotions prevailing; thus we may demonstrate to the world our Regard to our
Christian Testimony, and give no just occasion to any, to accuse us of
deviating from the Principles and conduct of our worthy Predecessors, who in
times of greatest difficulty, manifested Union amongst themselves, and steadily
preferred the cause and reputation of Truth to every other consideration. 1770.
1773.

CONDUCT AND CONVERSATION.
WHATEVER exercises we may meet with on account of our constant Testimony to
the Truth in all Godliness of Conversation, and to the end that we may not
faint in our Minds, Enlist under the banner of Christ, and pursue Peace without
fainting.
let us consider Him who endured such contradiction of Sinners, who took up the
Cross and despised the Shame, and is now set down on the right Hand of God as
the Captain of our Salvation; and let us follow him, and Fight under his Banner
the good Fight of Faith, that in the end we may obtain the Crown of
Righteousness which is Peace and Assurance forever. 1694.

Advised that such be dealt with who are given to Swearing, Diverse scandalous
enormities cause of dealing.
Cursing, Lying, Men and Women unlawfully, or unseemly keeping Company with
each other or any other scandalous Practice, and where any professing Truth are
guilty of any gross or notorious Crimes, Acknowledgments for scandalous
offenses to be read publicly.
or such other disorderly and indecent Practices as shall occasion public
Scandal, after being dealt with by the Overseers or other concerned Friends, if
they are brought to a sense thereof, or of their own free will when such a
sense is come to, such offenders ought without improper delay to appear at the
Monthly Meeting whereto they belong; and, to the end that the Scandal may be
removed, and our holy Profession cleared as much as in them lies, there
acknowledge the offense, and condemn the same in writing under their Hand, to
the satisfaction of the said Meeting; and let such acknowledgment be published
by the said Meeting, in such manner, as that it may reach as far, and become as
Public as the offense has been. And where any such offender refuses so to
acknowledge and condemn the Fault, the said Monthly Meeting ought speedily to
Testify against him or her, and the Fact, and publish such Testimony so far as
shall appear necessary for the clearing of Truth. Testimonies against such also
to be read publicly.
And although where such offenders do condemn their own scandalous Actions to
the satisfaction of the Meeting, yet Monthly Meetings ought to be cautious how
they too readily entrust such in the management of the affairs of the Church.
-- But if the offense committed be only against the Church, Acknowledgments and
minutes of disownment for offenses against the Church not be published.
and not of public scandal, in that case an acknowledgment and condemnation by
the Party, under Hand, and the same entered on the Monthly Meeting Book, is
sufficient; but upon the offender's failure or disqualification so to do, the
Meeting ought, after deliberate dealing and due admonition, to disown him or
her, by a Minute entered in their said Book, until he or she shall repent and
give satisfaction as aforesaid. 1719.

Temperance and Moderation.
We put you in mind of the Temperance and Moderation of faithful Friends, how
they avoided excess in eating and drinking, in gaity of Apparel and Furniture;
how Peaceably and Neighbourly they behaved toward all men, speaking evil of no
man, avoiding as much as possible all occasions of Discord; not Pettish,
Captious, heady and high minded, but Patient and Kind, showing forth out of a
good Conversation, their Works with meekness of Wisdom, to the praise of him
who had called them from Darkness to his mavelous Light. Inordinate pursuit
of workily Riches.
-- And we earnestly caution and advise against the inordinate pursuit of
Worldly Riches, which being sought within due Bounds for the comfortable
subsistence of ourselves and families, and the charitable relief of others in
necessity is not only Lawful but commendable, but when the Mind is carried away
with the love of those things, they then become, even though Men do not
transgress the bounds of Justice, a Clog and hindrance in its attendance on the
duties of Religion, and is an Excess which ought to be guarded against The Love
of Money being the Root of all Evil. I. Tim. VI. 9.10. And the coveting after
it in this Degree leads to Destruction, the Minds of such being so engrossed
with it as to forget and neglect the most necessary Part, viz. the great
Business of Religion and Salvation. 1734.

Reliance on Divine Providence.
A considerable Time was spent in a deep and weighty consideration of the
present trying Circumstances, which, through the permission of divine
Providence, attend the Inhabitants of these colonies, and a united concern
prevailing, that the Professors of Truth of every Rank and Station, may
seriously lay the same to Heart, and humbly wait for the direction of divine
Wisdom to govern their Conduct agreeable to our Christian Testimony, that the
weak among us may be strengthened, and all excited to manifest to the World the
excellency of our peaceable Principles, and reliance alone on the Divine
protection. 1774.

It is the earnest concern of this Meeting, that in all our Dealings and
transactions amongst Men, strict Justice may be observed, Strict Justice to be
observed, covetousness avoided.
and that no motives of pecuniary Interest may induce any amongst us to impose
one on another, on our Neighbors, or others. -- And it is desired that Monthly
Meetings may be careful to administer suitable admonition against a spirit of
Covetousness in any, and to bear a Testimony against every appearance of
deviation from strict Justice. 1778.

Friends are desired to be careful of their conduct at all times,
Circumspection in all things, and at all times.
and on all occasions, that no stumbling Block be laid in the way of honest
Inquirers, nor offense given to tender, young convinced Friends. Let your Light
so shine before Men, that they may see your good Works, and glorify your Father
which is in Heaven. Let us walk wisely toward those that are without, as well
as those within. Let our Moderation and Prudence, as well as Truth and Justice,
appear to all Men, and in all things; in Trading and Commerce, in Speech and
Communication, in Eating and Drinking, in Habit and Furniture, and through all
in a meek, lowly, quiet Spirit; that as we profess to be a Spiritual Minded
People, we may appear to be such, as being bounded by the Cross of Christ, show
forth the power of that divine Principle which we make Profession of, by a
Conversation every way agreeable thereunto. E. D.

We beseech you, in your ordinary Conversation among Men, Chaste exemplary
Conversation.
let your words be few and savory, and observe the Precept of the Apostle, Let
no corrupt Communication proceed out of your Mouth, so may your good example,
and the Gravity and Circumspection of your conduct and Behavior, minister
matter of just Rebuke to those who know not a Bridle to their Tongue, and who
seem not sufficiently aware, That in the multitude of Words there wants not
Sin. Pro. X. 19.

Frequent waiting in stillness on the Lord for the renewal of strength, keeps
the Mind at home in its proper Place and Duty, Avoid much Conversation.
and out of all unprofitable association and converse, whether amongst those of
our own, or other Professions. Much hurt may accrue to the religious Mind by
long and frequent Conversation on temporal matters, especially by interesting
ourselves too much in them; for there is a Leaven therein, which being suffered
to prevail, indisposes and benumbs the Soul, and prevents its frequent
ascendings in living aspirations toward the Fountain of eternal Life.

CONVINCED PERSONS.
IT is concluded that the following order be observed on receiving Persons into
Membership -- That they apply to the Overseers or Elders, and request to come
under the Care of Friends, who, Mode of receiving new Members.
when they are easy so to do, are to lay it before the Preparative Meeting; and
after that Meeting is fully satisfied, by paying a solid Visit, or otherwise,
they are to lay the case before the Monthly Meeting; which Meeting shall
appoint some suitable Friends to inquire into the Person's Life and
Conversation, and also to take a solid Opportunity of Conference with the
Party, in order the better to understand whether his or her Motives for such
Request be sincere, and on the Ground of true Convincement; and make Report of
their sense of the Persons suitableness to become a Member, which, if
satisfactory to the Meeting, a Minute should then be made, signifying the
acceptance of such into Membership, and appointing a Friend or two to acquaint
the Person thereof, and request his or her attendance at the next Monthly
Meeting -- But in all such Cases, Friends are desired carefully to attend to
the Advice of the Apostle, "Lay hands suddenly on no Man." The want of which
regular and due Care has often hurt the Particulars, by settling them in a
false Rest, and been very injurious to the Reputation of Society. N. E. D.

On deliberate consideration it is recommended, in all applications of persons
to be received into Membership, that Monthly Meetings be deep and weighty in
their deliberations and result; and when a Monthly Meeting becomes satisfied,
and united in believing that a Person applying to be received as a member of
our Society, is convinced of our religious principles, manifesting a good
degree of subjection to the Divine principle in his or her heart, and a
circumspect Life and conduct, may in their freedom receive such with propriety,
without respect to nation or color. 1796.

DAYS AND TIMES.
Superstitious observation of Days, Months and Times.
ADVISED, that Friends keep to their wonted Example and Testimony against the
Superstitious observation of Days, and to the simplicity of Truth, and our
ancient Testimony, in calling the Days and Months by Scripture Names, and not
by Heathen. E. D. 1691. 1697.

Reasons for our Practice.
We think it expedient to continue in remembrance, some of the Motives which
induced our ancient Friends to forbear the Vulgar Appellations of the Months
and Days, and to observe in their conversation and writings such Names as were
agreeable to Scripture, and the Practice of good Men therein recorded.

The Children of Israel, the People whom God chose out of all the Families of
the Earth to place his Name among, and to make himself known unto, were
strictly commanded, not only to abstain from the Idolatrous Practices of the
Nations, in the midst of whom they dwelt, but were enjoined to be Circumspect
in all Things that the Lord commanded," and even to "make no mention of the
Names of other Gods, neither to let it be heard out of their Mouth. Exodus
XXIII. 13. -- This Injunction was not relative to any Legal or Typical Rites,
external Ceremonies, or Institutions of the Law peculiar to the Jewish Nation,
but was a perpetual Command and standing Ordinance, respecting the Honor of
the one Almighty Being, the same Yesterday, to Day, and forever, and as such
ought to be regarded by us, and by all the Generations of those, who, with the
Heart believe, as well as with the Tongue confess, That the Lord he is God, and
that there is none else besides him." Deuteronomy. IV. 35. Who has declared, "I am
the Lord, that is my Name, and my Glory will I not give to another, neither my
Praise to Graven Images. Isa. XLII. 8.

Convinced of this great and everlasting Truth, both by the Testimony of the
Holy Scriptures, and the manifestation of that divine Principle, which leads
those who are faithful to its teachings, from all that would dishonor the Name
of God, either in Word or Deed, our ancient Friends were conscientiously
concerned to refrain from the use of those Names of Months and Days, which had
been ascribed by way of Honor to the Idols of the Heathen, and in conformity
to their false Worships; this Concern rested upon them, from a firm Persuasion,
that the Glorious Gospel Day and Time was come, wherein the Lord was fulfilling
his Covenant with Israel, viz. I will take away the Names of Baalim This word
Baalim, being the Plural Number of Baal, signifying Lord, has relation to the
Names of diverse Idols of the Heathen, worshipped in several Places.
out of his Mouth, and they shall no more be remembered by their Name. Hos. II.
17.

And that you may the more clearly discern the importance of that Christian
Testimony borne by our Predecessors in this Case, we recommend what follows to
your serious consideration. viz.

A brief Account of the Origin of the Names of some Months of the Year, and of
all the Days of the Week, now customarily and commonly used.

1st. January was so called from Janus, an ancient King of Italy, Months.
whom heathenish superstition had deified, to whom a Temple was built, and this
Month dedicated.

2nd. February was so called from Februa, a word denoting Purgation by
Sacrifices; it being usual in this Month for the Priests of the Heathen God Pau
to offer Sacrifices, and perform certain Rites, conducing as was supposed, to
the cleansing or purgation of the People.

3rd. March was so denominated from Mars, feigned to be the God of War, whom
Romulus, Founder of the Roman Empire, pretended to be his Father.

4th. April is generally supposed to derive its Name from the Greek appellation
of Venus, an imaginary Goddess, worshipped by the Romans.

5th. May is said to have been so called from Maia the Mother of Mercury,
another of their pretended ethnic Deities, to whom in this Month they paid
their Devotions.

6th. June is said to take its Name from Juno, one of the supposed Goddesses of
the Heathen.

7th. July, so called from Julius Caesar, one of the Roman Emperors, who gave
his Name to this Month, which before was called Quintilis or the Fifth.

8th. August, so named in Honor of Augustus Caesar another of the Roman
Emperors -- This Month was before called Sextilis or the Sixth. Macrob Saturn.
Lib. I. Chap. 12.


The other Four Months, namely, September, October, November, and December,
still retain their numerical Latin Names, which according to the late
regulation of the Calender will for the future be improperly applied. However,
from the continued use of them hitherto, as well as from the Practice of the
Jews before the Babylonish Captivity See the Scriptures to the Time of Ezra.
it seems highly probable, that the method of distinguishing the Months by
their Numerical Order only, was the most ancient, as it is the most plain,
simple, and rational.

As the Idolatrous Romans thus gave Names to several of the Months, in honor
of their pretended Deities; so the like Idolatry prevailing among our Saxon
Ancestors, induced them to call the Days of the Week by the Name of the Idol
which on that Day they peculiarly worshipped -- hence.

Days.
The First Day of the Week they called Sunday, from their accustomary adoration
of the Sun on that Day.

The Second Day of the Week they called Monday, from their usual Custom of
Worshipping the Moon on that Day.

The Third Day of the Week they named Tuesday, in honor of one of their Idols
called Tuisco.

The Fourth Day of the Week was called Wednesday, from the Appellation of
Woden, another of their Idols.

The Fifth Day of the Week was called Thursday, from the Name of an Idol called
Thor, to whom they paid their Devotions on that Day.

The Sixth Day of the Week was termed Friday, from the Name of Friga, an
imaginary Goddess, by them worshipped.

The Seventh Day they styled Saturday, as is supposed from Saturn, or Seater,
by them then worshipped. See Verstegan and Sheringham.


In the Ages of Popish Superstition, not only the use of such Heathenish Names
and Customs were indulged, but also other unsound and unscriptural Practices in
Religion were invented and introduced. For when the Profession of the Christian
Religion became National, Multitudes of Heathenish Priests, whose Interest lay
in the performance of Rites, Ceremonies, and Sacrifices, embraced prevailing
Christianity with selfish Views, and labored early, with too much success, to
find employment for themselves, by imposing on the People a new set of
Ceremonies and Sacrifices, bearing some resemblance to those, which in their
former state of Heathenism they had been accustomed to: From this corrupt
Source sprang the Popish Sacrifice of the Mass, the Celebration of which, at
particular Times, and on particular occasions gave rise to the Vulgar Names of
Michaelmas, Martinmas, Christmas, and the like.

Seeing therefore that these Appellations and Names of Days, Months and Times
are of an Idolatrous or Superstitious Original, contrary to the Divine Command,
the Practice of good and holy Men in former Ages, and repugnant to the
Christian Testimony borne by our faithful Friends and Predecessors in the
Truth, for the sake of which they patiently endured many Revilings; let neither
the reproach of Singularity, nor the specious Reasonings of such as would evade
the Cross of Christ, turn you aside from the simplicity of the Gospel, nor
discourage you from keeping to the Language of Truth, in denominating the
Months and Days according to the plain and Scriptural way of Expression,
thereby following the example of our worthy Elders, and coming up in a noble
and honorable Testimony against these, and all other remains of Idolatry and
Superstition. E. D. 1751.

Some Reasons for not observing Fasts and Feast Days and Times, Reasons against
Fast and Feast Days and Times etc.
and other human Injunctions and Institutions relative to the Worship of God,
and against Illuminating our Houses and closing our Shops on occasions of
Rejoicing. etc.

Ever since we were a People we have had a Testimony against mere Formality,
and human Injunctions in Matters of Religion and the Worship of God, and being
taught by the Precepts of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Testimonies of his
Apostles, and our own Experience, that the Worship and Prayers which God will
accept, can only be performed by the immediate assistance of the Holy Spirit;
we are conscientiously concerned to maintain our Religious Dissent from formal
and ceremonious Injunctions; by which set Forms and Times are appointed in
Man's Will for Divine Worship; for though the Jews in the first Covenant had
many Fasts and Feasts and holy Days, yet even in that Time, when the
observation of Fasts and appointed Days was enjoined, the Lord by the Prophet
declared, He was weary to bear their appointed Feasts, that their solemn
Meeting was Iniquity. Isaiah. I. 10 to 15. Because for want of a proper
Disposition to seek and serve him; their Hearts remained polluted. Ye shall not
Fast as Ye do this Day to make your Voice to be heard on high, is it such a
Fast that I have chosen, a Day for a Man to afflict his Soul? Is it to bow down
his head as a Bullrush, and to spread Sackcloth and Ashes under him? Will thou
call this a Fast and an acceptable Day to the Lord? Is not this the Fast that I
have chosen, to loose the Bands of Wickedness, to undo the heavy Burdens, and
to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every Yoke? Is it not to deal
thy Bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the Poor that are cast out, to
thine House; when thou see the Naked that thou cover him, and that thou hide
not thyself from thine own Flesh; then shall thou call, and the Lord shall
answer, thou shall cry, and he shall say here I am. Isa. LVIII. 4 to 9. From
which it appears, that even when Public Fasts were observed by Divine
appointment, yet the Lord declared his disapprobation of them, when the
Observers thereof did not manifest their sincerity by suitable Fruits of
Repentance and amendment of Life. But we dare not comply with Injunctions of
that kind, as the Dispensation in which those outward Observations were
enjoined, has long since Ceased. Christ, our Holy Head and High Priest, who is
the substance of that which was pointed to, and hoped for, enjoins his
Followers the observance of a Daily, universal Fast; a Fast from every thing
which has not a tendency to purify and perfect the Soul, and render it more and
more fit to become the Tabernacle of the Holy Ghost. He positively requires of
his Disciples and Followers, That they deny themselves, take up their Cross and
follow him" Matt. XVI. 24. And "that they Watch and Pray always, that they may
be accounted worthy to stand before him. Luke. XXI. 36. That in the Primitive
Churches they saw an end of these Shadows of things to come, and were brought
to him, the substance, in whom all Figures and Shadows do end, is manifested by
the repeated expressions of the Apostle Paul. For Christ is the End of the Law
for Righteousness to every one that believes" Romans X. 4. -- "But now has he
obtained a more excellent Ministry, by how much also he is the Mediator of a
better Covenant, which was established upon better Promises." Heb. VIII. 6. But
now after that ye have known God, or rather are known of God, how turn ye again
to the Weak and Beggarly Elements, whereunto ye desire again to be in bondage.
Ye observe Days, and Months, and Times, and Years; I am afraid of You, lest I
have bestowed upon You labor in vain." Gall. IV. 9 to 11. "One Man esteems
one Day above another, another esteems every Day alike: He that regards the
Day regards it unto the Lord, and he that regards not the Day, to the Lord
he does not regard it. Let us not therefore Judge one another any more, but
judge this rather, that no man put a Stumbling Block or an occasion to fall, in
his Brothers way." Romans XIV. 5, 6, and 13. "Let no Man therefore Judge you in
Meat or Drink, or in respect of an holy Day, or of the New Moon, or of the
Sabbath Days, which are a shadow of things to come, but the Body is of Christ.
Coll. II. 16.17. And we apprehend that the Testimony and Practice of our
Forefathers is truly consistent therewith, as will appear on a perusal of their
Writings, and particularly those of our worthy Friends Wm. Penn, and Robert
Barclay. Wm. Penn, Vol. II. 875.
We cannot in Conscience to God observe holy days so called, the Public Fasts
and Feasts, because of their human institution and ordination, and that they
have no Divine Warrant, but are appointed in the will of man. Even as we have
suffered much in our native Country because we neither could ourselves bear
Arms, nor send others in our places, nor give our money for the buying of
Drums, Standards, and other Military Attire: Barclay's Apology. 567.
and lastly because we could not bold our Doors, Windows, and Shops close for
Conscience sake, upon such Days as Fasts and Prayers were appointed to desire a
Blessing upon, and Success to the Arms of the Kingdom or Commonwealth under
which we live; neither give thanks for the Victories acquired by the effusion
of Blood; by which forcing of the conscience they would have constrained our
Brethren, living in diverse Kingdoms, at War together, to have implored Our God
for contrary and contradictory things, and consequently impossible; (...) is
impossible that two Parties fighting together should both obtain the Victory:
and because we cannot concur with them in this confusion we are subject to
Persecution, Yea, and others who with us do witness that the use of arms is
unlawful to Christians do look asquint upon us, but which of us two do most
faithfully observe this Testimony against arms, either they who at certain
times at the Magistrates order, do close up their Shops and Houses, and meet in
their assemblies, praying for the prosperity of their arms, or giving Thanks
for some Victory or other, whereby they make themselves like to those who
approve Wars and Fighting; or we who cannot do these things, for the same Cause
of Conscience, lest we should destroy by our Works what we establish in words,
we shall leave to the Judgment of all prudent Men.

Upon the same Principle, and for the like Reasons, we cannot conform to the
Custom of illuminating our Houses, Illuminating houses.
by placing Lights at the windows with others, as a mark of rejoicing for some
signal Victory in War, or in commemoration of some remarkable Day, or other
occasion; believing that Strife must come to an End, and war, with every thing
built thereon must cease among Christians; and therefore the continuance of
these Occasions are rather Causes of deep Mourning than of intemperate and rude
Joy. Hence we have patiently borne the breaking of our windows and Spoiling of
our Houses rather than comply with these marks of Degeneracy; which Violence
offered to us has appeared so abhorrent to others, that humane civil
Magistrates have of their own free will, sometimes kindly discountenanced, and
guarded us from.

And as we can appeal to the Searcher of Hearts, that our Testimony herein
proceeds from inward Conviction, and a Principle of Conscience, and not from
Perverseness, Obstinacy, or Disrespect to our Superiors, we hope the most
charitable and Christian construction will be put upon our Conduct in thus
Dissenting from the Practice of other Professors of Christianity: for though we
think ourselves well warranted in adhering to the Precepts of Our Lord Jesus
Christ, who enjoined his Followers, that when they fasted they should not
appear unto Men to fast, but unto their Father who sees in secret. Matt. VI.
16. Nevertheless it is far from us to censure such who sincerely esteem it
their duty to observe, in humility of Soul, Days and Times of Fasting and
Prayer.

We have ever believed, that it is by the Light, or Gift of God, all true
Knowledge in things spiritual is revealed, and as the same is received in the
Heart, by the strength and power thereof, all true Believers in Christ come to
the clear and distinct Knowledge of their Duty, and will be taught thereby when
to Fast, and what to Pray for as they ought: True Prayer.
and as Prayer is the most awful and solemn part of religious Worship, we
esteem it our Duty to wait for divine Light and Understanding, that we may know
the will of God, otherwise we may ask amiss, and not receive, and, by Offering
the Sacrifice of Fools, do evil.

If every particular Person would reform one, The acceptable Fast.
as it is in the power of every one, under the operation and influence of
divine Grace to do, this will be an acceptable Fast to the Lord; to Fast from
Strife, Contention, unnatural Heats, Broils, Animosities, Blood; from Luxury,
Wantonness, Revellings, Drunkenness, Profaneness, Impiety, Covetousness,
Deceit, Fraud, Infidelity, and all manner of evil, then might we have some well
grounded Reason to hope, that we may be favored with Days of Peace and
Tranquillity; and that in the Lords Time, the Professors of Christianity will
come to be of one Mind, in these, and other things appertaining to our present
and future well-being and Happiness, and say the same thing, sitting under
their own Vine and Fig Tree, where none shall make them afraid.

DEFAMATION AND DETRACTION.
Tatlers, Tale-bearers, Backbiters, Speakers of Evil, Busy Bodies etc to be
dealt with.
ADVISED, that such be dealt with as are guilty of Tatling, Tale bearing,
Reproaching, Backbiting, or speaking Evil of their Brethren or Neighbors; or
busily meddling, where not concerned, with the affairs of others; the tendency
of all which being to raise up Strife and Discord, or cause Disesteem among
Brethren and Neighbors.

Mode of proceeding on hearing of any scandalous reports of another, by the
Friend hearing them.
And as Backbiting, Whispering, and reporting any thing to the Injury of another
ought to be discountenanced, prevented, and utterly disused amongst us, if any
Friend hear of any scandalous Words or Actions of another, he ought, as much as
in him lies, to stop such Reports, by discountenancing or dealing with the
Reporter, showing the Evil and Injustice of such defamatory Conduct; and then,
without further spreading it himself, advise the Friend whom it concerns,
thereof, either by going to him or her, or if he or she belong to another
Meeting, by writing to him or her, and thus give an opportunity to such, to
clear themselves, if innocent, or condemn their Fault if guilty: and if one or
the other be not speedily done, the Friend, so religiously concerned for Love
and good order, may acquaint the Overseers, or some other judicious Friend of
the Meeting whereto the offender belongs, that he or she may be dealt with.
1719.

Discipline to be exercised against Tale-bearers etc.
We earnestly desire, that our Discipline be strictly put in practice without
delay, against Tale-bearers and spreaders of false Reports, affecting the
Character or Interest of another. 1723.

Whispering, Detraction etc. to be guarded against.
We remind you to stand upon your guard against all Whispering, Backbiting and
Detracting spirits, who busy themselves in spreading evil surmisings one of
another, and to discourage every Practice of that nature; observing the advice
of the Apostle, Let all Bitterness, Wrath, Anger, and evil Speaking be put away
from you, with all malice, be ye kind one to another, tender hearted, forgiving
one another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you, Ephesians. IV. 31.32."
Always mindful of the Precept of our Lord, "Whatsoever ye would that men should
do to you, do ye even so to them. Matt. VII. 12. E. D.

DISCIPLINE AND MEETINGS FOR DISCIPLINE.
Meetings for Discipline to be supported.
THE Institution of our Meetings for Discipline, chiefly for the necessary Order
and Discipline of the Church, has, on experience been found so beneficial,
that we earnestly recommend the support and use of them in that authority,
wherein they were established; for where any have been negligent in attending
them, or opposed to their usefulness, Carnality and Death have been the
Consequence. 1701.

Copies of Minutes etc. of one Mo. or Qu. Meeting to be granted to another.
It is the sense of this Meeting, as a general Rule in all Cases, that where any
Monthly or Quarterly Meeting have occasion for, and request Copies of any of
the Papers, Minutes, or Records of another Monthly or Quarterly Meeting, the
same may accordingly be granted. 1705. 1719.

Where any difference happens amongst Friends, Copies of entries etc. may be
granted or denied to private Persons.
and the same be entered in any Monthly or Quarterly Meeting Book, it is
agreed, that if the Parties, or either of them think that Copies of such
Entries may be useful and necessary for them, and request the same, such
Monthly and Quarterly Meetings shall have a discretional power to give or
refuse such Copies, according to the circumstances and motives attending. 1710.

Good Order to be preserved.
Advised that Care and earnest Endeavors may be exerted in all our particular
Meetings of Business for preservation of good Order and wholesome Discipline,
and we earnestly recommend the same to Friends in their several Places and
Stations, that they be not slack therein; but that Friends every where may
apply to the Lord for Wisdom, who will not fail those who seek it in humility
and fear; through which, as well Overseers as Heads of Families may be enabled
to discharge their respective duties and Trusts in a Christian, meek Spirit;
for it is that which gives weight and success to our Labors. Let us all
therefore guard against the warmth of our own Spirits; and let Love, the mark
of Discipleship govern in all our behavior one toward another, thus will
Truth make us appear lovely, and the Friends thereof be strong in the Lord.
1715.

Setting up or laying down of Meetings by what authority.
Agreed, that no Quarterly Meeting be set up, or laid down without the consent
of the Yearly Meeting; no Monthly, without the consent of the Quarterly, nor
any Preparative or other Meeting of Business or Worship, without application of
the respective Monthly Meeting to, and having consent of the Quarterly.
Subordination of Meetings.
-- These Meetings are subordinate and accountable thus; the Preparative to the
Monthly, the Monthly to the Quarterly, and the Quarterly to the Yearly Meeting;
so that if the Yearly Meeting be at any time dissatisfied with the Proceedings
of any of the said Meetings; or the Quarterly Meeting with the proceedings of
any Monthly Meeting, or the Monthly with any of its Preparative Meetings, such
Meeting or Meetings ought with readiness and meekness to render a satisfactory
account accordingly.

Recommended, Representatives of Mo. and Qu. Meetings to be appointed.
that there be a sufficient number of Friends appointed by each Monthly Meeting
to attend the service of the Quarterly Meeting to which they belong, and to
present on behalf, and by the order of the said Monthly Meeting what shall be
given them in charge, which ought to be in writing: and that there be for the
like service, at least four men, and four Women Friends appointed by each
Quarterly Meeting to attend the Yearly Meeting. Minutes to be made in Mo. and
Qu. Meetings.
And it is directed that Minutes or Entries be made in every Monthly and
Quarterly Meeting's Book of all such matters as shall come before and be
determined by them, or be removed to Quarterly or Yearly Meetings.

It is enjoined upon Monthly Meetings, that their best endeavors be used to
end all Business that arises therein, or is brought thereto, with Care and
Dispatch; but if they find any Business or matter too weighty or inconvenient
for them to determine, Removal of Business from Mo to Qu. and thence to Y.
Meetings.
they may move the same to the next Quarterly Meeting. And in like manner,
after due Care and Endeavors to end any matter, the Quarterly Meeting may
remove the same to the next Yearly Meeting.

After any member is charged with any Offense or Violation of our Discipline,
and is proceeded against so far, Offenders not to sit in our Meetings of
Discipline after their Cases are Minuted, unless required.
that for want of the same being cleared up to satisfaction, the charge shall
be brought into, and entered on the Minutes of the Monthly Meeting, such Person
shall not be suffered to sit in any of our Meetings of Discipline, until
required by the Monthly Meeting.

Friends punctually to attend their appointments, either as Arbitrators or
otherwise.
Many Inconveniences having arisen from the neglect or Delay, of Friends whose
duty it was to attend Monthly, Quarterly, or Yearly Meetings, sometimes under
appointments for that purpose; or who have been chosen to end Differences, as
Arbitrators or otherwise; or to do other services in or on behalf of the said
Meetings; it is earnestly advised and desired, that all Friends do carefully,
and punctually attend such Meetings and services at the Time appointed, unless
prevented by sickness or other extraordinary occasion, Not to withdraw from
Meetings without giving a satisfactory reason.
of which they ought to send information. And when any Friends, who stand
approved, do come to, and sit down in any of the said Meetings of Discipline or
on appointments as aforesaid, they ought not to withdraw from, or leave the
same until the Business be finished, without Liberty granted.

Spirit of the World etc.
Dear Friends, we are touched with a Godly Jealousy that the Love, Friendship,
and Spirit of this World, with Covetousness, Pride, Obstruct the growth of truth
Self Interest, and the inordinate pursuit of Lawful things here below, not
only obstruct the growth of Truth in some Hearts, but hinder many from coming
forward as otherwise they might, to carry on the good work of Discipline, and
perform other Offices of Love and Service in the Church of Christ; Let us
therefore seek to the Searcher of Hearts for his Divine Aid to empty us of
these and all other hindering things; beseeching the Lord to cause many more
worthy Laborers to be fitted and made willing to come forward in this part of
his great Harvest. And we advise, that where any are found short, weak, or
faulty, they may, without partiality, be admonished and sought in the spirit of
Love and Divine Charity, so that it may be seen by all, that the restoring
Spirit of meekness and Christian Love abounds before Church censure takes
place, and that a Gospel Spirit is the Spring and motive to all our
Performances, as well in Discipline as Worship -- But if any decline or let
fall any Branch of our Testimony, Any letting fall our Testimony to be dealt
with.
they are to be speedily dealt with and censured according to the good Order
and Discipline established amongst us. -- Hereby not only Unity but Purity will
be promoted in the Church, for whatever miscarriages may be committed by
Particulars, the Church will clear itself; and so not be chargeable therewith.
1746. 1765. 1767. 1770.

Our Monthly Meetings only to be open to those who are Members at passing
Marriages and to their near Relations.
Inconveniences having attended the unlimited Liberty granted in some Places to
Persons not professing with us, to come into our Meetings of Discipline at the
time when proposals of Marriages are made; and it appearing to be the unanimous
Judgment of this Meeting, that those Meetings should be only open to such who
are Members; the Monthly Meetings are therefore desired to permit only such
(who are not in Membership) to attend on those Occasions who are nearly related
or allied to the Parties. 1755.

Under a sense of Love and Concord prevailing, Concern to maintain our
Christian Discipline in confidence on Divine Providence.
and exciting thankfulness in the Minds of Friends generally, an united Concern
to maintain every Branch of our Christian Discipline is weightily recommended
to Friends in their respective stations; with desires, that in the Meekness of
Wisdom we may be qualified in the present sifting Times to strengthen and
confirm each other therein, and manifest to the World the sincerity of our
Faith and confidence in the protection of Divine Providence, which has been
hitherto signally manifested for the preservation of the faithful in the most
trying Dispensations. 1759.

Dear Friends, Friends excited to attend our Meetings for Discipline.
as it consisted with the will of our Heavenly Father, after he had called our
Predecessors in the Truth from the various forms of Religion then extant, to
Worship him in Spirit, to lead them into the establishing and support of a
Christian Discipline for the help and edification of the whole, we exhort
Friends, diligently to attend the Meetings appointed for so good a Work; And
therein labor for a right mind.
and that all who are concerned in the management thereof, do fervently seek to
be clothed with a right mind therein, that we may know that sweetness of
Spirit, which is above natural seize, so to qualify as that nothing may
be done through Rashness, Strife, or Vain Glory, but singly for the advancement
of the cause of Truth, and the good of Individuals; and when, through the
prevalence of a wrong Spirit in any professing with us, Persons disowned to be
convinced of the Rectitude of our Motives.
we are obliged to Testify against them, let all that in us lies be done to
convince them that our motives therein are pure, that when it pleases the Lord
to revisit them with the touches of his merciful kindness, often extended even
to the Rebellious, they may not be deterred from joining therewith by sourness
and Resentment at our manner of Treating with them, which may possibly be the
Case, if instead of an open Brotherly Love and freedom, we indulge a too
reserved, forbidding, or hasty Temper when we deal with offenders. Yet let not
any Friend be discouraged from administering Justice, None to be discouraged
from duty.
upon all disorderly Walkers, according to our wholesome Discipline: always
remembering, the Work is the Lords, and that the best amongst us are but
Stewards in his Cause, accountable for our management, and therefore
indispensably obliged to wait for his direction, that the forwardness of our
own Spirits and Judgments may not in Words only, but in Practice, be
effectually guarded against. 1760.

Concerned Friends to visit neighboring Meetings.
In order to unite us the more nearly one to another, as members of the same
Body, and to strengthen our Hands to promote the general cause of Truth; it is
recommended to Friends to stand open to the leadings of the Love of God,
through Jesus Christ our Lord: And when they feel drawings in their minds to
sit with any of their neighboring Monthly or Quarterly Meetings, that they
attend thereto; and that such Monthly or Quarterly Meetings, as are so visited,
receive such as they know to be well approved at home, They to be received in
Love.
in the Love of God, and not look upon them as Intruders: so shall mutual Help
be given and received amongst us, and we truly be a People led by one and the
same spirit. E. D. Page. 70.

All are to be thoughtful whether they have fully done their duty.
Let a necessary Inquiry be raised in the minds of all members of the Church,
who have had any part of the Lords Work upon them, how they have acquitted
themselves therein and discharged themselves in the sight of God; forasmuch as
a Day comes on apace in which an account of our Stewardship will be required at
our Hands. The right exercise of our Christian Discipline, in some Places at a
low Ebb, would again be revived and strengthened, if this awful sense of
rendering an account of our Trust, and the importance of being clear from the
Blood of all men, were enough impressed upon all minds. And dear Friends, as it
is the Lords Work, let it be done as in his Sight. Let all our Answers to the
Queries of this and other Meetings, Answer to the Queries to be plain and
explicit.
be plain and explici^. Let a due sense of the state of the Church, prevail on
your minds, rather than an unwillingness to appear deficient among your
Brethren. May a suitable engagement of mind prevail on all the active members
of the Church to acquit themselves with faithfulness, that they may at last
receive the Crown of Righteousness which will never fade away. Page. 71.

Use and design of Preparative Meetings.
Agreed that the use and design of Preparative Meetings is in general to digest
and prepare Business as occasion may require, which may be proper to be laid
before the Monthly Meeting, wherein Friends ought to be careful not to occasion
unnecessary delays, or undertake to decide on any business which claims
attention and care in Monthly Meetings -- And when Cases are agreed upon to be
carried forward, that they be entered in writing, and some suitable Friend or
Friends named to produce them to the Monthly Meetings, and that such proper
Notes thereof should be carefully preserved by Clerks of Preparative Meetings
as to said Meetings may appear useful and right.

Women's Meetings for Discipline. See Folio 139.

DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS.
Trusts to be faithfully discharged.
EXECUTORS and Trustees concerned in Wills and Settlements are advised to take
especial Care that they faithfully discharge their respective trusts according
to the intent of the Donors and Testators; and that charitable gifts, legacies,
bequests, and settlement of Estates, by Will or Deed, intended and given for
the use of the Poor, the Aged, the Impotent, or putting poor Friends children
to education or apprenticeship, may not be appropriated or converted to any
other uses than such as the Donors and Testators have directed and enjoined by
legal settlement, Will or Testament. E. D.

FAMILIES.
FORASMUCH as we have accounts from diverse places that visiting of Families
has proved beneficial both to the visitors and visited; Visiting Families
recommended as Mo. Meetings may appoint.
we earnestly recommend this service to the general practice of Friends, both
men and women, as Monthly Meetings under Divine Counsel may appoint. And we
desire that all who may become engaged herein, may seek the Lord for their
helper, and as they feel his Love to flow toward his Children and People, and
abide therein, they will witness his Providential Hand to direct, support, and
give them acceptance. 1723.

The edifying practice of visiting Families, Again recommended.
where performed in the openings, and under the Aid of Heavenly Wisdom, having
been found very beneficial in those places where it has been performed, by
encouraging the faithful, strengthening the Weak, and awakening the Lukewarm,
as well as in the suppression of superfluities, remedying many inconveniences,
and the instruction and regulation of the Youth; it has been recommended from
time to time, as appears by the Minutes of our Yearly Meeting, to the attention
and care of Quarterly and Monthly Meetings, to engage the minds of concerned
Friends to proceed therein as ability may be afforded by the great Preserver of
Men; Especially where too much neglected.
and especially where it has been too much neglected. And it is now again
impressed on Friends generally to be religiously thoughtful on this interesting
subject, that no opportunity, which is rightly opened may be lost, but that we
may move forward in the Lords fear, and under his guidance in so useful a part
of his work, wherein his reward to the faithful, qualified Labourer, will be
sweet Peace and solid lasting Comfort. From 1737. to 1783.

GAMING AND DIVERSIONS.
Friends concerned in Gaming and evil diversions to be disowned.
ADVISED, that a watchful care be taken to prevent Friends Children, and all
professing Truth, from going to, or being any way concerned in Stage Plays,
Lotteries, Music, and Dancing; and that such also be dealt with as run races,
on Horseback or on Foot, lay Wagers, or use any kind of gaming, or vain sports
or pastimes; For our Time swiftly passes away, and our pleasure and delight
ought to be in the Law of the Lord. And Friends are advised against attending
such Places of Diversion, and against falling into any of these Practices; and
if any who are concerned or indulge themselves in any of these Evils, cannot be
brought to a due sense of their misconduct herein, Monthly Meetings, after a
time of waiting and kind treatment, in the spirit of restoring Love, should
testify their disunion with them. 1716. 1719.

Encouraging Lotteries cause of disownment.
The ensnaring and unjust practice of Lotteries, and desire of gain thereby,
being contrary to our religious Profession: Monthly Meetings are desired to
maintain our Testimony against it, by admonishing those who may be in danger of
being ensnared by such temptations; and where any are concerned in such evil
schemes, that they endeavor to bring them to a sense of their error, and if
they cannot prevail with them to condemn it, by acknowledgment, the Testimony
of Truth should be declared against them. 1773.

GRAVE STONES.
THIS Meeting does give it as their Judgment, that it is wrong, Friends placing
Tomb Stones in our Grave Yards, or refusing to remove those placed, to be dealt
with.
and of evil tendency to have any Grave or Tomb Stones or Monuments placed at
or over any Grave in any of our Burying Grounds; and that those Monuments,
either of Wood or Stone, which are already set in the Burying Grounds of
Friends should be removed, and no new ones erected; and if any Friend opposes
this sense and direction, he or she ought to be dealt with as disorderly. 1706.
1707.

Although this Meeting early signified their full disapprobation of the vain
and superstitious Custom of erecting Monuments of any kind in memory of the
Dead, on or near their Graves, yet, Relatives of the Deceased to remove Tomb
Stones out of our Grave Yards.
with concern we have been informed that Marks of this sort have been placed in
our Grave Yards by some professing with us; it is therefore recommended to
Overseers and concerned Friends, to admonish the Relations of such deceased
Persons, speedily to remove those offensive distinctions, as inconsistent with
the plainness of our Principles and Practice, and seriously caution them
strictly to examine what Spirit they are of, who can thus act contrary to and
oppose the declared sense of the Body, Which if they refuse Qu. and Mo.
Meetings are to remove them.
both in Great Britain and these Provinces. And Quarterly and Monthly Meetings
are desired to use their utmost endeavors to prevent the continuance of this
Evil, by removing those Marks of Superfluity and excess out of our Burying
Grounds, where those concerned in putting them there, or the Relations of such,
to whose Graves they appear, neglect doing it, after notice for that purpose;
that so no cause of uneasiness may remain, or partiality be justly chargeable
upon us. 1729. 1731. 1732. 1733.

INDIANS.
Selling Rum or other strong Liquors to the Indians, to be censured.
WHEN way was made for our worthy Friends, the Proprietors and Owners of Lands
in these Provinces, to make their first Settlement, it pleased Almighty God to
influence the Native Indians so as to make them very helpful to those early
Settlers, before they could raise Stocks or Provisions for their sustenance.
And it being soon observed that those People, when they got Rum, or other
strong Liquors, set no bounds to themselves, but were apt to be abusive, and
sometimes even destroyed one another, there came a religious Concern upon
Friends to prevent those abuses; nevertheless, some People preferring their
filthy Lucre before the common Good, continued in this evil Practice, so that
our Yearly Meeting in the Year 1687 testified, that the practice of selling Rum
or other strong Liquors to the Indians, or exchanging the same for any Goods or
Merchandise with them, is a thing displeasing to the Lord, and a dishonor to
truth; and although this Testimony has been since renewed by several Yearly
Meetings, it is yet notorious that the same has not been duly observed by some
Persons; it therefore becomes the weighty concern of this Meeting, earnestly to
recommend that Testimony to the strict observance of all Friends; and where any
under our Profession act contrary thereto, let them be speedily dealt with and
censured for such their evil Practice. 1722.

Recounting the Lords blessings to the first Setlers.
In these Provinces we may say, the Lord has, as a gracious and tender Parent,
dealt bountifully with us, even from the days of our Fathers; it was He who
strengthened them to labor through the difficulties attending the improvement
of a Wilderness, and made way for them in the hearts of the Indian Natives, so
that by them they were comforted in times of want and distress; it was by the
gracious influence of his holy Spirit that they were disposed to work
Righteousness, and walk uprightly one toward another, and toward the Natives,
and in Life and Conversation to manifest the excellency of the Principles and
Doctrines of the Christian Religion, and thereby they retained their esteem and
Friendship, which ought ever to be remembered with grateful thankfulness by us.
1759.

It is the solid sense and judgment of this Meeting, Friends settling on Lands
not purchased of the Indians, not to have Certificates.
that Friends should not purchase, or remove to settle on such Lands as have
not been fairly and openly first purchased of the Indians, by those Persons who
are or may be authorized by the Government to make such purchases; and that
Monthly Meetings should be careful to excite their Members to the strict
observance of this advice; and where any so remove, contrary to the advice of
their Brethren, that they should not give Certificates to such Persons, but
persuade them to avoid the Danger to which they expose themselves, and to
convince them of the inconsistency of their Conduct with our Christian
Profession. 1763.

LAW.
Friends of sufficient Ability neglecting to pay their debts Monthly Meetings
to disown them.
ADVISED, that none in Membership with us, who are indebted to other Members, do
make use of that as a protection to them, thereby unjustly hoping to be out of
the reach of civil authority, and therefore careless of discharging their duty;
and where it appears to the satisfaction of a Monthly Meeting that a Debt is
just, and the Debtor is of sufficient Ability, but neglects to pay the same,
and that before such Complaint the Creditor has acquainted the Debtor that he
shall lay the case before Friends, the Monthly Meeting ought speedily to treat
with them, and where the endeavors used prove ineffectual, to disown those who
are so regardless of a just and punctual performance of their contracts. 1701.

Suing to be condemned.
As to Friends arresting or suing each other at Law for the recovery of Debts
whilst both are in Membership with the Body; It is the sense of this Meeting,
that if any Member shall arrest, sue, or implead at Law, any other Person in
Membership, before he or she has proceeded in a regular Gospel way; or in
Cases of sudden emergency or imminent Danger, by a few solid, active concerned
Friends who shall be consulted on the occasion; and agreeing in such Cases to
submit his or her suit to come into a general average, upon a just settlement,
with all the other equitable demands, and to receive his or her Dividend,
according to his or her demand, with all the rest, such ought to be dealt with
as other disorderly Persons; and if he or she refuses to withdraw the Suit, and
pay the cost thereof, and condemn such misconduct to the satisfaction of the
Meeting, after deliberate dealing and waiting with such, On suspicion of
inability Friends are to be advised to call their Creditors and deliver up
their effects, and to be censured on refusal.
they ought to be disowned. But if on such a complaint, or otherwise, it shall
appear to Friends, that there is reason to suspect the ability of any Friend or
Friends fully to discharge their just Debts, they should be immediately advised
to call their Creditors together; and if by them it shall be thought best to
offer up his or her effects to the end that the Creditors may receive an equal
Dividend, and they advise so to do, if such Debtor refuse to comply therewith,
he or she ought regularly to be disowned without too long delay. On compliance
with Friends advice, and not appearing faulty, such to be helped.
But if agreeable to this wholesome advice, Friends under those doubtful or
difficult circumstances, occasioned by unavoidable or unforeseen occurrences,
shall offer their all to their Creditors, let such have compassion extended to
them, and aid as objects of Christian Charity, and help as Brethren; they have
done what they can, and we can expect no more at present from them. On Ability
afterward acquired, such are to pay all.
Nevertheless if Persons so failing in their Circumstances should ever
afterward be favored with a full ability so to do, it is the Judgment of this
Meeting that Justice will then call upon them to pay their Creditors what
before they were deficient in, although by a composition then made they might
have been legally discharged. But this is not to be understood to give any one
a right to demand of, or trouble any such deficient Debtors whilst they are
honestly laboring to retrieve their circumstances, until it shall clearly
appear to the satisfaction of the Monthly Meeting, where such Friend or Friends
reside, or to a solid Committee thereof, that a sufficient Ability is arrived
at; under which circumstance, and after such a period arriving, any such Friend
refusing to do Justice to his Creditors, ought to be tenderly and deliberately
dealt with, and Disowned if he persists therein. 1710. 1719. N. E. D. E. D.

MARRIAGES.
Mutual duty of Parents and Children herein.
ADVISED, that Parents and Guardians of Children, in the fear of God, take
special care to prevent those under their charge from being engaged or
entangled with any upon the account of Marriage, before all things relating to
their outward Estates be firmly agreed on both parts; that so no breach may be
made upon the account of outward things, to the hurt or prejudice of young
People. E. D.

And we do also, advise and exhort all young and unmarried People among
Friends, that they do not make any motion or procedure one with another upon
the account of Marriage, without first acquainting their Parents or Guardians
therewith, and duly waiting upon them for their consent and agreement therein.
And we also advise, that, in the first place, all concerned seriously wait upon
the Lord for counsel and clearness in this weighty concern, before they make
any motion or procedure with any in order to Marriage; so as they may not be
led by any forward, brittle, or uncertain affections, in this great concern, to
their own hurt, grief of their Friends, and dishonor of truth; and let it be
the godly concern of both Monthly and Quarterly Meetings to be careful and
mindful of the preservation and good of children in this matter, as here
proposed and signified; and not to omit giving due and faithful warnings and
admonitions in this great and weighty concern.

Certificates to join in Marriage.
Agreed that all single Persons, who profess the Truth, being about to marry at
a distance from home, do take care to procure Certificates from the Monthly
Meeting they belong to, of their right of Membership, and clearness from any
other Person in respect to Marriage; and also that they obtain the mind of
their Parents or Guardians therein; Marriages not to be permitted without
consent of Parents etc.
and that none be permitted to join themselves in Marriage until such
Certificates, and the consent of their Parents or Guardians thereto, be also
signified in Person, or by writing, where it is practicable, or may be
reasonably obtained. 1682.

It is agreed, after well weighing the same, that Father and Son ought to be
discouraged from Marrying two Sisters. 1685. Father and Son not to Marry
Sisters.


It is declared to be the sense of this Meeting, that if any Widower or Widow,
professing Truth, shall make or accept an offer, Offers of Marriage not to be
made in less than 9 or 10 Months after former Husband or Wise's Death.
application, or procedure in order to Marriage, before nine or ten Months be
expired, after the Death of Wife or Husband, of such Person or Persons so
proceeding, such offer, acceptance, or procedure is over hasty and indecent;
and the respective Quarterly Meetings are desired to give Cautions against such
proceedings. Nor accomplished in less than twelve months.
And no Monthly Meeting ought to permit any Marriages to be proposed in the
said Meeting sooner than a Year after the death of Husband or Wife. 1749.

It is the sense of this Meeting, Marriages not to be made with those not in
unity, nor without consent of Mo. Meetings.
that if any member do join in Marriage with such who are not in Membership
with us, or in any other way than with the consent and approbation of the
Monthly Meeting, they should be dealt with agreeable to our Discipline. 1702.
1712. 1721.

After serious consideration concerning Marriages, Marriages not to be delayed
on account of any former misdemeanor.
this Meeting being ten^^^ in that respect, advises, that no misdemeanor be
treasure (...) or remain against any Person until the time of presenting
Marriage and then started, though perhaps long before done, and known to those
who so object to it at that time, which is a wrong thing; and such doings
should be checked and discouraged in all Meetings. 1712.

Agreed, that it be recommended to Monthly Meetings, Parties making suit for
Marriage, not to live in the same House.
that according to the ancient decent practice amongst Friends, they take care
that such men and women Friends who make suit or proposals of Marriage one to
the other, do not dwell in the same House, from the Time that they begin to be
so concerned, until the Marriage is accomplished. 1714.

Advised, Extra provisions at Marriages and invitations of Persons not in unity
to be avoided; and Marriages to be accomplished at week day Meetings.

Company for Marriage not to be kept with those not in profession or with bound
Servants without Liberty.

Such as attend Marriages accomplished contrary to Discipline, to be dealt with.

After consent given by Parents or Guardians not to be withdrawn without good
reason.

Marriages to be proposed to two Monthly Meetings.


that Friends every where avoid all superfluous and unnecessary Provision at
their Marriages, and as much as may be, inviting such as are not members of our
Society, or that will not be under our Discipline; and also to accomplish
marriages at Week Day Meetings, which may prevent great expectations. 1716.

Let such be dealt with as keep company in order for Marriage with those not in
membership with us, or with any bound Servant, without the leave of her master
or mistress. And for being present, or suffering their Children at Marriages of
members either by the official interference of Priests, or in any other way out
of our comely order; or the marriages of those not in membership, which are
accomplished by the assistance of a Priest. 1719.

It is the advice and Judgment of this meeting, that where Parents or Guardians
have approved the Visits or addresses of a man to their children or those under
their care, that they do not retract the same, without giving such Reasons as
shall appear well grounded and sufficient for so doing, to the satisfaction of
the Monthly Meeting whereto they belong.

That all according to our usual custom, do offer or propose their Marriage to
two Monthly Meetings, and that the second time be to the next successive
Meeting, unless sickness or other material cause prevent. At the first Meeting,
if no reason appear to the contrary, the appearance should be minuted, and
inquiry made concerning consent of Parents and Guardians, if either have any,
and if the Man belongs to the same Meeting, Inquiry to be made.
two Friends are to be then appointed to inquire into his clearness for
proceeding in such Marriage; and if there is issue by a former Husband; to see
that the childrens rights are legally secured, and make report to the next
Meeting. And the proper care is previously to be taken by the Women Friends
concerning the Woman. And if either of the Parties be from another Country, or
belong to another Monthly Meeting, let inquiry be then made for a Certificate
from such Meeting, and where none is produced let the Party be informed that
the Marriage cannot pass, or be allowed without one, which should certify their
clearness from all others in respect of Marriage. But if the Meeting which the
Friend belongs to lies within such distance as that it may probably be obtained
so as to be produced at the next Meeting, and there appears no objection, nor
any thing else to obstruct, it may then pass for the first time. At the second
Meeting, if what is above expressed be done, and all appear clear, let an entry
be made of their second appearance, and what more is usual and necessary, and
the Couple left at their liberty to accomplish their Marriage according to the
good order used among Friends.

Marriages to be accomplished gravely.
It is further advised, that the said Marriage be accomplished decently,
gravely, and weightily; and that the parties themselves, their Parents, and
others concerned, do take care at the Houses or Places where they go after the
Meeting is over, that no reproach arise, or occasion of Offense be given by any
intemperate or immoderate Feasting or Drinking, or by any unseemly, wanton or
rude discourses or actions; but that all behave with such sobriety as becomes a
People fearing God: and in order thereto, Overseers to be appointed.
and for the assistance of those concerned, let there be two Men and two Women
Friends appointed by the Monthly Meeting to attend the Marriage, both at the
Meeting and Place of Entertainment after, Their duty.
who are to take a religious care, that all be done, and that all behave as is
above advised, and that the Company retire to their homes in seasonable time.
And if, by them, or by any other Friend, any thing to the contrary is observed,
they ought as speedily as they conveniently can, to take such aside who make
any breach upon good order, and in Brotherly love, tenderly admonish them to a
better behavior; and that the said Friends do make report to the next Monthly
Meeting, whether this advice concerning decency and order be observed, Marriage
Certificates to be recorded.
and take care that the Marriage Certific^te be recorded.

The Form of which Certificate shall be as follows.
WHEREAS A. B. of (...) in the County of (...) in (...) Son of D. E. and (...)
Wife, Form of Marriage Certificate.
of (...) and F. G. of (...) Daughter of H. I. and (...) his Wife, of (...)
having declared their intentions of Marriage with each other, before several
Monthly Meetings of the People called QUAKERS at (...) aforesaid, according to
the good order used among them; (where the Parties are under the care of
Parents or Guardians, add) and having consent of Parents or Guardians concerned
(as the Case is) their said proposal of Marriage was allowed of by the said
Meeting. Now these are to Certify whom it may concern, that for the full
accomplishing their said intentions this (...) day of the (...) Month, in the
Year of our Lord (...) they the said A. B. and F. G. appeared in a public
Meeting of the said People at (...) aforesaid, and the said A. B. taking the
said F. G. by the hand, did, on this solemn occasion, openly declare, that he
took her the said F. G. to be his Wife, promising with the Lords assistance to
be unto her a loving and faithful Husband until Death should separate them; and
then in the same Assembly the said F. G. did in like manner declare, that she
took the said A. B. to be her Husband, promising with the Lords assistance, to
be unto him a faithful and loving Wife, until Death should separate them. And
moreover, they the said A. B. and F. G. she according to the custom of Marriage
assuming the name of her Husband, as a further confirmation thereof did then
and there to these Presents set their Hands; and we whose Names are also
hereunto subscribed, being present at the solemnization of the said Marriage
and Subscription, have, as Witnesses thereunto, set our Hands the Day and Year
above written.

A. B. F. ^.

As to Marriages of Persons too near of Kin, which has sometimes given concern
and trouble to Meetings where such have offered, Marriages be^ween first
Cousins, or any nearer of Kin not to be allowed.

Second Cousins cautioned against.


we concur with the early advice of the Brethren* and declare, that it appears
to be the most general sense of Friends, that no Marriages between first
Cousins, or any near^^^ degree of Relation, be allowed; and as it is not
thought safe (...) ^^^ely for second Cousins to intermarry, it is advised, that
Friends and Relations be careful in a timely manner to persuade against such
Marriages. 1721.

Persons precautioned marrying out may be disowned without further Dealing.
It is the sense of this Meeting, that if any who are in membership with us, do
go from amongst us in their Marriage, after having been precautioned by an
Overseer or other solid Friend against such a procedure, that they may be
testified against without further dealing, unless they voluntarily condemn
their disorderly proceedings to the satisfaction of the Monthly Meeting. 1722.

Large Portions in Marriage not to be sought after.
It is advised, that Parents who have Children to give in Marriage be not
anxious to obtain for them large Portions and Settlements, but rather be
careful that their Children be joined with Persons of Religious Inclinations,
suitable Dispositions, Temper, sobriety of manners, and diligent in their
business, which are essentially necessary to a comfortable Life in a Married
State, and watchfully guard against mixed Marriages, and unequally yoking their
Children therein. 1723.

Acknowledgments from first Cousins Marrying may be accepted with the
approbation of Qu. Meeting.
A Case of First Cousins having intermarried, and being brought to a proper
sense of their misconduct, coming before the Meeting, after deliberate
consideration it is concluded that a sincere acknowledgment from such may be
received by the Monthly Meeting; but lest the acceptance of acknowledgments to
reinstate such Persons, should tend to encourage Marriages of that kind,
Monthly Meetings are enjoined to take the advice and assistance of their
Quarterly Meetings, before they accept of such offerings, being well assured
that the Parties are brought to a due sense of their Transgressions, manifested
by uprightness of Life and Conversation, in order that they may be rightly
restored with the concurrence of the Quarterly Meeting. 1725. 1779.

This Meeting, after due consideration thereon, is of opinion, First Cousins by
Affinity, or any nearer of Kin, not to Marry.
that no Marriages ought to be allowed amongst us, between any Man and his
Wife's first Cousin; and so of other Relations equally near, or nearer of kin.
1734. 1755.

The Meeting being informed, Marriages between first Cousins to be testified
against.
that notwithstanding the sense of Friends declared against Marriages between
first Cousins, it has been practiced by some who pretend to be of us; this
Meeting therefore declares it as their sense, that where any Marriages of this
kind shall happen for the future, that Monthly Meetings on notice th^^eof, do
forthwith publish their Testimony against them. 1739.

An application for the sense of this Meeting from one of the Quarters, whether
a man may be restored into Fellowship, Marriage with Wife's half Sister, the
Parties disowned cannot be restored to Membership.
who has been Disowned for Marrying his Wife's half Sister, being solidly and
deliberately considered, it is resulted, that as Marrying within that degree of
kindred is forbidden by the Laws of the Government, and is contrary to our
Christian Testimony, it will not be for the reputation of Truth to receive such
into Membership with us as a religious Society, while they live in the breach
thereof. 1760.

The Increase of the breaches of our Testimony in going from amongst us in the
weighty engagement of Marriage, Early care of the Youth.
being often for want of due care in Parents, and those who have the important
charge of educating the Youth under their Trust, early to admonish and instruct
them in the Principles of Truth, and of impressing their minds with the duty of
religiously observing them; as much as possible restraining them from such
Company as will be likely to entangle their affections in an improper manner;
wherefore we tenderly advise to an increasing care amongst Friends in all
Quarters toward the Youth, that the consistency of our Principles in all
respects with the nature of true Religion, may be enforced on their tender
minds, by upright examples as well as by Precepts; and that where there is
apparent danger of the affections of any being improperly entangled, and the
care of Parents and Guardians and those who have their oversight appears not
sufficient to prevent their taking imprudent steps in the accomplishing of
their Marriage, Where Testimonies or acknowledgments for Marrying out should be
published.
care be taken, timely to apply for the help of their Friends. And on mature
consideration we are of opinion, that such who run counter to the good advice
of their Parents, or Guardians, and Friends, thus communicated to them, and
accomplish their Marriage in a clandestine manner, more especially when they
contribute to the support of an hireling Ministry, do bring Scandal on Society
by their undutiful, perverse conduct, and that Monthly Meetings when such
aggravated Circumstances occur, ought to set forth the same in their
Disownment, and may be justified in Publishing their Testimony against them, as
well as the Papers of acknowledgment taken from such. 1761.

Disownments for Marrying out to be speedy, without soliciting for
acknowledgments.
A weighty concern attending this Meeting on account of the frequent
transgressions of our Discipline in respect to Ma^^^ages accomplished contrary
to the good order established in the Society, and the too ready acceptance of
Papers of acknowledgment from such Persons on that account, which has not only
been matter of great trouble to Friends, but likewise introductive of many
Inconveniences, tending to promote Libertinism and a manifest deviation from
the purity of our Profession; it is therefore now earnestly recommended to
Friends in their respective Monthly Meetings, that they be careful speedily to
proceed to put the Rules of our Discipline in practice against such
transgressors, without waiting for Papers of acknowledgment from them; and that
when such Papers are voluntarily offered, they be careful to be well assured
that they proceed from a true Ground of sincerity and conviction in the
Transgressor, accompanied by due circumspection of Life and Conversation. 1762.

Persons in the degree between first and second Cousins not to intermarry.
A Request from one of the Quarters for the sense of this Meeting Relating to
the Marriage of Kindred in a degree between first and second Cousins coming
under consideration; after a free communication of Sentiments, and a weight and
solidity attending, it is the sense and Judgment of this Meeting, that
Marriages within that degree of kindred ought not to be allowed to be
accomplished amongst us. 1774.

Some doubts having been entertained respecting the authority of Monthly
Meetings to disown such Parents or Guardians, Parents conniving at outgoings in
Marriage to be dealt with and disowned.
who consent to, connive at, or encourage the Marriages of their Children and
those under their care (members of our religious Society) contrary to the good
order established amongst us: this Meeting taking the subject into solid
consideration, it appears to be the judgment thereof, that it is clear from the
nature of the case, that Monthly Meetings are authorized to give forth
testimonies of denial against such who transgress our Discipline and testimony
in these respects, if after Christian and Brotherly labor with them, they
cannot be convinced of their Error, and brought, from a due sense thereof, to
make satisfactory acknowledgment of the same. 1792.

MEETING HOUSES.
Titles to be carefully inspected.
IT is recommended to Quarterly and Monthly Meetings to make timely and careful
inspection into the situation of the Titles of Meeting Houses, Burial Grounds,
and other estates which have been vested in Trustees and by them held for the
use and benefit of the Society at large, or of any of those Meetings; so that
if it should appear needful by the death of any such Trustees or otherwise, due
and seasonable care may be taken to appoint some others to the trust; that
Friends may avoid future difficulties, and the risk of being deprived of such
Estates. Records of conveyances to be kept.

And where deposited.


And it is further recommended that Quarterly and Monthly Meetings respectively
as the Case may require, keep exact Records of all such Trusts and conveyances,
and also that a clear and regular accou^^ be kept by each respective Meeting,
of the place where, and the Persons with whom the Papers, Minutes, and Records
belonging to our religious Society are from time to time deposited; wherein due
care should be taken to lodge them with suitable Friends.

MEETING FOR SUFFERINGS.
IT being moved at this Meeting, Accounts of Sufferings for Truth's testimony
to be brought in.
that all Friends within the limits thereof, from their several Quarterly
Meetings, bring in an account of all Friends Sufferings, that have been or may
happen among them for their Testimony to the Truth; that it may be done Yearly,
unto which the Meeting agrees, and recommends the care thereof to the
respective Quarterly Meetings. 1709.

The following proposal was laid before the Yearly Meeting (to wit) We of the
Committee appointed to correspond with Friends in England, and to visit the
Monthly Meetings, Meeting for Sufferings established.
having had a ^^nference with the Committee appointed to adjust the (...)
M^^tings accounts; and taking into consideration the distressed stat^ of the
Frontier Settlements of these Provinces, and that we have just grounds to
apprehend that many of our Friends, who are now situate in parts immediately
exposed to danger, may so^^ stand in need of relief and assistance, and for
want of a timely care and Provision being made, may, in the approaching Winter
suffer deeply; are unanimously of opinion that it will be expedient to raise
such a sum of money for the stock of the Yearly Meeting as may enable those
with whom the distribution of it may be entrusted, to do more considerable
service than the sums usually raised would answer, and therefore conclude, that
less than One Thousand Pounds may not be sufficient. And in order that due care
may be taken to distribute or employ the Money to general satisfaction; we
propose, that the Treasurers of this Meeting should observe the directions of a
Committee to be appointed by this Meeting. And that such a Committee may be
constituted in the most equal manner, and the several Quarterly Meetings be
properly represented, we propose that this Meeting should nominate twelve
Friends, living in or near Philadelphia for the convenience of their getting
soon together; and that it be recommended to the several Quarterly Meetings to
appoint four Friends to represent each Quarter; and that the whole number
should meet at Philadelphia as soon as they can conveniently, and at their
first Meeting that they should regulate the manner and time of their future
Meetings.

Their services.
That the services proposed to be transacted by them be, to hear and consider
the Cases of any Friends under Sufferings, especially such as suffer from the
Indians or others, and to admister such relief as they find necessary, or to
apply to the Government or Persons in power on their behalf.

To correspond with the Meeting for Sufferings, or the Yearly Meeting of
London, and to represent the state of affairs of Friends here; and in general,
to represent this Meeting, and appear in all cases where the reputation and
interest of Truth and our religious Society are concerned: Provided that they
do not meddle with matters of Faith or Discipline not already determined in the
Yearly Meeting; and that at least twelve should concur on all occasions; and in
matters of great importance, that Notice be given or sent to all the Members
(...) C^^mittee.

After a deliberate and weighty Consideration of which, a spirit of sympathy
and brotherly concern appearing, and many useful and necessary observations
and, exhortations to excite Friends to a religious attention to the present
humbling Dispensations of Divine Providence; the Meeting very unanimously
agrees, that the Sum of One Thousand Pounds be raised in the usual manner as
soon as may be; and the Meeting confirms the Proposal of appointing a
Committee, Minutes to be kept.
and the limitation of their Trust, with this addition, that the said Committee
should keep fair Minutes of all their Proceedings, and produce the same to the
next Yearly Meeting; and the Representatives of the several Quarterly Meetings
are desired to meet together and nominate twelve Friends to be returned
Tomorrow for the approbation of this Meeting. And twelve Friends being
accordingly nominated, were approved of and appointed Members of the Meeting
for Sufferings; and the Treasurers of this Meeting are desired to attend, and
assist in the business of the said Meeting as constantly as they can; and in
case of the decease of any of the Friends nominated or to be nominated by the
Quarterly Meetings, or of any declining the service, it is the Judgment of this
Meeting, that the Survivors may, at a general Meeting, if they think it
necessary, choose others in their stead to serve for the remainder of the Year.
And the Representatives are desired to inform Friends in their respective
Quarters, that it is the Mind of this Meeting, that they should at their next
Quarterly Meetings nominate the four Friends to be chosen by them; and the
Quota of each Meeting should be raised and paid to the Treasurers as soon as
possible, lest for want of it the good purposes proposed should be, in some
measure, frustrated or delayed.

And as this Meeting when settled will be capable of discharging the services
for which the Committee appointed to consider the uses and manner of
application of Charitable Legacies and Donations, Further services.
and to advise respecting the Title of any Lands or other Estate belonging to
the several Meetings etc. was intended; it is the sense of this Meeting that
the necessary care in such matters will be a part of the proper concern of the
Meeting for Sufferings; Accounts of Sufferings for Truth's testimony to be kept
and sent to this Meeting.

Negligent Members how to be supplied by others.


and that Friends in their several particular Meetings should keep an (...) of
any Sufferings they may be subjected to for the Testim^ny of ^^uth, and send
the same to the said Meeting. 1756.

Agree (...) c^ntinue the Meeting for Sufferings as expressed in former (...)
and experience having shown the use and service (...) from th^^ institution of
that Meeting, and that there is a necessity of i^ ^eing duly attended by the
Members thereof, where there is (...) apparent neglect of any of those
appointed by the Yearly Meeting, the said Meeting for Sufferings is authorized
to appoint other Friends in the room of such, if, after seasonable admonition,
they continue to neglect or decline attending, and to acquaint the Quarterly
Meetings respectively, where they observe any, appointed to represent them,
continue neglectful of giving proper attendance, in order that such Quarterly
Meeting may appoint others. 1764.

The Minutes of the Meeting for Sufferings for the Year past were read, and the
transactions being approved, Meeting for Sufferings continued without
limitation.
that Meeting is agreed to be continued, agreeable to former Minutes, until
this Meeting may think necessary to direct the contrary. 1768.

Meeting for Sufferings appointed Overseers of the Press. Appointed Overse^^^
of the Press.
See Books Folio 15. 1771.

As many of our Brethren in various Places have of late been brought under
Sufferings for the Testimony of Truth, Accounts of Sufferings to be collected
and sent by Monthly Meeting^.
and of a good Conscience, the continuance and increase whereof there is reason
to expect; it is recommended to the Monthly Meetings, faithfully to collect,
and keep a regular Record of all such Sufferings, agreeable to the ancient
practice of Friends, and that these accounts be annually transmitted to the
Quarterly Meetings, and from thence to our Meeting for Sufferings, that they
may be laid before the Yearly Meeting; and Monthly Meetings are desired not to
be negligent in the performance of this Duty, as some Meetings appear to have
been. 1776. 1778. 1779.

Accounts to be clear and explicit.
It appearing by the Minutes of the Meeting for Sufferings that considerable
difficulty has occurred, on inspection of the accounts of Sufferings brought up
from the Quarterly Meetings, by their not sufficiently expressing what the
particular cases of Suffering they contain, were for, it is now recommended to
the Monthly and Quarterly Meetings to avoid, as much as may be, in future, such
Instances as do not appear clearly consistent with the united sense of the
Body; and that they continue faithfully to collect and send up accounts of
Sufferings as heretofore directed. 1784.

Friends, suffering for non-payment of taxes for war, to be encouraged to send
up a clear account thereof.
It is requested that such of our Brethren who beli^ve them^^^ves religiously
called to a passive submission of distraint of their Property for the payment
of Taxes levied for the (...) of War, be encouraged by Quarterly and Monthly
Meeting to kee^ a clear account of such Sufferings, that they may be coll^^ted
and transmitted to our Meeting for Sufferings as directed by former Minutes.
1786.

Who are Members of this Meeting.
Agreed after a serious Consideration, that none are proper Members of the
Meeting for Sufferings, but such who are appointed by this Yearly Meeting, or
by the several Quarterly Meetings; nevertheless approved Ministering Friends,
and Members of any Meeting for Sufferings of other Places, that correspond with
this Meeting; also have liberty granted them to attend. E. D.

MEETINGS FOR WORSHIP.
DEAR Friends, keep your Meetings in the authority, Persons coming late to
Meetings, being restless, falling asleep, going out etc. to be admonished.
wisdom and power of Truth, and unity of the blessed Spirit, and the God of
Peace be with you. And it is advised that such as come late to Meetings, or
when there fall asleep, or be restless, or do not stay in the Meeting, but go
forth unnecessarily, or otherwise demean themselves unbecoming our holy
Profession, as soon as Meeting is over, be admonished thereof by such as are
appointed to take care of such things. 1694. 1695.

Advised, Persons giving way to drowsiness to be labored with.
that all Friends keep constantly both to First Day and We^ Day Meetings, and
therein diligently wait upon the Lord, with fer^ (...) ^esires and cries in
Spirit after the enjoyment of his blessed (...) that they may know a travel and
right exercise of Min^ (...) which heaviness and drowsiness will be done away;
but th^se w^^ give way to a heavy sleepy Spirit, are great lets and hindrances
to the weak, as well as great weights and burdens to the faithful, and show
that through their own negligence they are not favored with the quickening
Spirit of Christ Jesus, at the time when they meet with the Lords People,
professedly to worship him in Spirit and in Truth. And solid Friends are
desired to labor in a Christian Spirit with such from time to time; it may be
that such religious endeavors may awaken and bring them to a sense of their
Condition. 1706. 1710.

We exhort all Friends to be diligent in attending our religious Meetings on
First and other Days of the Week, Persons neglecting, or coming late to
Meetings, going out and in unnecessarily etc. to be admonished.
not suffering any slight pretense or worldly Business to occasion our absence
from them; and when met together, let our minds be exercised in great gravity
and seriousness, considering ourselves as in the Presence of God, whom we ought
devoutly to fear, worship and serve, being assure^ that he will not be mocked,
for such as we sow such shall we re^^. And although our Meetings are sometimes
held in silence. ^^t not that discourage us from assembling ourselves together,
remembering that silence is necessary, in order to wait upon God, for a due
preparation of Heart (which is his work) to worship and serve him, and to speak
and hear with steadiness and a good understanding, as well as for
retrospection, recollection and self examination, to find how matters stand
between him and our Soul; and that we may be duly exercised in mental Prayer to
him for what we may see and feel we want. And let those who frequently neglect,
or do not in time attend our Meetings, or go out and in unnecessarily, or
otherwise disturb the Meeting, be rebuked and cautioned. And all Parents,
Masters, and Mistresses, ought at all Times to have a Godly care over their
Children, Servants and Families in those respects, and admonish them
accordingly. 1719. 1724. 1734. 1760.

Neglect of Meetings and contending against the duty of attending them cause of
public Disownment.
This Meeting declares it as their sense that such amongst us who neglect the
assembling of themselves together for the worship of Almighty God, and contend
against that necessary duty, if they cannot be brought to repent of their evil
Conduct, and condemn the same by acknowledgment to the satisfaction of (...)
Meeting, should be publicly testified against, as in Cases of (...) ^candal.
1739. 1740.

Zeal in the performance of Worship recommended.
We exhort all to a Christian exercise and zeal i^ (...) ^^rformance of Worship
to Almighty God; and as we are (...) our own Strength to perform this great
Duty, we recommend to a diligent waiting in true silence and retirement of
Mind, for the renewed sense of the inward power and virtue of his Spirit,
whereby we shall be qualified to worship him in an acceptable manner. Let our
faithfulness and sincerity herein appear, by the Humility, meekness and
circumspection of our Lives and Conversations, adorning the Doctrines and
Principles of Truth, as they were declared by Christ and his Apostles. Thus you
may witness the Lords holy Spirit to influence and direct you in all your Words
and Actions, and you will be preserved from looking outward, and from having
your expectations from Man, remembering the caution of our blessed Savior. If
any Man say unto you, lo here is Christ, or lo there is Christ, believe him
not. Mark XIII. 21. But let every one of you in particular closely attend to
the voice of the holy Spirit in his own Soul, which only can secure you from
being drawn aside by the Doctrines and Traditions of Men. And Beloveds, believe
not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they are of God, because many
false Prophets are gone out into the World. I. John. III. 24. IV. I. 1746.

It appearing, by the Reports brought up to this Meeting, Attendance of week
day Meetings.
that there is a neglect and deviation in some, from that ancient and
honorable practice of Meeting together on Week Days for the worship of him
that lives forever, it would be a matter of comfort that there might be a
general amendment in this respect: Those who have been preserved in
faithfulness therein, having livingly to testify from that experience which
cannot deceive, that it has been very profitable, and knowing the benefit of
such a Practice, their regard for those Providentially placed under their Care
so prevails, that they cannot be easy without encouraging and putting forward
their Children, Apprentices and Servants to this religious Duty, as well as
other behavior suitable thereunto. And if this useful Practice was more
generally attended to, it would do more for us and them than any outward
acquisition of Wealth; and without doubt, some such may with thankfulness have
to view our pio^^ Care in taking them from Worldly Business to seek a City
eternal in the Heavens. 1760.

This Meeting again recommends, Wilful neglect of Meetings cause of Disownment.
that Friends who are exercised in the Discipline, would early extend their
Brotherly love and care, in visiting such amongst us who are neglectful of
their Duty in attending our Meetings for Public Worship. And as a wilful
neglect of this important Duty is an evidence of manifest ingratitude to the
Divine Being, contrary to the example and Practice of the primitive Believers
in Christ, and our religious Testimony; after due deliberation, and having
fully discharged their duty toward them, and finding their endeavors to
reclaim them ineffectual, it is the sense of this Meeting, that such who are
thus insensible of their religious Duty, disunite themselves from Christian
fellowship with Friends, and Monthly Meetings should testify their disunion
with them. 1763. 1771.

It being observed that our Meeting Houses in various Places have been forcibly
possessed and applied to purposes contrary to our Christian Profession; this
Meeting desires, Being turned out of our Meeting Houses we are to meet as near
them as we can.
that when attempts are made in like manner, to deprive us of the use of any of
our Meeting Houses, Friends may be careful to manifest a disapprobation
thereof. And where our peaceable endeavors do not avail to prevent it, let a
lively zeal be exerted to maintain our Christian Testimony for the public
Worship of Almighty God, after the example of our worthy ancients in times of
close Persecution, by meeting as near the usual Place as they can; that we may
in this trying Dispensation, be instructed and excited to greater steadiness in
supporting all our religious Meetings, with that diligence and circumspection
which so important a Duty calls for; which will contribute to the prevalence of
Love and Unity on solid Ground, and qualify the Members of the Church to labor
harmoniously for the edification of each other, to strengthen the Weak, and
comfort the feeble minded, and for the support of our Christian Discipline in
general. 1778.

Persons indulging in drowsiness, or in the neglect of Meetings, not to be
employed in Truths service.
As the minds of many are turned toward Friends, and giving way to a drowsy
spirit in our religious Meetings, is an offense both to God and Man, it is
earnestly desired, that this cause of stumbling to sober Inquirers may be done
away: and as such shameful Indulgence must necessarily have a disqualifying
effect, it is the sense and judgment of this Meeting, that Quarterly, Monthly,
and other Meetings should not employ such Members in the ^^^^irs of Truth.

MEMORIALS.
IT is recommended to the several Quarterly and Monthly Meetings to collect as
fully as they can, Memorials of Ministers and Elders to be sent up.
some account of what Ministers and Elders have deceased within the limits of
their respective Meetings, since the last account was sent into this Meeting;
and such Memorials as they think necessary concerning those whose Lives and
Gospel Labors are remembered with a sweet savor. And the particular care of
Friends is desired every Year hereafter, to send up such accounts to the Yearly
Meeting, that our concern may be thereby manifested, to preserve the name of
the Righteous in remembrance. 1755.

On consideration of the mode sometime in use for the examination of Memorials
or Testimonies respecting deceased Friends, Memorials of deceased friends to be
inspected by the Meeting for Sufferings.
previous to their being read in this meeting, some inconvenience being found
to attend the same; Quarterly Meetings are therefore desired, in future to
forward such Memorials timely to the Meeting for Sufferings, for Inspection and
Consideration, before they are brought here, that the necessity of appointing a
Committee thereon during the sitting of this Meeting may be avoided. 1786.

MINISTERS AND ELDERS, AND MEETINGS OF MINISTERS AND ELDERS.
Ministers desirous of traveling to remote Parts, to lay their concern before
a Monthly Meeting.
AGREED, that if any Friend have it on his or her Mind to travel in the service
of Truth, to any remote parts, that before they so do, they lay their Concern
before the respective Monthly Meeting which they belong to, in order to have
the approbation of the same. 1681.

Ministers in Unity, not to be opposed publicly.
If any shall take upon them publicly to oppose a Ministering Friend, whether
recommended or not, in his or her Preaching or Exhortation; the disapprobation
of the Elders to such public appearances not being made known to them, or who
are not disowned by any Monthly Meeting; or shall keep on the Hat, or show any
other remarkable dislike against such in time of Prayer, let them be speedily
dealt with in such Manner as the Meeting may think requisite; but if any think
they have ought against what was delivered, they are first to speak to them
privately and deal with them orderly. 1719.

Elders to be appointed.
This Meeting agrees that each Monthly Meeting choose two or more Friends of
each Sex to sit with the Ministers, and they, together to compose the Meeting
of Ministers and Elders; taking care that the Friends chosen for that service,
be prudent solid Friends, and that they do carefully discharge their Trust, in
such Matters, and in such manner as the Monthly Meeting shall from time to time
appoint to them. 1714. 1740. 1755.

Ministers called to travel are to open their concern to Mo. Meetings, and take
a Certificate.
When any Friend finds it to be his or her duty to Travel in Truth's service, he
or she is to open it to the Monthly Meeting to which they belong, and obtain
the unity and concurrence of their Friends, with a Certificate thereof, for the
information of Friends whom they may be led to visit.

How Elders are to be appointed.
It is considered a safe and consistent practice, when the nomination of an
Elder is needed in any Meeting, that the consideration of the Person best
suited to that Station, should begin in a judicious Committee occasionally
appointed for the purpose by the Monthly Meeting; and such Person whose Name
they are easy to bring forward for this service, be mentioned in the Monthly
Meeting of Business for the concurrence thereof, or otherwise, it being deemed
an improper subject to be introduced into Preparative Meetings of Business.

When the Gifts of Ministers are considered and approved by a Monthly Meeting,
Ministers how approved.
and a Minute thereof forwarded to the Quarterly Meeting of Ministers and
Elders, the sense and concurrence of that Meeting ought to be had, before such
Minister be reputed as a received and approved Minister, or admitted to sit in
the Meeting of Ministers and Elders, or travel abroad in the Ministry.

It is desired that the Ministers and Elders of each Monthly Meeting, hold a
select Meeting once in three Months; Mo. Meetings of Ministers and Elders to be
held.
and being met together, after some time spent in solid Retirement, they should
proceed to read and consider the Queries, and how their purport is answered by
the members of that Meeting, and tenderly advise and assist one another, as the
nature of the case may require; from which Monthly Meeting two or more of their
Members ought to be appointed to the select Quarterly Meeting, constituted and
conducted in like manner as the Monthly Meeting; Qu. Meetings of Ministers and
Elders.
where the Queries are again to be read and answered, and the import of such
answers entered in Writing, and by that Meeting sent up to the Yearly Meeting.
Yearly Meetings of Do.
And as it may contribute to the advantage of the Society to have a Meeting of
Ministers and Elders established, and held at Philadelphia, to begin at the
tenth hour in the Morning of the seventh Day of the Week preceding the Yearly
Meeting, to continue by adjournments in the course thereof, and that a like
Meeting be held, to begin at the same hour on the seventh Day of the week
preceding the time of our general Spring Meeting, to each of which Meetings
every Quarterly Meeting within its verge should by their Representatives,
render a just account in Writing of the state of that Meeting to which they
belong; by which an opportunity may be given to the said Meetings of Ministers
and Elders, to impart such advice as they may see cause. And that the said
Meetings of Ministers and Elders do nominate a suitable number of weighty and
experienced Elders to attend the several sittings of the Meetings for Worship,
Elders to have oversight of public Meetings.
during the Yearly and general Spring Meetings, in order to take a prudent
oversight of the conduct thereof, and make such report to the adjournments of
the said Meetings as they may see necessary; whose proper Business it will be
to communicate such advices as in the wisdom of Truth may be found expedient:
And that the said Meetings of Ministers and Elders shall not in any wise take
upon them, Meetings of Ministers and Elders not to interfere with the
discipline.
or interfere with any part of the exercise of the Discipline of the Church
belonging to the Yearly Meeting for Business, or any subordinate Meeting for
Discipline, nor adjourn so as to interfere with the sittings of this Meeting.
E. D. 1721. 1722.

It is observed that the God and Fountain of all our mercies has opened,
Ministers and Elders to advise young Ministers in tenderness.
and is opening in diverse of our Young People, a Spring of living ministry;
therefore our earnest desire is, that both Ministers and Elders may be as
nursing Fathers and Mothers to those that are young in the ministry, and with
all care and diligence advise and admonish them, and if they see occasion
reprove them in a tender and Christian Spirit, observing the Rules of our
Discipline and counsel of Friends in that respect; also exhort them frequently
to read the holy Scriptures, and earnestly seek the mind of the Spirit of
Truth, to open the mysteries thereof, and as they keep in true Patience and
submission to the will of God, stand faithful, and abide in the simplicity of
the Gospel, being exercised in their proper Gifts, keeping down to the openings
of Divine Love and Life in themselves, they will witness a gradual growth, and
be content to wait for it in the will of God, and not strive to extend their
Declaration's further than they find the Life and Power of Truth to bear them
up.

And our advice is to all our Ministers, that they be frequent in reading the
Scriptures of the old and new Testament; Ministers for what to be dealt with.
and if any in the course of their ministry, shall misapply, or draw unsound
inferences or wrong conclusions from the Text, or otherwise misbehave
themselves in point of Conduct or Conversation, let them be admonished in Love
and Tenderness by the Elders or Overseers where they live, and if they refuse
to acknowledge and give satisfaction for their offenses, let them be further
dealt with, in the wisdom of Truth, as the case may require. 1723.

We tenderly recommend to faithful Friends, and especially Ministers and
Elders, Ministers and Elders to watch over the Flock, and be good examples.
to watch over the Flock of Christ in their respective Places and Stations,
always approving themselves by their pious examples in conversation and
conduct, to be such as faithfully and diligently walk up to the Testimony of
the blessed Truth whereunto the Lord has gathered us in this his Gospel Day.
1724.

It is the Judgment of this Meeting that no Minister should travel in Truths
service to parts beyond the seas, Ministers traveling beyond sea, to have the
concurrence of Qu. Meetings, endorsed on Mo. Meeting Certificates. And also of
the general Meeting of Ministers and Elders, if it can be.
without the concurrence of both the Quarterly and Monthly Meetings of Business
to which he or she belongs, signified by an endorsement made at the Quarterly
Meeting on the Certificate granted by the Monthly Meeting. And as the most
weighty, clear, and deliberate evidence should be obtained on the undertaking
this important service, in which the Reputation of Truth is immediately
concerned; it is therefore earnestly recommended, that unless such
Considerations should prevent, which the Quarterly and Monthly Meetings may
judge sufficient, the approbation of the annual or general Spring Meeting of
Ministers and Elders should be likewise obtained on such occasions, and
signified by their Certificate. And that no such approved Minister appoint any
Meeting out of the limits of the Quarterly Meeting to which he or she belongs,
without a Certificate from the Monthly Meeting for Discipline, or the
concurrence thereof. 1755.

Agreed that when any Friend feels a religious engagement of Mind to pay a
general Visit to the Meetings of Friends in New England, or parts further
Eastward or Northward, Ministers traveling to New England etc. on a general
Visit, to lay their concern before the Qu. Meeting.
or to the Carolina's or the settlements further Southward or Westward, or to
any Places on this Continent equally remote, where Meetings of Friends are not
established, according to the Rules and Order of our Discipline; after having
regularly obtained a Certificate from the Monthly Meeting of business of which
they are Members; that it will be expedient, and tend to the Reputation of
Truth, as well as the encouragement and preservation of the individuals
aforesaid (...) go forth in this weighty Service, to lay the same before the
Quarterly Meeting of Business, where it can be done without manifest
inconvenience, in order for the sympathy and concurrence thereof, and that the
same should be expressed by an endorsement on the Monthly Meetings Certificate,
signed by the Clerk of the said Quarterly Meeting. 1785.

Agreed, Certificates, how to be signed.
that in future the certificates issued by the general Meeting of Ministers and
Elders, be signed on behalf and by direction thereof by the Friend acting in
the station of Clerk. 1796.

MODERATION AND TEMPERANCE.
Taking Drams ^^utioned against.
ADVISED, that none accustom themselves to vain and idle company, sipping and
tippling of Drams and strong drink; for though such who use that evil practice
may not suddenly become drunken to the greatest degree, yet they often thereby
become like Ground fitted for the Seeds of the greatest transgressions, and
some who have had the good example of virtuous Parents, have from small
beginnings in Corners, arrived to a shameful excess, to the ruin of themselves,
their Wives and Families, and the scandal of that holy Name by which they have
been called. 1706. 1737.

Giving or receiving strong Liquors at Vendues censurable.
It having been observed that a pernicious Custom has prevailed upon People, of
giving Rum and other Strong Liquors to excite such to bid at Vendues to advance
the Price, which, besides the injustice of the artifice, is scandalous, and
leads to Intemperance and Disorder; it is therefore the unanimous sense of this
Meeting to caution Friends against the same. And if any under our Profession do
fall into this evil Practice, by giving or taking Drams or other strong Liquors
at Vendues, or any noisy revelling gatherings, they should be speedily dealt
with as disorderly Persons. 1726. 1734.

See Conduct and Conversation. Page 35.

Not to distill Spirits out of Grain, and to be very cautious of other
distillation.
An increasing concern and exercise having prevailed amongst Friends in several
of our Quarterly Meetings, respecting the unnecessary use of Spirituous
Liquors, which has greatly tended to the Corruption and depravity of the
morals of mankind, thereby increasing Guilt on our Country; under which
Consideration this Meeting is engaged to exhort and admonish Friends to use
great caution in distilling, or encouraging the Distillery or use of Distilled
or Spirituous Liquors of any kind. And in regard to the practice of destroying
Grain by distilling Spirits out of it; it is the sense and Judgment of this
Meeting, that that practice should be wholly discouraged and disused amongst
Friends; and that Friends ought not to sell their Grain for that purpose, nor
to use or partake of Liquors made out of grain. And in the Year 1781 it
appears, by a Minute, that the labor of Friends in these respects had been
found useful, and the same Concern is afresh recommended, It being the Judgment
of this Meeting that no member of our religious Society should be found in
these Practices. 1777. 1781.

See Conduct and Conversation Page 35.

Many just and pertinent Remarks being made in this Meeting, Friends to be
cautioned against importing or retailing Distilled Spirits.
clearly letting forth the corrupting, debasing, and ruinous effects consequent
on the importation and retailing large quantities of distilled Spirits, whereby
the intemperate use of them is greatly aided and encouraged, to the
impoverishment of many, distempering the Constitutions and Understandings of
many more, and increasing Vice and Dissoluteness in the Land, wherewith many
religiously attentive minds have been long painfully burdened; it is the
united sense of the Meeting, that well concerned Friends in all Quarters, be
earnestly excited to suffer the affecting importance of this mighty evil,
religiously to impress their minds, and animate them with a lively concern to
exert honest endeavors, both by Example and loving entreaty, to caution and
dissuade all our Members from being concerned in the importation or retailing
distilled Spirits, or giving Countenance thereto. 1784. 1787.

A fervent concern attending this Meeting, Friends who import retail or distill
spirituous Liquors to be treated with.
respecting the melancholy fruits of a too unguarded love of Lucre in promoting
the intemperate use of Spirituous Liquors, by importing, distilling, and
retailing them; a sense of the mighty and extensive mischiefs produced thereby,
being expressed with much weight and energy; the importance of which evil, and
promoting a Remedy therefore, requiring deliberate care as well as deep and
faithful attention; and it appearing there is an increasing concern
harmoniously prevailing against the practice of trading in, and making use of
an article, which is attended with obvious pernicious effects on the morals and
Health of the People in general; it is recommended in the most tender earnest
manner to our Quarterly and Monthly Meetings, to manifest a true disinterested
regard and attention to the judgment and pressing exhortation of the collective
body of Friends, as expressed in the Minute of this Meeting in 1777, and the
subsequent advices to this time, as well as the renewed exercise which has
attended the minds of Friends now assembled, for the preservation of our fellow
Members from the temptation of partaking in the Gain of unrighteousness. And
for the effecting this desirable purpose, we think it expedient, that Quarterly
and Monthly Meetings be excited and enjoined early to appoint Committees
unitedly to proceed in visiting and treating with our Members individually who
are concerned in importing distilled spirituous Liquors, either on their own
account, or as Agents for others; and those who purchase and retail them; as
also those Members who are concerned in the Distillation of those Liquors from
Grain or other Produce, either in their own Families, or encouraging or
promoting it in others.

Spirituous Liquors to be used cautiously as Medicine and refrained from in
Harvest.
And we apprehend it is expedient to recommend and advise those who make use of
Spirituous Liquors in their Families in a medicinal way, that they be careful
to keep within the bounds of true moderation in the use of them for such a
purpose; and that our Members in general refrain from the practi^e of using
them in the time of Harvest or otherwise; hoping, that the brotherly labor
with all who continue in the practices here recited, may be effectual to
convince them of the impropriety of their conduct, and the benefit of Christian
fellowship. 1788.

Moderation in all respects recommended.
It is affectionately recommended, that Friends be careful to use moderation on
account of Marriages, Births, and Burials, and on all other occasions; a
departure from which being a cause of stumbling to many, and a great
obstruction to a more full reformation, as well as attended with other evil
consequences, tending to obstruct that Light which we have to hold up to
others, and should have more abundantly, if we were faithful; lessening that
savor which we ought ever carefully to preserve, agreeable to the monition of
the holy Apostle, Let your moderation be known unto all men, the Lord is at
hand. Philip. IV. 5. And as the all seeing Eye beholds our thoughts, and views
us in all our ways and actions, what manner of men ought we to be in all
Godliness of Life, and sobriety of Deportment? 1789.

Those persisting in the distillation etc of Spirits not to be employed in
Truth's service.
Should any of our Members continue to reject the labor and advice of their
Friends and persist in the practice of Importing or vending distilled
spirituous Liquors, either on their own account or as Agents for others; or
Distill or retail such Liquors; or sell or grind Grain for the use of
Distillation, such should not be employed in any services in the Church, nor
their Contributions received for the use thereof. And if any should distill
Spirits out of Grain, or retail such Liquors, Such as distill or sell Spirits
from Grain, to be treated with as offenders.
Monthly Meetings should deal with them as other offenders, and if they cannot
be prevailed upon to desist from such a Practice, be at liberty to declare
their disunity with them. 1794.

MOURNING HABITS.
Mourning Habits and immoderate expenses about the Dead cautioned against.
ADVISED, against imitating the vain Custom of wearing or giving Mourning
Habits, and all extravagant expenses about the interment of the Dead. 1724.

NEGROES OR SLAVES.
IT appearing to have been the concern of this Meeting from time to time
revived with increasing weight, to testify their uneasiness and disunity with
the importation and purchasing of Negroes and other Slaves, and to direct the
Overseers of the several Meetings to advise and deal with such as engage
therein; and it has likewise been the continued care of many weighty Friends,
to press those that bear our name to guard as much as possible against being in
any respect concerned in promoting the bondage of such unhappy people; yet as
we have with sorrow to observe that their number is of late increased amongst
us, we have thought proper to make our advice and judgment more public, that
none may plead Ignorance of our Principles therein, and also again earnestly
exhort all, to avoid in any manner encouraging that practice, of making Slaves
of our fellow creatures. -- For if we continually bear in mind the Royal Law of
doing to others as we would be done by, we shall never bereave our fellow
Creatures of that valuable Blessing, Liberty, nor endure to grow Rich by their
bondage; to live in ease and plenty by the toil of those whom violence and
cruelty have put in our power, is neither consistent with Christianity or
common justice, and we have good reason to believe draws down the displeasure
of Heaven; it being a melancholy but true reflection, that where Slave keeping
prevails, pure Religion and Sobriety decline, as it evidently tends to harden
the heart, Evil effects of Slave keeping.
and render the Soul less susceptible of that holy spirit of Love, Meekness and
Charity which form the peculiar characteristic of a true Christian. How then
can we who have been concerned to publish the Gospel of universal Love and
Peace amongst mankind, be so inconsistent with ourselves, as to purchase such
who are Prisoners of War, and thereby encourage this antichristian practice;
and more especially as many of those poor Creatures are stolen away, Parents
from Children, and Children from Parents; and others who were in good
circumstances in their native Country, inhumanly torn from what they esteemed a
happy situation, and compelled to toil in a state of slavery, too often
extremely cruel. -- What dreadful scenes of Murder and cruelty those barbarous
Ravages must occasion in the country of those unhappy People, are too obvious,
Remember our blessed Savior's positive command to do unto others as we would
have them do unto us; and that with what measure we mete it should be measured
to us again. And we entreat all to examine whether the purchasing of a Negro,
either born here or imported, does not contribute to a further importation, and
consequently to the upholding all the evils above mentioned, and to the
promotion of Man stealing, the only theft, which by the Mosaic Law was punished
with death. He that steals a Man and sells him, or if he be found in his
hands, he shall surely be put to death. Exodus XXI. 16.

Badge of a true Christian.
The distinguishing Mark and Badge of a true Christian is Love and good works;
our Savior's whole Life on Earth was one continued exercise of them -- "Love
one another as I have loved you." How can we be said to love our Brethren, who
bring, or for selfish ends keep them in Bondage? -- Do we act consistent with
this noble principle, who lay such heavy Burdens on our fellow Creatures? Do
we consider that they are called, and sincerely desire that they may become
Heirs with us in Glory? and rejoice in the liberty of the Sons of God, whilst
we are withholding from them the common Liberties of Mankind? or can the Spirit
of God by which we have always professed to be led, be the author of those
oppressive and unrighteous Measures? Or do we not thereby manifest that
temporal Interest has more influence on our conduct herein than the dictates
of that merciful, holy, and unerring Guide?

And we likewise earnestly recommend to all who have slaves, to be careful to
come up in the performance of their duty toward them, and to be particularly
watchful over their own Hearts, it being by sorrowful experience remarkable,
that custom, and a familiarity with evil of any kind, has a tendency to bias
the judgment and deprave the mind; and it is obvious, that the future welfare
of those poor Slaves who are now in bondage, is generally too much disregarded
by those who keep them; if their daily task of labor is but fulfilled, little
else perhaps is thought of; Yea, even that which in others would be looked upon
with horror and Detestation is little regarded in them by their Masters, such
as the frequent separation of Husbands from Wives, and Wives from Husbands,
whereby they are tempted to break their Marriage Covenants, and live in
Adultery, in direct opposition to the Laws both of God and Man, although we
believe that Christ died for all Men without respect of Persons; how fearful
then ought we to be of engaging in what has so material a tendency to lessen
our Humanity, and of suffering ourselves to be inured to the exercise of hard
and cruel measures, lest we thereby in any degree lose our tender and feeling
sense of the miseries of our fellow Creatures, and become worse than those who
have not believed.

And Dear Friends, you who by Inheritance have Slaves born in your Families, we
beseech you to consider them as Souls committed to your trust, whom the Lord
will require at your hands, and who, as well as you, are made partakers of the
Spirit of Grace, and called to be Heirs of Salvation; and let it be your
constant care to watch over them for good, instructing them in the fear of God,
and the knowledge of the Gospel of Christ, that they may answer the end of
their Creation, and God be glorified and honored by them, as well as by us;
and so train them up, that if you should come to behold their unhappy situation
in the same light that many worthy men, who are at rest, have done, and many of
your Brethren now do, and should think it your duty to set them free, they may
be the more capable to make a proper use of their liberty.

Finally Brethren, we entreat you in the Bowels of Gospel Love, seriously to
weigh the cause of detaining them in Bondage; if it be for your own private
gain, it is much to be feared that the love of God, and the influence of the
holy spirit is not the prevailing Principle in you, and that your Hearts are
not sufficiently redeemed from the World, which that you with ourselves may
more and more come to Witness, through the cleansing virtue of the holy spirit
of Jesus Christ, is our earnest desire. 1754.

The inconsistency of the Practice of being concerned in importing or buying
Slaves, Concern against importing or buying Slaves, made Rule of Discipline.
with our Christian Principles being considered: It is the sense and judgment
of this Meeting, if any transgress, Overseers ought speedily to inform the
Monthly Meeting of such Transgressors, in order that the Meeting may proceed to
treat further with them, as they may be directed in the Wisdom of Truth. 1755.

Importing, Buying or selling Slaves, cause of denial of certain Privileges.
An unanimous concern prevailing to put a stop to the increase of the practice
of importing, buying, selling, or keeping of Slaves for term of Life, or
purchasing them for such a number of years manifests that such Purchasers do
only in terms but not in fact avoid the imputation of being keepers of Slaves.
-- And observing with thankfulness, that although many of our fellow subjects
have by the desolating Calamities of War, with which these Provinces are now
visited, been carried into Captivity, and slain, yet none of our Friends and
Brethren in Profession have, as we have yet heard, suffered in like manner;
under a sense whereof, this Meeting affectionately entreats, that Friends would
steadily observe the Injunction of Our Lord and Master, to do unto others as we
would they should do unto us, which would induce such Friends who have any
Slaves to set them at liberty, making a Christian provision for them according
to their Ages etc. And several Friends signifying their being so fully devoted
to render this advice effectual, that they were willing to visit, and treat
with all Friends who have any Slaves, Certain Friends appointed to visit all
who hold Slaves.
Five were therefore approved by the Meeting, to be accompanied by some Elders
or other faithful Friends in each Quarter; and if, after the sense and judgment
of this Meeting now given against every branch of this Practice, any professing
with us should persist to vindicate it, and be concerned in importing, selling,
or purchasing Slaves, the Monthly Meetings to which they belong should manifest
their disunion with such, by refusing to permit them to sit in Meetings for
Discipline, or to be employed in the affairs of Truth, or to receive from them
any Contribution for the relief of the Poor, or other services of the Meeting.

This concern weightily re^ommended to ^ttention.
From this to the Year 1774 many minutes appear, exciting Friends in their
Monthly Meetings, and more individually, with weight to attend to the religious
exercise now remaining upon us, that such among us who have Negroes in their
Families, may partake of the true Brotherly assistance of well concerned
Friends, in order that all may be encouraged not only to instruct them in
Reading and other useful Learning while they are young, but so to conduct
toward these poor people, that equity may take place throughout our Borders,
notwithstanding their different color or circumstance, and report their
proceedings from time to time. 1758.

It is the present sense and judgment of this Meeting, Friends who import,
sell, purchase or give away slaves to be disowned publicly.
that such of our Members who are concerned in importing, selling, or
purchasing; or that shall give away or transfer any Negro or other Slave, with
or without any other Consideration than to clear their Estate of any future
encumbrance, or in such manner that their Bondage is continued beyond the time
limited by Law or Custom for white Persons; and those who accept of such gift
or assignment, ought to be speedily treated with in the Spirit of true Love and
Wisdom, and the iniquity of their Conduct laid before them. And if, after all
this Christian labor, they cannot be brought to such a sense of their
injustice, as to do every thing which the Monthly Meeting shall judge to be
reasonable and necessary for the restoring such Slave to his or her natural and
just right to Liberty, and condemn their deviation from the Law of
Righteousness and Equity, to the satisfaction of the said Meeting, that such
Member be testified against as other Transgressors are by the Rules of our
Discipline for other immoral, unjust, or reproachful conduct.

And understanding that some Members of our religious Society through
inattention, and others from different motives, Difficult cases how to be
managed.
have been induced to be concerned in hiring Slaves on Wages, such should be
excited to consider, that this Practice manifestly contributes to promote the
unrighteous Traffic we are desirous to suppress; and therefore, they should be
advised and admonished against being thus accessory to promoting it. Also that
Friends be cautioned and advised against acting as Executors or Administrators
to such Estates where Slaves are bequeathed or likely to be detained in Bondage.

And we are of the Mind, Friends heretofore in part disowned for this practice,
to be further treated with and dissowned for other Breaches of discipline.

Slave holders to be treated with and disowned.


that where any Member has been heretofore so far excluded from religious
fellowship as the Minute of 1758 gives Authority, nevertheless, in case of
other disorderly conduct, that they be treated with agreeable to our
Discipline. 1774.

Under the calming influences of pure Love, we do with great unanimity give it
as our sense and judgment, that Quarterly and Monthly Meetings should speedily
unite in a further close Labor with all such as are Slave holders, and have
any right of Membership with us; and where any continue to reject the advice of
their Brethren, and refuse to execute proper Instruments of Writing, for
releasing from a state of Slavery such as are in their power, or to whom they
have any claim, whether arrived to full age, or in their Minority, and no hopes
of a continuance of Friends labor being profitable to them, that Monthly
Meetings, after having discharged a Christian duty to such, should testify
their disunion with them.

Complicated Cases to be submitted to Qu. Meetings whose advice to be regarded,
and disowned for a refusal.
And it appearing from the Reports of the several Quarters, that there are many
difficult and complicated cases, which relate to those oppressed and much
injured People, requiring great Circumspection and close attention, in order
that our religious Testimony may be promoted, and that the cause of Truth may
not suffer by unprofitable delays, we apprehend all such Cases might well be
submitted to Quarterly Meetings where they subsist, whose advice and judgment
should be observed and regarded; so that any Member who refuses or declines
complying therewith, after being labored with in the Spirit of Love and Wisdom
should be testified against.

Record of Man^^^ssions to be kept.
It is recommended that a regular Record be kept in each Monthly Meeting, in a
Book provided for that purpose, of all the Manumissions of Slaves already set
free, or who may hereafter be set free. 1776.

Slaves set free and their Children to be advised and instructed.
It is recommended to Friends in their several Quarterly and Monthly Meetings,
seriously and attentively to consider the circumstances of such Negroes and
their Children who have been restored to freedom, and the obligation we are
under to discharge our religious duty to them, which being disinterestedly
pursued, will lead the Professors of Truth to advise and assist them on all
occasions, particularly in promoting their Instruction in the Principles of the
Christian Religion, and the pious Education of their Children, as also to
advise them in respect to their engagements in Worldly concerns as occasions
offer. And it is desired that Friends of judgment and experience may be
nominated for this weighty service; it being the solid sense of this Meeting,
that we of the present generation are under strong obligations to manifest our
concern and care for the Offspring of those People, who by their labor have
greatly contributed toward the cultivation of several of these Colonies, under
the afflicting disadvantage of enduring a hard Bondage, and many amongst us are
enjoying the benefit of their Toil.

Women whose Husbands are not members, to unite with us in this concern or be
disowned.
It is the sense of this Meeting that where only the Mistresses of Families
where Slaves are held, are Members of our religious Society, and any such Women
evidently discover a disposition of Mind to reject or oppose the judgment and
concern of the Yearly Meeting heretofore given, that Monthly Meetings, after
due labor and Christian endeavors have been used to convince them of their
Error, without effect, should proceed to declare that they are not in
fellowship with us. And it is further desired, that Friends in the course of
their labor with such who continue to hold Slaves in Bondage, may be well
assured of the disposition of Mind of the Mistresses of Families, that they
unite with us in our Concern and Testimony against the iniquitous Practice; and
where a contrary disposition appears, and is persisted in, our Discipline
should be exercised against them. 1778.

We are united in judgment that the state of the oppressed People who have been
held by any of us or our Predecessors in Captivity and Slavery, calls for a
deep inquiry and close examination, Slaves set free to have their just rights
attended to by those concerned.
how far we are clear of withholding from them, what under such an exercise may
open to view as their just right; and therefore we earnestly and affectionately
entreat our Brethren in religious Profession to bring this matter home, and
that all who have let the oppressed go free may attend to the further openings
of Duty.

A tender Christian sympathy appears to be awakened in the minds of many who
are not in religious Profession with us, This concern to be spread among those
who are not in unity with us.
who have seriously considered the oppressions and disadvantages under which
these People have long labored, and whether a pious care to be extended to
these, and to their Offspring is not justly due from us to them, is a
consideration worthy of our serious and deep attention, or if this obligation
did not weightily lay upon us, can benevolent Minds be directed to any object
more worthy of their liberality and encouragement than that of laying a
foundation in the rising Generation for their becoming good and useful Men?
Remembering what was formerly enjoined, If thy Brother be waxen Poor, and
fallen in decay with thee, then thou shall relieve him; yea though he be a
stranger or a sojourner, that he may live with thee. Lev. XXV, 35. 1779.

Friends are again exhorted to use their endeavors for completing the
releasement of our fellow Men from Bondage in the few instances remaining,
Attention to the releasement of those slaves who remain in Bondage.
and to assist and advise for their religious and temporal benefit such Negroes
as have been set free, and to promote the pious Education of their Offspring,
And to do full justic^ commended
as well as their school learning; and to cherish amongst Friends an upright
concern that they be not found deficient in doing them full justice, as far as
may be in their power. 1780. 1781. 1782. 1784. 1785.

This concern recommended to the care of the Meeting for Sufferings.
The deeply affecting concern, on account of the continued Traffic in some parts
of this Continent, in the Persons of our fellow Men, the People of Africa,
afresh reviving; and the minds of many Friends being warmly animated with a
sense of its interesting Import, it is with much earnestness recommended to the
diligent attention and care of the Meeting for Sufferings, that no proper means
may be omitted, nor any opportunity lost, whereby the Testimony of Truth in
this matter may be advanced, and the cause of Mercy and Equity promoted and
strengthened in the minds of Men generally. 1786. 1787.

A Slave not to be purchased and manumitted for servitude.
It being enquired whether it is not a breach of our Testimony for a Friend to
make a purchase of a Slave, and then manumit him or her, and by agreement take
an Indenture or other obligation of servitude until the purchase money is paid,
it appears to be the sense of this Meeting, that such purchase and agreement is
contrary to our testimony against slavery. 1790.

OATHS.
ADVISED that our Christian Testimony be faithfully maintained against the
burden and imposition of Oaths, Testimony against Oaths to be maintained.
according to the express prohibition of Christ, and also of the Apostle James,
viz. Ye have heard that it has been said by them of old Time, thou shall not
forswear thyself, but shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths; but I say unto
you, swear not at all: neither by Heaven, for it is God's Throne; nor by the
Earth, for it is his Footstool; neither by Jerusalem, for it is the City of the
Great King. Neither shall thou swear by thy Head, because thou can not make
one Hair white or black: but let your communication be, Yea, yea, Nay, nay, for
whatsoever is more than these comes of evil Matt. V. 33 to 37. E. D.

But above all things my Brethren, swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by the
Earth, neither by any other Oath: but let your yea, be yea; and your nay, nay;
lest ye fall into condemnation. James. V. 12.

From the Year 1718 to 1771 diverse Minutes of this Meeting appear, Oaths
administered by Clerks etc. a violation of it.
declaring that Oaths administered by Clerks or others under the notice of
Friends, either in Court or elsewhere, violate our ancient Testimony. And
particularly in the Year 1758. It is earnestly recommended to Quarterly and
Monthly Meetings, Friend administering Oaths to be testified against.
that where any under our name are concerned in administering Oaths, to be
careful to proceed in dealing with them; and if they will not decline the
Practice and give suitable satisfaction to the Meeting they belong to, Friends
not to choose their Brethren to Of^^e^^ inconsistent (...) us.
to testify against them agreeable to the Rules of our Discipline. And in the
Year 1762 it is desired that all Friends may be particularly careful that they
be not accessory in promoting or choosing their Brethren to such offices which
may subject them to the temptation of deviating from our Christian Testimony in
this or any other branch thereof. 1758.

See Civil Government Page 32. 1710. 1758.

Quarterly and Monthly Meetings to support our testimony and Discipline against
Oaths.
Quarterly and Monthly Meetings are again earnestly desired seriously to attend
to the support of our Christian Testimony against Oaths, many minds being at
this time much affected in observing by the accounts now sent, that there are
Members remaining in some places, who preferring the temporal Honors and
Profits of this uncertain Life are led into a disregard of the solemn
injunction of our blessed Lord, and the Doctrine of the Apostle against
swearing; which we have grounds to believe was the Testimony and Practice of
the Believers in Ancient Times carefully to observe; and which our worthy
Predecessors in the Truth were zealously concerned to promote and maintain,
through much reviling, persecution, and sufferings. And as we are convinced it
remains to be our duty to support this part of our Christian Testimony,
faithful Friends are affectionately excited to unite in extending their
brotherly labor and endeavors toward those who are the occasion of this
Exercise; which proving unsuccessful, it is the sense of this Meeting that such
be treated with and proceeded against as Persons regardless of the unity of the
Brethren, and of our ancient Testimony.

Friends not to Elect their Brethren to Offices which subject them to a
Violation of our Testimony against Oaths.
And in order to prevent, as much as possible, such occasions of weakness, and
that we may be qualified uniformly to support this weighty part of our
Christian Testimony; we find it necessary again to exhort Friends in all
Places, carefully to avoid electing or promoting their Brethren to such
stations in Civil Government as may subject them to the temptation of violating
it. And where any Members show an inclination or desire of soliciting or
accepting of such offices, faithful Friends should take timely care to
discourage and caution them against it.

OVERSEERS.
LET each Monthly Meeting choose a proper number of sober judicious Men and
Women Friends, Overseers to be appointed.
to have the oversight and reside within the limits of the several particular
and preparative Meetings for which they are appointed. Who are to render an
account.
This choice may be made from time to time as they may see fit; which Overseers
are to render an account of their services and duties to the Monthly Meeting
when thereunto required.

It is the advice of this Meeting, that in speaking to, Overseers to deal with
offenders in a Christian Spirit.
or dealing with any, it be done in a Christian Spirit of Love and Tenderness;
laboring in Meekness to lay the Evil before the Offenders, to bring them to a
sense of it in themselves, and to promote their right restoration. And although
such as transgress, or lose their hold of Truth, are apt to oppose or be testy,
while they are in that condition, yet we ought patiently and meekly to instruct
and advise them, so that we may not only have the reward of Peace in ourselves,
but that it may, so affect the Spirits of those spoken to, as that they may be
sensible we have only performed a Christian duty, and an office of brotherly
love toward them. And acquaint Preparative and Monthly Meetings if they are
refractory.
After which tender dealing, if any reject the admonition, counsel or advice
given them, the Overseers are to acquaint the Preparative Meeting thereof, in
order if needful, that the same may be laid before the Monthly Meeting, that
further care may be taken with such according to our established Rules, of
which, Notice should be previously given to the Persons so dealt with, when
that can be conveniently done. 1719.

PLAINNESS.
Plainness of Speech Apparel etc recommended.
ADVISED, that all Friends, both old and young, keep out of the worlds corrupt
Language, Manners, vain and needless things and fashions, in Apparel,
Buildings, and furniture of Houses, some of which are immodest, indecent, and
unbecoming. And that they avoid the immoderate or vain use of Lawful things,
which though innocent in themselves, may thereby become hurtful; avoid also
such kinds of stuffs, colors and dress, as are calculated more to please a
vain and wanton, or proud mind, than for the^^ real usefulness; and let
Tradesmen and others, Members of our religious Society be admonished
accordingly, that they may not make themselves accessory to these evils; for we
ought in all things to take up the daily Cross of Christ; minding the Grace of
God which brings Salvation, and teaches to deny all ungodliness, and worldly
Lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present World, that
we may adorn the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, so shall we feel his
Blessing, and may be instrumental in his hand, for the good of others. 1682.
1694. 1695. 1711.

Watchfulness against vain customs and Fashions.
It comes before this Meeting, to press all Friends to diligence, and
watchfulness, against the vain customs and growing Fashions, which have been so
nobly denied and avoided by our Elders and Forefathers, who stood their ground
in a faithful Testimony against those things, which now too much appear in some
places, especially among our Youth, that our Discipline may be observed, and
duly put in practice, in this, as well as more weighty Points. 1715.

Self denial and true circumspection recommended.
As we have been redeemed from the confused Doctrines of the Schools, and the
unwarrantable power of Men in their unscriptural impositions of Articles,
Modes, and Ceremonies, and turned to an inward work in the simplicity of the
Gospel of Jesus our Lord; so, from the beginning, it has fallen closely on our
elder Brethren to bear Testimony against all Vanity and Pride; all superfluity
and excess: being rightly made to see, in the first place, the great necessity
of sincerity and uprightness of Heart toward God, and obedience to his
Commands; and next how inconsistent it is with this inward work, to retain or
launch into the vain Customs and Fashions prevailing amongst the Professors of
Christianity; for how is it possible for a mind truly religious to be delighted
in such follies. Let our Youth and others, who may make light of that plainness
of Speech, Apparel, and Furniture, which our elder Brethren have been led into,
but seriously examine their own Hearts, with due application and regard to the
Grace of God placed there, and they will find, that so far as they embrace such
Vanities, they weaken themselves in the true practice of religious Duties, and
invite further Temptations, and more dangerous Vices. Hypocrites being plain no
reason to discourage plainness in sincere Friends.
Neither can it be a satisfactory excuse, if they should observe any one who
may conceive the appearance of plainness to be some temporal advantage to them,
do put it on with unsanctified Hearts, and Minds filled with deceit, for such
as these are an abomination to God and good Men, and ought no more to deter the
sincere hearted from an exemplary behavior and conduct, than it should a just
Man from speaking Truth, because some Persons when they covertly can, will be
guilty of Falsehood. From these considerations, and in true love to the Youth
and others, a solid concern came upon Friends at this time, to encourage all to
a Christian Life of self denial, with all comeliness of conversation and
simplicity of Manners; observing that in some there appears too much
carelessness and neglect of this beautiful circumspection, and in others too
much highmindedness, whereby they err from the narrow Path which leads to true
Peace and Happiness; Former Epistles or Minutes to be read in Youth's or other
Meetings.
it is therefore the advice of this Meeting, that Friends in their respective
Quarterly and Monthly Meetings, as they find occasion, do cause former Epistles
or Minutes, or such parts of them as regard any growing or rising Evil, to be
read in our Youth's or other Meetings, as may be thought best. 1726.

We tenderly exhort all, Plainness and simplicity of the Gospel our forefathers
suffered for it.
seriously to consider the plainness and simplicity which the Gospel enjoins
and to manifest it in their Speech, Apparel, Furniture and appearance in all
things; in their Salutations and Conversation, into which our Forefathers were
led by the Spirit of Jesus Christ, his Precepts and example; and for which they
patiently suffered long imprisonments, and great persecutions; being convinced
that it was their duty thus to bear a Testimony against the vain Spirit of the
World. 1746.

A watchful care recommended. Our Saviors example still leads to it.
Whereas we have with deep concern observed that there is a great declension
from that simplicity in Speech, Behavior, and Apparel, which our worthy
Ancestors were led into; and as we find by experience, that the same spirit of
Truth which led our Ancients to lay aside every thing unbecoming the Followers
of Christ, will still lead in the same Path, all who submit to its guidance, we
earnestly entreat all Friends to watch over themselves in these respects -- The
example of our blessed Savior and his Followers, and of virtuous and holy Men
in all ages, ought to make a due impression on every considerate Mind; and
especially on such as have had the advantage of an Education in a Plainness
agreeable to such Example.

Misconduct of plain Persons, no objection to plainness.
Let not any such as degenerate in these respects excuse their own weakness,
under a pretense of the misconduct of some who have appeared outwardly Plain;
an objection of very little weight; for did they rightly consider, they would
clearly see, that the very reason why Deceivers sometimes put on plain Apparel,
is because true Men have been accustomed to wear it -- We also tenderly advise,
An exemplary Plainness without respect of Persons.
that Friends take heed, especially those who should be exemplary to others
under their care, that they exercise plainness of Speech without respect of
Persons, in all their converse among Men; and not balk their Testimony by a
cowardly compliance, varying their Language according to their Company; a
practice of very ill example to our observing Youth, and rendering those who
use it contemptible, and looked upon as a kind of Hypocrites, even by those
with whom they so comply: such a mean spirited Practice seems to be cautioned
against by the Apostle, when he advises. I. Tim. "That the Deacons be Grave,
not double Tongued;" a caution plainly importing that it is inconsistent with
the gravity of the Gospel. E. D. 1743.

Evil effects of a departure from Plainness.
It is matter of exceeding Grief and Concern to many of the faithful among us,
to observe, how far that exemplary plainness of habit, speech, and deportment,
which distinguished our Forefathers, and for which they patiently underwent the
reproach and contradiction of Sinners, is now departed from by many under our
name: a declension, from the simplicity of Truth herein has been, and we fear
is, attended with pernicious Consequences, in opening the way of some, the more
easily and unobserved to attend the places of public resort, for the exercise
of Sports, Plays, and other hurtful and destructive Diversions of the Age, from
which Truth taught our faithful Elders, and still teaches us wholly to refrain;
and indeed the Christian Gravity of their lives and actions, always carried
with it a severe reproof, and manifest opposition to the wantonness and Levity
of such dangerous and sinful Pastimes. Wherefore, we beseech you, be not
deceived, nor led aside by false notions of imaginary Pleasures, to partake of
the unfruitful works of darkness," but "watch and be sober;" and as becomes
Children of the light, and of the Day, "abstain from all appearance of evil. I.
These. V. 22. E. D. 1753.

POOR.
Support of the Poor our ancient Practice.
IT is the advice of this Meeting, that all poor Friends amongst us be taken due
care of, according to Friends ancient practice; their Cases duly inspected, and
they advised, relieved, and assisted in such Business as they are capable of;
and that none of them be sent to others for relief. 1721.

We support our own Poor, and contribute to others.
As Mercy, Compassion, and Charity are eminently required in this New Covenant
Dispensation we are under; so respecting the Poor, and Indigent amongst us, and
to see that there be no Beggar in Israel; it is the advice of this Meeting,
that all poor Friends be taken due care of, and none of them sent to the
Township to be relieved; and that nothing be wanting for their necessary
supply; which has been according to our ancient Practice and Testimony. Hence
it has long been of good report, that we have not only maintained our own Poor,
but also contributed our Share to the Poor of the Townships wherein we dwell.
E. D. 1720.

Riches should not be prostituted to Pleasure, Ambition etc.
As it has pleased the Lord to favor many amongst us with the outward Blessings
of this Life in so plentiful a manner, as that we are placed in a capacity of
doing much good, and of exercising the offices of Christian Love and Charity,
to the comfort and assistance of the Poor and Needy; those in affluence
especially, ought ever to bear in mind, that none are entrusted with Riches
that they may indulge themselves in pleasures, or for the gratification of
Luxury, Ambition, or vain Glory; but to do good, and to communicate thereof; by
which the afflictions of the Distressed will be mitigated. E. D. Page. 89.
1750. and 1757.

Mode of providing for and taking care of the Poor.
As one of the first and great Causes which engaged our ancient Friends to the
orderly establishing our Christian Discipline was the care of the Poor; and as
expenses must necessarily arise for their support, and the education of their
Children; it is recommended to each Monthly Meeting of Men and Women Friends,
to be open hearted and liberal in their subscriptions to raise and support a
Fund for these purposes; and that a Treasurer be appointed to receive the same;
which Fund should be open to each Meeting of Men and Women Friends; and that
two or more suitable Friends, Men and Women, be appointed to have the care of
the Poor, whose Business and Duty it should be to visit, inspect, and relieve
them, as becomes the Followers of Christ; and that two or more Friends be
annually appointed as an Audit to settle the Treasurers and Overseers Account,
and report the same to the Meeting. N. E. D.

PRIESTS WAGES OR HIRELING MINISTRY.
Unfaithfulness herein to be testified against.
IT is earnestly recommended to Friends in their several Meetings, where there
are any who balk the Testimony of Truth, by paying the Hireling Priests, and
vindicate their Conduct therein; to labor in true Love and tenderness to
convince them of their Error; and if their endeavors prove ineffectual, it is
the sense of this Meeting, that such Persons persisting in their unfaithfulness
and opposition to the sense of the Body, the Monthly Meeting should proceed to
testify against their conduct for the clearing of Truth and Friends. 1757.

Christ's Ministers ought to preach freely.
Let us keep in remembrance, that it is under the immediate teaching and
influence of the holy Spirit that all acceptable Worship is performed, and all
true Gospel Ministry supplied; that this pure and powerful Influence, in
vessels sanctified and prepared by the Divine Hand, is the essential
Qualification to that Work; that as the Gift is divine, the service is freely
and faithfully to be discharged, without any view to Reward from Man. E. D.

QUERIES.
AGREED that the nine following Queries be distinctly read, Mode and times of
reading and answering our Queries.
and deliberately considered, in each Preparative and Monthly Meeting preceding
each Quarterly Meeting, The injunction to read and answer the Queries once a
Quarter to be understood as binding on those Preparative Meetings only, where
more than one constitute a Monthly Meeting; except that in every preparative
Meeting, the nine Queries should be revived by reading them once a Year, in
that previous to the Quarterly next preceding the Yearly Meeting.
at which time Friends may have the opportunity of making such observations as
may tend to excite to vigilance and care in the diligent exercise of our
Christian Discipline, and promote an united labor for the good of the Church.
And in order to convey a general account of the state of Friends in such Cases
as may be most immediately necessary, to the Quarterly Meetings, full and
explicit answers be given in writing to the first, second, and ninth of the
said Queries, three times in the Year; and once in the Year, that is to say, at
the Preparative, Monthly and Quarterly Meetings, next preceding the Yearly
Meeting, that the said nine Queries be in like manner read and considered, and
each of them particularly and distinctly answered in writing, in order to
convey to the Yearly Meeting the most clear account of the state of said
Meetings.

I. Are all our religious Meetings for worship and discipline duly attended,
the Hour observed, The nine Queries.
and are Friends preserved from sleeping, or any other unbecoming behavior
therein? This Query was revised and thus improved in the Year 1782.


II. Is Love and Unity maintained amongst you, as becomes the Followers of
Christ? Are tale bearing, back biting, and evil reports discouraged? And where
any differences arise are endeavors used speedily to end them?

III. Are Friends careful to bring up those under their direction, in plainness
of Speech, Behavior, and Apparel, in frequent reading the holy Scriptures, to
restrain them from reading pernicious Books, and the corrupt conversation of
the World?

IV. Are Friends careful to discourage the unnecessary distillation, or use of
Spirituous Liquors, frequenting of Taverns and Places of Diversion, and to keep
in true Moderation and Temperance on the account of Births, Marriages, Burials,
and other occasions? These Queries were revised, and thus improved in the Year
1782.


V. Are poor Friends necessities duly inspected, they relieved or assisted in
such Business as they are capable of? Do their Children freely partake of
Learning to fit them for Business? And are they and other Friends Children
placed amongst Friends?

VI. Do you maintain a faithful Testimony against Oaths, an hireling Ministry,
bearing Arms, Training, or Military Services, being concerned in any fraudulent
or clandestine Trade, buying or vending Goods so imported, or Prize Goods; and
against encouraging Lotteries of any kind? These Queries were revised, and thus
improved in the Year 1782.


VII. Are Friends clear of importing, purchasing, disposing of, or holding
Mankind as Slaves? And do they use those well who are set free, and are
necessarily under their care, and not in circumstances, through nonage or
incapacity to minister to their own necessities? And are they careful to
educate and encourage them in a religious and virtuous Life? And this in the
Year 1776.


VIII. Are Friends careful to live within the Bounds of their Circumstances,
and to avoid launching into Trade or Business beyond their Ability to manage,
as becomes our religious profession? Are they punctual to their promises, and
just in the payment of their Debts, and are such as give reasonable ground for
fear on these accounts, timely labored with for their preservation or recovery.

IX. Do you take due care regularly to deal with all offenders, in the Spirit
of Meekness and Wisdom, without partiality or unnecessary delay, in order that
where any continue obstinate, judgment according to the nature of the Case may
be placed upon them in the Authority of Truth?

And in the Preparative and Monthly Meetings, when the foregoing Queries are
read, it is recommended that inquiry be made.

Inqueries.
Whether any young or single Persons make or encourage proposals of Marriage
with each other without consent of Parents or Guardians, or keep company with
those who are not of our religious Society, upon that account; and if Parents
give their consent to, or connive at their Childrens thus keeping Company, or
marrying with such, are they dealt with according to our Discipline? or are
there any professing with us, who have been present at Marriages accomplished
contrary to the Rules of our Discipline?

Whether any Widowers or Widows make or admit of proposals of Marriage too
early after the Decease of Husband or Wife, and the Rights of Children not
neglected?

Whether Friends are careful to make their Wills and settle their outward
Estates whilst in Health, and to apply public Gifts and Legacies to the uses
intended by the donors?

Whether any remove without Certificates, or come from other Places, appearing
as Friends, who have not produced Certificates?

Whether due care is taken to keep a regular Record of Births and Burials?

And it is further recommended, Recommendatory caution.
that all Contention and personal reflection be kept out of our Meetings; that
all Friends be careful to keep out of Heats and Passions, and doubtful
Disputations. And that we suffer no turbulent contentious Persons among us, in
ordering or managing the affairs of Truth; but that the same be managed in the
peaceable spirit and Wisdom of Jesus, with decency, Forbearance, and Love of
each other.

It is also directed, The 7 Queries of Ministers and Elders.
that the seven following Queries be read and considered in the Meetings of
Ministers and Elders; and that a general account be given in writing to the
Quarterly Meetings of Ministers and Elders three times in the Year,
comprehending a clear and intelligible account of the state of Ministers and
Elders in their respective Stations; and that particular and distinct answers
be given in writing to the said seven Queries from each Monthly Meeting of
Ministers and Elders once a Year to the Quarterly Meeting preceding the Yearly
Meeting, and particular and distinct answers transmitted in writing from thence
to the Yearly Meeting of Ministers and Elders.

I. Are Ministers and Elders careful to attend Meetings for divine worship, and
in bringing their Families with them; and are they careful to attend Meetings
for Discipline, and to encourage such of their Families to this Duty as are of
proper age, and suitable deportment; and are they good examples in humble
waiting, not giving way to drowsiness? This Query was revised and thus improved
in the Year 1795.


II. Are Ministers sound in Word and Doctrine, careful to minister in the
ability which God gives, and thereby kept from burthening the living?

III. Are the lives and Conversations of Ministers and Elders clean and
blameless amongst Men? Are they in unity one with another, and with the Meeting
they belong to, harmoniously laboring together for Truths Honor, and careful
to give no just occasion of offense to any?

IV. Do they rule their own houses well, bringing up their Families in
plainness, which Truth requires, in dress, language, and true moderation? And
are they good examples in these respects themselves?

V. Are they Peacemakers in Families and in the Church, not concerned in
raising or spreading evil reports, nor busy Bodies where they have no proper
business?

VI. Are they careful to maintain the Discipline in every part thereof, not
even to hide their own Families from Truth's Judgment, if occasion be given,
but impartially to administer justice as faithful Servants?

VII. Do any travel abroad as Ministers without being first recommended to and
accepted by the Quarterly Meeting of Ministers and Elders as such? And do any
appoint Meetings out of the limits of the Quarterly Meeting they belong to
without a Certificate from the Monthly Meeting of Business, or the concurrence
thereof?

Recommendatory Caution and Care.
And it is earnestly and affectionately recommended, that Ministers and Elders
watch over one another for good, to help those who are young in the Ministry in
the right line, discouraging forward Spirits that run into words without Life
and power, advising against affectation of Tones and Gestures and every thing
that would hurt their service; yet encouraging the humble careful Traveller;
"Speaking a Word in season to them that are weary." And let all dwell in that
which gives ability to labor successfully in the Church of Christ, adorning
the Doctrine which they deliver to others, being Examples of the Believers in
word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, and in purity.

It is recommended that the three following annual Queries be used in future,
instead of the four agreed upon in the Year 1755, which should be answered in
the Yearly Meeting, being first read and considered in each Monthly and
Quarterly Meeting previous to the Yearly Meeting, viz.

I. What Ministers and Elders deceased, and when, Three Annual Queries.
and what Memorials concerning them, or other deceased Friends which may be
profitable to Survivors? These two Queries were revised and thus improved in
the Year 1782. The second originated in the Year 1755.


II. What new Meeting Houses built, or new Meetings settled?

III. Are the Queries recommended to the Quarterly, Monthly, and Preparative
Meetings, read and answered agreeable to the direction of the Yearly Meeting?
These two Queries were revised and thus improved in the Year 1782. The second
originated in the Year 1755.


SCHOOLS.
Care and liberality to assist each other in support of Schools recommended.
WE desire Friends in their several Monthly Meetings to encourage and assist
each other in the settlement and support of Schools, for the instruction of
their Children, at least to read and write, and some further useful Learning to
such whole Circumstances will permit it; and that they observe as much as
possible to employ such Masters and Mistresses as are concerned, not only to
instruct their Children in their Learning, but are likewise careful in a spirit
of Meekness gradually to bring them to the knowledge of their duty to God, and
one to another; and we doubt not such endeavors will be blessed with success;
and on the contrary, we think there is much cause to apprehend that some
children, by the evil example and principles of their School Masters, have been
leavened with those Principles, which have led them to bad practices in the
course of their Lives -- We also exhort our Members to bring up their Children
to some useful and necessary employment, under the care of honest Friends, that
they may not spend their precious time in Idleness, which is of evil example,
and an inlet to vice and extravagance, and naturally leads to a familiarity and
friendship with the World, and to a conformity therewith, and often into hasty
and imprudent Marriages, by which they are rendered unhappy in this Life, and
in great danger of failing to attain to eternal Happiness hereafter. 1746.

Observations on Schools recommended to consideration, and care to execute them.
There appearing an united concern in this Meeting for the establishment of
Schools for the instruction of our Children in useful Learning; and some
observations relating thereto being prepared by a Committee, and Printed, are
earnestly recommended to the serious attention of Friends in their Preparative,
Monthly, and Quarterly Meetings, and to Friends generally, in order to excite
and revive a pious Care therein, and to make such progress in promoting the
Institution of such Schools as their Circumstances and the importance of the
matter requires.

They are as follows (to wit)

Some Observations relating to the Establishment of Schools.
It is the opinion of the Committee, that Friends having united with others, in
employing such Persons for Masters, who have not submitted to the operation of
Truth, has had a tendency to strengthen a disposition in our Youth to avoid
the Cross, and unite with the spirit of the World; whereby many hurtful and
corrupt things have gained ground amongst us.

On reviewing the Minutes of the Yearly Meeting, we find, that at several
Meetings, particularly at and since the Year 1750, the consideration of the
importance of training up our Youth in useful Learning, under the tuition of
religious, prudent Persons, suitably qualified for that service, came weightily
before the Meeting; when it was recommended, that Friends should exert
themselves therein as fully as their circumstances would permit; and that the
likeliest means to induce Persons properly qualified, to undertake the business
would be, to have some certain income fixed, in consideration of which the
Master should be obliged to teach so many Children, on behalf of each Monthly
or Particular Meeting, as the said Meeting shall judge adequate to the Salary;
and that no Master should be employed, but with the approbation of a Committee
of the Monthly Meeting, appointed for that and other services, relating to such
Schools: But we find that notwithstanding those pressing recommendations, very
little has been effectually done therein. We therefore think it necessary that
it be recommended to the Quarterly, and from thence to the Monthly and
Preparative Meetings, that the former advice of collecting a Fund, for the
establishment and support of Schools, under the care of a standing Committee
appointed by the several Monthly or Particular Meetings, should generally take
place, and that it be recommended by the Yearly Meeting, to Friends of each
Quarter, to send up the next Year an account of what they have done therein.
And we also think it necessary, that this weighty concern should in future
become the continued care of the Yearly Meeting, by an Annual Query; that so
the matter may rest on a solid foundation, and every possible encouragement and
assistance may be afforded to Friends, in the settlement of Schools, procuring
Masters etc. etc. through the whole extent of the Yearly Meeting. And,
notwithstanding some difficulties may appear in the raising a sufficiency,
fully to answer the end proposed, yet as improvements of this kind have often
arisen from small beginnings, it is desired, that Friends be not discouraged,
by their inability, but having faith in the divine blessing, being conferred on
their benevolent intentions, would begin, by making some provision, agreeable
to the circumstances of their respective Meetings. That within the compass of
each Meeting, where the settlement of a school is necessary, a lot of Ground be
provided, sufficient for a Garden, Orchard, Grass for a Cow, etc. And that a
suitable House, Stable etc. be erected thereon. There are but few Meetings but
which may, in labor, in materials or money, raise so much as would answer this
charge. Such a provision would be an encouragement for a staid Person with a
family, who will be likely to remain a considerable time, perhaps, his whole
life, in the service, to engage therein. This will obviate the necessity
Friends often think themselves under, of hiring no other but a single person,
for a Master, on account of boarding him, from one House to another, amongst
themselves; hence they are induced to bargain with transient Persons, often of
doubtful characters; some of whom have proved to be Men of corrupt minds; and
even where their conduct is moral, yet they are seldom likely to remain in the
service any longer than some employ more agreeable to support themselves
offers: Whereby the Teachers miss of opportunity of improvement, which nothing
will give, equal to that experience gained by long practice, in the education
or the Youth. A service, which, however it may be slighted by many, if duly
performed, is as arduous to the Teacher, as it is of advantage to the Youth:
And which if it was undertaken by pious minded Persons, more from an
inclination of benefiting the Youth, than from a desire of gain, would afford a
satisfaction far exceeding that of spending their time either in supineness and
ease, delighting themselves in the enjoyment of their Wealth, or in the
pleasure of amassing more. For indeed as the Apostle observes I. Cor. VI. 20.
II. Cor. V. 15. Ye are not your own, for ye are bought with a price -- that
they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which
died for them. And here a sorrowful consideration occurs, which we desire to
mention with caution and tenderness, that is the backwardness so apparent
amongst us to contribute that part of our substance, which the circumstance of
things and the necessities of the People, have on different occasions made
necessary; if this had not been the case, a matter of so great importance as
the virtuous education of our Youth, would not have lain neglected, for so long
a course of Years; after such pressing advices had been, so expressly, handed
down from the Yearly Meeting: Hence arises a query, how far our neglect of
applying to the necessary service of our fellow-men, such part of the goods
many have laid up in store, is one of the causes of the deep affliction which
now so feelingly attends, and how small a part of what has been forcibly taken
from many, if it had been seasonably, and cheerfully contributed, would have
answered the several good purposes, which have either been refused, or
neglected by us.

The giving proper encouragement to such Teachers as are capable by example and
precept, to promote the growth of piety and virtue; as well as due instruction
in our Youth, and are likely to continue in the service, would be attended with
further advantages as well from the experience the Teachers would necessarily
gain, as the opportunity they would have of training up lame Children, and
such, who in other respects, may be incapable of supporting themselves by
labor, to be educated and qualified to serve as School Masters; a
consideration well worthy our particular Care, as well from duty as interest.
The benefit of the Youth, and the means of a comfortable living for the Master,
may be increased, by the convenience which might be made, for boarding some
children, under his care, whose distant situation might otherwise impede their
instruction.

And if to what has been proposed, Friends were willing to add the promoting a
subscription, toward a Fund, the increase of which might be employed in paying
the Master's Salary, if necessary, and promoting the education of the poorer
Friend's children; such a Fund though it might be but small in the beginning,
being a fixed object, would draw the attention of Friends to contribute,
whereas so long as there is no beginning made, this weighty service is
neglected, by many, who would be glad of giving encouragement to so necessary
and good a work. And although many may not be able to give much, yet as they
are willing to contribute, in proportion to their abilities, it will, like the
Widow's Mite, entitle them to the blessing: People frequently appear to think
it is at their option to do what they will with their substance which they call
their own, to give or to withhold, at their pleasure, forgetting that they are
but as Stewards, accountable to him who has entrusted them: Others think they
are justifiable, though in the neglect of this plain Duty, in order to heap up
the more Riches for their offspring, contrary to our Blessed Savior's express
Command, "Lay not up for yourselves treasures on the Earth," and
notwithstanding the multiplied experience, daily before our Eyes, that Riches,
generally prove as Wings to raise their Children above Truth; or as thick Clay
to bind them to the Earth; But neither of these conclusions will stand the test
of that Gospel injunction, "Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thyself;" nor
enable to give a satisfactory account when that alarming proclamation will be
made, Steward, give an account of thy Stewardship, for thou may be no longer
Steward.

Signed on behalf of the Committee 29th of the 9th Month 1778. by ANTHONY
BENEZET. ISAAC ZANE.

Unremitted Care and industry in support of Schools recommended.
The account of attention given by Quarterly and Monthly Meetings to the concern
recommended to their especial and diligent care relative to the making a
liberal provision for the due instruction of the Youth, being read, and the
necessity of persevering in unwearied endeavors, to effect in a greater
degree, than has yet been done, the good purposes desired, being obvious,
continued attention, and further unremitted industry is renewedly urged, that
Friends of the respective Meetings may be enabled to give a more satisfactory
account in Reports of their further progress therein. 1784. 1785.

A Care also recommended for the instruction of black Children.
A desire prevailing that our Brethren every where; may be encouraged to
persevere in the desirable work of establishing well regulated Schools, under
the conduct of religious, well qualified Tutors; a continued close regard to
its importance, and the evil consequence resulting from a neglect of it, the
same is earnestly urged afresh to the vigilant care of concerned Friends, to be
extended not only to the Children of Friends of more easy circumstances in
Life, but also to the offspring of such as are Poor, and of the black People
whose condition gives them a claim to that Benefit. 1787.

It sorrowfully appearing, Liberality again recommended to promote Schools
under exemplary Teachers.
that there are affecting deviations from that plainness of speech, behavior
and apparel, which Truth has, and if obeyed does lead into; it is
affectionately recommended to Parents and Heads of Families, to seek after best
wisdom for the government of those under their care, and that proper endeavors
may be used to inculcate on the tender Minds of the rising Youth the essential
Principles and Doctrines of the Christian Religion, that so, that obvious
rawness and ignorance which appears in many, may be done away; and as helpful
thereto, Friends are again earnestly desired, with true liberality, to
encourage and promote Schools under the care of religious, exemplary Tutors,
and to establish Funds as recommended by this Meeting in the Year 1778. to
revive which five hundred Copies of the said recommendatory Minute are now
directed to be printed and sent down to the Quarterly and Monthly Meetings.

A proposition from one of the Quarters respecting the Institution of a School,
The Liberality and Schools of others, not proper for Friends to undertake in
their Meeting Capacity.
to be established and supported by Donations from Persons of different
religious Denominations, and for the education of poor Children not of our
religious Society, having been carefully attended to by Friends; it appears to
be the prevailing sense, that it will not be safe for this or any subordinate
Meeting, to patronize or take under their Care such an Institution. 1789.

We entreat all Parents seriously to lay to heart, The importance of a
religious education.
the great and lasting importance of a religious education to their Offspring;
and to be more solicitous that their tender minds may be impressed with
virtuous Principles, and early directed into the path of Purity* by which they
may obtain the Pearl of great Price, than to provide for them superfluous and
uncertain Riches, frequently the sorrowful means of their Declension and ruin.
And let your good Precepts be enforced by a prudent restraint and authority,
discouraging in them every appearance of evil. Admonition to Teachers.
And to all Masters and Tutors of children, we affectionately address
ourselves, that in a particular manner it may be your care to caution, and as
much as in you lies to guard the Youth committed to your charge, against the
dangers and allurements of evil communications, and the reading of profane and
immoral writings (those powerful Engines of Satan) whether they be such as
directly tend to defile the affections, or, with a more specious appearance, to
subvert the Doctrines of Christianity by a presumptuous abuse of Human Reason,
and by vain and subtle Disputations, after the Rudiments of the World, and not
after Christ. E. D. p. 78.

SCRIPTURES OF THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENT.
ADVISED, that no Friends Suffer Romances, Play Books, The Holy Scriptures to
be preferred to other Books.
or other vain and idle Pamphlets in their Houses or Families, which tend to
corrupt the Minds of Youth; but that they excite them to the reading of the
holy Scriptures, and other good and religious Books. 1721.

Recommended as an incumbent duty on Friends to cause their children to be
frequent in reading the holy Scriptures, Frequent reading the Scriptures
recommended.
and in observing to them the examples of such children, as in Scripture are
recorded to have early learned the fear of the Lord, and hearkened to his
counsel: Instructing them therein; laboring to impress their Minds with
reverence toward God, from whom they have their daily support; showing them
that they ought not to offend him, but love, serve, and honor him, in whose
hands all Blessings are. E. D. 1709.

Inasmuch as the Scriptures of Truth, An esteem for the Scriptures to be raised
in the Minds of Youth.
are the external means of conveying and preserving to us an account of the
things most surely believed, concerning the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ in
the Flesh, and the fulfilling of the Prophecies relating thereto; we recommend
to all Friends, especially Elders in the Church, and Heads of Families, that
they would, both by example and advice, impress on the minds of the younger
Rank, a reverend esteem of those excellent Writings, and advise them to a
frequent reading and meditating therein; Concerned Friends to recommend their
usefulness.
and that you would at proper times and seasons when you find your minds
rightly disposed thereunto, give the Youth to understand, that the same good
experience of the work of Sanctification, through the operation of the Spirit
of God, which the holy Scriptures plentifully bear Testimony to, is to be
witnessed by Believers in all Generations, as well as by those in the first
Ages of Christianity; on which occasions, some account of your own experience
may be helpful to them. And tell the Youth their experience.
And this may be the means under the Divine Blessing, of leading their Minds
into a firm belief of the Christian Doctrine in general, and in particular the
necessity of the aid and help of the operations of the holy Spirit of God in
the Hearts of Men, abundantly declared in that most excellent Book the Bible;
and for preserving them from being defiled with the many pernicious notions and
Principles, contrary to such sound doctrine, which are at this time
industriously dispersed, to the reproach of the Christian Profession. E. D.
1728.

Parents etc. to instruct their Children in the Scriptures and point out the
great Truths they contain.
We tenderly and earnestly advise and exhort all Parents and Heads of Families,
that they exert themselves in the Wisdom of God, and in the strength of his
love, to instruct their Children and Families in the Doctrines and Precepts of
the Christian Religion, contained in the holy Scriptures; and that they excite
them to the diligent reading of those excellent writings, which plainly set
forth the Miraculous Conception, Birth, Holy Life, wonderful Works, Blessed
example, Meritorious Death, and Glorious Resurrection, Ascension and Mediation
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; and to educate their children in the
belief of those important truths, as well as in the belief of the inward
manifestation and operation of the Spirit of God on their own Minds, that they
may reap the benefit and advantage thereof, for their own Peace and everlasting
Happiness, which is infinitely preferable to all other considerations -- We
therefore exhort, in the most earnest manner, that all be careful in this
respect, a neglect herein being in our Judgment very blameworthy. E. D. p.
224. 1732.

SORCERY.
IT is our Sense and Judgment, Pretending to knowledge of things hiddenly
transacted, Censurable.
that if any of our religious Society, shall apply to such Person or Persons,
as by color of any art or skill whatsoever, as Jugglers, or those called
Fortune Tellers, do or shall pretend knowledge to foretell future events,
discover things hiddenly transacted, or tell where things lost or stolen may be
found; or if any of our Members do or shall use, or pretend to such art or
skill; we do hereby in a just abhorrence of such doings, direct, that they be
speedily dealt with, and if they do not manifest a due sense of their evil
conduct, that they be testified against. 1723.

STOCK.
Collections for a Stock anciently recommended.
AGREED, that there be Collections brought in from each Quarterly, unto the next
Yearly Meeting, for a Yearly Meeting Stock, to defray the charges of the said
Meeting, according to the several agreements made, or hereafter to be made.
1695.

It was proposed, in behalf, and at the request of the Women Friends, that they
may be permitted to have a Yearly Meeting Stock of their own, for such service
as may fall more properly under their notice, to which this Meeting agrees.

Mode of raising a Stock and its uses.
A Stock having been generally kept, and by experience found necessary and
useful; it is agreed, that the same be occasionally renewed by a collection
from each Quarter of this Yearly Meeting, for defraying the expenses of
Society; and that it be continued in the hands of a Treasurer to be appointed
by this Meeting, and subject to be drawn out by the direction of this Meeting,
or by the Meeting for sufferings, for the general purposes and exigencies of
our religious Society.

Proportions of each Quarterly Meeting.
The Sums which may be thought necessary, it is agreed shall be raised by each
Quarter, in the Proportions which may be ascertained by this Meeting from time
to time 1705.

An arrangement of the Quotas of the several Quarterly Meetings produced by a
Committee appointed for that purpose was read, and concurred with as follows,
viz? 1790.

Philadelphia quarter to pay L. 17 in every hundred. Abington. 10 15 Bucks. 11
Chester. 14 10 Western. 13 Southern. 4 Burlington. 11 Gloucester and Salem. 13
10 Shrewsbury and Rahway. 5 5 L. 100 0

TAVERNS.
IT is advised, that Friends unite in endeavoring to lessen the number of
Taverns, Number of Taverns discouraged.
and to be careful in respect to signing Petition to recommend Persons for that
employment. 1738.

We entreat our young Friends, Unnecessary resort to Taverns discouraged.
with readiness to receive and observe the loving wholesome admonition of their
Parents and Friends, and carefully to avoid all evil Company, and communication
which corrupt good manners: And we think it necessary to renew our advice, not
only to the Young, but to those of riper Age, to avoid the keeping of much
Company, and resorting to Taverns and Places of entertainment when necessary
Business does not call them, whereby they are not only subjected to the
temptation of drinking to excess, the dismal effects of which in many we see
and lament, but hereby an opportunity is offered, for Men of corrupt Minds to
sow the evil Seeds of loose Principles, to the calling in Question the great
Truths of Religion set forth in the Scriptures of Truth, and striking at the
Foundation of Godliness and holy living, the ensnaring Consequences whereof we
desire all may lay to Heart in time. And in order that those who are unhappily
taken in these Snares, or engaged in such dangerous Conversation, may be
induced to break off before it is too late; it is our desire, that the Elders,
and considerate concerned Friends, may show a disposition to engage them in
their Company, and treat them with freedom and kindness, which will very much
make way for such advice as they may have to communicate to them; but if after
all this labor no fruits of amendment appear, then proceed to a regular
discharge of Duty, by dealing with them according to Gospel Order 1746.

Considering the difficulties and Snares, Caution against keeping Taverns,
both to our young People and others, which are attendant on keeping Houses of
public entertainment, Beer Houses and Dram Shops, whereby the reputation of
Truth has greatly suffered, and in some Places the children and Families of
Persons concerned herein have been brought into disgrace and ruin; it is the
united sense of this Meeting, that Friends ought not to give way to the desire
of outward Gain arising from such employments; but to keep themselves clear
thereof by attending to the pointings of pure wisdom, which will lead us to
seek for a way of supporting ourselves and Families in Business more consistent
with our holy Profession, and not liable to such snares and dangers. And that
all professing with us be advised not to go into these Practices; and that such
as are already engaged therein should be advised to decline them, as being
opposite to the sense of this Meeting now expressed. And that Quarterly and
Monthly Meetings do keep this subject closely in view, and by no means neglect
the proper care toward all such who are in danger of deviating in these
respects. 1777.

See Moderation and Temperance page 87.

TRADE OR TRADING.
ADVISED, Punctual performance of promises.
that all Friends be careful of entering into hasty engagements, but when they
give their words, that they as carefully abide by and perform them to the
utmost of their power, the Reputation which Truth gives them being otherwise
wounded, and such often occasion great disappointments to others, and give
great offense, and where any fail herein, it is desired that they be admonished
to give satisfaction, and do better. And let none Trade beyond their ability,
to the hazard of others; None to Trade beyond ability.
nor suffer their Minds to be defiled or oppressed by the Earth. 1695. 1701.

This Meeting being under an earnest care and concern for the Glory of God, the
reputation of our religious Profession, Friends not to launch out too far; but
keep to their proper Business.
and safety, and growth of every Member, do advise and counsel all Friends in
true love, and for their own good, that they keep to such honest and lawful
employments as they well understand, and are able to manage for a necessary
support of themselves and Families; and that they do not launch out beyond
their abilities, especially upon such credit as their Profession of the Truth
may have given them, more at the Hazard of others who trust them, than at their
own, which is not only a dishonor to Truth, but dishonest as Men; such cannot
be owned therein to have a place in the Body.

It is the advice of this Meeting that Overseers and other concerned Friends do
visit every Family amongst us where they think there is occasion to suspect
they are so declining in their worldly circumstances as to be likely to bring
reproach on our Christian Profession, by falling short of honestly discharging
their contracts, Friends to visit Persons suspected of going backward in their
Circumstances.
to the injury of their just Creditors; and if they will not take the advice of
Friends, then the Monthly Meeting to which such belong ought to deal further
with them, with liberty after due inquiry into the case to testify against them
as the nature of the case, and reputation of Truth may be found to require.
1710.

Friends to keep their words, and pay their debts in time.
Advised, that such be dealt with, as Trade by Sea or Land, or buy, bargain or
contract, beyond their ability; and such as keep not their words, promises, or
engagements in their dealings; nor pay their just debts according to time
agreed on, these being a reproach to Truth; and if they do not amend, and duly
answer they are to be further proceeded against. 1719.

To avoid hazards, live plain, avoiding evasions and Deceit.
It is our earnest desire that all Friends be very careful to avoid an
inordinate pursuit after the things of this world, by such ways and means as
depend too much upon the uncertain probabilities of hazardous enterprises, but
rather labor to content themselves with such a plain way and manner of living
as is most agreeable to the self denying Principle of Truth which we profess,
and which is most conducive to that tranquillity of Mind requisite to a
religious conduct through this world. Care of our first Friends herein.
Our primitive Friends were very remarkable for their uprightness and honesty
in their Commerce and Converse; very exact in performing their words and
promises, without evasive excuses; and in their dealings they were sincere, to
the reputation of the Society; much less did they by deceitful pretenses,
involve themselves in a multitude of affairs which they had not understanding
or Stock to manage, or contract debts which they were unable to pay, and
thereby wrong their Neighbors, which the Testimony of Friends has ever been
against. 1724. 1734. 1746.

Friends in danger of failing, to call their creditors together, and refusing
so to do, to be censured.
Advised, that a conscientious care dwell on all our Minds, not only to be just
in our Trade and Dealings, neither deceiving the Buyer in what we sell, or
falsifying the Balances, but that we keep to our promises, and pay our Debts in
due time, not exceeding our circumstances in our way of living, or in our
Trade, and when any Member of our religious Society finds himself not able to
comply with his contracts, that he call his Creditors together, and declare his
condition in time, and where any thus circumstanced refuse so to do, let such
be testified against. 1737.

Glorious freedom of the Spirit of Truth.
It being evident, that the Spirit of Truth, where it is received and given way
to, brings into such a glorious Liberty and freedom of Spirit, that those who
keep under the influence of it, are not in Bondage to the Spirit of this World;
We therefore desire both Old and Young to bear in Mind the advice and promise
of our Blessed Savior, Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness,
and all these things shall be added. Mat. VI. 33. But we are jealous that the
lukewarmness and indifferency which is manifest in too many respecting the
maintaining our ancient Testimony, has crept in and prevailed, and the
progress of the work of Religion in their Hearts has been obstructed by the
inordinate pursuit of Worldly Riches. 1746.

See this Sentiment further pursued under the head Conduct and Conversation.
Page 35. 1734.

Advised, that Friends every where should be careful, Not to defraud the
Government of its dues.
not only to be in no respect concerned in defrauding the Government of its
Duties, but in our Conversation that we do not by any means abet or encourage
the Practice in others; wherein we desire that all Friends would sincerely
unite in a becoming zeal, to maintain a faithful Testimony. 1755. 1771.

It is earnestly recommended that Friends frequently inspect the state of their
affairs, and when any find themselves unable, Friends to disclose their
circumstances when dangerous.
or have not more than sufficient to pay their just Debts, that they
immediately disclose their circumstances to some judicious Friends, or
principal Creditors, and take the advice of their Brethren how to act, and be
particularly careful not to pay one Creditor in preference to another. To keep
accounts with care.
It is also recommended to all Persons concerned in Trade, to keep their
accounts in such a clear, and accurate manner, that in case of failure, their
Creditors may see how the deficiency has happened: And those Friends who may be
appointed by Monthly Meetings to visit those who have failed, should always
inquire of Assignees or Trustees, how they have acted in the above respects,
and report to the Meeting. And it is advised, Duty of Trustees or Assignees.
that when Friends accept the office of Trustee or Assignee, they be active in
collecting the effects of the Estate, and punctual in making speedy
distribution. And it is the Judgment of this Meeting, Collections, etc. not to
be received from such who fail, until they make full payments.
that Monthly or other Meetings ought not to receive collections or bequests
for the use of the Poor, or other services of the Society, of Persons who have
fallen short in the payment of their just debts, though legally discharged by
their Creditors; for until such Persons have paid the deficiency, their
Possessions cannot, in equity, be considered as their own. And when failures of
this kind do occur, Causes of failures to be inquired into and testified
against where reproachful.
and such Persons decline or refuse to pay their just Debts, when of ability so
to do, Monthly Meetings ought to inquire into the cause, and where they
discover a conduct attended with circumstances which bring reproach or scandal
on the Society, that then Friends ought to testify against such offenders,
unless they condemn their misconduct in a satisfactory manner. E. D. p. 250.

WAR, AND TAXES THEREFORE.
Carefully to act up to our peaceable Principles.
ADVISED, that Friends be careful to keep up to the peaceable principles
professed by us as a People, and no way unite with such who make warlike
preparations, offensive or defensive, but upon all occasions to demean
themselves in a Christian and peaceable manner, thereby demonstrating to the
World, that when put to the trial, we are uniform in Practice and principle.
1739.

Certificates not to be given to excuse from Militia Fines.
It appearing that a Militia Law is lately passed in the lower Counties, by
which Friends are to be excused from some part of the penalties inflicted, on
producing Certificates from the Monthly Meetings to which they respectively
belong, of their being Members; which being considered, it is the sense of this
Meeting, that the granting of such Certificates may be attended with
inconvenience, and therefore advises against them. 1742.

Privateering or going with Letters of Mart cause of Disownment.
It having been represented and complained of, that notwithstanding we as a
People have looked upon ourselves, as the primitive Christians also did,
included in that notable Prophecy, They shall beat their Swords into
Ploughshares and their Spears into Pruning hooks, and learn War no more. Isa.
II. Agreeable to which is the Doctrine of our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ and his Apostles; whereto our ancient Friends abundantly bore testimony,
both in Doctrine and Practice, and suffered deeply for; which has been
confirmed by several of our Yearly Meetings, by their express declarations and
testimonies against carrying of Guns for defending our Ships, Persons, and
Goods; being under many strong obligations to observe the same; nevertheless,
some professing to be of our Society have slighted and neglected this our
ancient and Christian Testimony to that degree as to be concerned in
Privateering, or as Owners of Ships going with Letters of Mart, which is a
flagrant and lamentable departure from our peaceable principle, which has
always been to confide in the protection and Providence of Almighty God, and
not in weapons of war. And as these practices are attended with injustice,
barbarity, and bloodshed, this Meeting, after a serious consideration thereon,
have thought it our incumbent duty to bear our Testimony against the same; and
it is the unanimous sense of this Meeting, that all Quarterly and Monthly
Meetings, ought speedily to deal, in the Spirit of Truth and love, with every
Person found in the practice of any of these things, in order to bring them to
a sense of their Error, and to reclaim them from it, which if they cannot do,
then to testify against them. Not to purchase prize goods.
And it is also the Judgment of this Meeting, that all our Members be cautioned
and earnestly admonished against purchasing of prize goods, knowing, or having
reasonable cause to suspect them to be such, as a thing altogether inconsistent
with our principles. 1744.

As it has pleased the Lord, Bearing of Arms and fighting, unlawful to us.
by the breaking forth of the glorious light of the Gospel, and the shedding
abroad of his holy Spirit, to gather us to be a People, and to unite in Love,
not only one to another, but to the whole Creation of God; we therefore entreat
all who profess themselves Members of our Society, to be faithful to that
ancient testimony borne by us ever since we were a People, against bearing of
arms, and fighting, that by a conduct agreeable to our Profession we may
demonstrate ourselves to be real followers of the Messiah, The Prince of Peace,
of the increase of whose government and Peace there shall be no end. Isa. IX.
6.7. 1746.

It being represented to this Meeting, Friends not to accept the Balance after
distraint and sale of their property for Fines, etc.
that in some Places where distraint has been made of Friends goods for not
paying fines, for nonperformance of warlike services, the officers after sale
of them, have proposed returning the overplus, after deducting the Fine and
costs; it was unanimously agreed, that in all such cases, Friends should rather
suffer cheerfully than accept such overplus, unless where, without any change
of the species the officers return the same goods which they distrained, or a
part of them. 1755.

It is declared to be the sense of this Meeting, Furnishing Wagons to convey
Military stores a Military service.
that furnishing Wagons or other means for conveying of Military Stores, is a
Military service, and that the care of Elders, Overseers, and faithful Friends,
should be extended, in true love and christian tenderness, to such as deviate
herein, in order to convince them of their error. 1758.

We desire that all Friends would be careful, Friends not to be spectators of
Military preparations, etc.
that in no part of their conduct they manifest an approbation or countenance
to such things as are obviously contrary to our peaceable profession and
principles, either as spectators or otherwise, at the same time avoiding to
give just occasion of offense to any who do not make religious profession with
us, thereby discovering that we are actuated solely by a conscientious
Principle and christian spirit, agreeable to the repeated cautions and advices
heretofore given forth by this Meeting, our Meeting for Sufferings, and the
Epistles from our Brethren in Great Britain. 1775.

Friends not to pay fines, Penalty or Tax in lieu of personal service, or allow
their Children or servants to act therein,
As we cannot, consistent with our Christian peaceable Testimony, founded on the
example and precepts of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and of his Apostles,
be concerned in the promoting of War, or warlike measures of any kind; it is
our judgment, that such who make religious profession with us, and do either
openly or by connivance, pay any Fine, Penalty, or Tax, in lieu of their
personal services for carrying on War; or who do consent to, and allow their
Children, Apprentices, or Servants to act therein, do thereby violate our
Christian Testimony, and by so doing manifest that they are not in religious
fellowship with us. And that the sincerity and integrity of our conduct, with a
constant care to have a conscience void of offense toward God and Men may
clearly appear, we affectionately desire that Friends may be careful to avoid
engaging in any Trade or Business tending to promote War; Nor carry on Trade or
Business promotive of War, or buy Prize Goods.
and particularly against sharing or partaking of the spoils of War, by buying
or vending prize goods of any kind. And as we are thus steadily concerned to
manifest that it is our principal care truly to confess Christ before Men, and
to deny ourselves of the profits and honors of the World for his sake, we may
be confirmed in an humble trust and confidence, that he will confess us before
the Father, according to his gracious Promise. Mat. X. 32.

A Tax for purchasing Drums Colors, etc. not to be paid.
It is the sense of this Meeting, that a Tax levied for the purchasing of Drums,
Colors, and other warlike uses, cannot be paid consistent with our Christian
Testimony. 1776.

Taxes for carrying on War cautioned against.
Finding that in several Quarters a religious scruple has appeared, and
increases among Friends against the payment of Taxes imposed for the purposes
of carrying on War, their Minds being deeply concerned and engaged, faithfully
to maintain our Christian testimony against joining with or supporting the
spirit of Wars and fightings, which has remarkably tended to unite us in deep
sympathy with the seed of Life in their Hearts: And feeling a sincere desire
for the advancement of the Kingdom of the Prince of Peace, in such a gradual
progress as may be consistent with his divine will; it is the united sense of
this Meeting, fervently to recommend to all the Members of our religious
Society, that in singleness of Heart we may be truly exercised in giving due
attention to the dictates of unerring Grace, and strictly careful not to stifle
or suppress the secret monitions thereof in our Minds; A compliance with
requisitions for the purposes of War cautioned against.
and that all may be closely excited to watchfulness and care to avoid
complying with the injunctions and requisitions made for the purposes of
carrying on war, which may produce uneasiness to themselves, or tend to
increase the sufferings of their Brethren, which we apprehend will be the most
effectual means of advancing our Christian testimony in purity, and of
preserving us in a conduct consistent with the holy principle we profess. And
thus we shall experience fervent love and concord to prevail amongst us, which
will enable us to seek and promote the edification one of another, in that
Faith which works by love, freed from every censure inconsistent therewith.
1778.

Being favored with that solemn covering which produces unanimity and
brotherly love, this Meeting does agree, Not to be concerned in armed Vessels
or the purchase of goods imported in them.
that although our solid sense has been frequently given to excite and
encourage all Friends to stand faithful to our ancient testimony against the
spirit of Wars and Fighting, yet it may be seasonable and proper, for the
preservation of the weak, and strengthening the faithful, to advise and exhort
the Members of our religious Society to great watchfulness and circumspection
in their conduct, conversation, dealing, and commerce. And such of our Members
who are concerned in armed Vessel's should be admonished and dealt with
agreeable to the Rules of our Discipline. -- And it is further recommended that
our Members individually religiously cherish the render intimations of the
peaceable Spirit of the Gospel, with respect to suffering motives of worldly
advantage to induce them to ship or order their goods shipped in armed Vessels:
And that all Friends be vigilant and careful that they do not suffer their
Minds to be drawn out by prospects of Gain to deal in or purchase goods so
imported.

And we are desirous, Friends to attend to their tender scruples against
grinding Grain for the Army.
and earnestly recommend that Friends in every Quarter be encouraged to attend
to their tender scruples against contributing to the promotion of War, by
grinding of Grain, feeding of Cattle, or selling their property for the use of
the army, or other such warlike purposes. And that in Christian love and
tenderness, advice should be extended to such among us who have deviated, or
are in danger of deviating from the testimony of Truth in these respects, in
order that a concern and labor may be manifested for the advancement of the
peaceable Kingdom, and for our preservation in that Bond of brotherly love
which cements and unites the true followers of Christ. And it is with unanimity
recommended to the Quarterly and Monthly Meetings, and to the Members of our
religious Society in general, to observe and practice the advices and caution
herein communicated. 1779.

Friends to attend to the monitions of Grace against sundry things promotive of
War.
It is our unanimous sense and judgment, that a living concern for the
advancement of our testimony to the peaceable Kingdom of Christ, by refraining
from such compliances as evidently tend to war and bloodshed, still continues
to spread in many minds; and a fervent desire has prevailed amongst us, that
according to the advices given forth by this Meeting at sundry times,
particularly in the Year 1776, 1778 and 1779, respecting an engagement in any
Business tending to promote War; sharing or partaking of the spoils of War, by
purchasing or selling Prize Goods; payment of Taxes for the purposes of War;
being concerned in armed Vessels; importing or shipping of goods in such
Vessels; dealing in or purchasing goods so imported; grinding of Grain; feeding
of Cattle; or selling their property for the use of the army; the Members of
our religious Society be again exhorted to attend to the monitions of Divine
Grace, and carefully guard against suppressing them, either in themselves or
others, that so they may be preserved in a conduct consistent with our holy
Profession, and from wounding the minds or increasing the sufferings of each
other; not at all doubting, that he to whom appertains the Kingdom and the
power, who is wonderful in working, will continue to carry on and perfect his
blessed cause of Peace in the Earth. And a solid attention to this concern is
recommended to the diligent care and practice of Quarterly, Monthly, and
Preparative Meetings, and our Brethren in general, having a due regard to the
movings of divine wisdom, which will produce a single eye to the honor of
Truth and the unity of the Church. 1780. 1781.

It is the united sense and judgment of this Meeting that it is inconsistent
with our religious Testimony and Principle for any Friend to pay a Fine or Tax
levied on them on account of their refusal to serve in the Militia, Military
Fines not to be paid, however applied.
although such Fine or imposition may be applied toward defraying the expenses
of civil Government. 1790.

It is recommended to Monthly Meetings to extend labor to such Members as have
dealt, Military Certificates not to be dealt in.
or hereafter may deal in public Certificates issued as a compensation for
expenses accrued and services performed in the late War; and as we are united
in sentiment that such a traffic is inconsistent with our peaceable Testimony
and Principles; if any after proper counsel and admonition, should so far
disregard the sense of this Meeting and the advice of Friends as to continue in
the practice, Monthly Meetings may safely proceed to testify against them as in
cases of other breaches of our Discipline, 1791.

WILLS.
Friends to make their Wills in health.
WE think it proper to recommend, that Friends make their Wills in time of
health; and that they be careful to renew them as often as occasion may
require. 1721. 1722.

Making Wills in time of health, and without remembrance of resentments advised.
Knowing how quickly many are removed by Death, it is weightily recommended,
that care be taken by each Monthly Meeting, that Friends who have Estates to
dispose of, be advised to make their Wills in time of health, and strength of
Judgment, and therein to direct their substance as in Justice and Wisdom may
be to their satisfaction and peace; laying aside all resentment, though
occasion may have been given, lest it should go with them to the Grave,
remembering we all stand in need of Mercy and Forgiveness. Making such Wills in
due time can shorten no ones days, but the omission, or delay thereof to the
time of a Sick Bed, when the Mind should not be diverted from a solemn
consideration of the approaching awful period of Life, has often proved very
injurious to many, and been the occasion of creating animosities in Families,
which the timely performance of this necessary duty, before the painful
struggles of Nature impaired the understanding, or rendered so arduous a
temporal consideration unseasonable, might have effectually prevented. E. D.

and to employ skilful Persons to draw them.
Friends are earnestly recommended to employ Persons skilful in the Law, and of
good repute, to make their Wills, as great inconvenience and loss, and
sometimes the ruin of Families has happened through the unskilfulness of some
who have taken upon them to write Wills, being unqualified to act in a matter
of such importance. Inventory speedily to be made.
And all Friends who may become Executors or Administrators are advised to make
a full clear and perfect Inventory of the estate and effects of the deceased,
as soon as possible after the Interment, as many difficulties and disputes have
arisen, and sometimes injustice been done for want of it, or by deferring it
too long. E. D.

YEARLY MEETING.
IT appears by the Records, First Yearly Meeting.
that the first Yearly Meeting was held at Burlington the 31st day of the Sixth
Month 1681, for the Provinces of Pennsylvania and New Jersey. 1681.

It is unanimously agreed by this Meeting, One Yearly Meeting for Pennsylvania
and New Jersey.
that there be but one Yearly and General Meeting in Pennsylvania and West
Jersey, one Year at Burlington, and another at Philadelphia for Men and Women.
1685.

Agreed, Friends to be appointed to examine Papers.
that some approved Friends be from time to time appointed to read and examine
all Papers that may be sent to the Meeting, to have their approbation, whether
they be read publicly or not, before they are read. 1695.

As to the proposal for an alteration of the Yearly Meeting of Business to
Philadelphia, to be there held every Year; Spring Meeting established.
this Meeting concludes it best, for diverse considerations, to remain as it is
at present established: But being of opinion that a Yearly Meeting for worship
to be held at Philadelphia annually may be of service, this Meeting appoints
that a Meeting shall be held at Philadelphia on the second first day of the
Week in the next third Month, and to hold two days for worship, and so to be
continued annually on the same day. 1712.

The time fixed upon for the Spring Yearly Meeting at Philadelphia, Time of
holding Spring Meeting.
was altered to the third First day of the Week in the first Month. 1713.

This Meeting apprehending it may be of good service, Friends appointed to draw
Epistles, to meet and compare their Draughts.
does agree, and desire it may be observed for the future, that Friends
hereafter appointed to draw the Epistles from this Meeting, do all meet
together, and jointly read and consider their Draughts before they are brought
in. 1724.

It is the sense of this Meeting, Extracts, etc. from Yearly Meeting to be sent
by Quarterly to Monthly Meetings.
that full copies of Extracts of the Minutes of this Meeting, and of all other
Papers which are sent at any time by direction of this Meeting to the several
Quarterly Meetings, should, by the Clerk or such other Friend as each Quarterly
Meeting may appoint, be sent to the respective Monthly Meetings, so that each
Monthly Meeting may have a copy thereof to have recourse to as occasions may
require. 1754.

Times of holding the Yearly and Spring Meeting altered.
Agreed, to continue to hold our Yearly Meetings on the third First day of the
Week in the ninth Month, and that the General Meeting in the Spring be held on
the fourth First Day of the Week in the third Month. 1755.

Time of holding Y. Meeting.
Agreed to hold the Yearly Meeting on the fourth First Day of the Week in the
ninth Month. 1758.

Yearly Meeting fixed at Philadelphia.
The consideration of the Place most proper for holding our Yearly Meetings for
Business in future, now coming under the solid notice and thought of this
Meeting, and much time being spent thereon, and full opportunity given for a
free communication of Friends sentiments, and the calming influences of Gospel
love being over us; it appears to be the most general sense, that as
Philadelphia is the nearest Central for the Body of the Society, it is
therefore the most convenient for that purpose. 1760.

Time of opening the Yearly Meeting of Ministers and Elders, and Yearly Meeting
of Business.
By a Minute from our Meeting of Ministers and Elders now produced and read, it
appears, that they have had for several Years under consideration, the benefit
and expediency of opening that Meeting on the Seventh day of the Week preceding
the Yearly Meeting, at the tenth hour in the forenoon, instead of the eleventh,
and that the Yearly Meeting for Business should begin on Second Day at the
tenth hour in the forenoon instead of the third in the afternoon; and that the
Meetings for public worship on that Day should hereafter be discontinued, which
being solidly attended to is concurred with and adopted. 1789.

YEARLY AND OTHER MEETINGS FOR DISCIPLINE OF WOMEN FRIENDS.
FORASMUCH as our Women's Meetings for Discipline were at first set up and
established in divine wisdom, and by long experience have been found of
manifest advantage, not only to the Society in general, but the Youth of their
own sex in particular. It is earnestly desired, that our Sisters in the Truth,
whom the Lord has endued with Spiritual Gifts, may be encouraged to come up to
the help of their Brethren in that part of the Discipline of the Church
properly claiming their attention and care: On considering the nature and
extent whereof, it is apprehended a benefit might accrue, by explicitly setting
forth their distinct allotment and separate services in their Monthly and
Quarterly Meetings, and also in their Yearly Meeting.

Women's Monthly Meetings -- are.
I. To inspect and relieve the wants of the Poor of their own sex, and when
necessary, To take care of the Poor.
to apply to the Men's Meeting for the means, and for their concurrence as
cases shall require.

II. To take cognizance of proposals of Marriage, Marriages.
and appoint two of their Members to inquire into the conversation and
clearness of the Woman; also two to the oversight of the Marriage.

III. They are to appoint a suitable number of Overseers, Overseers.
who are to treat with offenders of their own sex, that their cases be laid
before the Women's Preparative, Dealing with offenders.
and if needful their Monthly Meeting, which should proceed to deal further
with such Delinquent, and report the result of their labors to the Men's
Meeting, who may join with them in the dealing if expedient; and the report of
the joint Committee is to be made to the Men's Meeting, which in either case,
is to inform the Women's Meeting of its determination -- No proceedings of the
Women only, are to be a sufficient ground for a Testimony of Disownment.

Admission, etc. into Membership.
IV. On application of a Woman for admission or reinstatement into Membership;
after a religious care therein has been exercised by Women Overseers, and in
the Preparative Meeting as the case may require, the Women's Monthly Meeting is
to make an appointment to join the Men, the report of which united Committee is
to be made to the Meetings, and the sense of the Men's Meeting thereon,
communicated to the Women's Meeting.

Certificates.
V. They are to join in Certificates of removal for Women Friends; in order
whereto, the Women's Monthly Meeting is to appoint two or more of their Members
to make the necessary inquiry, that the same may be prepared and laid before
the Men's Meeting: But if the Certificate is intended to include one or more
Males, then they are to report the result of their inquiry to the Friends named
on the like inquiry by the Men's Meeting, to which all Certificates applied
for, are to be first introduced for approbation and signing. And all
Certificates received for Women Friends, are to be laid before the Men's
Meeting, before they can be fully accepted by the Women's Meeting.

Concern of Ministers.
VI. When a Woman Minister apprehends herself under a religious engagement to
travel in Truth's service, she is first to spread her concern before the
Women's Meeting, and if united with, the same is to be laid before the Men's
Meeting, whose result is to be communicated to the Women's Meeting; to which,
when a Certificate for that purpose is prepared and signed by the Men's
Meeting, it is to be sent for their concurrence and signing.

Elders, how to be chosen.
VII. When the nomination of a Woman Elder is judged expedient, the Women's
Meeting should appoint a judicious Committee to join with a Committee of the
Men's Meeting in the consideration thereof, whose united result is first to be
communicated to the Men's Meeting, and their conclusion afterward imparted to
the Women's.

Queries, etc.
VIII. The Women's Preparative Meetings, especially those where more than one
constitute a Monthly Meeting, are to consider and answer the Queries; which is
likewise to be done in their Monthly Meetings; from which they are to report
the state of each Monthly Meeting to their respective Quarterly Meeting; to
attend which as their Representatives, they should nominate two or more of
their Members.

Women's Quarterly Meetings.
I. When a Woman Minister under a religious concern to travel in Truth's
service, Certificates for Ministers.
produces a Certificate of the approbation of the Monthly Meeting of which she
is a member, if the same is concurred with, and an endorsement made and signed
on behalf of the Men's Quarterly Meeting by their Clerk, it is to be returned
to the Women's Meeting* and also signed by their Clerk.

II. They are to receive the written Accounts sent from the respective Women's
Monthly Meetings, Report to Yearly Meeting.
and transmit the collected answers to the Queries, with such other matters as
appear needful, to the Women's Yearly Meeting; to attend the service whereof,
each Quarterly Meeting is to appoint a suitable number of Representatives.

III. They are to communicate to their respective Monthly Meetings, such
advices as they apprehend necessary, Diverse services.
with any epistles or writings issued for that purpose by their Yearly Meeting;
nominate Committees at the request of the Men's Meeting to visit their Monthly
Meetings, or for any other service which the Men's Meeting shall judge
expedient; and in all respects, they are to attend to those matters which may
properly come under the notice and care of Women's Quarterly Meetings.

The Yearly Meeting of Women Friends,
Held annually in Philadelphia, at the time of holding this Meeting, is at
liberty to correspond with any other Yearly Meetings of their own sex, either
in America or elsewhere, and to issue such counsel and admonition to their own
Quarterly and Monthly Meetings, as in the wisdom of Truth shall appear
conducive to real benefit and mutual edification; but the said Yearly Meeting
is not to hear or determine on any appeal, nor at liberty to make or alter any
Rules of Discipline or Queries.

They are to have a Stock of their own, for such sevices as may fall more
properly under their notice.

And finally it is desired that a fair Record be kept of the Minutes and
proceedings of the Yearly, Quarterly and Monthly Meetings of Women Friends: And
that annually their Representatives to the Yearly Meeting exercise a proper
religious care in the choice of a Clerk. -- And it is also further recommended,
that a discreet and seasonable change or reappointment of Clerks, in Quarterly
and Monthly Meetings be duly attended to.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 5 Line 6 for Commaded, read Commanded. 36 19 for Spiritual, read
Spiritually. 31 for their, read there. 75 35 for Folio 11, read Folio 15. 84 36
and 37 for Miinsters, read Ministers. 87 28 for mportance, read importance.


