A DEFENSE OF THE OLD TESTAMENT, IN A SERIES OF LETTERS, ADDRESSED TO THOMAS
PAIN, Author of a Book entitled, The Age of Reason, Part the Second, being an
Investigation of True and of Fabulous Theology.

BY DAVID LEVI, Author of Letters to Dr. Priestley, in Answer to his to the
Jews, etc. etc. etc.

The fool has said in his heart, there is no God.

Psalm xiv. 1. The wicked works a deceitful work.

Prove. xi. 18. NEW YORK: Printed by William A. Davis, 26 Moore street, For
NAPHTALI JUDAH, Bookseller, No. 47, Water street. 1797.

INTRODUCTORY LETTER.
SIR,
IT is some months since I read your Book entitled "The Age of Reason, part
second, being an investigation of true and fabulous Theology:" and do not
scruple to pronounce it one of the most violent and systimatic attacks on the
word of God, that ever was made; not on 'account of the novelty of the
objections contained therein, for in truth there is no novelty in them, but
from the acrimony and abuse; the illiberal satire, pretended ridicule, and
impertinent witticism, so liberally scattered throughout the performance; and
which, coming from the pen of a man that has acted so distinguished a part on
the theater of the political world; and whose writings have been read with
avidity in almost all parts of Europe, may perhaps, be of fatal consequence to
the faith of many: I, therefore, was determined to endeavor to apply an
antidote to the venom of your poison of infidelity; (as far as my poor
abilities would allow) but being then engaged in translating the Prayers of our
nation, from Hebrew into English, and arranging the copy for the second volume
of my Dissertations on the Prophecies of the Old Testament, I was obliged to
postpone it till the present: at the same time hoping that some one, far more
capable, would have undertaken the laudable task, and thus have rendered my
interference unnecessary. But, although several answers have been written, by
men of great abilities, yet, I humbly presume to think, that there is still
much to be said on the subject: especially as you seem to treat Christian
priests and preachers with such contempt, that it is to be supposed you pay but
little attention to their arguments, as you think P. 2 d. p. 2.
"that they only waste their time, and heat themselves in fractious disputes
about doctrinal points drawn from the Bible." You are also pleased, in a self
conceited important tone, to tell them that their answers to the first part of
your Age of Reason, is as "cobwebs brushed away by accident." It therefore is
to be hoped that these letters, written by one that is neither a Christian
priest, nor a preacher; and who consequently has no interest in preaching up
tithes, as he is but a poor, simple Levite, without any living in the Jewish
Church, may find grace in your sight, and not be considered as "cobwebs brushed
away by accident;" and thus obtain a favorable reception, not in the vain hope
of making you a proselyte to revelation, but only to show you, that you are not
possessed of a thorough knowledge of the subject of which you treat: it
therefore, is no wonder, that you have blindly followed Morgan, Tindal,
Bolingbroke, Hume, Voltaire, Spinoza, etc. all of whom, have long since started
one or other of the objections, that you have been collecting as it were to a
focus, in order to dazzle the eyes of the ignorant and unwary: the fallacy of
some of them, I have already exposed; See Lingua Sacra, Radix (...) where I
have clearly shown the falsity of the charge brought by Voltaire, Tindal and
Morgan, against the law of God: viz. that the Jews were therein commanded to
sacrifice human creatures. See also my Dissertations on the prophecies, Vol.
II. p. 314. concerning Jews being cannibals and man-eaters.
and with God's blessing, hope to show the futility of all the others.

I know not your motive for thus attacking the word of God: nor will I be so
uncharitable as to ascribe it to malevolence: I will not question your
sincerity, though I cannot approve of your mode of attack; it is not the manner
of a sincere enquirer after truth; but of one, who affects to be free from
vulgar prejudice, and of being thought wiser than the rest of mankind: it is
this, that has led many into insidelity. But, whether it is the love of truth,
fame, ambition, or malevolence, that has induced you to take this step, I will
heartily consider your arguments, and reason freely with you on the subject,
without the least asperity; and although I cannot flatter myself with the hopes
of convincing you of the truth of Revelation; yet, if I should be so happy, as
to save but one soul from imbibing the poison of your pernicious tenets, I
shall think my labor well rewarded.

I am, Sir, Your most Obedient, Humble Servant, D. LEVI.
Mile End New Town. August 30, 1796.
LETTER I.
SIR,
IT is not my intention in these Letters to follow you step by step through all
your turnings and windings, as that would answer no other end but to bewilder
the Reader, as seems to have been your intention: it will be sufficient for our
purpose, if we can prove the absurdity and falsity of your position, in the
plainest manner possible: I shall, therefore, consider your objections against
the Old Testament, in the following order: First, as to Moses being the Author
of the books ascribed to him. Second, as to the doctrines contained in those
books. After which I shall proceed to consider your objections to the prophets,
the phrophetical books, as also the others contained in the Old Testament.

You observe, (p. 5.) "My intention is to show that those books (the five books
of Moses) are spurious, and that Moses is not the author of them: and still
further, that they were not written in the time of Moses, nor till several
hundred years afterward," etc. The proofs you adduce, are, first, that Page 6.
"the whole of these books is in the third person; it is always the Lord said
unto Moses, or Moses said unto the Lord, etc. and this," you observe, "is the
style and manner that historians use, in speaking of the persons whose lives
and actions they are writing." Thus you argue, to prove that Moses did not
write the Pentateuch: though, as if sensible of the weakness of your argument,
you seem to abandon it immediately after, by allowing that, according to
grammatical right, a man may speak of himself in that manner This we know
without your concession: for Caesar, Xenophen, and Josephus writing of
themselves, wrote in the third person.
. But, if you had the least knowledge of the language in which Moses wrote, its
genius, idiom and phraseology, so different from all others, you would
certainly not have trifled thus with your readers: for allowing your objection
all its force, it does not prove that Moses was not the author of the
Pentateuch; nay, it in some measure proves that he was the author: this will
clearly be perceived, when we consider the different parts of the Pentateuch;
and arrange them under their proper heads, viz. Historical and Preceptical.
Now, as some parts are purely historical, it was proper that he should write in
the style that historians generally write in. For in the name of goodness, let
me ask, in what other style ought Moses to have written when he wrote the
historical part of the Pentateuch? The whole book of Genesis is historical, and
the facts related therein, are prior to the birth of Moses: he must therefore
have received an account of them; and this account, he received from God; he
therefore, very properly, wrote as one that is dictated to by another. And
this, he expressly informs us of himself, Numb. xxxiii. 2. "And Moses wrote
their goings out according to their journies, according to the word Heb. Mouth.
of the Lord."

Hence the propriety of Moses writing in the third person, as an historian, is
manifest; and which, if duly considered, will presently show the futility of
your reasoning on the subject; for as Moses wrote what God dictated to him,
your objection to the historical and chronological evidence, instantly falls to
the ground: for as God is Omniscient; with him there can be no futurity; he
could therefore, as easily instruct Moses to write what was to happen in five
or six hundred years, as he was able to acquaint him with what happened at the
creation, or on the very day that Moses wrote. Hence also, it is manifest that,
your objection against the expression of Moses, (Genesis chap. xiv. ver. 14.) of
Abraham's pursuing the enemy to Dan, "that there was no such place as Dan till
many years after the death of Moses; and consequently that Moses could not be
the writer of the book of Genesis, where this account of pursuing them unto Dan
is given." p. 10 -- 11.
is of no force to invalidate the historical and chronological evidence of the
books ascribed to Moses, as the author of them; because, he did not pretend to
write those things of his own knowledge, but only as they were dictated to him
by the Almighty, to whom all events are known.

As the same argument equally applies to what you advance concerning the kings
of Edom that reigned before any king reigned in Israel: of the manua which the
children of Israel eat till they came to the borders Canaan; and concerning the
bed of Og, etc. it would be only wasting of time to show the fallacy of them;
as it must be visible to the meanest capacity. I shall however, take notice of
what you advance concerning the slimsy pretense of prophecy, as you are pleased
to call it.

You say, p. 16.
"the two instances I have given would be sufficient, without any additional
evidence, to invalidate the authenticity of any book that pretended to be four
or five hundred years more ancient than the matters it speaks of, or refers to,
as facts; for in the case of pursuing them unto Dan, and of the kings that
reigned over the children of Israel, not even the flimsy pretense of prophecy
can be pleaded. The expressions are in the preter tense, and it would be
downright idotism to say that a man could prohesy in the preter tense." Here
sir, we have a specimen of your profound criticism, and the great knowledge you
have of prophetic writing: What! attempt to criticize on the Bible, and not
know that prophecies are sometimes delivered in the preter tense! Do you not
know, (and if you do not, it is civility to inform you) that the delivery of
prophecy in the prepreter tense is often made use of, and which is to show the
truth of it; as if it were already come to pass? This is well known to all
those that are in the least acquainted with the prophetic writings; numerous
instances of which might be adduced, if it was necessary.

It must also be considered that Moses was not prophesying then; but writing of
history, under the guidance of the supreme being? he therefore related things
as if they were actually come to pass, being directed by God so to do: and
which accounts for all your objections to the historical and chronological
evidence of the books ascribed to Moses.

That Moses wrote those books by divine inspiration, is manifest from the exact
accomplishment of every event foretold by him. Of this, I shall produce such
clear and unequivocal proofs, as to strike the Deist and infidel dumb.

That which I shall principally insist upon, is the dreadful denunciations of
Moses relating to our dispersion, wherein he tells us, (Levit. xxvi. 33. and
Deuteronomy. xxviii. 64.) that we shall be scattered over the face of the whole earth,
among all nations: but what is most wonderful, he tells us, that we shall
nevertheless remain a SEPARATE people, capable of being gathered together in
the latter days. This he assures us of in the following words. "And yet for all
that, when they be in the land of their enemies, I will not cost them away,
neither will I abhor them, to destroy them utterly, and to break my covenant
with them: for I am the Lord their God Levit. xxxvi. 44.
. This sir, is corroborated by the other prophets, (whom you have also been
pleased to treat with such contempt) for Jeremiah observes (chap. xxx. 11.)
"For I am with thee, says the Lord, to save thee: though I make a full end of
all the nations whither I have dispersed thee, yet I will not make a full end
of thee, but I will correct See also chap. xlvi. 28.
thee in measure; and will not altogether consume thee." And Amos (chap. ix.
8.) says, "Behold, the eyes of the Lord God are upon the sinful kingdom; and I
will destroy it from off the face of the earth; yet will I not utterly destroy
the house of Jacob, says the Lord. For, lo, I will command, and I will sift
the house of Israel among all nations; as (one that) sifteth (corn) with a
sieve: and a grain shall not fall upon the ground." That is, the collective
body of the nation shall not be destroyed; as I shall show at large in the
explanation of that prophecy, in my dissertations on the prophecies of the Old
Testament: the second volume of which, is just published.

Hence it is manifest, that although Moses and the other prophets, assure us
that, the nation should be scattered among all nations, and sorely afflicted;
yet should they not be utterly destroyed, as was the case of other nations, as
we see it fully verified at this day. And now, sir, give me leave to ask you,
how it was possible for Moses, without being divinely inspired, to foresee
that, the dreadful punishments which he had denounced against them, should be
so fully accomplished, as they are allowed on all hands to be; because, a
number of accidents might have arisen, to prevent their completion, which no
human foresight could have foreseen? As for instance, the greatest part of our
sufferings have arisen from the persecutions which we have suffered from
Christians, on account of the difference of religion, and the charge brought
against us, of crucifying the Lord of life, and Savior of the world. Now, if
this had not taken place, it is most probable, that we should not have suffered
such cruel and dreadful persecutions, etc. as we have experienced for so many
hundred years.

Again, how could he foresee, but that the nation, after its being driven out
of its own country, scattered in all parts, and suffering such misery, might
not thereby be induced entirely to abandon Judaism; and so fall in with the
religion of the different countries, where they were dispersed: and thus become
incorporated with them, and entirely swallowed up among them; as has been the
case of the greatest monarchies. Indeed, nothing could, or would be more
probable: for as to what some Deists (who when driven from one entrenchment,
retire into another, and from that into a third; and all along behave like an
adversary who fights, not with the hopes of success, but for the vain glory of
not yielding till he can hold out no longer) pretend, that the law he gave
them, which contained the prohibition of meats, intermarriages with other
nations, etc. is the sole cause of it, is puerile, and carries its own
confutation with it. Because, as I have observed, how was he sure, that as well
as they fell into idolatry, and other enormous crimes, they would not violate
those prohibitory precepts, whose transgression was so much less heinous; and
thus be mingled among the nations: for surely, nothing else could in all human
probability be expected; considering what they have suffered during this long
and dreadful captivity; for I am free to assert, no nation ever suffered the
like, during a space of almost eighteen hundred years. But Moses, contrary to
all human foresight, informs us, that notwithstanding the severe, and almost
unparalleled chastisements that they should experience, yet, should they still
be preserved a distinct nation. How exactly (...) has been fulfilled to this
very day, (...) not be insisted upon; as it is (...) every eye, and manifest to
the (...) capacity; although a period of upwards of three thousand years has
elapsed since the delivery of this prophecy. I therefore would sain ask you, or
any other Deist, Whether it was possible that Moses, or any other person could
foresee such a wonderful event, by any human means whatever; or how you, or
they, can account for it, on any other scheme, than that of divine prescience?

If we enter into particulars, we shall find, that all the punishments which he
denounced against them, have been so exactly fulfilled in every particular,
that it is no wonder, if infidels were to have recourse to the old hackneyed
objections, that the facts were prior to the predictions, and that the
prophecies were written after the histories. If, therefore, the accomplishment
of the preceding prophecy, which may properly be called, a standing miracle,
even to this very day, the like of which has never been seen or heard of in
the world, should not be able to convince you or other unbelievers, how can we
expect that any other argument should, how strong soever? But, as I would not
by any means, omit adducing any argument that may serve to illustrate the
subject, or tend to carry conviction home to the doubting and wavering mind, I
shall just take a brief view of the accomplishment of some of the most
remarkable of these denunciations.

He tells them, that numbers of them shall be destroyed. "And ye shall be left
few Deuteronomy. xxviii. 62.
in number," etc. This, not to mention the other slaughters and massacres which
they have suffered, was fully verified in the last siege of Jerusalem, when
invested by Titus; when, as Josephus says, Bell. Juda. Lib. VI. Cap. 3. Sect. 3.
an infinite multitude perished by famine: for he computes that, during the
whole siege, the number of those that were destroyed by that and the sword,
amounted to eleven hundred thousand, as the people were assembled from all
parts to celebrate the passover; and Basnage gives us an account of one
million, three hundred and thirty nine thousand, six hundred and ninety
persons, that were destroyed in Jerusalem, and other pants of Judea, exclusive
of ninety nine the sand two hundred, taken prisoners, as he has collected from
the accounts of Josephus History of the Jews, Book I. Chap. viii. Sect. 19. p.
8. Note.
. Indeed, there is not a nation upon earth, that has suffered such a number of
massacres and persecutions: their history abounds with little else; and if God
had not promised them his particular protection, the whole race, would long ere
this have been extirpated; for as Basnage observes, Ibid. Chap. I. page 2.
"Here is also another circumstance, that heightens this prodigy. This forlorn
and persecuted nation can scarce find one place in the universe to rest their
heads, or to set their seet in. They have waded through floods of their own
blood, and are as yet preserved. That infinite number of Jews, which we shall
see hereafter murdered through a cruel and barbarous zeal, weakened, but did
not destroy that nation. For notwithstanding the joint persecutions of
Christians and Idolators, who designed their ruin, they are still in being."

He also told them, "And ye shall be plucked from off the land whither thou
go to possess it." Deuteronomy. xxviii. 63.
This is most singular, and really worthy of observation, that even before they
had entered the land to take possession of it, he assures them, that if they
disobeyed the Lord's commandments, they should be plucked off from it. Now, I
defy you, or any one else, to produce any instance of a legistator ever staking
his reputation thus; and the exact manner it has been fulfilled, is clear from
their history; for they were indeed plucked off from their own land, when the
ten tribes were carried away captive by the king of Assyria; and of whom we
know nothing certain to this hour; and when the other two tribes were carried
captive to Babylon: but more especially, when their city and temple were
destroyed, and the nation carried captive by the Romans.

From that time to this, their country has been in the possession of foreign
lords and masters, few Jews living in it; and those of a low and poor
condition. A celebrated Jew of the twelfth century, Benjamin of Tudela in Spain.
who traveled into all parts to visit his brethren, and inform himself of the
exact state of their affairs, acquaints us that Jerusalem was almost entirely
abandoned by the Jews; for he did not find there, above two hundred persons,
Benjamin Itiner, p. 41.
who were mostly dyers of wool; the monoply of which trade they purchased every
year. They all lived together under David's tower, and made very little figure.
In other parts, he found one or two in a city, in another twenty, in others
more; and in many none at all. An accurate and faithful English traveller,
Sandy's travels, Book III. page 114.
who had been in the holy land says, that, "It is for the most part, now
inherited by Moors and Arabians; those possessing the valleys, and these the
mountains. Turks there be few: but many Greeks with other christians of all
sects and nations, such as impute to the place an adherent holiness. Here be
also some Jews, yet inherit they no part of the land, but in their own country
do live as aliens."

He also informs them, that they should be scattered among all nations; "And
thou shall be removed into all the kingdoms of the earth Deuteronomy. xxviii. 25.
." Again, "And the Lord shall scatter thee among all the people, Heb. Peoples.
from one end of the earth even unto the other." Ibid. 64.
This indeed, has been most amply fulfilled since the great dispersion of the
Jews by the Romans. For what people have been scattered so far and wide as
they? and where is the nation that is a stranger to them, or to which they are
strangers? They swarm in many parts of the east, are spread through most of the
countries of Europe and Africa, are pretty numerous in the West Indies, and
there are several families of them in America. They circulate, as a Christian
author says, (Bishop Newton) through all parts were trade and money circulate;
and are, as I may say, the brokers of the whole world.

But though they were to be thus dispersed; yet he assured them that, they
should not be to tally destroyed, (as already mentioned) "And yet for all that,
when they be in the land of their enemies," etc Levit. xxvi. 44.
. On this, an author of great note, Basnage.
observes, and what a mavelous thing is it, that after so many wars, battles
and sieges; after so many fires, famines and pestilences; after so many
rebellions, massacres and persecutions; after so many years of captivity,
slavery and misery, they are not destroyed utterly, and though scattered among
all people, yet subsist as a distinct people by themselves: where is there any
thing comparable to this to be found in all the histories, and in all the
nations under the sun?"

But though they should not be utterly destroyed, yet should they suffer much,
and not have rest long in any place. "And among these nations shall thou find
no ease, neither shall the sole of thy foot have rest Deuteronomy. xxviii. 65.
," This has indeed been fully verified; for they have been so far from finding
rest, that they have been banished from place to place, from country to
country. In many places, they have been banished, and recalled, and banished
again. I shall just take notice of some of their great banishments in modern
times, from countries well known. About the latter end of the thirteenth
Basnage, Book VII. Chap. xix. Sect. 20, etc.
century, they were banished from England by Edward I. Some say it was Henry
III.
and were not permitted to return and settle there again, till Cromwell's time,
or rather under Charles the second. In the latter end of the fifteenth century,
as Mariana observes, Basnage, B. VII. Chap. xxi.
they were banished from Spain, by Ferdinand and Isabella: and according to his
account, there were seventy thousand families, or eight hundred thousand
persons, that left Spain upon the execution of this edict. Some Abarbanal.
Cordoso las Excellen. etc.
reckon an hundred and twenty thousand families. They were indeed received in
Portugal by John II. but he made them pay a dear price for a refuge; and a few
years after they were banished by his successor Emanuel; who violated his faith
with them, "By depriving them of their liberty to carry away their children
under fourteen years of age, which reduced them to that despair, that some of
them killed themselves, and others sacrificing nature to their religion, turned
executioners to their own bowels." Basn. Book VII. Chap. xxi. Sect. 25.
This leads us to what Moses says, concerning their children, "Thy sons and thy
daughters shall be given unto another people, and thine eyes shall look, and
fail with longing for them all the day along: and there shall be no might in
thine hand." Deuteronomy. xxviii. 32.
How exactly has all this been fulfilled in several countries; but especially
in Spain and Portugal, where they formerly were so numerous; and where their
children were taken from them by order of the government, to be educated in the
Popish religion; as mentioned in the first prophecy of Moses, in my
Dissertations on the prophecies, Vol. I. page 32. And Basnage Hist. of the
Jews, B. VII. Chap. xiii. Sec. 14.
observes, that the fourth council of Toledo, ordered that all their children
should be forced from them, for fear they should partake of their errors; and
that they should be shut up in monasteries, to be instructed in the Christian
truths. He adds, "We shall see in the sequel the lamentable effects of these
rapes." And it has been shown, under the preceding head, that when they were
banished from Portugal, all their children under fourteen years of age, were
taken from them, and baptized. A practice not at all justifiable adds the
historian. Mariana, Book XXVI. Chap. vi.


He also tells them, that they shall be oppressed and spoiled continually. "And
thou shall be only oppressed, and spoiled evermore, and no man shall save
thee," Deuteronomy. xxviii. 29.
etc. Now it is well known what frequent seizures have been made of their
effects, in almost all countries, either to supply the necessities of the
state, or the luxury of the prince: How often have they been fined and fleeced
by almost all governments? How often have they been forced to redeem their
lives by sums extorted from them? The instances are innumerable. I shall just
mention what an English historian Kennet. Vol. I. page 179.
says, that Henry III. "Always polled the Jews at every low ebb of his
fortunes. One Abraham, who was found delinquent, was forced to pay seven
hundred marks for his redemption. Aaron, another Jew, protested that the king
had taken from him at times, thirty thousand marks of silver, besides two
hundred marks of gold, which he had presented to the queen."

And in the year 1240, when the king attempted to fleece them to the utmost, a
most respectable author observes, See Anglia Judaica. p. 70.
that he "commanded all the Jews of both sexes throughout England, to be
imprisoned, till they would make a discovery of their wealth: which he
appointed officers to receive in every county, and return to his exchequer.
Many of them, no doubt, pleaded poverty, or pretended to have given up all: but
as the tyrant was in earnest to have their last farthing, he extorted it by the
most cruel torments."

Stow says, that the generality of them had one eye put out. And Matthew Paris
Matthew. Paris and Stow, anno 1210.
tells us, that from one particular Jew at Bristol, the king demanded no less
than ten thousand marks of silver, (a prodigious sum in those days!) which
being resolutely denied him, he commanded one of his great teeth to be pulled
out daily, till he consented. The poor man had the courage to hold out seven
operations, but then, sinking under the pain, ransomed the remainder of his
teeth, at the price demanded. And when they were banished in the reign of
Edward I. their estates, etc. were confiscated, which brought immense sums to
the crown. Thus have they been served, almost every where; a plain
demonstration of the full accomplishment of this prediction.

In verse 34 he says, "Thou shall be mad, for the sight of thine eyes which
thou shall see." And have we not seen into what madness and desperation they
have been driven by the oppressions, extortions, and cruel usage they have
experienced? Have they not in mere fury and desperation destroyed themselves,
their wives and children? Josephus Joseph. De Bell. Jud. Lib. VII. Cap. viii.
et ix.
mentions, that after the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus, some of the Jews
took refuge in the castle of Nasada, where being closely besieged by the
Romans, they, by the persuasion of their leader, Eleazer, first murdered their
wives and children; after which, they chose ten men by lot to slay the rest;
when this was done, they chose one of the ten to kill the other nine in like
manner; which having performed, he set fire to the place, and then stabbed
himself. There were nine hundred and sixty, who perished in this miserable
manner. Instances of the like behavior has often occurred since; I shall only
take notice of one mentioned in English history. When in the reign of Richard
I. the people rose in arms to make a general massacre of them, fifteen hundred
of them retired into York castle, Basnage, Book VII. Chap. x. Sect. 20. page
638: who for his authority quotes Matthew. Paris, p. 111, and Polyd. Virgil. L.
14. p. 248. See also Anglia Judaica, p. 25.
where being closely besieged, they offered to capitulate, and to ransom their
lives with money. The offer being refused, one of them cried in despair, That
it was better to die courageously for the Law, than to fall into the hands of
the Christians. Every one immediately took his knife, and stabbed his wife and
children. The men afterward retired into the king's palace, and set it on
fire, in which they consumed themselves with the palace and furniture.

He tells them, that in this dreadful captivity, they shall serve other gods.
-- "And thou shall serve other gods, wood and stone." Deuteronomy. xxviii. 36.
Again, "And there thou shall serve other gods, which neither thou nor thy
fathers have known," Ibid. 64.
etc. This has been exactly fulfilled during this woeful captivity, when the
Jews in Spain, and other countries were obliged to comply with the idolatrous
worship of the church of Rome, etc. and to bow down to stocks and stones,
rather than to have their effects seized and confiscated, or their pesons
murdered by the inquisition, etc. which has caused fuch a number to apostatize
See Levi's Dissertations on the prophecies, Vol. I st. p. 18, Note 2d.
, etc.

In verse 37, he tells them, "And thou shall become an astonishment, a proverb,
and a byword among all nations whither the Lord shall lead thee." Has not
this been fulfilled, and as we may say, is fulfilling every day? Is not the
pretended avarice, usury, and hard heartedness of a Jew become proverbial? Is
it not said, that their very countenances commonly distinguish them from the
rest of mankind? And has not a great master of nature, drawn the portrait of a
Jew, in a most detestable character, in his Jew of Venice? Do not Heathens,
Christians and Mahometans, however they may differ in other points, yet agree
in abusing, vilifying and persecuting the Jews? And has not a Christian writer
of our time, vilified them in a most unwarrantable manner; although it is well
known, that there is not a people on earth, more friendly and favorable to good
order and good government, or more obedient to their rulers, than they are?
Yet, are they treated in all respects, as if they were of another species.

He also tells them, that, "The Lord will make thy plagues wonderful, and the
plagues of thy seed, even great plagues, The right honorable Edmund Burke.
and of long continuance Deuteronomy. xxviii. 59.
," etc. And have not their calamities been of long continuance? Have they not
continued upwards of seventeen hundred years? Their former captivities were
very short in comparison of this: besides the time of their redemption was well
known and ascertained: and during the Babylonish captivity, they had prophets
Ezekiel and Daniel.
among them, who exhorted and comforted them; but during this long and dreadful
captivity, there is not one true prophet among them, to inform them of the end
of their calamities; as the psalmist says, "We see not our signs, (there is) no
more any prophet, neither (is there) among us any that knows how long Psalm
lxx. v. 9.
." In their former captivities, they had the consolation of being together in
one place: in Egypt, they dwelt together in the land of Goshen; and they were
all carried together to Babylon; but at present they are scattered all over the
face of the earth. What nation has ever suffered so much, and yet continued so
long? What nation has subsisted as a distinct people even in their own
country, so long as these have done, though dispersed in all countries, without
having any place they can call their own? And what a standing miracle is this,
thus exhibited to the view and observation of the whole world?

Lastly, he tells them that they shall be carried into Egypt again, and exposed
to sale as slaves, but there would be none to purchase them. "And the LORD
shall bring thee into Egypt again Ver. 68.
, in ships, by the way whereof I spoke unto thee, thou shall see it no more
again: and there ye shall be sold unto your enemies for bondmen and
bond-women, and no man shall buy you." This, is a striking contrast to what
happened to them when Moses brought them out from Egypt; for then, they came
out in a triumphant manner, as mentioned Exodus xiv. 8. "And the children of
Israel went out with an high hand." But now, he says, they shall return thither
as slaves. This was fully accomplished; for it appears from Josephus, Jos. Ant.
Lib. XII. Cap. 1. et 2.
that in the reign of the two first Prolemies, a number of Jews were slaves in
Egypt. And when Jerusalem was taken by Titus, Bell. Jud. Lib. VI. Cap. viii.
Sect. 2. p. 1288.
he sent many of them captives, who were above seventeen years of age, bound to
the works in Egypt: those under seventeen, were sold; but so little care was
taken of these captives, that eleven thousand of them perished for want. The
markets were so overstocked with them, that as Josephus says elsewhere, they
were sold with their wives and children at the lowest price. And after their
last overthrow by Adrian, many thousands of them were sold; and those that
could not be sold were transported into Egypt; and perished by shipwreck or
fanine, or were massacred by the inhabitants. All which is a manisest proof of
the accomplishment of this remarkable denunciation, in every particular.

These sir, are manifest proofs of prophecies: of prophecies delivered above
three thousand years ago: and which we nevertheless plainly see fulfilling in
the world at this very time: and what stronger proof can we have, or desire, of
the divine legation of Moses? For what legislator durst ever attempt to stake
his credit thus, by denouncing such severe deminciations against a nation for
disobedience of religious ceremonies only: for as to what deists assert, that
any wife and intelligent lawgiver might easily foresee that, the observance of
the judicious laws instituted by him, would tend to make a nation flourish, and
that the rejection of them would lead to their ruin, is futile: because such
foresight could at any rate only comprehend political institutions; and
therefore, the non observance of such might end in the loss of their liberty,
or the subversion of their government: and which might easily be foreseen. But
even this, was not always the consequence: for although we find, that the
Lacedaemonians did not make so great a figure, after they had fallen from the
observation of the rudes which Lycurgus (whose sole aim was to train them to
war) had enjoined them; because they could not then make war against, conquer,
and command all those round them; yet we find, that the Romans, on the
contrary, advanced their state to the highest pitch of glory. after they had
changed the constitution from what it was in Numa's days; whose only concern
was, that Rome should continue in peace and amity. Whence it is manifest, that
Moses, could never have foreseen by any human sagacity, the calamities which
have befallen them, as the consequence of the transgression of laws purely
religious: as it is impossible, according to the laws of nature, that a nation,
as a collective body, and state of government, should be happy or miserable,
merely for the sake of religious institutions, whose object was not peace or
war: and yet, we see with what exactness these particular predictions have been
fulfilled: Can we then in reason any longer doubt the divine mission of Moses?
I really know not, how these instances may affect you, or any other
unbelievers, but for my own part, I must freely acknowledge, that they not only
convince, but astonish and amaze me, beyond utterance. They are indeed, what
Moses predicted they should be, a sign a wonder for ever, as he says, in chap.
xxviii. 45-46, "Moreover all these curses shall come upon thee, and shall
porsue thee and overtake thee, till thou be destroyed; because thou hearkenedst
not unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to keep his commandments, and his
statues which he commanded thee. And they shall be upon thee for a sign and for
a wonder, and upon thy feed for ever." For they are a sign of their rebellion
against God, and a wonder of their preservation, amidst all those dreadful
calamities which they have suffered for so many hundred years.

I shall now proceed to take notice of the character of Moses, as stated in the
Bible, to see if it is as you say, P. 6.
"the most harrid that can be imagined," I am confident, it will appear to be
the very reverse of what you have asserted it to be. The evidence that I shall
produce will be such as you can have no objection to, as it is the same that
you make use of yourself; P. 5.
I mean the books themselves. So far we are agreed. Now for the proof.

According to the account we have in these books of the first calling of Moses
to his mission, it does not appear that he was a vain and arrogant coxcomb; but
on the contrary, it shows him to be a meek and humble person; one that was
fully sensible of the importance of the business he was to engage in; and,
therefore, he says to God Exodus iii. 11.
, "Who (am) I, that I should go unto Pharaoh, and that I should bring forth the
children of Israel from Egypt? In this humble state of mind he continued, till
the Lord was angry Exodus iv. 14.
with him, and commanded him to go. When he came to Pharaoh, he did not behave
like an arrogant coxcomb Exodus v. 1. 3c.
, but with a becoming dignity, unappalled at the presence of the Egyptian king,
in all his pomp and pride, he acted like the messenger of the greatest king,
who he was confident was able to protect him; and of whose omnipotent power, he
constantly endeavored to make them sensible: for which reason, he always
warned them of the day that the plague was to commence, and also granted their
request to remove it; and that, at their own appointed time: as he himself says
Exodus viii. 6. etc.
, "According to thy word: that thou may know that (there is) none like unto
the LORD our God." Thus did he endeavor to make Pharaoh sensible with whom he
was contending; and that he ought, therefore, to submit so him, and to save
himself and his people from the destruction that would certainly attend his
disobedience. This, Sir, is not the behavior of an arrogant coxcomb, nor yet
that of a detestable Page 15.
villain; but on the contrary, that of a pious, virtuous person, who tried
every means in his power to avert the dreadful judgment that hung over Pharaoh
and his people for their wickedness.

When he brought the nation forth from Egypt, with what gentleness did he lead
them! even "as a nursing father, bears the sucking Numb. xi. 12.
child." With what patience did he bear their frequent reproaches and
murmurings. But when they were in danger of being destroyed, what public
spirit, what love did he show for his people See Exodus xxxii. 32.
! How often did he earnestly supplicate the supreme being in their behalf, to
save them from the punishment they had so justly merited for their sins. And
when he was fully assured of his death, Numb. xxvii. 13. etc.
his only concern was for them; earnestly requesting God to appoint (...) to
govern them, "that the congregation of the LORD, might not be as sheep that
have no shephered." And now, give me leave to ask you, whether this action
shows him to be an impostor? for had he aspired to the regal power, no man ever
had a better opportunity of accomplishing it. But he never thought of it: all
his actions show that he acted under the immediate authority of God. He,
therefore, saw, without murmuring, his brother and his brother's children
raised to the sacerdotal office. And what adds to the luster of the action, he
himself puts them in possession of this dignity, whilst he leaves his own
children mixed in the crowd of Levites, without hopes of ever rising to any
higher preferment: for by the constitution of the priesthood, they were barred
from ever having any share in the honor, power, or wealth of the priests, and
rendered totally incapable of ever enjoying the authority and dignity of the
high priest's office. These, Sir, are some of the actions of Moses; and they
are such as show him to have been a person of eminent virtue and piety. And, as
he was virtuous and pious himself, so he endeavored to form a virtuous people,
who, by a faithful service paid to the one true God, should give an example to
all the nations of the earth, of a pure and reasonable worship. This Sir, was
the sole end of the legislation of Moses, so much superior to all other forms
of government; for as the illustrious author of the Spirit of Laws, says,
"Besides the common object which all governments have of supporting themselves,
each of them has besides a peculiar one." Thus Sparta formed soldiers, Rome
conquerors, and Carthage merchants and navigators; but this object of Moses, I
am bold to affirm, was much more noble, and more worthy of a wise legislator,
than any of those.

I must farther observe, that the most famous legislators made it a rule not to
change any thing in the ancient superstitions, but to leave the people at full
liberty to prostitute their adoration to inferior gods, to the stars, the
elements, plants, reptiles, etc. While Moses considered it as a most important
obligation, to instruct his nation in its duty toward the great Creator and
governor of the world. To make them sensible of his power, goodness, justice
and providence; and to teach them how to deserve an happy existence under his
almighty protection, by an exact observance of his laws. Do you not think, Sir,
that a conduct like this, deserves encomiums even in a philosophical light?

Moreover, what legislator ever spoke of the supreme being to his people, as
Moses did to the Hebrews? he gives them the most sublime ideas of him, and
shows them the most manifest proofs of his particular providence, etc. And
which leads me to take notice of an observation that I have made elsewhere
Dissertations on the prophecies of the Old Testament. Introd. to Vol. Is It. p.
44.
, in support of the truth of the divine dispensation of Moses -- It is as
follows. -- The modern philosophers, such as Voltaire, etc. take a pride in
representing the Jews as an ignorant, stupid, and barbarous nation, compared
with the more polished nations of antiquity. Let us now for a moment grant the
truth of their assertion, it of course will follow that, from a people so
ignorant, stupid, and unpolished, as they are represented to be, we naturally
should not expect to find sentiments and doctrines, far superior to any thing
of the kind that we find among the most improved nations.

Now, it is well known that the ancient, nations the Egyptians, the
Babylonians, the Assyrians, the Tyrians, etc. were the neighbors of the Jews,
and completely surrounded them. These, were all sunk into the most gross and
stupid idolatry: for they worshipped not only the sun, moon, and stars: which
they supposed to be animated, and on whose influence they imagined their good
and bad fortunes depended; but death men, heroes, etc. Jupiter, Venus, Adonis,
etc. as also animals, insects, and even onions. It therefore is requisite to
enquire, how the Jews thus surrounded by these natitions, became possessed of
such just and sublime conceptions, with respect to the Deity; and the most
exalated ideas of his pure UNITY, as inculcated in the writings of Moses; and
where could they have learned such rational worship? A worship confined to one
invisible, Omnipotent, Omniscient, and Omnipresent, being; the maker and
governor of all things, visible and invisible, from whom the sun; moon, stars,
and every thing else derived their existence, and in whose power it is to
dispose of them as he pleases. It is clear they could not have learned it from
these nations, nor any other; because their religion was so essentially
different from that of any other nation in the ancient world: for they all,
without exception, practiced the most impure, as well as the most cruel rites
in honor of their Gods; and their public festivals in general, were scenes of
riot and debauchery.

Many of their ceremonies were most horribly barbarous. Their priests cut and
mangled themselves, in a most horrid manner, and practiced the most dreadful
mortifications in the course of their worship. Innocent children were not
spared by their parents, who madly devoted them to the most cruel death; that
of burning them alive, either to appease the wrath, or secure the favor of
their gods. A remarkable instance of which, we have in the life of
Themistocles, the renowned Admiral of the Athenians, as related by Plutarch.
"When Themistocles was about to sacrifice upon the Admiral galley, there were
three very beautiful captives brought to him, well dressed and gloriously
adorned with rich vests of gold, said to be the children of Autarctus and
Sandauce, sister to Xerxes. As soon as the prophet Euphrantides saw them, and
observed that at the same time the fire blazed out from the offerings, and cast
forth a more than ordinary bright flame, and that one sneezed to the right,
which portended a fortunate event, he took Themistocles by the hand, and
ordered that the three children should be consecrated and purified for
sacrifice, and offered up as a vow for victory to Bacchus Omastes, or the
Devourer; for hereby the Greeks should not only save themselves, but also
obtain victory. -- Themistocles was stariled at a prophecy that carried so much
cruelty and inhumanity in it; but the populace, according to their manner in
all pressing difficulties, trusting more to any absurd and extravagant methods
of appeasing the Deity, than to such as are reasonable, with one voice invoked
Bacchus, and bringing the captives to his altar compelled him to perform the
sacrifice, as the prophet had commanded."

They also practiced many shocking indencies, not proper to be recited; women,
in other respects chaste, were taught that prostitution (in which the choice of
a partner was not thought of, as being totally excluded) was a necessary made
of recemmending themselves to the (...) and protection of their deities. This
being the case, of which, we have the most unexceptionable evidence of both
Greeks and Romans: and as every effect must have an adequate cause, I wish that
you, or any other of the modern philosophers, would be pleased to inform me,
how you, or they, can account for the phenomena of a little Jewish horde, as
Voltaire delights to call them, being thus possessed of the true knowledge of
the one living and eternal God, his providence, etc. while the learned,
polished, and civilized nations, were sunk in the most gross, barbarous, and
stupid Idolatry, unless they had received the knowledge thereof by divine
revelation. I shall farther show from the whole tenor of the Mosaical
dispensation, in particular from the precepts of the land etc. that these
institutions could be none other than divine.

Of all vices (as one of my learned brethren says Jews Letters to Voltaire.
,) the most hurtful to society, of all wrongs the most irreparable, of all
crimes the blackest, is certainly calumny: for as a great poet says,
Shakspear's Measure for Measure, Act 3. Se. 2.
"No might nor greatness in mortality
Can censure escape: back-wounding calumny
The whitest virtue strikes. What king so strong
Can tie the gall up in the sland'rous tongue?"


And of this you have bestowed not a a little on Moses; whom you describe as p.
14.
"the wretch that first began and carried on wars on the score, or on the
pretense of religion;" etc. And of which you say, you shall state but one
instance: which is that of the Midianites. You say, p. 14.
"When the Jewish army returned from one of their plundering and murdering
excursions, the account goes on as follows, Numbers, chap. xxxi. ver. 13. "And
Moses, and Eleazar the priest, and all the princes of the congregation, went
forth to meet them without the camp; and Moses was wroth with the officers of
the host, with the captains over thousands, and captains over hundreds, which
came from the battle; and Moses said unto them, Have ye saved all the women
alive? Behold, these caused the children of Israel, through the counsel of
Balaam to commit trespass against the Lord in the matter of Peor, and there was
a plague among the congregation of the Lord. Now, therefore, kill every male
among the little ones, and kill every woman that has known a man by lying with
him; but all the women-children that have not known a man by lying with him,
keep alive for yourselves."

This is the text: and on which you comment as follows. p. 15.
"Among the detestable villains that in any period of the world have disgraced
the name of man, it is impossible to find a greater than Moses, if this account
be true. Here is an order to butcher the boys, to massacre the mothers, and
debauch the daughters." Let us now sir, consider this heinous charge, which
with all the abuse that you are master of, you have exhibited against Moses: in
order to which, we must take notice of the cause of this war; and which we
shall find to be not a "plundering and murdering excursion," but undertaken at
the express command of God, to avenge the children of Israel of the Midianites,
for what they had suffered through their seduction; and also for God's
vengeance against them, for the crime of idolatry which they had caused Israel
to commit against him: for both these are mentioned in ver. 2 and 3. "Avenge
the children of Israel of the Midianites, etc. -- And avenge the Lord of
Midian." For by the diabolical scheme of the Midianites prostituting their
women, the children of Israel, were seduced to commit idolatry: for which
crime, twenty four thousand of them were cut off. They therefore were commanded
to make war upon them: and the astonishing success of the expedition, plainly
showed, that it was undertaken and conducted under the immediate government of
God: for though the Jewish army consisted of but twelve thousand men, yet did
they not lose one single man, in fighting against the host of Midian; and which
made so great an impression on the minds of the captains of the host, (of which
you take no manner of notice, though if the one part be true, the other must be
equally so) that they offered an oblation to the Lord, for his gracious
interposition in their behalf.

When this army returned thus victorious, Moses and the princes of the
congregation went to out to meet it; and Moses observing the women captives was
wroth with the officers; and in a tone of surprise, asked, "Have ye saved all
the women alive?" For the officers of the army were fully convinced that,
according to the rules of war, none were to be put to death, but those that
opposed them; and therefore, women and children were excepted; as we find Moses
himself had laid it down as rule for the nation, when making war against any
other nations, than the Canaanites: Deuteronomy. xx. 10. "When thou come nigh unto a
city to fight against, etc. -- And if it will make no peace with thee, etc. --
Thou shall smite every male thereof with the edge of the sword. But the women,
and the little ones, and the cattle, etc. shall thou take for a spoil to
thyself." The officers therefore, flew all the males in Midian, and took the
women, and the little ones captive. But Moses tells them, that here the case
was far different; for, "Behold, these caused the children of Israel, through
the counsel of Balaam, to commit trespass against the Lord in the matter of
Peor," These women were the principal actors in this abominable and attrocious
crime; for by their prostituting themselves, they seduced Israel, and drew them
to the impure worship of their idol god Baal-peor; "and thus there was a plague
among the congregation." It therefore, is but justice, that they should be
punished in an exemplary manner; as also to prevent their ever again alluring
the nation to the love of licentious pleasures, and the practice of idolatry.
The young males were ordered to be put to death, (as Abarbanal observes) to
prevent the mischief that might ensue from their being spared; by becoming as
"pricks in their eyes; and thorns in their sides," either by attempting to
avenge what they would esteem their country's wrongs, or by leading the nation
into idolatry. But the young maidens who had done no injury to the nation; and
being as yet unpolluted with the abominable and atrocious crimes of their
mothers, were not likely to injure thein, were permitted to live, to be
employed in domestic uses in their families, or given as wives to their men
servants, as will be shown hereafter. This is the real state of the matter.
But, you, sir, without any regard to truth or decency, assert, Page 15.
that "it appears from the 35th verse of this chapter, that the number of
women-children consigned to debauchery by the order of Moses, was thirty-two
thousand." But whence, sir, does this appear? is it to be found in the words of
Moses? Certainly not. Prove it then, sir, it is incumbent on you to prove it.
Prove this, I say, and I will never more defend Moses; but will acknowledge him
to be that detestable villain and horrid monster that you pronounce him to be.
Prove this, and I will then acknowledge the Old testament to be what you have
called it, "a work of lies, blasphemy, and wickedness; a bad book; the worst of
books;" any thing, whatever you please. Once more, I say, prove this, or I must
tell you plainly (excuse my freedom) that you are not only a base calumniator,
but the basest of calumniators, thus to misrepresent God's proceedings in such
a barefaced manner; and which even your predecessor, Voltaire, and the other
infidel critics, were not hardy enough to do: for they only objected to the
great number of girls that could be found in a country of the extent that
Midian was of. But not a word, did they presume to say, about the order of
Moses for debauching the women children: No sir, they knew better; they knew
that they could be easily detected in making such an assertion; for they knew
that Moses was so far from ordering any such thing, that his laws did not even
permit it: this is clear from Deuteronomy. xxi. 10 -- 14. where it is ordered that a
man shall not even marry a captive, without several previous formalities: and
if he afterward did not like her, he was obliged to let her go free; and durst
not by any means dispose of her, "because he had humbled her." This is to be
understood of the abasement which she had experienced, by being confined to
severe trials, in the house of a stranger during a month; and then seeing
herself cast off by him, at the very time she expected to become his wife. For
it is the opinion of the Talmudists of Jerusalem, of Josephus, and of Philo,
that the law did not allow the first familiarities of the soldier with his
captive. He was obliged to marry her. See also Abarbanal on Deuteronomy. xxi. 10, etc.
This is a manifest proof of the tenderness with which the laws of Moses treated
prisoners of war: and I am confident that no one can produce any ancient
nation, whose government ever treated them with the like tenderness and respect.
All which, shows the falsity of what you have advanced so injurious to the
character of Moses; and which must now recoil on your own head.

LETTER II.
SIR,
I Shall now proceed to take notice of your objections to the Books of Moses
themselves; and shall show, by their internal evidence, that they are justly
entitled to the appellation of being the word of God.

To begin with the book of Genesis. You observe, Page 14.
"Take away from Genesis the belief that Moses was the author, on which only
the strange belief that it is the word of God has stood, and there remains
nothing of Genesis, but an anonymous book of stories, fables, and traditionary
or invented absurdities, or of downright lies." This, sir, is the polite
language which you make use of, in speaking of the book of Genesis; a book that
teaches us the origin of the world, the genealogies of our first parents, the
settlements of ancient nations, and the rise of arts. Concerning these things,
I am free to assert, that antiquity cannot supply us with more veritable and
precious monuments than is contained in this, and the other books of Moses. For
as the authors of the ancient universal history observe, Vol. Is It. Anci. Univ.
Hist. preface, p. 13.
Moses is the only authentic writer of what happened before, and for several
ages after the flood. He is by universal consent allowed to be the most ancient
historian now extant: as it is certain, that his history was composed, not only
before all the histories, but even before the fables of the Greeks. For there
is nothing contained in them relating to the time before the deluge, that has
any appearance of truth: Ibid page 27.
of this, every discerning mind will be fully convinced, on comparing the
fabulous histories of Sanchoniatho, Manetho, Berosus, See his fabulous account
of the deluge, Univ. Hist. page 50, etc. As I have mentioned the deluge, I deem
it necessary, for the information of those who wish to see the history of Moses
strengthened by the testimony of those that are called profane writers, to
observe that the deluge, or universal destruction by water, is confirmed by the
concurrent testimony of the most ancient writers; as the authors of the
Universal History observe, (Vol. 1. p. 55.) "That there was such an universal
destruction by water, is confirmed by the concurrent testimonies of several of
the most ancient writers and nations in in the world. What account the Chaldean
records (meaning the history of Berosus) give of it, we have already seen. The
Indian and Persian tradition we may mention hereafter. That the Egyptians were
no strangers to this event, appears not only from those circumstances of Osiris
and Typhon mentioned above; but also from the testimony of Plato: who says,
that a certain Egyptian priest recounted to Solon, out of their sacred books,
the history of the universal flood, which happend long before the particular
inundations known to the Grecians. The inhabitants of Heliopolis, in Syria,
showed a chasm or cleft in the earth in the temple of Juno, which swallowed up
the waters of the flood. Nay, the very Americans are said to acknowledge and
speak of it in their continent: and we are told, that there is a tradition
among the Chinese, that Pooncu, with his family escaped the general deluge,"
etc. Thus we see that most nations have some idea of a delage, though none have
so clear an account of it, as that given by Moses.
Herodotus, and Diodorus Siculus, with that of Moses.

His philosophy also, is not that barren and fruitless one, whose subtility
evaporates in empty reasonings, and whose powers spend themselves in
discoveries of no use to the happiness of men: it is not that disastrous
philosophy, which, with an axe in its hand, and a veil over its eyes, throws
down, overturns, and destroys every thing, and builds up nothing: which in its
impious phrenzy, makes matter its God; and which distinguishes man from beast
only by his shape. No Sir, it is the wise philosophy of a good man, who wishes
to render his fellow creatures happy: for Moses begins his history, with
informing us, that there is a God, and that he created the world, and all that
is therein. This was the grand fundamental principle, to bring men to the
knowledge and worship of him that made them: for it is manifest to
demonstration, that if man does but give himself time to reflect, that God made
him, and gave him hands to feel, legs to walk, etc. and endowed him with powers
and reasoning faculties, far beyond that of the brute creation; he will
naturally love and reverence that great and awful being, that can mould him as
he pleases. The knowledge of this sublime truth, effectually destroys all those
false notions entertained by certain philosophers, of the eternity of matter,
and a fortuitous concourse of Atoms. It lays the axe to the root, and at once
annihilates that foolish, absurd, and impious tenet: and which is a
demonstration that the philosophy of Moses, was most beneficially conducive to
to the happiness of mankind.

He is also to be admired as an historian; for, as a learned christian Lowth's
letter to Warburton.
observes, "Whatever defects may be noted in his history upon the whole, when
compared with the more regular and more labored productions of the polished
historians of Greece and Rome; yet in many parts of it he has given evident
marks of superior-abilities as an historian. The history of Joseph, for
instance, is an example of simple, noble, elegant, interesting, pathetic
narration: of a justness, neatness, and perspicuity of historic composition; to
which nothing equal, or in any degree comparable, can be produced from
Herodotus or Xenophon, Sallust or Livy."

As an orator, his exhortations in the book of Deuteronomy, carry with them a
force, a spirit, and an elegance, equal at least, (considering the subject) to
anything ever penned.

As a poet, his beatiful ode, recorded in Exodus, is superior to any thing of
the kind: but his prophetic poem in Deuteronomy, is not to be equalled. It
contains six parts, as I have shown in another Introduction to Lingua Sacra, p.
4.
place. The first part consists of the first five verses, and is a prefactory
introduction to the poem: The second part contains nine verses; the subject of
which is the kindness and beneficence of the Supreme Being toward Israel: The
third part consists of the next four verses, in which he describes the sin and
wickedness of the nation: The fourth part consists of the next seven verses, in
which he recounts the afflictions with which GOD would punish them for their
disobedience: The fifth part contains the next eight verses, wherein he
describes the final do struction, which the Supreme Being might have been
induced to have brought upon them for their enormous crimes, had it not been
for one particular reason, and which he inimitably describes: The sixth and
last part contains the last ten verses of the poem, in which he rehearses the
consolation of Israel, and the vengeance which GOD will take on their enemies.

And I cannot forbear observing in proof of the prophetic inspiration of this
poem, that the first five parts of it, have been fully accomplished, viz. The
kindness and beneficence of the Supreme Being toward Israel, in giving them
possession of the holy land, and their prosperity under David and Solomon:
their sins of idolatry, etc. their captivity, and the severe punishments that
followed, and their preservation as a distinct nation to this very day,
notwithstanding all their sufferings, and which undoubtedly, is one of the most
wonderful things in the world, as (shown at large in my Dissertations on the
Prophecies vol. Is It. p. 17, etc.) whence, I presume to think, that the
completion of the first five parts, may be considered as a pledge and earnest
of the accomplishment of the sixth, which mentions the redemption of the
nation, etc. And it is very remarkable, that the prophet Jeremiah has clearly
evinced the truth of this position, in the following words, Jerm. xxxii. 42.
which produces as an argument, in support of what he had delivered as a
prophecy, foretelling the future restoration of the nation: "For thus says the
Lord, like as I have brought all this great evil upon this people, so will I
bring upon them all the good that I have promised them." A stronger proof than
what is contained in these words of the prophet, in support of the spirit of
prophecy, cannot be required; for the accomplishment of the evils predicted, is
a sure pledge of the completion of the good promised: and therefore, as it is
allowed on all hands, that the first five parts of this poem, has been
fulfilled in every particular fact, it consequently is manifest, that not the
least doubt ought to be entertained of the full accomplishment of the last
part. And which is a demonstrable proof of the divine mission of Moses.

I am, etc.

LETTER III.
SIR,
I SHALL, now proceed to the other books of Moses; viz. Exodus, Leviticus,
Numbers and Deuteronomy. These, sir, contain our laws, Religions and Moral;
Civil, Political, and Ritual; (though I do not mean to treat of them all thus
distinctly arranged; but only of a few of them as they occur to illustrate the
subject we are treating of) from all which I hope to prove, to the satisfaction
of every candid and liberal mind, that these laws were every way worthy of God,
who was pleased to bestow them by the hands of his servant Moses, on this
people Israel.

There is one God, says the Pentateuch, and but One. This God alone deserves to
be worshipped. He is the Supreme Being, the necessary origin of all beings; no
other is comparable to him. He is a pure spirit, immense and infinite; he
cannot be represented by any bodily shape. It is he that created the universe
by his power, and governs it by his wisdom. He views all our actions; nothing
can escape his watchful eye; and with an equitable hand he rewards and punishes
us according to our deserts.

All this we learn from those books; for the belief of the existence of God, is
founded on the first great commandment, I am the Lord thy God. Exodus xx. 2. and
Deuteronomy. v. ^.


That he is One, we are taught from Deuteronomy. vi. 6. Hear O Israel, the Lord is our
God, the Lord is own.

That he alone is to be worshipped, is contained in the second and third
commandments, Thou shall have no other Gods before me. Thou shall not make unto
that any graven image, etc. Thou shall not been down thyself to them, nor serve
them, etc.

That he cannot be represented by any bodily shape, we are taught from Deuteronomy.
iv. 15. For ye saw no similitude on the day that the Lord spoke unto you in
Horeb. This doctrine was likewise strongly inculcated by the prophet Isaiah
Isal. xi. 18.
, who says, "To whom therefore will ye liken God? and what is the form of
resemblance that ye will compare with him? Again Ibid. 25.
, To whom will ye liken me? and to whom shall I be equalled? says the holy
one."

That God knows all the thoughts and actions of mankind; and is not so in
different and unconcerned about them, as the unbelievers think; who say, "the
Lord sees us not; the Lord has forsaken the earth," (Fzek. viii. 12?) But on
the contrary, he observes, and takes cognizance of all our actions: this we are
taught from Genesis vi. 3. "And God save that the wickedness of man (was) great in
the earth." See also Genesis xviii. 20, besides several other parts of these books.

That God rewards and punishes with an equitable hand, we are taught in Exodus
xxxii. 32, 33. "Yet now, if thou will forgive their sin: and if not, blot me, I
pray thee, out of thy book which thou have written, And the Lord said unto
Moses, whosoever have sinned against me, him will I blot out of my book."

We are also taught, that although a temple was commanded to be built;
ministers appointed for its service, sacrifices and offerings instituted; yet
all this is nothing in his eyes, if the sentiments of the heart do not give it
life. The worship that he requires above all things, and before every thing, is
the acknowledgment of our entire dependence on him, and of his supreme
dominion; thankfulness for his benefits; trust in his mercy, reverence, and
love. Thus he says, Deuteronomy. v. 6.
"And thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy
soul, and with all thy strength. And now Ibid. x. 12
Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy
God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul. To keep the commandments of the
Lord, and the statutes which I command thee this day for thy good." See also
chap. xi. ver. 13, etc. where these true and sublime ideas are also strongly
inculcated; and which so eminently distinguish the Jewish from all ancient
legislators; and plainly show that the doctrines, which recommend such a pure
worship, can be none other than divine; as being every way worthy of God.

Let us now examine the morality taught in these books, what beauty and purity
do we find in this morality! There is scarcely a vice which it does not
condemn. It is not enough that evil actions are forbidden, even desires are
prohibited, "Thou shall not desire Deuteronomy. v. 21.
. Thou shall not covet Exodus xx. 17.
In inculcating this morality, Moses not only requires perfect equity,
untainted probity, justice, faithfulness, and the most exact honesty; but he
would also have us be humane, compassionate, and charitable: ever ready to do
unto others as we should wish they would do unto us, as he says Levit. xix 19.
, "But thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself."

This love is also to be extended to the stranger; "And if a stranger sojourn
with you in your land, ye shall not vex him. But the stranger that dwells
with you, shall be unto you as one born amongst you, and thou shall love him as
thyself; for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt. Levit. xix, 33-34
Love ye therefore the stranger: for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt."
Deuteronomy. x. 19.
Thus you may perceive that this brotherly love and charity was not confined to
those that were Jews born; as every other person might share in them: for it
is, and ever was, a fixed law amongst us, to admit into our religion and
commonwealth, all those that were willing to submit to our laws and customs;
and who after submitting to the right of circumcision, and performing ablution,
were incorporated among the nation, and became as one of them: for thus the law
speaks of the stranger. "Let all his males be circumcised, and then let him
come near and keep it; and he shall be as one that is born in the land; for no
uncircumcised person shall eat thereof. One law shall be to him that is home
born, and unto the stranger that sojourneth among you Exodus xii. 48-49.
. Now Sir, is not this law far more humane than that exclusion of strangers,
ordained by so many other legislators Thus among others, we find Lycurgus
excluding all strangers from his common wealth. See his life by Plutarch.
?

Let us now consider the humane and charitable laws, ordained for the relief of
the poor, the widow and the fatherless: of the servants and slaves: and we
shall presently perceive how superior they were to all the laws of the ancient
polished nations.

Of the poor.

"And if thy brother be waxen poor, and fallen in decay with thee, then thou
shall relieve him: yea, though he be a stranger or a sojourner, that he may
live with thee. Take thou no usury of him, or increase: but fear thy God, that
thy brother may live with thee. Thou shall not give him thy money upon usury,
nor lend him thy victuals for increase. I am the LORD your God, which brought
you forth out of the land of Egypt, to give you the land of Canaan, and to be
your God Levit. xxv. 35.
. -- If there be among you a poor man of one of thy brethren, within any of thy
gates, in the land which the LORD thy God gives thee, thou shall not harden
thy heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poor brother. But thou shall open thine
hand wide unto him, and shall surely lend him sufficient for his need, in that
which he wants Deuteronomy. xv. 7 -- 8.
. -- If thou lend money to any of my people that is poor by thee, thou shall
not be to him as a usurer, neither shall thou lay upon him usury. If thou at
all take thy neighbor's raiment to pledge, thou shall deliver it to him by
that the sun goes down, for that is his covering only, it is his raiment for
his skin: wherein shall he sleep? And it shall come to pass, when he cries
unto me, that I will hear: for I am gracious Exodus xxii. 25 -- 27.
. When thou do lend thy brother any thing, thou shall not go into his house
to fetch his pledge. Thou shall stand abroad, and the man to whom thou do
lend shall bring out the pledge abroad unto thee. And if the man be poor, thou
shall not sleep with his pledge. In any case thou shall deliver him the pledge
again when the sun goes down, that he may sleep in his own raiment, and bless
thee: and it shall be righteousness unto thee before the LORD thy God Deuteronomy.
xxiv. 10 -- 13.
."

Of the widow and fatherless.

"Ye shall not afflict any widow, or fatherless child. If thou afflict them in
any wise, and they cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their cry: And my
wrath shall wax hot; and I will kill you with the sword: and your wives shall
be widows; and your children fatherless Exodus xxii. 22-24.
."

Of hired servants.

"Thou shall not oppress an hired servant that is poor and needy, whether he be
of thy brethren, or of thy strangers that are in thy land within thy gates. On
his day thou shall give him his hire, neither shall the sun go down upon it,
for he is poor, and sets his heart upon it: lest he cry against thee unto
the Lord, and it be sin unto thee Deuteronomy. xxiv. 14.15.
."

Of a purchased servant.

"If thou buy an Hebrew servant, six years he shall serve: and in the seventh
he shall go out free for nothing." Exodus xxi. 2.
If he came in by himself, he shall go out by himself: If he were married, then
his wife shall go out with This denotes one that had been sold by order of the
judges for theft; as mentioned (Exodus xxii. 2.) "If he have nothing, then shall
he be sold for his theft." And of one so sold, the master became subject to the
maintenance of his wife and children: for as she had no other support but her
husband: labor; the law obliged the master to maintain them. Here, sir, is an
additional proof of the wisdom and humanity of the laws of Moses, compared with
those of the most civilized nations.
him. If his master have given him a wife, This denotes a female slave like
those taken from the Midianites, etc. and not an Hebrew maid servant.
and she have borne him sons or daughters; the wife and her children shall be
her master's and he shall go out by himself. If thy brother an Hebrew man, or
an Hebrew woman be sold unto thee, and serve thee six years; then in the
seventh year thou shall let him go free from thee. And when thou sendest him
out free from thee, thou shall not let him go away empty: Thou shall furnish
him liberally out of thy flock, and out of thy floor, and out of thy wine
press: of that wherewith the Lord thy God has blessed thee thou shall give
unto him. And thou shall remember that thou wast a bondsman in the land of
Egypt, and the Lord thy God redeemed thee: therefore, I command this thing to
day." Deuteronomy. xv. 12-15.
etc. besides, a number of other passages of the like import.

Of slaves.

"And if a man smite his servant, or his maid, with a rod, and he die under his
hand, he shall surely be punished. Notwithstanding, if he continue a day or
two, he shall not be punished; for he is his money Exodus xxi. 20 -- 21.
. -- And if a man smite the eye of his servant, or the eye of his maid, that it
perish, he shall let him go free for his eye's sake. And if he smite out his
man-servant's tooth, or his maid-servant's tooth, he shall let him go free for
his tooth's sake Ibid. 26 -- 27.
."

Before I proceed, it is necessary to inform you, that the servants here
mentioned, are not Hebrew servants, (called purchased servants) but slaves,
bought from among the Gentiles, or captives taken in war; as also of those
strangers that sojourned among them; agreeable to the following command, "Both
thy bondmen and thy bond-maids, which thou shall have, shall be of the heathen
that are round about you; of them shall ye buy bondmen and bond maids.
Moreover, of the children of the strangers that do sojourn among you, of them
shall ye buy Levit. xxv, 44, ^^.
," etc. which when bought became their proper goods, and continued with them as
their lands did; for an inheritance to them and their children after them See
verse 46.
. And it is of these latter, that the law is thus tender; for the former, were
not to go free for the fake of an eye or a or a tooth These Gentile slaves were
not only to go free for the loss of an eye or a tooth: but likewise for the
loss of any of the twenty four principal members. See Talmud. Bab. Kedushin
fol. 25.1, and Maim. in Hilchoth Evadim. chap. v.
: but if the master shall thus injure them, they were entitled to the same
reparation as the other Hebrews. And, now Sir, if you please to review all the
laws of the ancient nations, I am confident, you will not be able to find any
thing in them, that can equal the humanity and tender care of the law of Moses,
not only for the poor, the widow and the orphan, but for the slave also: for
almost all the ancient governments abandoned, without exception, the slaves of
both sexes to the lust and brutality of their masters. Montesquieu says, "I do
not think, that the policy of the Romans was good in this respect. They gave a
loose to the incontinence of masters." (the same may be said of almost all
ancient nations) He adds, "Slavery has for its object utility not
voluptuousness. The laws of decency are founded on the laws of nature, and must
be felt by all nations. And if the law which protects the modesty of slaves is
valid even in arbitrary governments, where absolute power reigns, how much more
in others!" This licentiousness (observes the editor of the Jews Letters to
Voltaire) was the bane of morals among ancient nations. What could unfortunate
slaves do against voluptuous imperious masters, who were restrained by no laws?
If you are acquainted with history, you cannot be ignorant to what excesses
Excesses of incontinence, says the same author, which are attested by all the
ancient writers. Read only Anacreon and Horace, and see to what excesses the
Greeks and Romans went in this respect. Even Cato, the wise Cato, carried on a
scandalous trade with his beautiful slaves, whom he prostituted. There were
also excesses of cruelty without bounds. It makes one tremble to read over the
Roman laws respecting slaves. They compare them to beasts of burden, and give
them up to the most cruel tortures. Did the master of a family happen to be
assassinated, all those that were under the same roof, or even within the sound
of the voice, were condemned to die without distinction. These laws are the
work of ferocity, and the scandal of reason, and can any one prefer such
government to that of the Hebrews?
this permission gave birth, even amongst nations that are proposed to us as
models of civilized and wise governments.

At Lacedemon, let slaves be treated in the cruellest manner whatsoever, they
yet could claim no protection from the laws. If any one looked above his
condition, by an elegant figure, he was condemned to die and his master was
fined, See vol. 22d. of the Memoirs of the Academy of Belles Letters, written
by Mr. Capperonier.
in order that he might by severity prevent his other slaves from offending
hereafter the eyes of the citizens by their outward accomplishments.

The Spartans, being authorized by such laws, used to fall upon the Helots,
whilst they were at work in the fields, and without mercy would destroy the
ablest men amongst them; and this for mere exercise, and lest these slaves
should increase too much. This was the ambuscade, mentioned by Aristotle, as
one of the institutions of Lycurgus " Aristotle in his second and seventh Books
of Politics, Plato in his first Book de Legibus, and Polybious in the sixth of
his History," says M. Dacier in his notes on the life of Lycurgus in Plutarch,
"have reproached Lycurgus for that his laws were more adapted to make men
valiant than to make them just.
." "The thing" as Plutarch says In the life of Lycurgus.
, "was this; Those who had the care of the young men, dispatched from time to
time some of the ablest of them into the country at random, armed only with
their daggers, and taking a little necessary provision with them: these in the
daytime hid themselves in the thickets and clefts, and there lay close, but in
the night they issued out into the highways and killed all the Ilotes they
could light upon; sometimes they set upon them by day, as they were at work in
the fields, and murdered the ablest and stoutest of them in cold blood, as
Thucydides also, in his history of the Peloponnesian war, relates, where he
tells us, that such of them as the Lacedaemonians had singled out for their
valor, were crowned by proclamation, as persons enfranchised (for their good
services;) and went about to all the temples in token of freedom; but that soon
after they all disappeared on a sudden, being about the number of two thousand;
and no man neither then nor since could give an account how they came by their
deaths. And Aristotle particularly says, that the Ephori, so soon as they were
entered into their office, used to declare war against them, that they might be
massacred with a pretense of Law."

And Rome still more barbarous, calmly viewed her great men slaughter their
slaves, without the least cause of complaint, in order to throw their bodies
into their fish ponds to make their lampreys more delicious, by such
nourishment. Even under the eyes of the Magistrates, thousands of these unhappy
creatures expired in the amphitheatre, for the amusement of a fierce and cruel
people, and some festival days caused more human blood to flow in the empire,
than many days of battle.

But the laws of Moses did not give such tyrannical power to masters: on the
contrary, they tenderly watched over the lives and modesty of the slaves, as is
plain from the foregoing extract from these laws; and which no doubt, was the
reason that our ancestors were almost the only ancient The Atheniens, of all
others, treated their slaves with gentleness.
people, among whom there was not any of those rebellions of the slaves, which
often brought so many other nations to the brink of ruin, Not only the
Spartans, Sicilians, and Romans, experienced dangers from their rebellious
slaves, as is well known, but modern nations also have been frequently exposed
to the same dangers. And in this unfortunate war the melancholy proofs of the
dreadful effects of such rebellion, is still before our eyes.


From the extracts of our laws above mentioned, you may also perceive the
moderation we were enjoined to use toward our debtors The moderation toward
debtors, will be farther treated of, when we come to speak of the sabbatical
year, etc.
; and which I would recommend you to compare with the horrid law of the twelve
tables, which permitted the creditors to load the debtors with chains; and
after some market days, to out them in pieces, and to share amongst them their
bloody limbs, or to sell them to strangers!

This humanity, Sir, was also extended even to the delinquent, as is plain from
the following text. "And it shall be, if the wicked man be worthy to be beaten,
that the judge shall cause him to lie down, and to be beaten before his face,
according to his fault, by a certain number. Forty stripes he may give him, and
not exceed: lest if he should exceed, and beat him above these with many
stripes, then thy brother should seem vile in' thy sight Deuteronomy. xxv. 2-3.
." By this wise and humane law, so different from that of all other nations,
the punishment of the culprit, was not left to the arbitrary will of the judge,
who might order his hundreds or thousands of lashes; No Sir, the number was
restricted to forty stripes: and that they might not exceed the number thus
limited by the Our code is short, and clear; kings can read it and nations
understand it; whilst the code of laws of some of the most refined civilized
nations, after many hundred years labor, are scarcely any thing more than
undigested compilations, confused heaps of foreign oppressive laws, and
barbarous customs; they are dark labyrinths, in which the most learned
counselors lose their way, and through which the greatest lawyers can scarcely
show a path: for what is law to day, is not allowed to be law to morrow It must
farther be observed, that all the tribes in the whole nation, were governed by
the same laws and flatutes. Judah had the same as Reuben; and Benjamin had none
others than Simeon. But is many nations and governments, "every town, every
hamlet has its own laws. What is just in one village, is unjust two miles
farther, and they change laws as often as they change post horses." Our laws
were uniform and unvariable. But "there is no stability in theirs. They change
like the dresses of men and women. They have not any fixed laws even in
criminal cases," These are the sentiments of M. Voltaire himself. See the
supplement to le philosophe ignorant. etc.
law, or doctors ordained, that no more than thirty nine stripes should be
given See Gemara Makkoth, Perek Jilo hean Halockeenfol. Vol. 23.1.
.

But this is not all, our laws every where order us to treat even the brute
creation with humanity. "And whether it be cow or ewe, ye shall not kill it and
her young both in one day Levit. xxii. 28.
. Thou shall not take the dam with the young Deuteronomy. xxii. 6.
." Thou shall not muzzle the ox when he treads out the corn*. The law also
commanded us to let the beast rest on the sabbath. From all which, it is
manifest, that the more you study the laws of Moses, the more instances you
will find in them of gentleness and humanity: and the more they are compared
with ancient legislatures, the more a man will be convinced of their excellence.

LETTER IV.
SIR,
I shall now take notice of some of the precepts of the land, which may be
properly termed a part of the Political laws of Moses. With these, several
Festivals, (which are a part of the Ritual law) are closely connected: and
therefore, it is proper to consider them conjointly. And for the better
understanding of which, it is necessary that we go back to the call of Abraham;
when we shall plainly see the propriety of the nation's being called God's
chosen people* This will appear manifest from the purpose for which they were
chosen: which was to hand down the unity, and worship of the one only God, the
creator of heaven and earth. This purpose, by the infinite wisdom of God, has
been fully accomplished through their means, as will be perceived in the sequel.

Notwithstanding the severe and exemplary punishment, with which God punished
the sins of the old world; and the means which we are naturally to suppose that
Noah took to provide for the instruction of the new in the true worship of God:
we nevertheless find, that in a very short time, mankind degenerated again, and
advanced apace toward the same state of depravity, that they were in before
the flood: especially in regard to false worship, God therefore, called
Abraham, who wherever he went Chaldees, Canaan, and Egypt, were then the most
renowned and conspicuous countries: the inhabitants of which, were all deeply
versed in the idolatry of the ancient Sabians. See Maimonides in Noreh
Nevuchim, part 3d. chap. xxxvii.
, plainly showed them the vanity of worshipping the creature instead of the
creator; and boldly asserted his supremacy, in defiance of all opposition Maim.
Ibid. chap. xxix
. For his faith and righteousness, God made choice of him and his posterity, to
hand down the knowledge of his unity, and preserve the principles of the true
religion uncorrupted, amidst the Idolatrous fictition of a false theology. It
was for this purpose that God selected the family of Araham from among all
nations, and sealed them with his coyenant*, to be the repository of the sacred
oracles: that they might convey them to posterity in their original purity. And
that this might be fully accomplished, God promised Abraham the land of Canaan
for an inheritance for his posterity: though before that time should arrive,
they would be sorely afflicted in captivity; from which however, he would
redeem them; and severely punish their oppressors; and thus make them fully
sensible, that he alone was God; and governed the world by his particular
providence. And, as Egypt might justly be considered as the very sink of false
worship; the contaminated fountain, whence flowed idolatry, the arts of magic
and divination; and the institutions of superstitions and obscene rites; God
was pleased to make it the scene of the great (...) was the necessity of the
miracles performed by Moses: for the sole end and purpose of these miracles
was, to convince all -- the Israeltes*, the Egyptians, and the rest of the
nations, that the false deities worshipped by them, were naught but vanity,
that could not profit: for that the Lord alone was the true God, and governor
of the world; and that there was none else besides.

Now the most rational method that could have been taken to reclaim all those
from their errors, and induce them to embrace the truth, was to make it appear
plain and evident to their understandings, that things were, in fact, otherwise
than they apprehended. For the Egyptians falsely imagined that those
illustrious heavenly bodies, the sun, moon and stars, as also the elements,
were the distributors of blessings and comforts: for as they observed the
course of things to be constantly regulated, and the blessings of life to (...)
and agency of these bodies, they, consequently, were led to believe them to be
the only gods that governed the world. This being the case, let us now consider
how their fatal mistake was to be removed, and they set right in this point: --
Was it not by convincing them that these bodies had no other powers or
qualities than what they derived from their great Creator, whose instruments
they were, employed by him to carry on the purposes of his providence? And what
more rational method could God have made use of to form this conviction, than
that of empowering his messenger to alter or suspend the qualities of these
bodies, and make them operate by his bare command, in direct opposition to
their ordinary course? This was appealing to their own notions, and making them
sensible, in their own way, that the Lord alone was the creator and governor of
the world, and that all visible beings were but so many subordinate agents,
working by his power, and under his directions: and whose powers he can suspend
whenever he pleases: consequently, he alone was entitled to the worship and
obedience of men, as he only could reward or punish them.

That we may place this matter in a clear light, it will be necessary to take a
particular view of the progress and conduct of the whole proceeding.

In the first place then, God, by a message in his own name, required the
Egyptian king to release his people Exodus v. 1.
. "Thus says the Lord God of Israel, let my people go that they may hold a
feast unto me in the wilderness." By Pharaoh's answer to this message, it is
plain, that he disclaimed all knowledge of the God of Israel, and absolutely
refused to yield any obedience to him: thus he says Ibid. 2.
, "Who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice to let Israel go? I know not
the Lord, neither will I let Israel go. I worship my own gods, and none other."
This was then the proper time to convince him, and all the Egyptians of their
folly, or to punish them for their wickedness, if they persisted therein. But
God foreseeing by his omniscience what the consequence would be, and being, as
it were, unwilling to enter on the methods of severity, commanded his servants
to go again to Pharaoh, and repeat the demand of his dismissing the Israelites.
On this second application, when the king required them Although it is not
mentioned that Pharaoh did ask them for a miracle; yet, as God had instructed
them how to act, when that Pharaoh should require one of them; (as well'knowing
that he would) and as they acted conformable thereto, it is naturally to be
supposed, that he actually asked them for the miracle, before that Aaron threw
down his rod. See Arbabanal on Exodus vii. 9. etc.
to exhibit some miracle, as a proof that they were not magicians, but the
messengers of God, (as Abarbanal observes) "Aaron cast down his rod before
Pharaoh, and before his servants, and it became a serpent." Hereupon the
magicians were called to confront him; and they having cast down every man his
rod, they, in like manner, became serpents. Thus far, then, both parties
exhibited equal signs of power; but the superiority of God's messengers soon
appeared; for "Aaron's rod swallowed up their rods."

But this miracle making no impression on the mind of Pharaoh, God proceeded by
other miracles to show his omnipotent power, in opposition to their false
deities; by asslicting them with ten plagues; and which were wrought in the
four elements; as well as in the heavenly bodies: for as Abarbanal observes,
some were transacted in grosser elements of earth and water; as the turning the
waters into blood, and the plague of frogs: both these were in the element of
water. The next three were produced from the earth: and the remainder were
performed in the lighter elements of air and fire; as also by the suspension of
the light and emanation of the heavenly luminaries, the sun, moon, and stars,
when he covered the land of Egypt with thick darkness for three days. These
miracles were admirably calculated to prove the falsity of their ideas
concerning their deities; as well as to punish them for their sins, of idolatry
etc. for as they highly venerated the waters of the Nile, as being the fruitful
source of their choicest blessings; insomuch that in their barbarously
superstitious devotions to this river, they stained its current with human
sacrifices The Egyptians used annually, at the ceremony of cutting down the dam
of Khalij, or great canal, to sacrifice a girl, or, as others say, a boy and
girl, to the Nile, as a tribute to that river for all the benefits they
received from it. See Univer. Hist. Vol. Is It. p. 172.
. And also thre^^ the males of the children of Israel therein: the turning its
water into blood, was a just and suitable punishment for such bloody rites and
cruelties: by thus depriving them of its bounty, in rendering its water, which
was their common drink, unfit to be drank; and destroying its fish, so that
they could not eat them.

In like manner did all the other miracles tend to convince them of his
omnipotent power over their false deities, and his particular providence in the
government of the world, and the protection of those that serve him. This is
manifest by the distinction made between the children of Israel in the land of
Goshen, and the the Egyptians, during the whole progress of these plagues See
Exodus viii. 18-19 -- ix. 4-6-26 and x. 23.
. But the last of these miracles, viz. the death of the first born, was such a
manifest proof of his power and sovereignty, and a demonstration of his taking
particular cognizance of human transactions, and sooner or later rewarding
every man according to his works, as could not be denied. For, as he at first
threatened, Exodus iv. 21 -- 22.
that if they would not let his first born Israel go, and serve him, he would
slay their first born: the accomplishment of that threat made so great an
impression on Pharaoh and all his people, that they not only gave them leave to
go, but forced them to depart.

On this destruction of the first born of the Egyptians, was instituted the
ceremony of the redemption of the first born of the Hebrews Ibid. xiii. 2 -- 16.
; as was also the passover, etc. in order to fix lasting traces on their minds,
of the wonders which God had worked for them: to perpetuate from generation to
generation the memory of these great events; and to evidence the truth of them
to the whole earth, even down to our own times; for the ceremony of the
passover, and the other festivals, as well as the redemption of the first born,
are all strictly observed throughout the nation, at this very day; as proofs of
the miracles performed for them at their deliverance from Egypt.

The passover, therefore, as well as the redemption of the first born, which
were instituted immediately in commemoration of the redemption from Egypt, are,
in themselves, a clear evidence and demonstration of that event, as related by
DIVINE REVELATION; more especially, as a great number of the other precepts
contained in the Mosaical laws are founded Exodus xxix. 46. Levit. xi. 45. xix.
36. xxii 33. xxiii. 43. xxv. 38.42.55. and xxvi. 13.45. Numb. xv. 41. Deuteronomy. vi.
12. xiii. 11. xvi. 3, and xxiv. 17. Besides a number of other passages.
on the said redemption: and they are continually reminded Ibid. etc.
of their subjection in Egypt, and the degraded state of bondage, that they
were there held in: it, therefore would be highly absurd to conceive it
possible, that three or four millions of people, could suffer themselves to be
imposed on in such a barefaced manner, by being continually told of the
degraded state that they had been in; and unanimously agreeing to accept of an
institution said to be founded on a miraculous deliverance wrought for them,
if, in fact, no such deliverance had ever taken place. A position like this,
Sir, surely no deist, freethinker, or skeptic, will be hardy enough to advance.
Now this institution actually took place at the very time of their departure
from Egypt, and has continued to this day: so that it is impossible to doubt
the truth of it. Indeed, the miracles of Moses bear such evident marks The
miracles of Moses have four marks of anthenticity peculiar to them, which
evidently demonstrate their divine origin: in the first place, they were
objects of sense: that is perceptible by the senses. Secondly, they were
performed in the most public manner, in the presence of several millions of
people, who were all eye witnesses of them; and some miracles continued for a
great number of years, as the manna, etc. Thirdly, a great part of the
ceremonial law is founded on them. Fourthly, those very precepts took place
from the time of their being performed, and have continued the same to this
very day, without change or innovation.
of truth, being performed in so public a manner, and for such wise purposes;
and on the notoriety of which, several festivals and other precepts were
instituted, and immediately took place, and continue in full force to this
hour; that it really is astonishing how any rational person can doubt their
authenticity. It must farther be observed, in support of what I have advanced,
that God himself when he came to give them the law, appealed to the truth of
those things of which they were eye witnesses See R. Judah in Lib. Cozri.
, and in which, as I may say, parties concerned: he, therefore, does not say, I
AM THE LORD THY GOD, WHO MADE HEAVEN AND EARTH: for of that, they were not eye
witnesses; consequently, they could neither affirm, or deny the same: But he
says, I am the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the land of Egypt. Of this
transaction, and the miracles performed both antecedent and subsequent to their
departure from thence, they were all living witnesses: it being but fifty days
since their departure, and forty three since the Egyptians were drowned in the
sea, when they went over dry shod. It therefore, is not only improbable, but
almost impossible to imagine, that a whole nation could be thus imposed upon.
Hence, it necessarily follows, that as the precepts of the law, are founded on
the redemption, and the miracles which accompanied it; and which were performed
in the presence of those to whom these precepts were given, I say, it
necessarily follows that the miracles were performed by a divine power; and
that the precepts founded thereon, are divine precepts: consequently, we have
here a demonstration of divine revelation.

There is an other proof of the divine mission of Moses, that I can by no means
omit mentioning; (though in truth it it needs not father confirmation) I mean,
God's speaking to Moses face to face, in the presence of six hundred thousand
men, besides women and children; as mentioned Exodus chap. xix. 9. "And the Lord
said unto Moses, Lo, I come unto thee in a thick cloud, that the people may
hear when I speak with thee, and believe thee for ever.

This, Sir, was an especial proof of the divine mission of Moses; and indeed, a
greater cannot be required, as Moses himself emphatically expresses Deuteronomy. iv.
32-33.
it; "For ask now of the days that are past, which were before thee, since the
day that God created man upon the earth, and (ask) from one end of the heaven
unto the other, whether there has been (any such thing) as this great thing
(is), or has been heard like it? Did (ever) people hear the voice of God
speaking out of the midst of fire, as thou have heard?" And it was this, that
God meant by the expression. "And this (shall be) a sign unto thee, that I have
sent thee; when thou have brought forth the people out of Egypt, ye shall serve
God upon this mountain Exodus iii. 12.
."

For this was the essential proof of the divine mission of Moses; because, they
not only heard God speak to Moses, but to themselves likewise; and by which
they were fully satisfied of the existence of the spirit of prophecy, as we
find they expressed themselves Deuteronomy. v. 24
: "And we have heard his voice out of the midst of the fire: we have seen this
day that God does talk with man, and he lives."

And what is still a greater proof (if a greater can be) of his divine mission,
and that the nation was fully convinced thereof, is, that they, from
thenceforward, agreed to receive, as coming from God, whatever he should
deliver to them; because, they were then fully satisfied of his mission. Hear
their own words. "Now therefore why should we die? for this great fire will
consume us. If we continue to hear the voice of the Lord our God we shall die.
For who (is there) of all flesh that has heard the voice of the living God,
speaking out of the midst of fire, as we (have) and lived? go thou near, and
hear all that the Lord our God shall say, and speak thou unto us all that the
Lord our God shall speak unto thee, and we will bear (it), and do Deuteronomy v. 25 --
26 -- 27. See also Exodus xx. 19.
(it).

And as it was by such extraordinary means that they were brought to a firm
belief in the divine mission of Moses, so has it never been effaced from the
Jewish nation: for notwithstanding that they fell into idolatry, and other
crimes; yet at no time whatever, did the nation deny the divine mission of
Moses, or abrogate his laws. No, Sir: not the destruction of our government,
and the consequent dispersion of the nation; the persecutions of Heathens and
Christians, and the almost universal contempt of all nations, have ever been
able to root it out of our hearts. In consequence of this, the laws of Moses
have been handed down to us, through so many ages and revolutions, ever the
same, and ever respectable, whilst nothing remains of so many forms of
government of the most renowned nations but the names of the lawgivers affixed
to some fragments of their laws. But this is not all; not only the Jews, but
two thirds of this habitable globe revere these laws and look upon Moses as
divinely inspired. What human government ever had the like success.

Compare this, now sir, with the extraordinary method that the great Lycurgus
took to render his laws immortal, and to cause them to be delivered down
unchangeable to posterity. "To bring this to pass Plutarch's life of Lycurgus
, he called an extraordinary assembly of all the People, he told them that he
now thought every thing reasonably well established, both for the public
happiness, and improving the virtue of each particular; but that there was one
thing still behind, and that of the greatest importance, which he thought not
fit to impart until he had consulted the oracle: In the mean time his desire
was, that they would punctually observe his laws without any the least
alteration until his return from Delphi, and then he would do as the God
should' direct him. They all consented readily, and prayed him to hasten his
voyage; but before he departed he administered an oath to the two kings, the
Senate, and then to all the commons, that they would inviolably observe his
ordinances during his absence. This done, he set fail for Delphi: when he came
to the oracle, and had sacrificed to Apollo, he asked him, whether the law he
had established were sufficient to make a City virtuous and happy? The Oracle
answered, That this laws were excellent, and that the City should continue in
the highest renown while it observed the polity of Lycurgus. He took this
oracle in writing, and sent it over to Sparta: and then, having sacrificed the
second time to Apollo, and taken his leave of his friends, and his son, he
resolved that the Spartans should never be released from the Oath they had
taken, but that there he would put a voluntary end to his life. He therefore
made an end of himself by a total abstience from meat." But notwithstanding all
this, in about five centuries; it was all forgotten; and it most certainly
would not have continued so long; but (as M. Dacier observes See his notes on
Plutarch's life of Lycurgus.
;) that the Spartans for a long time, had no wars but in Peloponnesus. But as
soon as their thirst of Empire had inspired them with a design of having naval
forces, and entertaining foreign Troops; and there was a necessity of foreign
money to pay them; then their oath availed no more against that necessity, than
if it had been a spider's web; they did not so much as remember any such had
ever been taken. Then were the laws of Lycurgus violated with a vengeance, and
they were no more thought of than if they had never been.

And now Sir, give me leave to ask you on what principles of philosophy, can
you account for this great disparity between the duration and perpetuity of the
laws of Moses, and those of Lycurgus: for, this duration, this perpetuity of
our laws, with the respect and veneration with which they have been treated for
so many ages, and in so many climates, cannot be the effect of chance. And can
you account for it by any natural means? No sir: it is impossible! The only
solution is, that the one was the work of man; consequently fallible; and
liable to be annulled. But the other, is the work of God, and, therefore, not
subject to abolition; for as the Psalmist says, "Various are the imaginations
in the heart of man: but it is the counsel of the Lord alone that shall stand.
The counsel of the Lord shall stand for ever: (and) the purposes of his heart
to all generations." Yes, Sir, we here clearly perceive the finger of God: his
power and his wisdom shine forth too conspicuously to suffer the least doubt to
remain.

The feast of Pentecost, and Tabernacles, also founded on their redemption: the
former, in memory, of the delivery of the law on mount Sinai; which was on the
fiftieth day of their departure from Egypt; and the latter, as scripture
expressly asserts, to commemorate the goodness Levit. xxiii. 43.
of God, in the protection of the Israelites in the wilderness. These three
great festivals, viz. Passover, Pentecost, and Tabernacles, bear evident marks
of their divine institution: and strongly inculcate a divine providence: for
they were called festivals of appearance; because, thereon all the males were
to appear before the Lord in Jerusalem: as Exodus xxxiv. 23 -- 24.
it is said, "Three times in a year shall all your males appear before the Lord
God, the God of Israel. For I will cast out the nations before thee, and
enlarge thy borders: neither shall any man desire thy land, when thou go up
to appear before the Lord thy God, three times in the year. Three times in a
year shall all thy males appear before the Lord thy God, in the place which he
shall choose: in the feast of unleavened bread, and in the feast of weeks, and
in the feast of Tabernacles; and they shall not appear before the Lord empty.
Every man shall give as he is able, according to the blessing of the Lord thy
God which he has given Deuteronomy. xvi. 16 -- 17.
thee."

On this institution, I must observe, that in the first place, it strongly
inculcates (as do most of the precepts, those of the land especially) a
particular providence; for they were to go up to Jerusalem, to return thanks to
God for their redemption from Egypt, and for the land which God had given to
them, and the blessing he had bestowed on the fruits of the earth, etc. For the
Passover was instituted in memory of their going out of Egypt in the month Abib
Exodus xxxiv. 18.
; and the feast of weeks for the offering of the first fruits of wheat harvest
Ibid. 22.
; and the feast of Tabernacles is called the feast of ingathering, when they
had fully got in their harvest: they, therefore, as an acknowledgement for
these great benefits, were commanded to offer freewill offerings, and give to
the Levite, the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, according to the
blessing which the Lord their God had given them: thereby justly attributing
every benefit they enjoyed to the bountiful hand of Providence.

Secondly, it clearly proves, that this law could be none other than a divine
ordinance; for on these festivals all the males were commanded to come up from
all parts to Jerusalem (as above mentioned.) Now, this is what no legislator,
in his senses, ever dared attempt to do: to leave the land three times a year
to the defense of old men, women and children; promising them at the same time
that no one should take or desire it. Who ever attempted to risk the ruin of
his nation in this manner? more especially when it is considered by what kind
of neighbors they were surrounded; and who were almost ever hostile to them. I
say, who dared do so? Who dared make such a promise, without running the risk
of bringing inevitable ruin on the whole nation, but He in whose hand the
hearts of kings are as rivers of waters, and who turns them whithersoever he
pleases Prove. xxi. 1.
? He only, could thus promise to protect their country in their absence,
against the incursions of their warlike neighbors; and which was actually the
case during all the time of their observance of this precept: so that this may
be considered as a standing miracle, and a demonstration of the divine origin
of the institution of these festivals.

We shall now proceed to speak of those precepts, that are more immediately
connected with the land; when the divine origin of the Mosaical laws will be
farther demonstrated.

All the ancient nations looked upon the distribution of lands as a masterpiece
in politice: And give me leave to ask you sir, where they were more wisely
distributed than by our lawgiver? The institutions of the famous Spartan
legislator, so highly extolled by the Greek writers, must in this respect,
yield the palm to the Hebrew legislator: for in the distribution appointed by
him, every one out of the six hundred thousand men fit for war, that entered
the land of Canaan, was to have a portion of ground given to him, sufficient to
maintain him and his family in decent affluence.

This inheritance, Moses informed them, was given to them by God; they held it
immediately from him, and were to consider him as the only Lord of the land.
Hence it was, that they were commanded to offer the first fruits to Jehovah;
when they were to make confession Deuteronomy. xxvi. 3, etc.
of his goodness to them, in giving them the promised land, and in bestowing
his bountiful blessing on it.

They were also commanded to give tithes to the Levites, Numb. xviii. 21, etc.
Deuteronomy. xxvi. 12, etc.
etc. And, although you have been so severe against christian priests, for
demanding of tithes, yet, I think, you cannot in reason, have any objection to
this institution in the Mosaical law: for, in the first place, as the whole
tribe of Levi had no inheritance in the land, and were moreover set apart for
the service of God, it was but just that they should have wherewithal to live;
God therefore ordered that the other tribes should give them tithes. And,
secondly, though the Israelites were commanded to give tithes; yet was it not
lawful for the Priest The priest had the grea: tithe, which was a sistieth
part, and was separated before the tenth part for the Levite. Note, of the
tenth which the Levite received, be was obliged to give a tenth to the priest;
See Numb. xviii. 26. etc. and which was called the tithe of tithes. Besides,
there was the second tithe which the owner was obliged to eat in Jerusalem, on
spend the value of it there, by redeeming it, and adding a (...) park to it. In
the third year it was eaten at home, being spent: upon the Levites, the poor,
the fatherless and the widow: as will be shown at large in a future publication
wherein I shall treat of all the precepts of the law of Moses.


or Levite to come and demand it as their right: but only to ask for it as a
free gift of the husbandman; (who might give it to whatsoever priest or Levite
that he chose) much less had they any power to take it by sorce; or to
institute a process by law against them for non-payment: No, sir, the giving of
tithes was a voluntary act. God had indeed commanded them to give tithes, as an
acknowledgement of their holding the land immediately from him; (and which no
doubt, every good Israelite would be very willing on that account to do; more
especially as they were promised an increased blessing in return) but he by no
means authorized the priests or Levites, to force it from them; or in case of
refusal, to harrass them by law suits, etc. Heace, there was no such quarrels
and contentions between the priests and people in the Jewish nation, as exists
in many others; and which is a demonstration of the divine wisdom in the
formation of this institution.

Another thing that was continually to remind them, that they held the land, as
the immediate gift of God, was, that the lands thus given to them, were to be
absolutely unalienable. "The land shall not be sold for ever: for the land is
mine; for ye are strangers and sojourners with me." (Levit. xxv. 23.) By this
means the estates of the Israclites were so unalterably fixed, that no family
could ruin itself, or grow too rich and powerful: for the law ordained, that
all estates sold, should return to its first owners, or their heirs, at the
year of the Jubilee. Thus, the lands passed from the fathers to the children,
and were to remain forever in the same tribe Numb. xxxvi. 7 -- 9. And by which
law, an heiress was obliged to marry in her father's tribe; that the
inheritance might not be removed from one tribe to another.
and family. This law was the effect of deep and wise policy. It perpetuated
all the advantages of the first distribution; and by confining the citizen to
his original spot, endeared it to him; and excited in him a love of industry
and frugality. It repressed avarice, and restrained the ambitious schemes of
great landholders: It prevented the oppression of the poor, and took away all
cause of jealousy, discontent, faction, and all those evils which other common
wealths vainly endeavored to remedy by their agrarian laws.

But the greatest proof of a divine providence was inculcated by the law, that
ordained the observance of the Sabbatical year, and year of Jubilee. On these
years, there was to be a total cessation from all manner of agriculture. "But
Levit. xxv. 4.
in the seventh year shall be a sabbath of rest unto the land, a sabbath for
the LORD: thou shall neither sow thy field nor prune thy vineyard. That which
grows of its own accord of thy harvest, thou shall not reap, neither gather
the grapes of thy vine undressed: -- A Jubilee shall that siftieth year be unto
you: ye shall not sow, neither reap that which grows of itself in it Levit.
xxv. 11.
, etc." They were not only forbidden to fow, but were also prohibited from
gathering the spontaneous product of the sields and fruit trees, but all was to
be in common; for the poor and the beasts of the field Exodus xxiii. 11.
, etc.

On the sabbatical year, there was also to be a full discharge of all money
lent to the poor; "At the end of every seven years thou shall make a release.
And this is the manner of the release; every ereditor that lends ought unto
his neighbor, shall release it, he shall not exact it of his neighbor, or his
brother, because it is called the Lord's release." Deuteronomy. xv. 1 -- 2.
This was a most humane and benevolent law, in regard to the poor debtors, not
to be equalled in any legislature.

The Jubilee year was distinguished from the sabbatical year, by the sollowing
ordinances. First, it was a year of general release of purchased servants. Even
such as at the end of their six years services had voluntarily refused to
accept of their freedom, and in consequence had their ears bored Exodus xxi. 6.
in token of perpetual servitude, were nevertheless set free at the Jubilee;
for in the fiftieth year, they were to "proclaim liberty throughout all the
land, unto all the inhabitants thereof Levit. xxv. 10.
."

Secondly, in this year, all the estates that had been sold, were to return to
their former proprietors, or to the families to which they originally belonged:
so that no family could be sunk and ruined, and doomed to perpetual poverty; as
the family estate could not be alienated for more than fifty years This law of
the Jews (says Dr. Jennings) was famous among the Heathens, some of whom copled
after it. Diodorus Siculus says, it was not lawful for the Jews to sell their
inheritances. Diod. Sicul. lib. 40. And Aristotle in his polities, Lib. 2. cap.
7, and lib. 6. cap. 4. says of the Locrians, that they were prohibited by their
laws from selling their ancient possessions.
. The nearer therefore, that the Jubilee was, the less was the value of the
purchase of an estate. Levit. xxv. 16.


These laws, if viewed in a political light, cannot be sufficiently admired:
for they effectually prevented the too great oppression of the poor, as well as
their being liable to perpetual slavery. By this means the rich were also
prevented from accumulating lands upon lands; and a kind of equality was
preserved through all their families. Never was there any people See Jemmings
antiq. B. 3. C. 10. p. 301.
so effectually secured of their liberty and property, as the Israelites were;
for God not only engaged so to protect these invaluable blessings by his
providence, that they should not be taken away from them by others; but also
provided in a particular manner, by this law, that they should not be thrown
away by their own folly; since the property, which every man or family had, in
the original division of the land of Canaan, could not be sold, or any way
alienated for above half a century, at the utmost.

It has already been shown, that exclusive of the humane and beneficent laws,
which took place in the Sabbatical and Jubilee years, in favor of the poor,
the servants, etc. they were not permitted to sow or reap, etc. The question
therefore is, what were they to eat when they were thus deprived of the produce
of their estates every seventh year? The wise lawgiver was fully sensible of
this objection, and therefore provided a full answer to it, "And if ye shall
say, what shall we eat the seventh year? behold, we shall not sow, not gather
in our increase: Then I will command my blessing upon you in the sixth year,
and it shall bring forth fruit for three Leviticus xxv. 20, 21.
years." This promise (and which was faithfully performed, while they on their
part fulfilled the conditions on which it was promised) is an evident
demonstration of the divine institution of this law; for here could be no
counterfeit; no juggle: such extraordinary fruitfulness every sixth year, must
plainly show, that the promise could only be made by the Creator of all things,
the supreme Lord of the whole world. No human legislator, ever durst attempt to
make such a promise; and that for his own credit, the credit of his laws, and
the safety of his nation, which might be greatly endangered, by having a faminc
brought upon the land, in case of failure of the promise; and which it was not
in the power of any mortal to prevent. But in the history of the Hebrews, we
have such a manifest proof of the faithful performance of this promise, that
when the nation did not fulfill the conditions of it on their part, they were
not only punished with famine, See 1 King. xviii. 2. 2 King. vi. 25. viii. and
xxv. 3.
but they were also carried captive into a strange country, and their land lay
waste for seventy years, till it had fulfilled the sabbatical years which they
had not observed; agreeable to what Moses, by the command of God, had
threatened and foretold so many hundred years before it came to pass: Compare
Levit. xxvi. 34 -- 35. with 2 Chronicles. xxxvi. 21. See also Jerem. xxxiv. 8 -- 22.
where you will find how exactly the denunciation of Moses, for the
non-observance of the Sabbatical and Jubilee years, was exactly fulfilled in
every particular. Ought we then any longer to doubt of the divine mission of
Moses?
and which is such an evident demonstration of the divine mission of Moses, as
in my humble opinion cannot be controverted. Let the deep politician, the
consummate statesman, and the grave philosopher that studies the human heart;
who looks into the volume of nature, investigates nature's laws, and deduces
effects from causes; weigh, examine, and search into the minutest detail of the
laws of Moses, and he will be convinced of the divine legislature of Moses.

And, now sir, let us consider your ridiculous assertion, that, "there is no
affirmative evidence that Moses is the author of those books;" page 6.
What! no affirmative evidence, you say! In the first place, does not Moses
himself tell us that he was the author of them? And Moses wrote this law, and
delivered it unto the priests the sons of Levi, which bare the ark of the
covenant of the Lord, and unto all the elders of Israel Deuteronomy. xxxi. 9.
. And it came to pass when Moses had made an end of writing the words of this
law in a book, until they were finished; Deuteronomy. xxxi. 24
" Thus he assures us, that he wrote the whole law, till it was perfectly
complete.

Secondly, as above shown, the precepts contained in the law, were founded on
his bringing the nation out of Egypt; and which have been observed by the whole
nation to this day; from the time of Moses to Joshua: and from him to the time
of the judges; to David and to Solomon; and during the existence of the temple
which the latter built. By all those that were carried captive to Babylon: by
those that returned from thence with Ezra, as also those that staid behind in
Chaldea, For but a few of them returned from Babylon, and those of the poorer
sort.
Assyria, and other eastern provinces: by the Jews that have resided for time
immemorial in Cochin, It is supposed that they were carried there at the
destruction of the first temple. They certainly must have been settled a long
while in the country; for it is near fifteen hundred years since the emperor
Irway Barrimine, granted permission to Joseph Rabin (the prince or governor of
the Jews at Cochin) to wear the five colors, the salutation, riding on horses
or elephants, to convert any of the five nations to his religion, etc. etc.
according to the patent engraved on copper, and preserved by the Jews at
Cochin; a copy of which is now before me. At that time, they were already
pretty numerous there, and seemed to be in great favor; consequently, they
must have been settled there same length of (...) before.
and who had no intercourse with the other Jews, till the Dutch came to trade
there. By the Jews of Spain, who were carried captive there, at the destruction
of the first temple; Abarbanal on the last chapter of 2 Kings.
as Abarbanal observes. By all those Jews that were carried captive at the 01
destruction of the second temple, and dispersed all over the globe. By
Josephus; by the compilers of the Mishna and the Talmud, by that great luminary
Maimonides, who lived in the eleventh century, and in his comment on te Mishna,
drew up the articles of faith of the Jews: they consist of thirteen articles;
three of them have respect to Moses and his law: viz. the seventh, which is the
belief of the great degree of the prophecy of Moses: the eighth is "the belief
that the law is from God; that is," as he observes, "we are to believe ALL the
law which we now have, is the very same law given to Moses; and that he
received it all from the mouth of God, the historical part as well as the
preceptive; and no one else knew of such historical facts, or had any such
source of information; and therefore he was called (...) a scribe; because he
acted as one that wrote from the mouth of another; for which reason, we seldom
or ever find him speaking in his own person, but as one that is copying from a
book, or what another is rehearsing to him," etc. By this, you may also clearly
perceive what little force there is in your pitiful objection, that "the books
cannot be written by Moses, because they are written in the third person." It
is, indeed, so weak, that I am surprised, a person of your sagacity should
adopt it. But when I consider, that almost all your objections are taken from
one infidel writer or another, my wonder is turned into contempt. The ninth, is
"the belief of the immutability of the law." This, fir, is a part of the
confession of faith of the Jews at present: and has always been so, from Moses
to the present hour; and you cannot produce any period from the time of Moses
till now, that it has not been their says: for even the Samaritans, (who never
received but the five books of Moses) the Sadducees, and the Karites, those
enemies to tradition, all held the same. And which also shows the absurdity of
what you assert, that these books were "written by some very ignorant and
stupid pretenders to authorship, several hundred years after the death of
Moses." For at no time whatever, could a spurious history be imposed upon them,
without some one starting up to detect it. It therefore is incumbent on you to
prove at what time it could have been done: for assertions without proof, are
of no weight; especially in a cause of such importance. What! ignorant
pretenders to authorship write the books of Moses? If you were possessed of the
least knowledge of the sacred language, you would easily be able to discern,
that the purity and elegance of the diction, As to his prophetic poem in Deuteronomy.
if we consider the purity of the diction, the grandeur and sublimity of the
sentiments, the force and beauty of the imagery, and the harmony of the
numbers; (being the true sententious style, characteristic of Hebrew poetry) we
shall find, that it has never been surpassed by any of the other prophets; nor
could it even be imitated by any of them.
gives the lie to your assertion. Let any one but compare these books (in the
original) with the writings that are known to have been written some hundred
years after the death of Moses, immediately after their return from Babylon, by
Ezra, etc. and they will be fully convinced of the truth of what I have
advanced: and the futility of what you have asserted.

Besides, at what time could such an innovation take place? at what time did
the nation first submit to this imposition? to be obliged to offer their first
fruits, to give tithes to the priests, the Levites, the poor, the fatherless,
and the widow; to be compelled to leave their habitations three times in a
year, and come from the most distant parts to Jerusalem, (leaving the whole
country to the defense of old men, women and children) and bring free gifts
with them: to let their lands lay waste every seventh, and every fiftieth year;
and thereon to remit all debts, let all purchased servants go free, and all
estates return to their first owners? I say, when could all this have been
introduced? for there was no time from the time of Moses to this hour, when
such an imposture could have been accomplished, without being detected. Is it
to be imagined, that the whole body of the nation should concur in carrying on
such a fraud against themselves, and that there should not be found one among
them, that had either ability or honesty to discover it? Nay, that all Israel,
for upwards of three thousand years, through the several periods of their
commonwealth, the revolutions of empires, and the vicissitudes of time; in
prosperity and adversity; during a long and dreadful exile, dispersion, poverty
and persecution, such as no nation ever suffered; should yet continue to act in
a manner that evinceth the strongest conviction of the divine origin of the
laws of Moses; though, according to your assertion, there is not the least
foundation for such a rational belief? Surely, there are none so credulous as
to be capable of believing such things as these.

It is also well known that other legislators have pretended to divine
inspiration, but they were scarcely believed, even during their lives, and this
belief soon vanished away. But this is not the case in regard to the divine
legation of Moses; No sir, Our ancestors believed it, and their descendants do
so to this day: And not only they, but the greater part of the inhabitants of
this globe: Heathens It must add great weight to the arguments in support of
the authenticity of the Pentateuch, when it is considered, that the great and
leading facts (as Dr Shaw observes in his history and philosophy of Judaism. p.
353.) in the Mosaic history seem to have been known to Pagan writers of the
greatest antiquity, and are handed down in their works, with such evident
resemblance in their features, as must discover the original from which they
were copied, notwithstanding all the artful disguise which their pride made
them use to conceal it. This analogy betwixt scripture history and Heathen
mythology, learned men have traced in a great variety of instances; Some
respecting the creation; and others the flood, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Joseph,
and Moses, etc. See shaw, p. 353. Note.
, Christians and Mahometans, who, though so opposite in their religious
sentiments; agreeing in nothing, but in their hatred and contempt of the
nation; yet, all concur in the belief of the divine mission of Moses. Whence
then this difference, sir? Is it not because imposition vanishes, but truth
stands the test?

And now, Alluding to Mr. Paine's abusive address to the priests. See. p. 25.
Mr. Pain, and ye Deists and Infidels of every description, who have written
with such acrimony, and indecent levity, against the authority of the books of
Moses, what have ye to say? Will ye, with all this mass of evidence against
you, and staring you in the face, still have the assurance to take up your
pens, and continue to impose on the weak, the ignorant and unwary, by
asserting, that the work of the inspired penman is naught but fiction, when it
is as evident as demonstration can make truth appear, that it all is the word
of God. What shadow of pretense have ye now to produce, for continuing the
immoral and blasphemous charge? What have ye still to offer against the pure,
just, moral, humane and truly benevolent religion of Moses? Is there a virtue
that it does not inculcate, or a vice that it does not condemn? In short,
whatever can render a man respectable in his own eyes, and dear to his fellow
creatures: whatever can insure the peace and happiness of society, and make man
happy, both here and hereafter, is there placed in the list of duties.

It is no wonder then to find even Moses himself struck with admiration at the
excellence of these laws; and to hear him break out in transport, thus Deuteronomy.
iv. 8.
"And what nation is there so great, that has statutes and judgments so
righteous, as all this law which I set before you this day."

LETTER V.
SIR,
BEFORE I take leave of the Pentateuch, I shall take notice of another
objection you have made to the books of Moses being the word of God, because,
as you say, it is therein said, "that they (the Israelites) came by stealth
upon whole nations of people, who as the history itself shows, had given them
no offense; that they put all those nations to the sword; that they spared
neither age nor infancy; that they utterly destroyed men, women and children;
that they left not a soul to breathe. The bible tells us, that those
assassinations were done by the express command of God. To believe therefore
the Bible to be true, we must unbelieve all our belief in the moral justice of
God; for wherein could crying or siniling infants offend?" This objection, as
are almost all those that you have brought against the Bible, is not new; it
has been urged by Voltaire, Bolingbroke, Morgan, etc. and often refuted by
several writers; some in one manner; and some in another; whether what I shall
advance on the subject will be more satisfactory, must be left to the opinion
of the candid and judicious reader.

I have already observed, See page 96.
that God called Abraham, and selected him and his family, to be the repository
of the sacred oracles, and to hand down the knowledge of the true worship of
God, and his unity, etc. God therefore promised Abraham to give his posterity
the land of Canaan, with a design to make them a separate people, to preserve
them from the infection of idolatrous principles, which were then so prevalent.
Now, it is well known that the Canaanites, as well as the Egyptians, were deep
sunk in idolatry; and which had so far prevailed among them, that they
sacrificed their children to Moloch: "for every abomination to the Lord, which
he hates, have they done unto their gods; for even their sons and their
daughters have they burnt in fire to their gods." Deuteronomy. xii. 31.
And, these abominable practices, seem in a manner, to have been authorized not
only by custom, but by some command. "After the doings of the land of Egypt
wherein ye dwelt shall ye not do: neither shall ye walk in their ordinances."
Levit. xviii. 3.
This shows that their barbarous rites, were founded on certain laws and
statutes; for this is what the word (...)properly signifies. And, indeed,
nothing less than a pretense to some direction of sacred authority, could
induce them to act so contrary to all natural and moral principles. But by such
pretended laws, they could allow and recommend incestuous The magicians allowed
a man to marry, not only his sister or his daughter, but also his mother; and
it went so far with that sect in the practice that in the sacerdotal tribe, he
that was born of this last and worst sort of incest, was looked upon as the
best qualified for the sacerdotal function: none being esteemed among them more
proper for the highest stations in it, than those that were born of mothers who
conceived them of their own sons. See Prideaux. Connect. Part 1st. B. 4. p.
262, and the authors he quotes.
marriages and the Hence we may see how justly strict the law of Moses was in
regard to unlawful and incestuous marriages, etc. See Lev. xviii. 6. etc.
sacrificing of innocent children. For this excess of vice, we find them
remarkable, as early as the time when the promise of their country was made to
Abraham. Genesis xv. 16. "For the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full."
This being the case, how can we complain if God, after having beheld their
abominable practices for such a space of time, and perceiving no signs of
repentance and reformation among them, should at length punish them with a most
awful severity: and thus, not only put an end to their abounding wickedness,
but also make others, and particularly the Israelites, who were to possess
their country, stand in awe and dread the danger of imitating them in their
abominations; as Moses says, Levit. xviii. 24 -- 25 -- 28.
"Defile not ye yourselves in any of these things; for in all these the nations
are defiled which I cast out before you. And the land is defiled: therefore I
do visit the iniquity thereof upon it, and the land itself vomiteth our her
inhabitants. Ye shall therefore keep my statutes and my judgments, and shall
not commit any of these abominations; that the land spew not you out also, when
ye defile it, as it spewed out the nations that were before you."

Now, if considered in this light, the extirpation of those nations, must
appear to be no more than a just visitation of the divine displeasure, for
their atrocious wickedness. The Israelites are therefore to be considered, in
this matter, as no more than the instruments of the divine vengeance. And why
might not Jehovah, the bestower, and therefore the sovereign of life, with
equal justice cut off these sinful nations and their posterity, by the
intervention of human agents, as destroy them by an earthquake, inundation,
fire from heaven, famine, pestilence, or any similar judgment: in which case,
smiling and crying infants must also have equally suffered? Had God then
thought proper to have destroyed them, thus we should have revered, without
daring to blame, such a tremendous display of his justice and power: where
then, I fain would ask, is the material difference? In either case, his conduct
is equally justifiable.

But that which I would principally insist upon, is, that the Israclites were
not absolutely commanded to extirpate the Cannanites: and for the better
understanding of which, it is necessary to take notice of a part I do not mean
to treat here of the whole of the military laws of the Jews, (as having
reserved that for the future publication, already mentioned in these letters,
but only of such part as serves to illustrate the question.
of the military laws of the Hebrews: which is as follows. "When thou come
nigh unto a city to fight against it, then proclaim peace unto it. And it shall
be, if it make thee answer of peace, and open unto thee, then shall it be that
all the people that is found therein, shall be tributaries unto thee, and they
shall serve thee. And if it will make no peace with thee, but will make war
against thee, then shall thou besiege it: And when the Lord thy God has
delivered it into thine hands, thou shall smite every male thereof with the
edge of the sword. But the women, and the little ones, and the cattle, and all
that is in the city, even all the spoil thereof, shall thou take unto thyself:
and thou shall eat the spoil of thine enemies, which the Lord thy God has
given thee. Thus shall thou do unto all the cities which are very far off from
thee, which are not of the cities of these nations. But of the cities of these
people, which the Lord thy God does give thee for an inheritance: thou shall
save alive nothing that breaths: But thou shall utterly destroy them, namely,
the Hittites, and the Amorites, the Canaanites, and the Perrizites, the
Hivites, and the Jebusites, as the Lord thy God has commanded thee Deuteronomy. xx.
10 -- 15.
." When this passage is duly considered, we shall find, that, first, they were
obliged to send them an offer of peace: for this law was general, as "When thou
go forth to battle against thine enemies Ibid. 1.
, etc. When thou come nigh unto a city to fight against." etc. There was no
distinction in this case; it did not matter, whether they were far or near, in
regard to the proclamation of peace: for thus is it understood by all our
Rabbis, When I mention the Rabbis, I wish to be understood, as speaking of
the ancient Mishnical doctors, the Talmudists, etc. who flourished after the
Babylonish captivity, during the time of the second temple, etc.
who observe, that they were obliged to offer peace to the seven nations, as
did Moses to Sihon: (Numb. xxi. 21.) and if they answered peace; then were they
to become tributary, and be permitted to remain in the country on condition of
their renouncing idolatry, and observing the seven precepts of the sons of
Noah. These precepts are as follows: First, not to commit idolatry. Second, Not
to blaspheme, but to worship the true God. Third, to appoint and constitute
just and upright judges; that justice may be impartially administered to (...)
Fourth, not to commit incest. Fifth, Not to commit murder. Smith, Not to rob,
or steal, etc. Seventh, Not to eat a member of any living creature: that is,
the flesh of any beast taken from it when it was alive.
The real distinction therefore between these, was this, that if the nations
who were far off, refused to make peace, they were to kill all the males; that
is, all those that bore arms, for then every man was a soldier; and they were
not allowed to kill any but those that opposed them, as already mentioned. p.
52.
It therefore must be observed, that this is a permission, not an order given:
they were allowed to kill those that opposed them, and none This was a proper
lesson of humanity, fitted to those barbarous times, and given to our fathers,
to oblige them to abstain from those shocking practices which all nations then
indulged themselves in: and which, in later times, the most polished nations,
the Persians, the Greeks, and the Romans, etc. under kings, and commanders most
famed for gentleness and benevolence practiced; as will be shown at large, in
treating of all the precepts of the Mosaical law, in the future publication
already mentioned.
else: and therefore the women and children were to be preserved alive. But, if
any of the cities of the seven nations refused to make peace with them, then
they were not to save alive any thing that breaths: and the reason is
immediately given; "that they teach you not to do after all their abominations,
which they have done unto their gods, so should ye sin against the Lord your
God." Deuteronomy. xx. 18.


But if they were willing to make peace Israel was obliged to make peace with
either of them: whether those that were far off; or those that were near; all
were equal in this particular. And therefore our rabbis say, that upon
Joshua's entering the land of promise, he published three proclamations; first,
"that those inclined to make peace, should have peace granted to them. Second,
those that intended to war, should have war. And third, those that wished to
depart, might freely depart." Hence it is manifest that they were obliged to
offer them peace: and which is plain, from Josh. xi. 19-20. "There was not a
city which made peace with the children of Israel, save the Hivites, the
inhabitants of Gibeon: all other they took in battle. For it was of the Lord to
harden their hearts that they should come against Israel in battle, that he
might destroy them utterly, and that they might have no favor, but that he
might destroy them, as the Lord commanded Moses." And which, plainly implies,
that if they had not been so obstinate, as to engage in a war with the
Israelites, and to appear in arms against them, but had repented, and submitted
their proposals, they would have been saved, instead of being put to death;
consistent with the divine command concerning their excision. If therefore the
Canaanites met with destruction from the victorious sword of the Israelites,
they had none but themselves to blame. By complying with the reasonable terms
offered to them, it was in their power to prevent it.

I am, however, aware that the case of the Gibeonites may be urged as an
exception to the position here laid down: as we find the Israelites expressing
themselves in the following terms to them, "Peradventure ye dwell among us; and
how shall we make a league with Josh. ix. 7
you?" By which, it would appear at first view, that they could not make peace
with any of those nations: but this objection will instantly vanish, when the
exact meaning of the words made use of, by the Gibeonites, is clearly
understood: for they did not simply ask for peace, but said, "now therefore
make ye a league with Josh. 6.
us." That is, as the Israclites understood it, to treat them as confederates,
as allies; to admit them to a league of equal right and privilege, such as one
independent state enters into with another. And which the Israelites could by
no means comply with; because they were so often commanded not to make 2
covenant with them, lest it should be a snare to them; (see Exodus xxiii. 34.
xxxiv. 12 -- 15. and Deuteronomy. vii. 2.) they therefore said, how can I make a
league with you, seeing it is so strictly forbidden to make a covenant with any
of these nations; although we are permitted to let them live, on their asking
for peace, and, submitting to the conditions annexed thereto: viz. the
renouncing all idol worship and becoming tributary. This is manifest from the
manner in which they behaved to the Gibeonites, when they found that they were
of the seven nations; for otherwise, no oath could have been binding on the
Israelites, (much less one obtained by fraud) to oblige them to violate the
command of God, in suffering those to live that he had doomed to die. This may
also be farther proved from the lenity shown to the inhabitants of Gezer;
Joshua xvi.
to Rahab, vi, 22.
and to the family in Bethel: Judge. i. 26.
from all which, it is demonstrable, that if the Canaanites had repented, and
submitted to renounce all their idol worship, and become tributary, they would
not have been cut off. But their abominable and atrocious wickedness was the
only, and sole cause of their excision: and clearly shows the futility of your
objection.

I am, etc.

LETTER VI.
SIR,
YOU observe (p. 18), "I proceed to the book of Joshua, and to show that Joshua
is not the author of that book, and that it is anonymous, and without
authority." I shall not spend my time to show how unconnected your conclusion
is with your premises, as the learned bishop of Landaff has clearly pointed out
the fallacy of your argument, by showing that a book may be anonymous, and yet
not be without authority. I, therefore, do not mean to contend with you
concerning Joshua's writing the book that bears his name, because I am
convinced he did not write it: for it is no where said that he wrote it, as is
testified of Moses (as above mentioned, page 121 -- 122): but only after Joshua
had delivered his exhortation, it says Josh. xxiv. 2
, "And Joshua wrote these words in the book of the law of God, and took a great
stone," etc. If then, he had written the whole book, it would also have been
mentioned; I, therefore, am of opinion, with the learned Abarbanal (See his
preface to Joshua), that the prophet Samuel wrote the books of Joshua (except
the part which Joshua wrote himself), Judges, Ruth, and a part of the book that
bears his name; and which was finished by Nathan the prophet, and Gad the seer
(as mentioned 1 Chronicles. xxix. 29.); but all this does not deduct from their
authenticity, or invalidate their authority in the least: as even on this
scheme they were written by the prophets; and are very properly called the word
of God, from the words above quoted; where what Joshua wrote, is said to be
written in the law of God: and also because they direct us to the true worship
of God, by clearly pointing out to us the merciful dealings of God toward
Israel; and which is the great end and purpose for which they were designed;
for the principal end of the book of Joshua, is to testify that all promises
which God made to our ancestors Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, as recorded in the
law of God, by the hands of Moses, concerning the conquest and possession of
the land, were all fully accomplished; and of which Joshua himself bare witness
in his public exhortation to Israel, in his old age, "And behold, this day I am
going the way of all the earth: and ye know in all your hearts, and in all your
souls, that not one thing has failed of all the good things which the Lord
your God spoke concerning you; all are come to pass unto you, and not one thing
has failed thereof." Josh. xx^i 14.
And which was a manifest proof of the divine mission of Moses; as every thing
that he had predicted was fully accomplished. And which must undoubtedly have
made a great impression on their minds, by convincing them of the omnipotent
power of divine providence; and thus induce them strictly to adhere to the
worship of the true God; and to which the admonition of Joshua also greatly
tended, by placing before them the dreadful consequence of disobedience,
"Therefore it shall come to pass, that as all the good things are come upon
you, which the Lord your God promised you; so shall the Lord bring upon you all
the evil things, until he have destroyed you from off this good land which the
Lord your God has given you." Josh. xxiii. 15.
And the good effects of all this, may be easily perceived; first, in the
affair of the altar raised by the children of Reuben and Gad, Ibid. xxii. 10 --
34.
etc. wherein it is shown how tenacious they were of adhering to God's worship;
and how fearful of having any thing among them, that appeared like idolatry;
and secondly, by what is recorded of them in the 31st verse of the last chapter
of the book of Joshua, "And Israel served the Lord all the days of Joshua, and
all the days of the elders that outlived Joshua and which had known all the
works of the Lord, that he had done for Israel."

This leads me to take notice of what you are merrily pleased to call, the
"tale of the sun standing still upon Mount Gibeon, and the moon in the valley
of Ajalon," Page 20.
and which you farther say, "is one of those fables that detects itself. Such a
circumstance could not have happened without being known all over the world.
Whereas, there is not a nation that knows any thing about it." But how should
they, when it is well known, that there is not a nation in the world whose
annals reach this era by some hundred years? And yet, my good friend, it will
perhaps appear that you are mistaken as to the fact, for the same supernatural
phenomenon is recorded in the ancient Chinese annals, to have happened and
been observed there, in the reign of their 8th monarch You: though according to
their fabulous manner, they say it lasted ten days. (Anc. Univ. Hist. Vol. 18.
p. 107.) To this may also be added what Herodotus says, the Egyptian priests
told him; viz. that the sun had four times deviated from his course, having
twice risen where he uniformly goes down, and twice gone down where he
uniformly rises: by which you may perceive, that the Egyptians had also a
confused tradition concerning the two miracles respecting the sun, as recorded
in scripture.

You say, "as a poetical figure, the whole is well enough;" Page 20.
but although there are some commentators who may view it in this light; and
that perhaps for the reason alleged by a certain Christian writer, who says,
"but because there seems, to my apprehension at least, no sufficient reason for
such supernatural appearance in this instance:" See Wakefield's reply to the
second part of the Age of Reason, p. 27 -- 28.
But if duly considered, it will appear that it was extremely necessary, at
this juncture, as being highly conducive in promoting the grand design; I mean,
the establishment of the true religion, and the extirpation of Idolatry: and in
which light, we must also view the dividing of the river Jordan, and the
casting of hail stones from heaven upon the Canaanites, etc. inasmuch as they
all tended to fill the nations with astonishment, Josh. v. 1.
and to imprint on their minds, Ibid. ix. 9.
as well as those of the Israelites, the highest conceptions of the majesty and
greatness of the Lord Jehovah: and thus make them sensible of the sin and folly
of trusting in any other god but him: for it is well known that at this time
all nations had their several tutelar deities, to whose protection they
committed themselves and their country, and to whose assistance 2 Kings xvii.
26. xviii. 33. and xix. 12.
they ascribed their successes in war. Now, the principal deities which the
Canaanites worshipped, were the sin, That Baal denoted the sun, I have shown at
large, in Lingua Sacra, Radix (...).
moon, and the heavens, or air. To convince them then, that the gods in whom
they trusted were entirely subject to the will of the God of Israel; and at the
same time to punish them for the false worship they paid to them, "the Lord
cast down great hail stones from heaven (or the air) upon them unto Azekah;"
and then stopped the two great luminaries in their course. And therefore it
says, "in the sight of all Israel," that all Israel might receive instruction
from it, and be deterred from falling into the like idolatry: and no doubt it
was to this in a great measure; that they showed their dread and detestation of
it, in the affair of the Reubenites, etc. building the altar; as above
mentioned. (page 150) Hence it is manifest, that this miracle is to be
considered, as a link in the great chain of miracles, began by Moses, to
convince and punish the nations, as well as to wean the Israelites from that
idolatry, to which they were so prone.

How that the miracle was performed, it is impossible for us to explain;
neither do I think it at all necessary; it is sufficient, as we have shown,
that the end it was intended for was worthy of God. And in testimony of the
reality of the miracle, we find that, when the prophet Habakkuk, in his Habak.
iii. 10 -- 13.
prayer for the preservation of the nation, in this long and dreadful
captivity, recounted all the miracles and wonders which God performed for
Israel when he brought them out of Egypt: he likewise enumerated all those
performed in the conquest of Canaan: "The mountains saw thee and they trembled:
the overflowing of waters passed away: the deep uttered its voice, and lifted
up its hands on high. The sun and the moon stood still in their habitation: by
the light of thine arrows they went, and by the brightness of thy glittering
spear. In thine indignation did thou march through the land; in thy wrath
did thou tread Heb. Thresh.
the nations. Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people, even for the
salvation of thine anointed." By the mountains trembling, he meant the kings of
Canaan, who trembled, and were in pangs: and thus says Moses in his song: Exodus
xv. 15 -- 16.
"All the inhabitants of Canaan shall melt away. Fear and dread shall fall upon
them;" the overflowing of the waters denotes the streams when Jordan was
divided: and the deep uttering its voice, denotes the fame of that miracle
through all the land of Canaan: Josh. v. 1 etc.
the lifting up of its hands on high, denotes that the lower streams of Jordan,
whose banks were then overflowed, Josh. iii. 15.
passed away toward the Red Sea, whilst the upper waves stood on an heap. The
sun and moon standing still in their habitation, requires no explanation: the
arrows and glittering spear, denote the instruments of destruction which God
employed; the great hail stones; and which may be metaphorically called his
arrows and spear; and by whose light the Israelites walked: thus did God, in
wrath and indignation, on account of the great and abominable wickedness of the
Canaanites, march through the land, and crushed them, as corn is by the drag;
and which was, when he went forth for the salvation of his people. Thus we see
the prophet describing in sublime figurative language, all the miracles
performed in the conquest of Canaan; amongst which none is so plain and clear
as this of the sun and moon standing still; and which is an evident proof of
the truth thereof: especially, when it is considered, that the subject of the
prophet's prayer was for the preservation of the nation in this captivity,
which God informed him of upwards of six hundred years before it took place.

There is also another proof of the reality of this miracle; which is the
appeal that the author of the book of Joshua makes to the book of Jasher, as a
testimony of the fact which he was then recording, "Is not this written in the
book of Jasher?" Hence it is manifest, that the book commonly called the book
of Jasher, existed, and was well known at the time the book of Joshua was
written: and pray, sir, what book do you think this was? Why, none other than
the law of Moses. I see you are surprised; but hold, sir, I will presently
explain this to you. The word in the Hebrew (with which, I judge, you are
totally unacquainted, though so highly requisite in the task you have
undertaken), is (...) Hayashar; and which, according to the rules of Hebrew
grammar, is a noun substantive common, and not a noun substantive proper; as,
in the latter case, the (...) he notificative, which denotes the article the,
could not have obtained; (See Lingua Sacra, Vol. Is It. p. 109. etc.) for which
reason, it ought properly to have been translated the righteous, not Jasher;
and it would be nonsense to say the Jasher. The writer, therefore, when
recording the miracle, according to the idiom and phraseology of the language
in which he was writing, expresses himself thus, "Is not this written in the
book of the righteous? i. e. in the law of the righteous God. Has not this been
predicted in that righteous book? Yes, most certainly. But, perhaps you may
ask, where? Be patient, and I will tell you. When Moses was blessing Israel
before his death, he told them of the happiness they were to enjoy in the land,
and that they should atchieve the conquest thereof by the especial miraculous
assistance of the God of Israel; he expressed himself in this manner Deuteronomy.
xxxiii. 26.
, "There is none like unto the God of Jeshurun, who rides upon the heaven in
thy help, and his excellency is on the skies. Which is the habitation of the
eternal God, and underneath are the everlasting arms: and he shall thrust out
the enemy before thee, and shall say destroy them." By this sublime figurative
language, the prophet foretold the destruction of their enemies in the land of
Canaan; and which should be, by the power of him who rides above the heavens:
who guides all by his omnipotent power: the mover of the heavens: who only is
able to stop the heavenly luminaries in their course, "till the people had
avenged themselves of their enemies. Josh. x. 13.
Agreeable to what is here written, "And shall say, destroy them." And the
consequence of this will be, that "Israel shall then dwell in safety alone,
according to the form of the blessing of Jacob, on a land of corn and wine,
also his heaven shall drop dew."

He then concludes, "Happy art thou O Israel! Who is like unto thee, O people
Alluding to Genesis xxvii. 28.
saved by the Lord, the shield of thy lielp, and who is the sword of thine
excellency! and thine enemies shall be found liars unto thee, and thou shall
tread upon their high places." In the conquest of Canaan, it may well be said,
that the Lord was the shield of their help, and the sword of their excellency.
The Gibeonites, a part of their enemies, were found liars to them, by
pretending that they came from a far country, when they dwelt in the land: and
the treading on their high places, denoted the dastruction of the five kings in
this battle, on whose necks Joshua commanded his captains to tread, as is said,
Josh. x. 24 -- 25.
"Joshua called for all the men of Israel, and said unto the captains of the
men of war which went with him, Come near, put your feet upon the necks of
these kings: for thus shall the Lord do to all your enemies against whom ye
fight." In this sense the Chaldee paraphrast Onkelas, who lived in the first
century, also understands it. And the Chaldee paraphrast Jonathan, who lived
near an hundred years before the destruction of the second temple; likewise
under stood the roun (...) in the sense here given; for he translates it (...)
(...) the book of the law.
I shall give his translation in his own words, (...) And thou shall tread on
the joints of the necks of their kings. See also Jarchi, Abarb. etc.

Thus is the reality of this miracle not only confirmed, but the prediction of
Moses, is also fully verified; and the existence of the law of Moses at that
time, clearly preved: as it would have been madness in the author, to have
appealed in proof of his veracity, to a book that never yet had existence, or
that was not well known in the nation, as an authentic book.

The end of the other three books, viz. Judges, Samuel, and Kings is also to
inform us of the particular providence of God; by showing, that in the days of
the Judges, as well as those of the kings, the nation was exceedingly wicked;
forsaking the true worship of God, and committing idolatry, etc. for which they
were delivered into the hands of their enemies; but when they sincerely
repented, and returned to God, their enemies fell before them; and they enjoyed
the greatest prosperity and happiness that possibly could be; as in the reigns
of David and Solomon: all which, was a manifest proof of the superintendance of
divine providence, and of the truth of what Moses had told them, concerning the
reward and punishment, which they were to expect in case of obedience or
disobedience: and which was fully accomplished in every particular; till that,
for the great wickedness of the nation, and their kings, they were destroyed
from off the goodly land, as Joshua had also told them; and as is recorded in
those books: and which is a demonstrable proof of their authority.

As to the difference between the books of Kings and Chronicles, I must tell
you, that they have been noticed by several Hebrew commentators, and clearly
accounted for by that great luminary, the learned Abarbanal, as he has shown,
that there is nothing contradictory in the different books, but that each
writer, had a different purpose in view; and which easily accounts for the
omissions in one book, though related in the other: but as it would swell these
letters, (which already exceed the limits I first intended) to the bulk of a
large volume, I must omit entering into the explanation at present, and reserve
it for my commentary on the Old Testament.

I should indeed extend these letters to a length troublesome to myself, and
tiresome to the reader, were I minutely to answer every objection you have
made, and to rectify the numberless errors into which you have fallen: I
therefore did not intend to have said any more on the subject of these four
books; but the ridicule you have made use of in a note, on the story of the
angel appearing to Joshua, deserves the severest reprehensions; for that being
so ignorant of sacred literature, you should thus profanely jest, with what you
do not in the least understand, as I shall plainly show.

That person, whoever he be, that attempts to criticize on scripture, ought not
only to have a great knowledge of the Hebrew, but also a thorough acquaintance
with the idiom and phraseology of the sacred language, so different from all
others: or he will certainly fail in the attempt, and render himself ridiculous
in the eyes of every discerning person, and justly merit their contempt. Of the
truth of this observation, there cannot be a greater, than will appear in the
explanation of the subject in question. Before I proceed to the explanation, it
is necessary to enquire why Joshua, who was the commander in chief, as well as
the ruler of the nation, when he saw a man, for the text does not say an angel,
at a distance, should go up to him himself, and ask him, art thou for us, or
for our adversaries? as this ought to have been done by some of the troops, who
ought to have gone and seized him and brought him to Joshua, and not Joshua
have gone to him, as it might perhaps have been his intention, to assassinate
the commander in chief; it therefore is something uncommon, that Joshua, who
was ninety three years old, should thus expose himself to danger. But the
solution of this is, that as the text says, "And it came to pass when Joshua
was by Jericho," Josh. v. 13.
that is, he was considering, how and by what means he should take Jericho, as
it was so strongly fortified; "he lift up his eyes, and looked, and behold
there stood a man over against him," by the word (...) opposite him, we are to
understand that the man was visible to Joshua only Thus Daniel says, "And I
Daniel alone saw the vision: for the men that were with me saw not the vision."
Dan. x. 7. See also viii. 15. and x. 16.
; and, therefore, he immediately knew that it was an angel, and not a human
person, for which reason, he went to him in person; and seeing him with a drawn
sword in his hand, the ensign of destruction, he asked him, " art thou for us,
or for our adversaries? Have thou thy sword drawn to assist us, or to afflict
us in favor of the enemy? To which he answered, "Nay, but as captain of the
host of the Lord am I now come." Think not, Joshua, that you are the captain of
the Lord's host (i. e. Israel) in this business, and therefore do challenge,
me, whether I am for you or your enemies: No; it is not so: but I am
(appointed) the captain of the host of the Lord; and for that reason am I now
come. When Joshua heard this, he "fell on his face to the earth, and did
obeisance" to him as his superior But not as an act of adoration, as you
erroneously assert; owing to your ignorance, of the sacred Language: for the
verb (...) denotes to, how down and make obeisance, etc. as well as to worship;
numerous examples of which occur in scripture, according to the manners of the
eastern nations.
, "and said unto him, what says my lord Another eastern term of honor,
frequently met with in the Bible.
unto his servant?" For as you are the captain, it is my duty to pay obedience
to your commands. The angel then informed him of the end and purpose for which
he came; which was to inform him that Jericho was not to be taken by any human
means; and therefore he said unto him, "Loose thy shoe from off thy foot, for
the place whereon thou stand is holy." That is, do not busy yourself in
forming schemes for the taking of the city, because it can only be taken in a
supernatural manuer. And thus we find it said to Moses, when he turned aside to
see why the bush was not consumed, "put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for
the place whereon thou stand," etc. Do not attempt to account for this, on
the principles of nature; for it is not a natural cause, but a supernatural
one; For the bush was an emblem of the low degraded state of the nation in
Egypt; as was its burning of their misery; but its not being consumed was to
show that their bondage, etc was not a natural or accidental cause; but solely
by God's appointment to their ancestor Abraham; and therefore, as they were
under the immediate care of his providence; they could not be destroyed,
although so sorely oppressed. And which has been the case with the nation to
this day: as shown at large in vol. 1st of my Dissertations on the Prophecies.
page 77, etc.
and which was denoted by God's calling the place The Hebrew noun (...) place,
is used figuratively to denote contemplation, intellectual view, etc. as in
Exodus xxxiii. 21. See Maim. in Morch Nevuchim. part 1st. chap. viii.
holy. When, therefore, Joshua heard this of the angel, it says, "And Joshua
did so." Not that he pulled his shoe off, but that he immediately desisted from
attempting to reduce it by any stratagem of war; and, therefore, it says, "Now
Jericho was straightly shut up, none went out, and none came in." It was not to
be taken by any human power; and, therefore, the word of God came immediately
unto Joshua, to inform him, that though it could not be reduced by any human
force, yet, "I have given into thy hand Jericho, and the kings thereof." etc.
Hence the cause of the appearance of the angel is manifest: for as Joshua, who
was just going to engage in a war with so many nations, and finding the first
city that he was going to attack so strongly fortified, he was naturally much
taken up in thought, to find out the means of reducing it; as well knowing that
a miscarriage in the first onset, might lead to the most dreadful consequences,
even the entire destruction of the whole nation; as he himself pathetically
expresses it, on the failure of their attempt against Ai Joshua vii. 7 -- 10.
; the angel, therefore, came to inform him, that he had no occasion to employ
any human force or stratagems of war to reduce Jericho, but only to obey the
command of God in all things; and to ascribe the glory of his conquests to the
author of them, the Lord of hosts. Thus encouraging him to trust solely in God,
in the arduous business he was then employed in; and which we find, was
actually the case in the conquest of the land of Canaan. As to your low wit
about pulling off the shoe it no doubt originated in your ignorance, as you
ought to have known that this rite was an indication of reverence for the
divine presence, when all human and worldly thoughts ought to be set aside: for
which reason, the priests always officiated barefooted in the temple.

The two books of Ezra and Nehemiah you allow to be genuine books, as being
written by the authors whose name they bear, giving an account of the return of
the Jews from the Babylonish captivity, about four hundred and fifteen years
before the christian era; but then you observe, p. 35.
"Those accounts are nothing to us, nor to any other person, unless it be to
the Jews, as a part of the history of their nation: and there is just as much
of the word of God in those books, as there is in any of the histories of
France, or Rapin's history of England." Whatever these books may be to you, or
any other deist or infidel, they are of the highest importance to us as Jews;
and not only to us, but likewise to all who believe the Old Testament to be the
word of God; as far as the full completion of prophecy is a proof of the truth
of revelation. The prophet Jeremiah said, Jerem. xxix. 10.
"For thus says the Lord, surely when seventy years have been completed at
Babylon, I will visit you, and I will perform toward you my good promise, in
bringing you again to to this place." Now, the very first verse of the book of
Ezra, which you allow to be a genuine book, proves the full completion of this
prophecy, so contrary to all human foresight. "Now in the first year of Cyrus
king of Persia, that the word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah might be
fulfilled; the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus," etc. Surely you cannot say
this is nothing to us; I mean to you and me: I as a true believer, you as an
unbeliever; because it is perfectly decisive in the cause at issue between us;
for if the book of Ezra, which you allow to be a genuine book, proves that
Jeremiah was a true prophet, there is an end of all dispute between us; because
here is a demonstration of the truth of divine revelation, admitted by
yourself, as you allow the genuineness of the book that records the completion
of the prophecy Nay, these books not only confirm the truth of Jeremiah's
prophecy, but likewise prove the authenticity of the books of Moses, Joshua,
Judges, Kings, and Chronicles; all which are referred to by Ezra and Nehemiah,
as containing the religion, laws and history of the Jewish nation, from Abraham
to that very time. See Ezra, chap. ix. and x. and Nehem, Chap. iii -- ix. and x.
Of this, it appears to me, you was fully sensible; and therefore wished to
invalidate the testimony of those books, by giving the authors a side blow:
observing, Page 35.
"But even in masters of historical record, neither of those writers are to be
depended upon." As a proof of which you tell us, that the total amount of the
number of those who returned from Babylon, does not agree with the several
particulars. But is it to be supposed that a man of Ezra's acknowledged
abilities, should not be able to give us the sum total of forty-two particular
sums? Neither is it usual for impostors to make such glaring blunders, that
every school boy may detect. But the truth of the matter is, as Jarchi
observes, that "those above mentioned in the particulars, were of the tribe of
Judah and Benjamin, and the priests; and the difference in the sum total, was
made up of those of the other tribes." See Jarchi in Loc.
Thus also it is explained in Seder Onglam.

You seem to speak well of the book of Job Page 37 -- 38.
, but at the same time attempt to prove it a gentile book, by saying, "I have
seen the opinion of two Hebrew commentators, Aben Ezra and Spinosa, upon this
subject; they both say that the book carries no internal evidence of being an
Hebrew book; that the genius of the composition, and the drama of the piece,
are not Hebrew, that it has been translated from another language into Hebrew,
and that the author of the book was a gentile; that the character represented
under the name of satan (which is the first and only time this is mentioned in
the Bible) does not correspond to any Hebrew idea." But where, sir, did you see
all this? for in the first place, Spinosa never was admitted an Hebrew
commentator; all we know of him is, that he wrote several tracts, and after
different changes, at length became an atheist. As to Aben Ezra, he only says,
on verse 11 of chapter second. "And our Rabbis of blessed memory say, that
Moses wrote the book of Job: but I am inclined (to think) that is a translated
book; and therefore it is difficult to explain, as are all translated books."
But not a word does he say, of its being a a gentile book; nay, in his preface
to this book, he seems to acknowledge that it was written by Moses, or at least
some other prophet; for there he says, "And of the righteous Job, the prophet
testifies that he was singularly righteous in his generation; and that his
sufferings were not for any evil he had committed," etc. What you observe
concerning satan, is borrowed from your master Voltaire; who says, it is a
Chaldean word, and which proves you both to be ignorant of the Hebrew: The
Chaldea word for an adversary is not (...) with sin, but (...) with samech.
for (...) is incontestably an Hebrew noun, and denotes an adversary: an
accuser: in which sense, we find it used by Moses, Numb. xxii. 22. "And the
angel of the Lord stood in the way, (...) for an adversary against him." See
also verse 32. Thus also 1 King. v. 4. (...) There was no adversary. The Plur.
affix. occurs in Psalm. cix. 20. (...) The reward of mine adversaries. The verb
also occurs in the same Psalm ver. 4. (...) For my love they bate me. All
which, plainly shows the fallacy of what you have advanced: and what truth
there is in your assertion.

You also observe, p. 38.
"that the book shows itself to be the production of a mind cultivated in
science," And was not Moses, to whom this book is ascribed, a man of science?
Is it not allowed on all hands, that Moses was instructed in all the learning
of the Egyptians, who were well acquainted with arts and sciences, and who had
addicted themselves to the study of astronomy Anc. Univ. Hist. vol. Is It. p. 246.
in the earliest ages? But you say, "The astronomical names, Pleiades, Orion
and Arcturus, are Greek, and not Hebrew names; and as it does not appear from
any thing that is to be found in the Bible, that the Jews knew any thing of
astronomy, or that they studied it, they had no translation for those names in
their own language, but adopted the names as they found them in the Poem Page
38.
." Now it is manifest from the Bible, that the Jews were acquainted with
astronomy, and studied it; See Exodus xii. 2. "This month shall be unto you the
beginning of months: it shall be the first month of the year to you." As their
months were from thenceforward to be lunar months, their year of course fell
short of the solar year, eleven days, some sew hours and minutes, and as they
were commanded to celebrate the passover in the month Aviv, Exodus xxiii. 15.
xxxiv. 11 and Deuteronomy. xvi. 5.
and which should be in the vernal equinox; they consequently were obliged to
make intercalations; as otherwise, the feast would be anticipated eleven days
every year; so that in the space of thirty three years, it would be carried
backward through all the seasons of the year, as is the case in Turkey; it
therefore is plain, that when Moses appointed this sort of year, they were
obliged to study astronomy. See what your favorite Hebrew commentator, Aben
Ezra, says on the subject, Exodus xii. 9. etc. See also Abarb. and R. Levi Ben
Gershom, in Loc.

You assert that the names of the constellations Pleiades, Orion, and Arcturus,
are Greek names; but did you ever consult the original? if you had, you would
have found that the names of the constellations mentioned in Job, are as unlike
the Greek names which stand in the common translation (the only one you are
able to read) as possibly can be: for the word Arcturus, is my Osh, that
rendered Orion is (...) In Isaith xiii. 10. we meet with (...) And their
constellations. And some think that (...) keesel denotes scorpion. See Jarchi,
Aben Ezra, Kimchi, and Abarbanal, Ibid. and Lingua Sacra, Radix (...).
keesel, and that rendered Pleiades is (...) kee^^a. By this, the commonest
reader, and the meanest capacity may plainly see, how unfounded your objection
is, and with what hesitation they ought to admit any of your statements. The
preceding piece of false criticism, may be attributed to your ignorance; but to
what shall we attribute what follows: "We know nothing of what the ancient
gentile world (as it is called) was before the time of the Jews, whose practice
has been to calumniate and blacken the character of all other nations;" etc. --
It appears to have been their (the heathen) custom to personify both virtue and
vice, by statues and images, as is done nowadays, both by statuary and by
painting; but it does not follow from this, that they worshipped them any more
than we do." Is not this curious apology for the heathen's idolatry, made with
a view to blacken and calumniate the character of the Jews, and their sacred
books, because these books clearly show that they did worship them? See the
different accounts given in those books of the abominable worship of the
ancient Egyptians, Babylonians, etc. But believe not those books; read profane
authors (as they are called), and you will find that the worship of images was
universal. Did not the Sabians worship images Anciently all the idolatry of the
world was divided between two sects: viz. the worshippers of images, who were
called the Sabians, and the worshippers of fire, who were called the Magians.
See Maim. in Moreh Nevuchim.
? Did not the Romans worship the Gods? Did not the Grecians worship images? Did
not the Ephesians worship the great goddess. Diana? In short, there was not an
ancient nation that was not guilty of idolatry, either by image worship, or
that of the heavenly bodies, etc.

Of the Psalms, you say Page 40.
, "that some are moral, others are very revengeful. -- It is, however; an
error; or an imposition to call them the psalms of David; they are a
collection, as song-books are nowadays." But had you been in the least
acquainted with the writings of the Hebrews, whose books you have attempted to
criticize with such asperity, you would have known that they held that David
did not compose the whole of Psalms, as some are inserted therein that were
composed by Adam, Melchisedeck, Abraham, Moses, Heaman, Jeduthun, Asaph, and
the three sons of Korab This is the opinion of all the ancient Rabbis.
, but they are called the Psalms of David, because he composed the major part
of them; and they are wonderfully instructive, as being every where full of the
praises of God, the remembrance of his loving kindness to himself, as also to
the nation; besides moral precepts, and such sentiments as are adapted to make
a man good and happy in every station of life.

But why did you not consult the Hebrew commentator Aben Ezra on the subject?
If you had, you would have found that in his preface to Psalms, he is decidedly
of opinion that the Psalms are not a collection of songs, as you foolishly
assert; but sacred hymns; several of which are prophetical; (as I shall show at
large in my Dissertations on the Prophecies, the second Volume of which is just
published) and that they all were written by (...) the inspiration Thus
also-says Maim. Moreh Nevuchim, part 2d. chap. xlv. See also Lingua Sacra, life
of David, in Radix (...).
of the holy spirit: and that David was a prophet. How you, who are such a
minute enquirer after truth, came to overlook this, which would have prevented
your exposing yourself to ridicule, I know not; but if it was owing to your not
finding in the writings of your infidel masters any traces of it, I really pity
you; because your own ignorance utterly precludes you from reaping any
advantage from the writings of such an eminent commentator, (as his works have
never been translated into our venacular tongue) especially, as you seem to
have a great deference for his opinion: and which must certainly be a very
great misfortune to you, as it exposes you to commit such egregious blunders,
as must render you truly contemptible.

The Proverbs of Solomon, you esteem a jest book, but this is nothing
extraordinary; for if the Psalms of David is esteemed by you a song book, why
may not Proverbs be a jest book? However, if you had consulted Aben Ezra on the
subject, he would have taught you better. He would have taught you, that "this
part For he divides the book into four parts; and is here speaking of the first
part.
is admonitory; and acquaints us with the exalted degree of the eternal wisdom,
for by it, As Solomon says, chap. iii. 19. "The Lord by wisdom has founded the
earth:" etc.
the world was called into existence from nonentity: he therefore admonishes us
to adhere to it, and to turn aside from the abominable woman: he also instructs
us, to destroy the foolish appetites incident to creatures formed of matter;
and thus preserve alive the immortal soul." This sir, is what he would have
taught you; and can you perceive any jest in all this? But stop, hear Solomon
himself, "The fear of Jehovah, is the beginning of knowledge, but fools despise
wisdom and instruction." This, sir, is no jest; but if contrary to all the
rules of right reason, you should still persist in asserting it to be a jest, I
should not scruple to pronounce you in earnest to be one of those fools that
"despise wisdom and instruction." Let us proceed, "My son, hear the instruction
of thy father, and forsake not the law of thy mother." That is, next to God,
let me advise thee, my son, to reverence thy parents: and not only to hearken
unto thy father when he instructs thee in the fear of God, or tells thee thou
have done amiss; but also to let thy mother's commands be a law to thee. And
happy would it have been for many, had they atended to this admonition; in
which I am sure you can see no jest. Again, "My son, it sinners entice thee,
consent thou not." My son, walk not thou in the way with them: refrain thy foot
from their path. For their feet run to evil and make haste to shed blood," etc.
These are a few of the proverbs of Solomon, contained in the first chapter of
Solomon's "jest book." I imagine they are rather too grave to cause merriment;
but they may be of great, service in making a person wise and virtuous. Pity
you did not read this jest book through with becoming attention: if you had, it
would have taught you to "Be not wise in thine own eyes: but to fear the Lord
and depart from evil."

The book of Ecclesiastes Solomon was called (...), (which properly denotes an
assembler; from the Radix (...) which see in Lingua Sacra) on account of the
wisdom which was centred in him. See Aben Ezra, and Jarchi, Eccle. i. 1.
you say, "is written as the solitary reflections of a worn out debauchee, such
as Solomon was, who looking back on scenes he can no longer enjoy, cries out,
All is vanity!" n="*" p. 41.
Attend now to the words of Aben Ezra, who after showing the difference between
good and bad actions, etc. and that every man finds his own way pure in his own
sight; observes, "But the Lord God of Israel stirred up the spirit of Solomon
his beloved, to explain acceptable words, and to teach us the path of
rectitude," etc. And indeed, the whole work is uniform, (though there are many
detached sentiments and proverbs interspersed) and confined to one subject;
viz. the vanity of the world, which is exemplified by the experience of
Solomon, introduced in the character of a person investigating a very difficult
question; examining the arguments on both sides, and at length disengaging
himself from an anxious and doubtful disputation, by observing, "Let us hear
the conclusion of the whole matter, Fear God, and keep his commandments: for
this is the whole duty of man." Eccle. xii. 13.


As to Solomon's sins and debaucheries, with which you wish to blacken his
writings, they are so far from derogating from the purity of his doctrine, that
all is vanity, but the fear and love of God, that on the contrary, they
strongly enforce it; by teaching us the following important truths. First, not
to slight the command of God; for as we find it commanded, that the king "shall
not multiply wives to himself, that his heart turn not away." Deuteronomy. xvii. 17.
Solomon, by slighting this commandment, actually fell into the crime foretold
as the consequence of the breach of it. Secondly, that though he was so great
and wise a king, yet was he immediately severely punished for his sins, by
having the kingdom rent from him, and given to Jeroboam: and which is a
manifest proof of the divine superintendance of the actions of mankind, however
high and exalted their station: and which ought to make us all extremely
cautious of offending the most high in any degree whatever.

You say Solomon's Songs are amorous and foolish enough, but which wrinkled
fanaticism has called divine. -- I hope you do not account Aben Ezra a wrinkled
fanatic. Now he is decidedly against you, for he says, "This poem is an entire
sacred allegory. It commences at the time of Abraham, and extends to the time
of the Messiah: and which describes (if I may use the expression) the conjugal
union of God with the Jewish Church: which, as a peculiar people, having been
selected by him from among all nations; he had (as it were) ratified his choice
by a solemn covenant. This is the solemn compact, so frequently celebrated by
almost all the sacred writers under the same image; and who have therefore
compared the nation's committing idolatry, to a woman being guilty of adultry
toward her husband. He also says, " Far be it, far be it from us, to imagine
that the song of songs, contains any thing amorous, but is entirely
figurative." Thus you stumble step by step, till at last, I fear you will fall,
and rise no more. Excuse my freedom, but really my patience is almost
exhausted; I am quite weary of wading through such a farrago of nonsense,
ignorance, futility, and indecent levity. How must the Hebraist smile, to hear
you with an air of importance, violently declaiming against the compilers of
the Bible, for the placing of Solomon's song after Ecclesiastes, etc. as any
little Jew schoolboy, could have told you, that they are not placed thus in
the Hebrew Bible. There, the arrangement is as follows, First, the Pentateuch:
Second, the former Prophets, viz. Joshua, Judges, Samuel, and kings: Third, the
latter prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah,
Micah, Nahum, Habakuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah, and Malichi: Fourth, the
Hagiography, which contains, Psalms, Proverbs, Job, Song of songs, Ruth,
Lamentations, Ecclesiastes, Esther, Daniel, Ezra, Nehemiah, and Chronicles.
Hence, you may also perceive the futility of your objection concerning the term
greater and lesser prophets Part. 1. p. 15
, as termed by Christians in general, (though I suppose, they only mean the
size of the books) but had you ever seen an Hebrew Bible, you would have known
that there is no such thing in it, as lesser and greater prophets: as they are
all included in the term latter prophets; and are enumerated thus, Isaiah,
Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and the twelve: because they are all included in one book,
by the Jews. Are you not ashamed now of your misplaced wit? Alas! What a
lamentable thing is ignorance!

The book of Ruth, you call "an idle, bungling story, foolishly told about a
strolling country girl creeping slily to bed to her cousin Boaz." Is this fair
criticism? Is it truth? Does it appear so from history? On the contrary, we
find that she was no strolling girl; and it is very base in you thus to traduce
her character. She had been married ten years, and being left a widow without
children, and fully bent on renouncing the idolatry of her native country, she
accompanied her mother in law, back to the land of Israel: there, her mother
informed her of the right of redemption which she had, according to the law of
Israel, among whom she was now incorporated. She therefore instructed her how
to act, in order to break the matter to Boaz, and to claim his protection; for
which reason, she laid herself down at the foot of her aged kinsman's bed, and
rose up as innocent as she laid down, and with an high encomium on her virtuous
Chap. 10.11.
behavior. She was afterward married to Boaz, and acknowledged by all her
neighbors, nay, by all the city, to be a strictly virtuous woman and it is to
be presumed, that they most certainly were better acquainted with her
character, than you possibly can be. As to its being called the word of God,
hear what Aben Ezra says, "Because David was the root of the kingdom of Israel,
his genealogy was written in the sacred books."

You observe P. 37.
, "If Madam Esther thought it any honor to offer herself as a kept Mistress to
Ahasuerus," etc, but pray Sir, where did you find that Esther offered herself?
Not in the history I am sure: for according to the account there, "She was
taken to the king's house, to the custody of Hagai, keeper of the women Esther.
iii. 8.
." Whence, I apprehend, it was as much against her inclination to enter the
king's seraglio, as it was yours to enter the Luxembourgh. And Aben Ezra
asserts, "that she was seized by force." Thus also Jarchi (Vide in Loc). The
book clearly points out the particular providence of God in the care of his
peculiar people: and a manifest proof of its authenticity, is the celebration
of the feast of Purim (in allusion to pur the lot) by the whole nation to this
day See Levi's Ceremonies of the Jews, p. 127.
, in commemoration of the great and wonderful deliverance which God wrought for
them, by means of Esther and Mordecai.

I am, etc.

LETTER VII.
SIR,
I SHALL now proceed to take notice of what you observe concerning Isaiah, and
the other prophets. You say p. 43.
, "Whoever will take the trouble of reading the book ascribed to Isaiah, will
find it one of the most wild and disorderly compositions ever put together: it
is one continued, incoherent, bombastical rant, full of extravagant metaphor,
without application, and destitute of meaning; a school boy would scarcely have
been excusable for writing such stuff." I really know not which most to admire,
your ignorance, or presumption. "Whoever will take the trouble," etc. I sir,
have taken that trouble; nay, I have commented on a great part of it; (See my
Dissertations on the prophecies vol. 1st. and IId.) and am allowed to have some
little knowledge in the language in which it is written: but have not sound it
to be "such stuff," as you assert it is. On the contrary, I have found the
diction pure: the sentiments grand and sublime; and the imagery strong and
beautiful. You compare, "the burden of Babylon, the burden of Moab, etc. to the
story of the knight of the burning mountain," etc. But if you had read the
burden of Babylon with attention, and compared it with its present state, as I
have done, I doubt not but it would have made as strong an impression on your
mind, as it has on mine; especially, if you consider that this prophecy was
delivered near two hundred years before its completion: and that the captivity
of the Jews, for which the Babylonians were to be thus punished, did not fully
take place till about one hundred and thirty years after the delivery of this
prophecy: that the Medes, who are expressly mentioned (chap. xiii. 17.) as the
principal agents in the overthrow of the Babylonish monarchy, by which the Jews
were released from that captivity, were at the time of the delivery of this
prophecy, an inconsiderable people; having been in a state of anarchy ever
since the fall of the great Assyrian Empire, of which they formed a part, under
Sardanapalus: and did not become a kingdom under Dejoces till about the
seventeenth year of Hezekiah. The exact completion of prophecies like these,
plainly show from whom the prophet received them; from him, to whom all things
are known; he therefore, challenges the false gods to come forth, and give
evident demonstration of their foreknowledge and power, by foretelling future
events. "Let them approach, and tell us the things that shall happen; the
things that shall first happen, what they are, let them tell us; and we will
consider them; and we shall know the event; or declare to us things to come
hereafter. Tell us the things that will come to pass in latter times: then
shall we know, that ye are gods." Isaiah xli. 22.
In opposition to this, the true prophet of the true God, as an evident proof
of the truth of what he had predicted, says, "The former predictions, lo! they
are come to pass: and new events I now declare: before they spring forth, I
make them known unto you." This, Sir, is the test of prophecy; it is this that
distinguishes the burden of Babylon, the burden of Moab, etc. from those
foolish tales that you ridiculously wish to compare them with. And, in truth,
there cannot be a stronger or more convincing proof of the truth of prophecy,
and the accomplishment of future events so foretold, than this position: for if
the former prophecies were exactly fulfilled, it is an earnest of the
completion of the suture events so predicted. And yet, in defiance of such
clear evidence, you assert, that the last verse of the forty fourth, and the
beginning of the forty fifth chapters of Isaiah were written at least an
hundred and fifty years after Isaiah was dead* and are p. 44.
a compliment to Cyrus, who permitted the Jews to return to Jerusalem from the
Babylonian captivity, to rebuild Jerusalem and the temple, as stated in Ezra."
And as a proof of this, you quote these two verses; but herein you have acted
very unfairly; for you ought to have began at verse 24th. of chapter xlivth, as
it is there that the prophecy commences, "Thus says the Lord, thy redeemer;
even he that formed thee from the womb: I am the Lord who makes all things;
who stretched out the heavens alone; who spread the firm earth by myself, I am
He, who frustrateth the prognostics of the impostors, and makes the diviners
mad; who reverseth the devices of the sages, and infatuateth their knowledge:
who establishes the word of his servant: and accomplisheth the counsel of his
messengers: who says to Jerusalem, Thou shall be inhabited, and to the cities
of Judah, ye shall be built; and her desolate places I will restore." Thus he
shows the return of the nation from the Babylonian captivity, according to his
prediction; in opposition to that of the prognosticaters and diviners; whose
wisdom and counsel God frustrateth, but establishes the word of his servant.
In the next three verses, he shows the destruction of Babylon; the manner it is
to be taken, and by whom. "Who says to the deep, Be thou wasted; and I will
make dry thy rivers:" By this figurative language, the prophet shows the taking
of Babylon by Cyrus, who drained off the waters of the Euphrates, which ran
through the city of Babylon, by means of which, he marched his troops by night
along the bed of the river into the heart of the city, Heredot. Lib. 1. Cap.
178. 185. and Seq. and Cyropedia. Lib. 7.
and surprised it. The prophet then shows by whom it should be thus conquered;
and for what purpose: even for the sake of Israel, God's chosen servants; that
all might know that Jehovah alone was God, and none else. -- "Who says to
Cyrus, who is my shepherd? and he shall fulfill all my pleasure: by saying to
bJerusalem, Thou shall be built; and to the temple, Thy foundations shall be
laid. Thus says the Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus, whom I hold fast by the
right hand: that I may subdue nations before him; and ungird the loins of
kings: that I may open before him the valves; and the gates shall not The gates
of Babylon within the city, leading from the streets to the river, were
providentially left open, when Cyrus's forces entered the city in the night
through the channel of the river, in the general disorder occasioned by the
great feast which was then celebrated: otherwise, says Herodotus (Lib. 1.191.),
the Persians would have been shut up in the river, and taken as in a net, and
all destroyed. And the gates of the palace were imprudently opened by the
king's orders, to enquire what was the cause of the tumult without, when the
two parties under Gobryas and Gadatas rushed in, got possession of the place,
and slew the king. Xenoph. Cyroep. 7. p. 328.
be shut. I will go before thee, and make the crooked places strait; the gates
of brass will I break in pieces Herodotus says (1.179.) "In the wall all round
there are an hundred gates all of brass; and so, in like manner, are the sides
and lintels." The gates within the city, opening to the river from the several
streets, were likewise of brass; as were also these of the temple of Belus.
Ibid. 1.180.181.
, and the bars of iron will I cut asunder. And I will give unto thee the
treasures Sardis and Babylon when taken by Cyrus, were the wealthiest cities in
the world. Croesus, celebrated beyond all the kings of that age for his riches,
gave up his treasures to Cyrus, with an exact account in writing of the whole,
containing the particulars with which each wagon was loaded, when they were
carried away, and which were delivered to Cyrus at the palace of Babylon.
Xenoph. Cyrop lib. 7. p. 503.515. According to Pliny's account (Not. Hist.
33.15.) of the wealth taken by Cyrus in Asia, the gold and silver, converted
into pounds sterling, would amount to one hundred and twenty six millions, two
hundred and twenty four thousand pounds. Brerewood, De Ponderibus, cap. 10.
of darkness, and the stores deep hidden in secret places: that thou may
know that I am the Lord; he that calls thee by thy name is the God of
Israel." By this, God showed that it was not by his own power that Cyrus
achieved all his conquests, but by the divine assistance: and which Cyrus
himself acknowledged; Ezra i. 2. "Thus says Cyrus, king of Persia, the Lord
God of heaven has given me all the kingdoms of the earth;" etc. Not as
Sennacherib, who said, "By the strength of my hand have I done it; and by my
wisdom, for I am prudent Isaiah x. 13.
;" etc. For which the prophet denounced his destruction; and which was fully
accomplished. Nor yet like Nebuchadnezzar, who said, "I will ascend aboye the
heights of the clouds; I will be like the most high." Isaiah xiv. 14.
For which blasphemous expression, that dreadful sentence contained in the
following verses was pronounced against him and his posterity: and which was
likewise accomplished in every particular. But Cyrus was fully convinced, that
he owed his victories to God, to whom alone he ascribed all his successes; more
especially, as he was affined, that the God of Israel, had called him by name,
near two hundred years before his birth, that he might know that he was
Jehovah, the God of Israel; and that he did not make him thus successful and
victorious for his sake; but for the sake of his chosen Israel, as in ver. 4.
etc. "For the sake of my servant Jacob, and of Israel, my chosen; I have even
called thee by thy name; I have surnamed thee, though thou have not known me. I
am the Lord, and none else; beside me there is no God: I have girded thee,
though thou have not know me. That they may know from the rising of the sun,
and from the west, that there is none beside me: I am the Lord, and none else;
Who forms the light, and creates darkness; who makes peace, and creates
evil: I, Jehovah, am the author of all these things." We now have a full view
of the prophecy, the truth of which is proved by its full completion in every
particular; so contrary to the pretended oracles and predictions delivered by
the prognosticators, diviners, etc. -- The prophet, in figurative language,
also shows the manner in which Babylon was to be taken; and that, though God
had called Cyrus, and led him on to victory, etc. in such an extraordinary
manner, yet it was not for his merit, for he knew not the Lord: but the sole
end and purpose for which he was called, and thus exalted, was for the sake of
the God of Israel's chosen people; and that he might know that the Lord alone
formed all things; contrary to the great principle of the Magian religion,
which prevailed in Persia in the time of Cyrus, and in which he probably was
educated, that there are two supreme, coeternal, and independent causes,
always acting in opposition to each other; one they called Light, who was the
author of all good; the other they called Darkness, the author of all evil;
that when the good being Light had the ascendancy, then good and happiness
prevailed among men; and when Darkness had the superiority, then evil and
misery abounded. In reference, therefore, to this absurd opinion, held by the
person (Cyrus) to whom this prophecy is addressed, God by his prophet, in the
most significant terms, asserts his omnipotence and supremacy: "I am the Lord,
and none else; Who forms the light and creates darkness; who makes peace
and creates evil: I Jehovah am the author of all these things." Declaring that
those powers, whom the Persians held to be the original authors of good and
evil to mankind, representing them by light and darkness, as their proper
emblems, were no other than creatures of God, the instruments which he employs
in his government of the world, ordained, or permitted by him, in order to
execute his wise and just decrees; and that there is no power, either good or
evil, independent of the one supreme God, infinite in power and in goodness.
Now, is it possible to conceive, that a captive Jew, intending to compliment
Cyrus, the greatest prince in the world, should be so stupid, so devoid of all
reason and common sense, as to tell him, that the victories he had achieved,
and the conquests he had obtained, were not the effect of his wisdom, prudence
and valor; but were bestowed on him by the God of Israel: a God whom he did not
know: and that they were not bestowed on him for his merit; because he did not
worship God, as he did not know him; but for the sake of God's chosen people,
that they, through his means, might be released from the captivity they were
held in by the Babylonians; so that he was nothing more than a more instrument
in the hands of that God which he knew not; and who also told him, that the
Gods he worshipped were no other than his creatures; and that his religion was
all a lie. This, I must confess, was a pretty way indeed to compliment a great
prince, such as Cyrus; but that it should procure from him the deliverance of
the captives, as a thankful acknowledgement that he owed all his power and
greatness to God's infinite goodness and power, is altogether incredible: and
whoever maintains such an absurdity, shows either a weak head or a bad heart.

As to what you say (p. 45.) of "the studied craft of scripture-makers, in
making every part of this romantic book of school boy's eloquence, bend to the
monstrous idea of a son of God begotten by a ghost on the body of a virgin,"
etc. I have nothing to say, as it does not concern me in the defense of Isaiah:
because, I am fully convinced, that the prophet never intended any such thing;
as I have shown at large, in my Letters to Dr. Cooper, in answer to his, One
great argument for the truth of Christianity from a single Prophecy. See my
letters to Dr. Pilestly, Dr. Cooper, etc.
But, as you to attempt (...) prove from this passage, that Isaiah was "a lying
prophet and an impostor," I shall briefly state the true intent and meaning of
the prophecy; and show that what he had predicted, was fully verified in every
particular.

It must be observed, that before this confederacy of the two kings against the
house of David, they each had warred separately against Judah; when Rezin first
carried away a great multitude of them captive to Damascus; and afterward the
king of Israel also smote an hundred twenty thousand of them in one day: and
carried away two hundred thousand of them captive; but although they were made
captives, yet were they not retained in captivity; for the men of Israel being
admonished by the Lord's prophet, the principal men, "rose up; and look the
captives, and with the spoil clothed all that were naked, among them, and
arrayed them, and shod them, and gave them to eat and to drink, and anointed
them, and carried all the feeble of them upon asses, and brought them to
Jericho the city of the palm trees, By this sir, you may perceive that there
was some humanity amongst those Israelites, whom you, and your master,
Voltaire, every where represent as a horde of barbarous brutes.
to their brethren, 2 Chronicles. xxviii. 15. But now that they formed a league
together, not for the purpose of making captives, or taking of some cities; but
with an intent of making an entire conquest of the kingdom of Judah, destroy
the house of David, and place another family on the throne; it says, they "went
up toward Jerusalem, to war against it." For though when they came up
separately against Judah, God suffered them as the instruments of his
vengeance, for their manifold sins, to prevail against them: yet, when that
un-natural confederacy of Israel with the uncircumcised was formed; and they
planned the total destruction of the royal house of David, God would by no
means suffer it: they consequently could not prevail against it. And, because
the house of David was so greatly moved at this formidable confederacy; (but
which was not the case, when they came up separately, and therefore is not
mentioned in Chronicles) God commanded Isaiah to go forth, and encourage Ahaz,
by telling him that this scheme, "shall not stand, neither shall it come to
pass." And as a proof of this, the prophet gave him the following sign. "Behold
the young woman has conceived, (...) Is the present tense: Is with child.
and bears of son, and shall call his name Immanuel. Butter and honey shall
he eat, at his knowing At his knowing, etc. The circumstance of the child's
eating butter and honey, was to denote a state of plenty; and which was to
arise from their deliverance, that was to take place before the child should
know to refuse the evil, and choose the good, at which time he was to eat it;
and which was actually the case, as I have plainly shown above.
to refuse the evil and choose the good. For before the child shall know to
refuse the evil and choose the good, the land shall be forsaken, which thou
abhorrest because of both its kings." This was fully accomplished, when the
king of Assyria slew Rezin 2 King. xvi. 9.
and Hosea the son of Elah slew Pekah Ibid. xv. 30.
Thus was this prophecy fully verified in every particular: for the prophet
declared by the command of God that the above mentioned purpose of the two
kings, "shall not stand, neither shall it come to pass." I now ask you, Did it
stand? Did it come to pass? Did they dethrone and destroy the royal-house of
David? Was the son of Tabeal ever made king of Judah? No. On the contrary, the
two confederate kings were both cut off, before the child that was to be born,
knew to refuse the evil, and choose the good, exactly as the prophet had
predicted. Hence it is manifest, that the kings not only failed in their
attempt, but were themselves cut off; while Ahas continued to reign over Judah,
and was peaceably succeeded by his son Hezekiah. Pray, Sir, who is now the
lying prophet and impostor? I will not say you have told a lie, but you have
said the thing that is not true: and, therefore, think the following words of
the prophet peculiarly applicable to you: Woe unto them who call evil good, and
good evil; who put darkness for light, and light for darkness; who put bitter
for sweet, and sweet for bitter. Woe unto them who are wise in their own eyes,
and prudent in their own conceit Isai. v. 20 -- 21.
."

You charge Jeremiah with "guarding his p. 47.
prognostications in such a crafty manner, as to leave himself a door to escape
by," because he had said, that though God should denounce the destruction of a
nation for its wickedness; yet, if that nation should repent, and return from
its evil, the Lord would repent of the evil that he thought to do unto them;
and vice versa. This you call "an absurd subterfuge, p. 48.
-- consistent with nothing but the stupidity of the Bible." But in my humble
opinion, it is highly instructive; for under the type of the potter's
fashioning the vessel as he pleases, is shown, God's absolute authority over
all nations and kingdoms, to regulate and alter their condition at his own
discretion; and that he rewards and punishes them according to their desert. It
must therefore be considered as a warning to all nations, to be careful not to
commit evil in the sight of the Almighty; and likewise as an enconragement to
those who have sinned, to avail themselves of God's mercy, to repent and turn
from their evil way; as was actually the case of the Ninevites: and as is plain
from the whole tenor of the history of the Hebrews.

You next bring forward an objection, which you have borrowed from Spinoza and
others, concerning the disordered state of the book: but this does not affect
the authenticity, nor the genuineness of the book of Jeremiah: for although the
order of time may not be every where observed; yet may it be accounted for, in
supposing that Ezza, or the men of the great synagogue, having found all the
prophecies of Jeremiah separately, they collected them together into one book,
without attending strictly to the order of their proper places: and yet this
may not have been the effect of chance, but of some cause known to the prophet
and them, though unknown to us; as the learned Abarbanal has observed on the
xxxvth chapter, which contains a prophecy expressly said to be delivered in the
days of Jehoiakim, and yet is placed after several that were delivered in the
days of Zedekiah: but the reason of this, appears to be as follows. When
Jeremiah had written the preceding prophecy, concerning their not suffering the
bondmen and bond-women to go free according to the law of Moses, Exodus xxi. 2.
Levit. xxv. 39. etc.
and for which he denounced a severe sentence against them; he thought proper
to place immediately after it, the prophecy concerning the Rechabites, who
strictly obeyed their father's injunction: and when he made trial of their
obedience, and offered them wine to drink, they refused it; alleging the
express prohibition of their father. By which, the prophet had an opportunity
of placing the disobedience of the Jews to the divine command, in a much
stronger point of view; by contrasting it with the obedience that the
Rechabites paid to their father's command; and as is plain from the words of
the prophet, ver. 13, 14, 15. "Thus says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel;
go and say unto the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, Will ye not
receive instruction to hearken to my words? says the Lord. The words of
Jonadab the son of Rechab, which he gave in charge to his sons, not to drink
wine, have been punctually performed, etc. But ye have not hearkened unto me,"
etc. Then follows the severe sentence which God had pronounced against them for
their disobedience, contrasted with the reward he promised to bestow on the
Rechabites for their obedience. In this manner, all the seeming disorder in the
arrangement of the book, might probably be accounted for.

You also charge (p. 52.) the prophet, or the book, it is all the same, with
contradiction, because two different accounts are given of his imprisonment:
but if you had attended to the different accounts with a candid eye, in order
to come at truth, you would have found, that they recorded two different
imprisonments; as nothing can be more obvious than that he was twice
imprisoned: The learned Abarbanal is of the opinion that he was imprisoned
several times; the first of which was in the days of Jehoiakim; this he has
clearly and satisfactorily proved from the different texts: and which the
learned reader may see in his comment on the xxxviith chapter.
first, in the house of Jonathan the scribe, as mentioned chap. xxxvii. 15.
and-from which he was liberated by Zedekiah, to the court of the prison, and
had by his order a stated allowance of bread, until all the bread in the city
was spent: and for having publicly predicted the destruction of Jerusalem, he
was a second time imprisoned in the dungeon of Malchijah the king's son; whence
he was freed by the intercession of Ebed-melech, as mentioned chap. 38.

The different names in the twenty-first and thirty-eighth chapters, plainly
show that they were different events; the one, giving an account of those that
were sent with the message from Zedekiah; the other, of those that heard him
declare to the people the destruction of Jerusalem: and so far from the
conference breaking off abruptly, at the tenth verse of the twenty-first
chapter, that it is continued to the end of the chapter: for from verse the
third to verse seventh, he answers the king; from verse the eighth to the
tenth, he speaks to the people; and from verse the eleventh to the end, to the
house of the king of Judah.

You observe (p. 51) "But the instance in the last chapter (the lii.) is still
more glaring;" because it contains an account of the destruction of Jerusalem,
which had been already mentioned; but this objection is so futile, that I
should not have taken notice of it, were it not to expose its absurdity; and to
let your admirers see what a profound critic you are in sacred literature; for
it is universally allowed Sec Abarbanal, etc.
to have been added by some one after Jeremiah's time, probably by Ezra and the
men of the great synagogue, who revised the sacred writings, and collected them
into one body; as is plain from the text. Thus far (are) the words of Jeremiah.
And which was, to distinguish the preceding prophecies from what follows: which
is nearly the same word for word, as it is recorded in the second book of
Kings, chap. xxiv. 18 -- 20, and chapter xxv. together with some few additions. And
the reason of its being placed here, was to show, the complete and exact
accomplishment of the predictions of Jeremiah concerning the Jewish nation: and
the truth of the divine word of prophecy.

I now proceed to take notice of a matter of greater importance; namely, your
charge against Jeremiah for his duplicity. That we may have a clear view of the
force of your objection, it is necessary to observe that Jeremiah, on account
of his having publicly predicted the destruction of Jerusalem, had been cast by
the princes of Judah, who sought his life, into a miry dungeon, as above shown;
and where he certainly would have perished, had not Ebed-melech taken
compassion on him, and spoken to the king in his favor, saying, "My lord, the
king, these men have done evil in all that they have done to Jeremiah the
prophet, whom they have caused to be thrown into the dungeon: and he is like to
die for hunger in the place where he is." On this representation, the king
ordered Jeremiah to be taken out of the dungeon; and, shortly after, sent for
him privately (See verse 14.), and desired him to conceal nothing from him; at
the same time binding himself by an oath, that, whatever the nature of his
prophecy might be, he would not put him to death, nor deliver him into the
hands of those men (the princes) that sought his life. Jeremiah then showed him
God's purpose respecting the fate of Jerusalem. When the conference was ended,
the king, mindful of his oath to preserve the life of the prophet, dismissed
him, saying, "Let no man know of these words, and thou shall not die. But if
the princes hear that I have talked with thee, and they come unto thee, and say
unto thee, Declare unto us now what thou have said unto the king, hide it not
from us, and we will not put thee to death; also what the king said unto thee:
then shall thou say unto them, I presented my supplication before the king,
that he would not cause me to return to Jonathan's house to die there. Then
came all the princes to Jeremiah, and asked him, and he told them according to
all these words that the king had commanded." On this, you observe (p. 52)
"Thus, this man of God, as he is called, could tell a lie, or very strongly
prevaricate, -- for certainly he did not go to Zedekiah to make his
supplication; neither did he make it." But you certainly mistake, sir; it is
not said that he went to make his supplication, but that he presented it. And
as it is mentioned in the preceding chapter, that, in the conference with the
king, he did make supplication to him, it is very probable that in this
conference he renewed it: especially as we find that he continued in the court
of the prison: but be this as it may, I contend that Jeremiah did not
prevaricate nor tell a lie on this occasion: he acted as every honest, prudent
man would have done in his situation. He knew these men were his enemies, and
sought his life; he, therefore, was under no obligation to tell the whole
matter to such men; he told them the truth in part, to save his life; and that
was sufficient. Moreover the king had commanded him what he should say, and
particularly charged him to let no man know what had passed between them: he,
therefore, as an obedient and dutiful subject, thought it his bounden duty to
do as the king had commanded him: if he had not you would have accused him of
betraying the king's confidence; especially as you have already affixed a
suspicion on him of his being a traitor.

But your next charge is of a still more serious nature, for you accuse
Jeremiah of delivering false predictions. "In the xxxivth chapter" you say, (p.
53) "is a prophecy of Jeremiah to Zedekiah in these words," ver. 2. -- 'Thus
says the Lord, Behold, I will give this city into the hands of the king of
Babylon, and will burn it with fire: and thou shall not escape out of his hand,
but thou shall surely be taken, and delivered into his hand; and thine eyes
shall behold the eyes of the king of Babylon, and he shall speak with thee
mouth to mouth, and thou shall go to Babylon. Yet hear the word of the Lord, O
Zedekiah, king of Judah, thus says the Lord, thou shall not die by the sword,
but thou shall die in peace; and with the burnings of thy fathers, the former
kings that were before thee, so shall they burn odours for thee, and will
lament thee, saying, Ah, lord! for I have pronounced the word, says the Lord.'

"Now, instead of Zedekiah beholding the eyes of the king of Babylon, and
speaking with him mouth to mouth, and dying in peace, and with the burning of
odours, as at the funeral of his fathers (as Jeremiah has declared the Lord
himself had pronounced), the reverse, according to the lii. chapter, was the
case: it is there said, ver. 10. 'That the king of Babylon flew the sons of
Zedekiah before his eyes; then he put out the eyes of Zedekiah, and bound him
in chains, and carried him to Babylon, and put him in prison till the day of
his death." -- "What then can we say of these prophets, but that they are
impostors and liars?" I can say, that there is not a word of truth in all that
you have advanced; for the prophecy was sulfilled in every particular, as will
be seen, by comparing the words of the prophecy with the history.

THE PROPHECY.

"I will give this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall burn
it with fire. And thou shall not escape out of their hands, but shall surely be
taken and delivered into his hand. And thine eyes shall behold the eyes of the
king of Babylon, and he shall speak with thee mouth to mouth. -- And thou shall
go to Babylon. Yet hear the word of the Lord, O Zedekiah, king of Judah: Thus
says the Lord of thee, Thou shall not die by the sword, but thou shall die in
peace: and with the burnings of thy fathers, so shall they burn odours for thee.

THE HISTORY.

"Came Nebuzaradan, captain of the guard, into Jerusalem, and he burnt the
house of the Lord, and the king's house, and all the houses of Jerusalem, and
all the houses of the great men burnt he with fire. But the army of the
Chaldeans pursued after the king, and overtook Zedekiah in the plains of
Jericho: and all his army was scattered from him. Then they took the king, and
carried him up unto the king of Babylon to Riblah; where he gave judgment upon
him. And the king of Babylon slew the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes: Then he
put out: the eyes of Zedekiah; and the king of Babylon bound him in chains, and
carried him to Babylon, and put him in prison, still the day of his death." Chapter
lii. 8 -- 13.2 King. xxv. 5 -- 9. See also 2 Chronicles. xxxvi. 19.

Hence it is manifest, that Zedekiah did see the eyes of the king of Babylon,
when he slew the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes; and spoke judgments This is
the literal sease of the Hebrew.
with him: that is, he upbraided him with the perfidy of his revolt against
him; as he had sworn by God to him (See 2 Chronicles. xxxvi. 13.): for which he put
out his eyes The prophecy of Ezekiel concerning Zedekiah, is very remarkable:
(Chap. xii. 13.) "And I will bring him to Babylon to the land of the Chaldeans;
yet shall he not see it, though he shall die there." How exactly was this
accomplished, when the king of Babylon put out his eyes, and then brought him
to Babylon! So that though he died there, yet he did not see it.
and carried him to Babylon, where he died in peace, as the prophet had
predicted. He did not die in battle: neither was he put to a violent or
shameful death: he died a natural death on his bed, though in a prison. Thus we
see how the prophecy and history agree, and show the full completion of the
prophecy. And now, sir, what can we say of those who call Jeremiah a liar and
impostor, but that they are base calumniators?

You also assert P. 53.
, that Jeremiah joined himself afterward to Nebuchadnezzar, and went about
prophesying for him against the Egyptians; Thus much for another of these lying
prophets. But where did you find this? Surely not in the narrative that we have
of these transactions: for there it is said, "And the captain of the guards
took Jeremiah, and said unto him, the Lord thy God has denounced this calamity
against this place (no small compliment to the truth of the prophet's
predictions). If it seem good unto thee to come with me to Babylon, come, and I
will set mine eyes upon thee." But he declined accepting this kind and friendly
offer of Nebuzaradan; and with a disinterestedness, and true patriotism, (which
perhaps you would have admired in any other man but a prophet) he returned to
his distressed brethren, and when they were determined to go down to Egypt, he
endeavored to prevent them: telling them, according to the word of the Lord,
that if they went thither, the sword of which they were afraid should overtake,
them there in the land of Egypt, and they should die there: because they
dissembled when they sent him to enquire for them of God, "saying, Pray for us
unto the Lord our God; and according to all that the Lord our God shall say, so
declare unto us, and we will do. But ye have not hearkened unto the voice of
the Lord your God, -- Now, therefore, ye shall know assuredly that by the
sword, and by famine, and by pestilence shall ye die in the place whither ye
desire to go to sojourn (Jerem. xlii. 20.22.)." But they still persisting in
going to Egypt, forced Jeremiah along with them. There indeed he prophesied
against the Egyptians, (as in their destruction, the Jews that were in Egypt
were included;) and also against several other nations, particularly against
the Babylonians, without the least regard or attention to or from
Nebuchadnezzar; and which is a plain proof of the falsity of your change
against the prophet; whilst the exact accomplishment of these prophecies are an
evident demonstration of the truth of Jeremiah's prophetic spirit.

You say (p. 54.) "In the former part of the Age of Reason, I have said that
the word prophet was the Bible word for poet. I am sufficiently justified in
this opinion, not only because the books called the prophecies are written in
poetical language, but because there is no word in the Bible except it be the
word prophet, that describes what we mean by a poet." -- I suppose then, sir,
that you are perfectly acquainted with the Hebrew, and know that there is no
word for poet in that language, but (...) Nabee, which is always translated a
prophet. Well, and what then is the word for poem in the Hebrew? It must
certainly be (...) Nebuah: but (...) denotes a prophecy, and not a poem. (...)
Sheer, Sir, is the proper word for poem in the Hebrew: whence is derived (...)
Mes^^aerear, a poet. It must also be observed, that the word (...) a prophet,
is never applied to any but such as were sent to the people to admonish and
instruct them; for (...) is properly derived from (...) the fruit of the lips
(Isaiah lvii. 19.). And, therefore, Moses says in Deuteronomy. xviii. 15. -- "The Lord
thy God will raise up unto you (...) a prophet as I am from the midst of thee,
of thy brethren, unto him ye shall hearken:" and ver. 18. "I will raise them up
(...) a prophet from among their brethren, as thou art, and I will put my words
in his mouth," etc. " (...) A prophet unto the nations have I constituted
thee." (Jerm. i. 5.) "And the Lord said unto me, Go, (...) prophesy unto my
people," (Amos vii. 15.) Whence if is manifest that the word (...) properly
denotes a messenger sent with a prophesy; and which is the reason that the book
of Daniel, though it contains prophecies of the utmost importance; many of
which have been so exactly fulfilled; that infidels have asserted, that the
facts were prior to the predictions: yet it is placed among the Hagiographical
books, and not among the prophetic: as I have shown at large in Lingua Sacra,
Radix (...) and where I have also shown the true meaning of the words (...)
Roeeh and (...) Choezeh; both of which in English denote a Seer; and applied to
such as saw a vision of God, but were not sent with any message to the people,
etc. From all which it is plain, that your criticism is false and fallacious;
owing to your extreme ignorance of the subject you pretend to treat of; and
which must ever render you contemptible in the eyes of every discerning reader.
Alas! how are the mighty fallen!

Your illiberal abuse of the prophets and prophecies, (P. 54. 55.) the former
of whom you call "poetical-musical conjuring-dreaming-strowling-gentry;" and
the latter you compare to "fortune-telling, casting nativities, predicting
riches, fortunate or unfortuate marriages, conjuring for lost goods," etc.
plainly shows, that you either have mistaken their office and character, or
what is worse, wilfully misrepresent them: for their office was, to deliver to
the nation, the commands of (God, his promises and threatenings; and to
admonish them to return to their duty, as the prophet says, "And I have sent
unto you all my servants, the prophets, rising up early and sending, saying,
Return I pray you, every one from his evil way, and amend your doings," etc.
(Jer. xxxv. 15. besides several other passages in the same prophet of the like
import.) In the execution of this duty, they were frequently persecuted; and
which, these holy men had foreseen and expected as the reward of their labors;
and therefore, we generally see them take this painful and weighty office on
them very reluctantly, and at last accept it merely in obedience to the
repeated orders of heaven. But, as soon as they had accepted it, and the burden
of the word was laid on them, they boldly issued forth before kings and people;
upbraiding them for their idolatry and their crimes; and then, neither exile,
nor chains, nor dungeons, could silence their noble indignation: but they
sustained all with the utmost fortitude.

You next charge the prophets with beling party men; and observe (p. 55.) "This
party prophesying showed itself immediately on the separation of the first two
rival kings, Rehoboam and Jeroboam. The prophet that cursed, or prophesied
against the altar that Jeroboam had built in Bethel, was of the party of Judah,
where Rehoboam was king; and he was way laid on his return home by a prophet of
the party of Israel, who said unto him, (2 King chap. xiii.) 'Art thou the man
of God that came from Judah? and be said I am." Then the prophet of the party
of Israel said to him, 'I am a prophet also as thou art, (signifying of Judah)
and an angel spoke unto me by the word of the Lord, saying, Bring him back with
thee unto thine house, that he may eat bread and drink water: but, says the
18th verse, he lied unto him."

"The event, however, according to the story, is, that the prophet of Judah
never got back to Judah; for he was found dead on the road, by the contrivance
of the prophet of Israel, who no doubt was called a true prophet by his own
party; and the prophet of Judah a lying prophet." This charge is a most
abominable falsehood, and plainly shows your depravity of heart. Was Shemaiah
who admonished Rehoboam to desist from going to war with Jeroboam, because the
thing was from God, a party prophet* And if the prophet that came from Judah
was a party prophet, and not a true prophet of God, how could he so exactly
foretell what Josiah was to do on the altar upwards of three hundred and fifty
years after? And how came king Jeroboam's had, which he stretched out to lay
hold of the man of God, to be instantly dried up, and the altar rent, according
to what he had predicted? These things you have thought proper not to mention,
(an evident proof of your candor.) But you say, "the prophet of Judah was
killed by the contrivance of the prophet of Israel." Do you think then, that
the prophet of the party of Israel, was a master of wild beasts, and kept lions
to destroy the prophets of the party of Judah? Indeed, he must have been an
admirable fellow, that could train his lions in such a manner, as that they
should slay the man and not kill the beast, nor devour the carcass of the
prophet (ver. 28.) To be serious, does not the death of the prophet, and the
subsequent behavior of the lion, teach us, that the prophet was slain by the
express command of God, as it was foretold? But that which flatly contradicts
your assertion is, the prophet of Israel's fair, open, and candid
acknowledgment, that the prophet of Judah (as you call him, though without the
least shadow of truth, as I shall show in my comment on scripture) was a true
prophet of God, not a lying prophet, as you basely and falsely assert. Hear his
charge to his sons, and take shame to yourself, for having thus vilified the
true servants of God. "When I am dead, then bury me in the sepulcher wherein
the man of God is buried; lay my bones beside his bones. For the saying which
he cried by the word of the Lord against the altar in Bethel, and against all
the houses of the high places, which are in the cities of Samaria, shall surely
come to pass." Compare this with 2 King. chap. xxiii. 16 -- 19. and you will be
convinced, how exactly this prophecy was fulfilled in every particular.

Jehoshaphat king of Judah, Jehoram king of Israel, and the king of Edom, being
engaged in a war against the king of Moab, you observe (p. 56.), "the story
says, they were in great distress for water, upon which Jehoshaphat said, ' Is
there not a prophet of the Lord, that we may enquire of the Lord by him?' The
story then says, that these three kings went down to Elisha (an high honor
indeed for one of your conjurors), and when Elisha (who as I said, was a
Judah-mite prophet) saw the king of Israel, he said unto him, ' What have I to
do with thee, get thee to the prophets of thy father, and to the prophets of
thy mother. As the Lord of hosts lives, before whom I stand, surely, were it
not that I regard the presence of Jehoshaphat, king of Judah, I would not look
toward thee, nor see thee.' Here is all the venom and vulgarity of a party
prophet." And here sir, is all the venom and vulgarity of an ignorant,
impertinent, profane scoffer. What! Elisha a Judah-mite prophet! Ha! ha! My
good friend, you must go to school: Elisha a Judah-mite! Was Ab^lmaholah, the
birth place of Elisha, (1 Kings xix. 16.) in the kingdom of Judah? Was Samaria,
where the prophet generally resided, (2 King. v. iii. xi. 32. etc.) in the
kingdom of Judah? Was Elisha a Judah-mite party prophet, when he discovered to
the king of Israel the secret counsels of the king of Syria against him? Did he
ever prophecy in, or concerning the kingdom of Judah? On the contrary, was he
not always looked upon as the prophet of Israel? Did he not order one of the
sons of the prophet to anoint Jehu king of Israel? And when Elisha lay on his
death bed, it was not the king of Judah that came to him, but the king of
Israel that came to see him; "And wept over his face, and said, O my father, my
father! the chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof." (2 Kings xiii. 14.)
This plainly shows that the king considered him, not only as a true prophet,
but as the principal prophet in Israel.

"Now for the prophecy;" you say, p. 56. Thus says the Lord, make this valley
full of ditches; which was just telling them what every countryman might have
told them, without either fiddle or farce, that the way to get water was to dig
for it." But this buffoonery, -- "dashed and (...) with sins,
"To please the fools, and puzzle all the wise,"
is not a true representation of the case; for the ditches were not dug to get
water by digging for it, but that they might hold the water when, "without wind
or rain," it should miraculously come from another country; and "behold there
came water by the way of Edom, and the country was filled with water." Thus was
the prophecy fully accomplished."

As to what you say concerning Elisha's cursing the little children, which you
have borrowed from Voltaire See Philosophy of History. p. 2^5.
, I must observe, that the Hebrew word (...) translated children, properly
denotes lads, youths, etc. and is frequently used to denote persons arrived at
years of discretion: as in Genesis xxxvii. 2. xli. 12. xlv. 20. etc. 1 Samuel xxv.
5-9. etc. etc. As to the term (...) here added, and translated little, it is
also used in Hebrew to denote low, etc. so that the proper sense is youths of a
low degree: i. e. worthless young fellows. This will more plainly appear, when
it is considered that Bethel was the idolatrous city, where the priests of Baal
ministered to the calves of Jeroboam; and as they had heard of the ascent of
Elijah, and of Elisha's succeeding him; they sent their disciples in derision
of them both, to to mock Elisha; by saying, "Go up, thou bald head," etc. for
as Elijah was known by the description of "an hairy man," (2 King. i. 8.) they,
to deride him, said, "Go up," etc. that is, thou who art bald, why do thou
not ascend to where thy master the hairy man is gone? Seeing them thus deride
both him and his master, he, as the Lord's prophet, jealous for the honor of
God, and his servants, cursed them; and has he not acted justly, his curse
would not have effected the destruction of the offenders; but God, who knew
that they deserved death, miraculously sent the bears to destroy them, at the
word of the prophet. This is the true state of the case: and plainly shows how
unjust is your illiberal and scurrilous abuse of this prophet, by calling him a
conjuror, a curser, and a liar.

The books of Ezekiel and Daniel you allow to be genuine; but in order to
discredit the authority of these books, you have formed a strange and monstrous
hypothesis, for which there is not the least foundation in those books. You
suppose (p. 58.) that the dreams and visions of Ezekiel and Daniel were not
revelations from God, but a pretended, enigmatical correspondence relative to
the recovery of their country from the Babylonian yoke. You also suppose (p.
59.) that for men situated as Ezekiel and Daniel were, "scarcely any thing
could be more absurd than to suppose that such men should find nothing to do,
but that of employing their time and their thoughts about what was to happen to
other nations, a thousand or two thousand years after they should be dead."
Then you suppose that men might take up the prophetic office when they pleased,
as they do any other trade or calling; and then lay it down again when they
pleased; but this, every reader of the Old Testament knows to be false; for
those that were called to the prophetic office, had no choice; they were
obliged to obey God's command, as above shown. This is a manifest proof of your
consummate ignorance and impudence; and indeed, these suppositions are
altogether so absurd, that it is scarcely credible, that any man in his senses,
who had ever so little regard to his reputation, as an impartial inquirer after
truth, should adopt such an hypothesis: or that he should have so little
respect for his readers as to obtrude it on the world. Surely sir, you must
have considered your readers as no better than heads of onions, when you wrote
this; no wonder then, if indignation should prompt the discerning reader to cry
out, "It is not easy I confess.
"To baffle such a plate of brass;
"For, in my days, I never did hear,
"So impudent a sophister."


You say, p. 60. "that Ezekiel, speaking of Egypt, chap. xxix. ver. 11. says, '
No foot of man shall pass through it, nor foot of beast shall pass through it:
neither shall it be inhabited for forty years.' This is what never came to
pass, and consequently it is false, as all the books I have already reviewed
are." But this did come to pass, according to the figurative language of the
prophet; for the expression of the foot of man or beast passing through,
denoted the great desolation, that was to be brought on it: and that its trade,
which was then carried on by caravans as it is at present, should be totally
destroyed for forty years, and which was fully accomplished, as the learned
Abarbanal has shown; for from the time that Nebuchadnezzar Berosus and
Megasthenes, two heathen historians, who lived about three hundred years before
the Christian era, bear testimony to the conquest of Egypt by Nebuchadnezzar;
for, they say, he conquered great part of Africa, and took several captives
from Egyp: and carried them to Babylon: and that he transplanted and settled
others in Pontus, as bishop Newton has shown from these historians.
conquered Egypt till the ruin of the Babylonian empire, was forty years. And
had you taken the pains to have looked a verse or two beyond where you quoted
from, you would have seen the sequel to this prophecy, ver. 14, 15. "And they
shall be there a low kingdom. It shall be the lowest of the kingdoms; neither
shall it exalt itself any more above the nations: that they rule not over the
nations." This you may perhaps call an enigmatical dream, or a vision about the
recovery of Ezekiel's country: or say downright, "it is a lie." But every
candid, impartial person, will no doubt esteem it a wonderful prophecy; for
though it is upwards of two thousand years since the delivery of it, yet has
it been fulfilling from that time to this; as Egypt has in general been
tributary and in subjection to strangers; for it was first conquered by the
Baby lonians under Nebuchadnezzar; and afterward by the Persians under Cyrus,
Cambyses, etc. After the Persians, it became subject to the Macedonians; and
afterward to the Romans, then to the Saracens, and then to the Mamalucs: and
now is a province of the Tunkish empire. This is proved from Herodoms,
Xenophon, etc. See Newton on the proph. Differ. 12.

Your profane jest concerning Jonah and the great fish You say a whole, I know
not where you found this; not in the text I am sure: for there it says, agreet
fish; and we have but an imperfect acquaint. ance with the natural history of
fishes. However, we know, that the white shark or lawin, is a very dreadful and
voracious fish, the largest of all sharks. They have been seen of 4000with. and
men have been found whole in them. Cham. Cyc. and Will. Pis. p. 47.
, scarcely deserves an answer; but, as you attempt to ridicule the prophets,
and blacken their character through Jonah, it is necessary to say a few words,
in order to clear Jonah's character from that foul aspersion which you have
cast on it.

It is well known that Assyria, of which Nineveh was the capitol, was ordained
to destroy the kingdom of Israel, and to carry the nation captive; it was
therefore called the rod of God's anger; "Ho! to the Assyrian, the rod of mine
anger," (Isai. x. 5.) This Jonah knew, and therefore determined within himself
not to go on this mission, that the Assyrians might not escape the punishment
due to their crimes, through his means, as he would then be accessory to the
destruction of his own nation; this affected him greatly; and induced him to
withdraw from the holy land, and attempt to suppress his mission; choosing
rather to suffer death than in any wise be instrumental to the ruin of his
nation, by saving the Assyrians; and which proceeded from his public This
public spirit was conspicuous in the character of Moses, David and Jeremiah.
See Exodus xxxii. 32.2 Sam. xxiv. 17. Lameatations, etc.
spirit, and love of the nation; and not from "the malevolent spirit of a
Bible-prophet." This was the cause of his grief throughout the whole of this
business (as I shall show at large in my comment on the Old Testament); and
therefore he said, "O Lord, take, I beseech thee, my life from me:" As I have
now performed my mission, and find that they are to be spared to be the
instruments of thy vengeance against my nation; I beseech thee to take my life
from me; "for it is better for me to die than to live," and see the destruction
that is to be bro't on my people. The instruction that we receive from this
story is truly great; as it shows us the benefit of true repemance from the
Ninevites; and the frailty of all human enjoyments from Jonah's gourd; as will
be shown in the aforementioned comment.

Your nonsensical observation on the prayer of Jonah is -- "light as chaff that
floats before the wind." and therefore merits not a reply. Your balderdash
about the "satire and the moral of the fable," is naught "But the sinister
application of the malicious,
Ignorant. and base interpreter."


You conclude your illiberal abuse of the Old Testament in a style of the
utmost self-importance, "I have now gone through the Bible (here, good Sir, you
mistake the Old Testament for the Bible) as a man would go through a wood with
an axe on his shoulder, and fell trees. Here they lie; and the priests, if they
can, may replant them. They may, perhaps, stick them in the ground, but they
will never make them grow." And do you really think so highly of your
performance as to imagine that you have thereby demolished the authority of the
Old Testament? Is it possible you can be so infatuated, as to suppose that you
have by such a compound of ignorance, absurdity and nonsense, been able to
effect what Morgan, Tindal, Bolingbroke, Hume, Voltaire, Spinoza and other
infidels, have not been able to effect, with all their wit and learning? How
ridiculous! No, sir; you have not effected it. I will tell you what you have
done: you have in a most unbecoming manner, ridiculed that which was held most
sacred; and basely calumniated characters esteemed most venerable; you have
revived the scoffs of the profane, and increased the doubts of those who
wavered. This, and more you have done in going through the Old testaments but
you have taken no notice of the design God had in view, in choosing a people,
not for their own sakes, but that they might hand down through all ages the
knowledge of his existence, his unity and partioular providence. To this end,
God revealed his law to all Israel, in the presence of the whole nation. In
this law he set before them in plain terms, the reward of their obedience, and
the dreadful punishment they were to expect in case of disobedience. These they
experienced alternately as they obeyed or disobeyed the Lord's command; till at
length, for their wickedness they were cast out from off the goodly land which
the Lord had given them; their whole polity and government totally destroyed;
and themselves dispersed all over the face of the earth, as Moses had told them
upwards of three thousand years ago. But notwithstanding this dispersion, and
all the dreadful calamities which have accompanied it, yet have they been
miraculously preserved, as Moses had told them; (as shown at large in the
former part of these letters) and which was corroborated by the other prophets.
It is the wonderful accomplishment of these predictions, that has established
the truth and verity of these books: and caused them to be handed down to us
for so many centuries, with respect and veneration; and which they ever will
retain, in defiance of the utmost malice of deists and insidels, till time
shall be no more.

Yours, etc. D. LEVI.


