WIVES AS THEY WERE, AND MAIDS AS THEY ARE:

A COMEDY, IN FIVE ACTS.

PERFORMED AT THE LONDON AND DUBLIN THEATERS WITH UNIVERSAL APPLAUSE -- AND AT
GREENWICH-STREET, N. YORK.

FIRST AMERICAN -- FROM THE THIRD LONDON EDITION.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY R. WILSON, 149, PEARL-STREET.

1797.

PROLOGUE -- By a FRIEND, Spoken by Mr. WADDY.
I COME not to announce a bashful Maid
Who never has tried the drama's doubtful trade,
Who sees with fluttering hope the curtain rise,
And scans with timid glance your critic eyes;
My client is a more experienced dame,
Though not a Veteran, not unknown to Fame,
Who thinks your favors are an honest boast,
Yet fears to forfeit what she values most;
Who has, she trusts, some character to lose,
E'n though the woman did not aid the Muse;
Who courts with modest aim the public smile,
That stamp of merit, and that meed of toil.
At Athens once (our author has been told)
The Comic Muse, irregularly bold,
With living calumny profaned her slage,
And forged the frailties of the faultless sage.
Such daring ribaldry you need not fear,
We have no Socrates to libel here.
Ours are the follies of an humbler flight,
Offspring of manners, volatile and light;
Our general satire keeps more knaves in awe,
Our court of conscience comes in aid of law.
Here scourged by wit, and pilloried by fun,
Ten thousand coxcombs blush instead of one*
If scenes like these could make the guilty shrink,
Could teach unfeeling Folly how to think,
Check Affectation's voluble career,
And from cold Fashion force the struggling tear,
Our (...) w^^^d your loudest praise forego,
Content to feel within "what passes show."
" But since" (she says) "such hopes cannot be mine,
" Such bold pre^ensions I must needs r^sign,
" Tell these great judges of dramatic laws,
" Their reformation were my best applause;
" Yet if the heart my proud appeal withstands,
" I ask the h^mbler su^^rage of their hands."
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
COVENT GARDEN.
MEN.
Lord PRIORY Mr. Quick Sir WILLIAM DORRILLON Mr. Munden Sir GEORGE EVELYN Mr.
Pope Mr. BRONZELY Mr. Lewis Mr. NORBERRY Mr. Waddy OLIVER Mr. Faw^^tt NABSON
Mr. Thompson.
WOMEN.
Lady PRIORY Miss Chapman Lady Mary RAFFLE Mrs. Mattocks Miss DORRILLON Miss
Wallis. Several Servants etc.
SCENE, LONDON.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
GREENWICH-STREET.
MEN.
Lord PRIORY Mr. Warren Sir WILLIAM DORRILLON Mr. Harwood Sir GEORGE EVELYN Mr.
Moreton Mr. BRONZ^LY, Mr. Bernard Mr. NORBERRY Mr* Tailor OLIVER Mr* Bliss^tt
NAB^ON Mr* ^^arrell.
WOMEN.
Lady PRIORY Mrs* Morris Lady ^ary RAFFLE Mrs. Oldmixon Miss DORRILLON Mrs.
Merry. Servants, etc.
WIVES AS THEY WERE, AND MAIDS AS THEY ARE.
ACT I.
SCENE I. An Apartment at Mr. Norberry's.
Enter Sir William Dorrillon, followed by Mr. Norberry. Mr. Nor. WHY blame me?
-- Why blame me? -- My sister had the sole management of your daughter by your
own authority, from the age of six years, till within eight months of the
present time, when, in consequence of my sister's death, she was transferred to
my protection.


Sir Wm. Your sister, Mr. Norberry, was a prudent good woman -- she never could
instruct her in all this vice.


Mr. Nor. -- Depend upon it, my dear friend, that Miss Dorrillon, your
daughter, came to my house just the same heedless woman of fashion you now see
her.


Sir Wm. (impatiently.) Very well -- It Is very well -- But when I think on my
disappointment --


Mr. Nor. There is nothing which may not be repaired, Maria, with you for a
guide --


Sir Wm. Me! She turns me into ridicule -- laughs at me! This morning, as she
was enumerating some of her frivolous expenses, she observed me lift up my
hands and sigh; on which she named ^ifty other extravagances she had no
occasion to mention, merely to enjoy the pang which every folly of here is sends
to my heart.


Mr. Nor. But do not charge this conduct of your daughter to the want of filial
lov^^ -- did she know you were Sir William Dorrillon, did she know you were her
father, every word you uttered, every look you glanced, would be received with
gentleness and submission: -- but your present rebukes from Mr. Mandred (as you
are called) from a perfect stranger, as she supposes, she considers as an
impertinence which she has a right to resent.


Sir Wm. I wish I had continued abroad. And yet, the hope of beholding her, and
of bestowing upon her the riches I acquired, was my sole support through all
the toils by which I gained them.


Mr. Nor. And, considering her present course of life, your riches could not
come more opportunely.


Sir Wm. She shall never have a farthing of them. Do you think I have
encountered the perils of almost every climate, to squander my hard-earned
fortune upon the paltry vicious pleasures in which she delights? No -- I have
been now in your house exactly a month -- I will stay but one day longer -- and
then, without telling her who I am, I will leave the kingdom and her for ever
-- Nor shall she know that this insignificant merchant whom she despises, was
her father, till he is gone, never to be recalled.


Mr. Nor. You are offended with some justice; but, as I have often told you,
your excessive delicacy and respect for the conduct of the other sex,
degenerate into rigor.


Sir Wm. True -- for what I see so near perfection as woman, I want to see
perfect. WE, Mr. Norberry, can never be perfect; but surely women, women, might
easily be made angels!


Mr. Nor. And if they were, we should soon be glad to make them into women
again.


Sir Wm. (inattentive to Mr. Nor.) -- She sets the example. She gives the
fashion! -- and now your whole house, and all your visitors, in imitation of
her, treat me with levity, or with contempt. -- But I Will go away tomorrow.


Mr. Nor. Can you desert your child in the moment she most wants your
protection? That exquisite beauty just now mature --


Sir Wm. There Is my difficulty! -- There Is my struggle! -- If she were not so
like her mother, I could leave her without a pang -- cast her off, and think no
more of her -- But that shape! that face! those speaking looks! Yet, how
reversed! -- Where is the diffidence, the humility -- where is the simplicity
of my beloved wife? Bu^ied in her grave.


Mr. Nor. And, in all this great town, you may never see even its apparition.


Sir Wm. I rejoice, however, at the stratagem by which I have gained a
knowledge of her heart: deprived of the means of searching it in her early
years, had I at present come as her father, she might have deceived me with
counterfeit manners, till time disclosed the imposition. -- Now at least, I am
not imposed upon.

Enter Servant.
Ser. Lord Priory.

( Exit.
Sir Wm. Lord Priory!


Mr. Nor. An old acquaintance of mine, though we seldom meet. He has some
singularities; and yet, perhaps --

Enter Lord Priory.
Mr. Nor. My dear Lord, I am glad to see you. Mr. Mandred ( introducing Sir
William). My Lord, I hope I see you in perfect health.


Lord Priory. Yes: but in very ill humor. I came to London early this morning
with my family for the winter, and found my house, after going through only a
slight repair, so damp, that I dare not sleep in it: and so I am now sending
and going all over the town to seek for lodgings.


Mr. Nor. Then seek no farther, but take up your lodgings here.


Lord Priory. To be plain with you, I called in hopes you would ask me; for I
am so delicately scrupulous in respect to lady Priory that I could not bear the
thought of taking her to an hotel.


Mr. Nor. Then pray return home, and bring her hither immediately, with all
your luggage.


Lord Priory. I am most extremely obliged to you ( very fervently); for into no
one house belonging to any of my acquaintance would I take my wife, so soon as
into yours. I have now been married eleven years, and during all that time I
have made it a rule never to go on a visit* so as to domesticate, in the house
of a married man.


Sir Wm. May I enquire the reason of that?


Lord Priory. It is because I am married myself; and having always treated my
wife according to the ancient mode of treating wives, I would rather she should
never be an eyewitness to the modern household management


Sir Wm. The ancients, I believe, were very affectionate (...)


Lord Priory. And they had reason to be so; for their wives obeyed them. The
ancients seldom gave them the liberty to do wrong: but modern wives do as they
like.


Mr. Nor. And don't you suffer lady Priory to do as she likes?


Lord Priory. Yes, when it is what I like too. But never, never else.


Sir Wm. Does not this draw on you the character of an unkind husband?


Lord Priory That I am proud of Did you never observe, that seldom a breach of
sidelity in a wi^^ is exposed, where the unfortunate husband is not said to be
"he best creature in the world? Poor man, so good-natured? -- Doatingly fond of
his wife! -- indulged her in every thing! -- How cruel in her to serve him so!"
Now, if I am served so, it shall not be for my goodnature.


Mr. Nor. But I hope you equally disapprove of every severity.


Lord Priory (rapidly) What do you mean by severity?


Mr. Nor. You know you used to be rather violent in your temper.


Lord Priory. So I am still -- apt to be hasty and passionate -- but that is
rather of advantage to me as a husband -- it causes me to be obeyed without
hesitation -- no liberty for contention, tears or repining. I insure conjugal
sunshine; by now and then introducing a storm; while some husbands never see
any thing but a cloudy sky, and all for want of a little domestic thunder to
clear away the vapors.


Sir Wm. I have long conceived indulgence to be the bane of female happiness.


Lord Priory. And so it is. -- I know several women of fashion, who will visit
six places of different amusement on the same night, have company at home
besides, and yet, for want of something more, they will be out of spirits; my
wife never goes to a public place, has scarce ever company at home, and yet is
always in spirits.


Sir Wm. Never visits operas, or balls, or routs?


Lord Priory. How should she? She goes to b^d every night exactly at ten.


Mr. Nor. In the name of wonder, how have you been able to bring her to that?


Lord Priory By making her rise every morning at five.


Mr. Nor. And so she becomes tired before night.


Lord Priory. Tired to death. Or, if I see her eyes completely open at
bedtime, and she asks me to play one game more at picquet, the next morning I
jog her elbow at half after four.


Mr. Nor. But suppose she does not reply to the signal?


Lord Priory. Then I turn the key of the door when I leave the chamber; and
there I ^ind her when I come home in the evening.


Sir Wm. And without her having seen a creature all day?


Lord Priory. That is in my favor; for not having seen a single soul, she is
rejoiced even to see me.


Mr. Nor. And will she speak to you after such usage?


Lord Priory. If you only considered how much a woman longs to speak after
being kept a whole day silent, you would not ask that question.


Mr. Nor. Well, this is the most surprising method!


Lord Priory. Not at all. In ancient days when manners were simple and pure,
did not wives wait at the table of their husbands? and did not angels witness
the subordination? I have taught Lady Priory to practice the same humble docile
obedience -- to pay respect to her husband in every shape and every form -- no
careless inattention to me -- no smiling politeness to others in preference to
me -- no putting me up in a corner -- in all assemblies, she considers her
husband as the first person.


Sir Wm. I am impatient to see her.


Lord Priory. But don't expect a fine lady with high feathers, and the et
caetera of an Eastern concubine; you will see a modest plain Englishwoman with
a cap on her head* a handkerchief on her neck, and a gown of her own
manufacture.


Sir Wm. My friend Norberry, what a contrast must there be between Lady Priory
and the ladies in this house!


Lord Priory (starting) Have you ladies in this house!


Mr. Nor. Don't be alarmed; they are both single, and can give Lady Priory no
ideas concerning the marriage state.


Lord Priory. Are you sure of that? Some single women are more informed than
their friends wish them to be.


Mr. Nor. For these ladies, notwithstanding a few (what you would call)
excesses, I will answer.


Lord Priory. Well, then, I and my wife will be with you about nine in the
evening; you know we go to bed at ten.


Mr. Nor. But remember you bring your own servants to wait on you at five in
the morning.


Lord Priory. I shall bring but one -- my old servant Oliver, who knows all my
customs so well, that I never go any where without him.


Mr. Nor. And is that old servant your valet still?


Lord Priory. No, he is now a kind of gentleman in waiting. I have had no
employment for a valet since I married: -- my wife, for want of dissipation,
has not only time to attend upon herself, but upon me. Do you think I could
suffer a clumsy man to tie on my neckcloth or comb out my hair, when the soft,
delicate, and tender hands of my wife are at my command?

( Exit.
Sir Wm. After this amiable description of a woman, how can I endure to see
her, whom reason bids me detest; but whom nature still --


Mr. Nor. Here she comes; and her companion in folly along with her.


Sir Wm. There Is another woman! that Lady Mary Raffle! How can you suffer such
people in your house?


Mr. Nor. She is only on a visit for a few months -- she comes every winter, as
her family and mine have long been intimately connected.


Sir Wm. Let us go. I cannot bear the sight of them.

( Going.
Mr. Nor. Stay, and for once behave with politeness and good humor to your
daughter -- do -- and I dare venture my life, she will neither insult nor treat
you with disrespect. You know you always begin first.


Sir Wm. Have not I a right to begin first?


Mr. Nor. But that is a right of which she is ignorant.


Sir Wm. And deserves to be so, and ever shall be so, I stay and treat her with
politeness and good humor? No -- rather let her kneel and implore my pardon.


Mr. Nor. Suffer me to reveal who you are, and so she will.


Sir Wm. If you expose me only by one insinuation to her knowledge, our
friendship is that moment at an end.


Mr. Nor. (Firmly). I have already given you my promise on that subject; and
you may rely upon it.


Sir Wm. I thank you -- Let us go, I believe you -- and I thank you.

( Exeunt Sir William and Mr. Norberry.
Enter Lady Mary Raffle and Miss Dorrillon. Miss Dor. (Stealing on as Mr.
Norberry and Sir William leave the stage). They are gone. Thank heaven they are
gone out of this room, for I expect a dozen visitors; and Mr. Norberry looks so
gloomy upon me, he puts me out of spirits; while that Mr. Mandred's peevishness
is not to be borne.


Lady Mary. Be satisfied; for you were tolerably severe upon him this morning
in your turn.


Miss Dor. Why, I am vexed -- an^d I don't like to be found fault with in my
best humor, much less when I have so many things to tease me.


Lady Mary. What are they?


Miss Dor. I have now lost all my money, and all my jewels at play; it is
almost two years since I have received a single remittance from my father; and
Mr. Norberry refuses to advance me a shilling more. What I shall do to
discharge a debt which must be paid either today or tomorrow heaven knows!
Dear Lady Mary, you could not lend me a small sum, could you?


Lady Mary. Who? I! [ with surprise] -- My dear creature, it was the very thing
I was going to ask of you: for when you have money, I know no one so willing to
disperse it among her friends.


Miss Dor. Am not I! -- I protest I love to part with my money; for I know with
what pleasure I receive it myself, and I like to see that joy sparkle in
another's eye, which has so often brightened my own. But last night ruined me
-- I must have money somewhere. -- ^s you cannot assist me, I must ask Mr.
Norberry for his carriage, and immediately go in search of some friend that can
lend me four, or five, or six, or seven hundred pounds. But the worst is, I
have lost my credit -- Is not that dreadful?


Lady Mary. Yes, yes, I know what it is.

( Shaking her head.)
Miss Dor. What will become of me?


Lady Mary. Why don't you marry, and throw all your misfortunes upon your
husband?


Miss Dor. Why don't you marry? For you have as many to throw as I have.


Lady Mary. But not so many lovers who would be willing to receive the load. I
have no Sir George Evelyn with ten thousand pounds a year -- no Mr. Bronzely.


Miss Dor. If you have not now, you once had: for I am sure Bronzely once paid
his addresses to you.


Lady Mary. And you have the vanity to suppose you took him from me?


Miss Dor. Silence. -- Reserve your anger to de^end, and not to attack me. We
should be allies by the common ties of poverty: and it is time to arm; for
here is the enemy.


Enter Sir William and Mr. Norberry. Sir Wm. They are here still.

( Aside to Mr. Norberry, and offering to go back.)
Mr. Nor. ( Preventing him.) No, no.


Miss Dor. I have been waiting here, Mr. Norberry, to ask a favor of you.

( He and Sir William come forward.) Will you be so kind as to lend me your
carriage for a couple of hours?


Mr. Nor. Mr. Mandred ( pointing to Sir William) has just asked me for it to
take him into the city.


Lady Mary. Oh, Mr. Mandred will give it up to Miss Dorrillon, I am sure; he
can defer his business till tomorrow.


Sir Wm. No Madam* she may as well put off hers. I have money to receive, and I
cannot do it.


Miss Dor. I have money to pay, and I cannot do it.


Lady Mary. If one is going to receive, and the other to pay money, I think the
best way is for you to go together; and then, what deficiency there is on one
side, the other may supply.


Miss Dor. Will you consent, Mr. Mandred? -- Come, do; and I Will be friends with
you.


Sir Wm. (Aside.) "She Will be friends with me!"


Miss Dor. Will you?


Sir Wm. No.


Miss Dor. Well. I certainly can ask a favor of Mr. Mandred better than I can
of any person in the world.


Mr. Nor. Why so, Maria?


Miss Dor. Because, instead of pain, I can see it gives him pleasure to refuse
me.


Sir Wm. I never confer a favor, of the most trivial kind, where I have no
esteem.


Miss Dor. (Proudly) Nor would I receive a favor, of the most trivial kind,
from one who has not liberality to esteem me.


Mr. Nor. Come, Miss Dorrillon, do not grow serious: laugh as much as you
please, but say nothing that --


Sir Wm. (To her impatiently.) From whom then can you ever receive favors,
except from the vain, the idle, and the depraved? -- from those whose lives are
passed in begging them of others?


Miss Dor. They are the persons who know best how to bestow them: for my part,
had I not sometimes felt what it was to want a friend, I might never have had
humanity to be the friend of another.


Enter Servant. Servant. Sir George Evelyn.


Mr. Nor. And pray, my dear, whose friend have you ever been? --

(Enter Sir George Evelyn.) -- Not Sir George Evelyn's, I am sure; and yet he
of all others deserves your friendship most.


Miss Dor. But friendship will not content him: as soon as he thought he had
gained that --


Sir George. He aspired to the supreme happiness of your love.


Miss Dor. Now you talk of "supreme happiness," have you provided tickets for
the fete on Thursday?


Sir George. I have; provided you have obtained Mr. Norberry's leave to go.


Mr. Nor. That I cannot grant.


Miss Dor. Nay, my dear Sir, do not force me to go without it.


Sir Wm. ( With violence.) Would you dare?


Miss Dor. ( Looking with surprise.) "Would I dare," Mr. Mandred! -- and what
have you to say if I do?


Sir Wm. ( Recollecting himself) I was only going to say, that if you did, and
I were Mr. Norberry --


Miss Dor. And if you were Mr. Norberry, and treated me in the manner you now
do, depend upon it (...) should not think your approbation or disapprobation,
your pleasure or displeasure, of the slightest consequence.


Sir Wm. ( Greatly agitated.) I dare say not -- I dare say not. Good morning,
Sir George -- I dare say not. -- Good morning, Mr. Norberry.

( Going.)
Mr. Nor. Slopt a moment. -- Maria, you have offended Mr. Mandred.


Miss Dor. He has offended me.


Sir Wm. ( At the door, going off) I shall not offend you long.


Mr. Nor. ( Going to him, and taking him by the arm) Stay, Mr. Mandred: Miss
Dorrillon, make an apology; Mr. Mandred is my friend, and you must not treat
him with this levity.


Lady Mary. No, no apology.


Miss Dor. No, no apology* But I Will tell you what I Will do.

( Goes up to Sir William.) -- If Mr. Mandred likes, I Will shake hands with him
-- and we'll be good friends for the future. But then, don't find fault with me
-- I cannot bear it. You don't like to be found fault with, yourself -- You look
as cross as any thing every time I say the least word against you. Come, shake
hands; and don't let us see one another's failings for the future.


Sir Wm. There is no future for the trial.


Miss Dor. How do you mean?


Mr. Nor. Mr. Mandred sets off again for India tomorrow.


Miss Dor. Indeed! I thought he was come to live in England! I am sorry you are
going.


Sir Wm. ( With earnestness) Why sorry?


Miss Dor. Because we have so frequently quarrelled. I am always unhappy when I
am going to be parted from a person with whom I have disagreed; I often think I
could part with less regret from a friend.


Sir George. Not, I suppose, if the quarrel is forgiven?


Miss Dor. Ah! but Mr. Mandred does not forgive! no! in his looks I can always
see resentment -- Sometimes indeed I have traced a spark of kindness, and have
gently tried to blow it to a little flame of friendship; when, with one hasty
puff I have put it out.


Sir Wm. You are right. It is -- I believe -- extinguished.

( Exit Mr. Norberry following.)
Sir George. A very singular man.


Lady Mary. Oh! if he was not rich, there would be no bearing him -- indeed he
seems to have lost all his friends; for during the month he has been here, I
never found he had any one acquaintance out of this house.


Miss Dor. And what is very strange, he has taken an aversion to me. -- But it
is still more strange, that although I know he has, yet in my heart I like him.
He is morose to an insufferable degree; but then, when by chance he speaks
kind, you cannot imagine how it soothes me. -- He wants compassion and all the
tender virtues; and yet, I frequently think, that if any serious misfortune
were to be^al me, he would be the first person to whom I should fly to complain.


Lady Mary. Then why don't you ^ly and tell him of your misfortune last night.


Sir George ( starting). What misfortune?


Miss Dor. ( to Lady Mary. Hush!


Lady Mary. A loss at play. --

( To Miss Dorrillon.) -- I beg your pardon, but it was out before you said
hush.


Sir George. Ah! Maria, will you still risk your own and my happiness?


Miss Dor. Your happiness and mine, Sir! -- I beg you will not place them so
near to each other.


Sir George. Mine is so firmly fixed on you, it can only exist in yours.


Lady Mary. Then, when she is married to Mr. Bronzely, you will be happy
because (...) will be so?


Sir George. Bronzely! has he dared?


Miss Dor. Have not you dared, Sir?


Lady Mary. But I believe Mr. Bronzely is the most daring of the two. --

( aside to Sir George.) -- Take care of him.

( Exit.
Sir George. Miss Dorrillon, I will not affront you by supposing that you mean
seriously to receive the addresses of Mr. Bronzely; but I warn you against
giving others, who know you less than I do, occasion to think so.


Miss Dor. I never wish to deceive any one -- I do admit of Mr. Bronzely's
addresses.


Sir George. Why, he is the professed lover of your friend Lady Mary! or
granting he denies it, and that I even pass over the frivolity of the cox^omo,
still he is unworthy of you.


Miss Dor. He says the same of you; and half a dozen more say exactly the same
of each other. If you like, I Will discard every one of you as unworthy; but if I
retain you, I will retain the rest. Which do you choose?


Sir George. I submit to any thing rather than the total loss of you -- But
remember, that your felicity --


Miss Dor. "Felicity! felicity!" -- ah! that is a word not to be found in the
vocabulary of my sensations! -- sighing.


Sir George. I believe you, and have always regarded you with a compassion that
has augmented my love. In your infancy, deprived of the watchful eye and
anxious tenderness of a mother; the manly caution and authority of a father;
misled by the brilliant vapor of fashion; surrounded by enemies in the garb of
friends -- Ah! do you weep? blessed, blessed be the sign! Suffer me to dry
those tears I have caused, and to give you a knowledge of true felicity.


Miss Dor. ( recovering) I am very angry with myself. -- Don't, I beg, tell Mr.
Norberry or Mr. Mindred you saw me cry -- they will suppose I have been more
indiscreet ( (...) her tears) than I really have. For in reality I have nothing
--


Sir George, Do not endeavor to conceal from me, what my tender concern for
you has given me the means to become acquainted with. I know you are plunged in
difficulties by your father neither sending nor coming, as you once expected --
I know you are still deeper plunged in your fondness for play.


Miss Dor. Very well, Sir -- proceed.


Sir George. Thus, then -- Suffer me to send my steward to you this morning; he
shall regulate your accounts, and place them in a state that shall protect you
from further embarrassment till your father sends to you; or protect you from
his reproaches, should he arrive.


Miss Dor. Sir George, I have listened to your detail of vices which I
acknowledge, with patience, with humility -- but your suspicion of those which
I have not, I treat with pride, with indignation.


Sir George, How! suspicion!


Miss Dor. What part of my conduct, Sir, has made you dare to suppose I would
extricate myself from the difficulties that surround me, by the influence I
hold over the weakness of a lover?

( Exeunt separately.)
ACT II.
SCENE I. Another Apartment at Mr. Norberry's.
Enter two porters from an upper entrance, bringing in trunks; Lord Priory and
Mr. Norberry following. Mr. Nor. HERE, Stephens, why are you out of the way?
Show the men with these boxes into the dressing room appointed for my Lord
Priory.

( A servant enters on the opposite side, and the porters follow him off at a
lower entrance on that side)
Enter Sir William Dorrillon. Sir Wm. My Lord, I hope I see you well this
evening.


Lord Priory. Yes, Sir -- and you find I have literally accepted Mr. Norberry's
invitation, and am come to him with my luggage.


Enter Oliver, with a small box in each hand. Lord Priory, Follow those men
with the tr^nks, Oliver.


Mr. Nor. Ah, Mr. Oliver, how do you do?


Oliver, Pretty well -- tolerably well! I thank you, Sir.

( Ex.
Enter Servant. Lady Priory. Enter Lady Priory.
Lord Priory (to her) Mr. Norberry, our worthy host; and Mr. Mandred

( She curisies.
Mr. Nor. I hope your ladyship will find my house so little inconvenient to
you, as to induce you to make no very short visit.


Lady Priory. I have no doubt, Sir, but I shall find, from your friendship,
every comfort in this house which it is possible for me to enjoy out of my own.


Enter Lady Mary Raffle and Miss Dorrillon. Mr. Nor. ( introducing them.) Lady
Priory -- Lady Mary Raffle -- Miss Dorrillon -- Lord Priory.


Lady Mary. Permit me, Lady Priory, to take you to the next room: we are going
to have tea immediately.


Lady Priory. I have drank tea, Madam.


Miss Dor. Already! It is only nine o'clock.


Lady Priory. Then it is near my hour of going to bed.

( Lord Priory, Sir William, and Mr. Norberry, retire to the back of the stage,
and talk apart.)
Lady Mary. Go to bed already! in the name of wonder, what time did you rise
this morning?


Lady Priory. Why, I do think it was almost six o'clock.


Lady Mary (in amaze.) And were you up at six this morning?


Lady Priory, Yes.


Miss Dor. At six in the month of January!


Lady Mary. It is not light till eight: and what good, now could you possibly
be doing for two hours by candlelight?


Lady Priory. Pray, Lady Mary, at what time did you go to bed?


Lady Mary. About three this morning.


Lady Priory. And what good could you possibly be doing for eleven hours by
candlelight?


Lady Mary. Good! It Is as much as can be expected from a woman of fashion* if
she does no harm.


Lady Priory. But I should fear you would do a great deal of harm to your
health, your spirits, and the tranquillity of your mind.

[ Mr. Norberry goes off -- Lord Priory and Sir William come forward.]
Lady Mary. Oh, my Lord Priory, I realy find all the accounts I have heard of
your education for a wife to be actually true! -- and I cannot help laughing to
think, if you and I chanced to have married together, what a different creature
you most likely would have made of me, to what I am at present!


Lord Priory. Yes; and what a different creature you most likely would have
made of me, to what I am at present.


Sir Wm. Lady Priory I am not accustomed to pay compliments, or to speak my
approbation, even when praise is a just tribute; but your virtues compel me to
an eulogium. -- That wise submission to a husband who loves you, that cheerful
smile so expressive of content, and that plain dress which indicates the
elegance as well as the simplicity, of your mind, are all symbols of a heart so
unlike to those which the present fashion of the day has misled --


Miss Dor. Why look so steadfastly on me, Mr. Mandred? Do you pretend to see my
heart?


Sir Wm. Have you any?


Miss Dor. Yes; and one large enough to hold -- even my enemy.


Enter Servant. Servant. Mr. Bronzely.


Miss Dor. Show him into the other room.

[Exit Servant.] Come, Lady Priory we must introduce you to Mr. Bronzely: he is
one of the most fashionable, agreeable, pleasant, whimsical unthinking, and
spirited creatures in all the world: you will be charmed --


Lady Priory. I dare ^a^ it is near ten o'clock. I am afraid I shall not be able to
keep awake.


Miss Dor. You must -- We are going to have a little concert -- 'Twill be
impossible to sleep.


Lady Mary. Upon my word, my Lord, your plan of management has made your wife
unfit for company.


Lord Priory. So much more fit to be a wife.


Lady Mary. She is absolutely fatigued with hard labor -- for shame! -- How
does household drudgery become her hand?


Lord Priory. Much better than cards and dice do yours.

[ Exit Lady Mary followed by Lord Prior, -- Sir William is left on the stage
alone.]
Sir Wm. She "has a heart large enough to receive her enemy." -- And by that
enemy she menas her father.

[ He sits down, and shew^ marks of inquietude. Enter Sir George Evelyn.
Sir George. I beg your pardon, Mr. Mandred -- I hope I don't interrupt you --
I only wished to speak to Miss Dorrillon.


Sir Wm. She is just gone into the next room,


Sir George. To the concert?


Sir Wm. Are not you invited?


Sir George. Yes; but before I go in, I wish to know who are the company. --
Can you tell whether -- a Mr. Bronzely is there?


Sir Wm. I know he is.


Sir George. Are you acquainted with him?


Sir Wm. I have met him here frequently.


Sir George. And are you certain he is here at present?


Sir Wm. I have reason to be certain.


Sir George. Any particular reason?


Sir Wm. Your mistress, when his name was announced, went out to him,
exclaiming "he was the most charming and accomplished man in the world."


Sir George ( greatly agitated.) She loves him, Sir -- I have reason to believe
-- to know she loves him. Thus she gives up my happiness and her own, to
gratify the vanity of a man who has no real regard for her; but whose
predominant passion is to enjoy the villainous name of a general seducer.


Sir Wm. ( rising.) Why do you suffer it?


Sir George. Hu^h! Don't repeat what I have said, or I lose her for ever. I am
at present under her resentment; and have just sent into the next room, to ask,
if she were there, to speak with her.


Enter Miss Dorrillon. Miss Dorrillon. And is it possible I was sent for by you?


Sir George. Don't be offended, that I should be uneasy and (...)


Miss Dor. I cannot forgive you, Sir, 'ti^ impossible.

( Going.
Sir George. You pardon those, (...) a, who offend you more.


Sir Wm. But an ungrateful mind always prefers the unworthy.


Miss Dor. Ah, Mr. Mandred, are you there? ( playfully And have you undertaken
to be sir George's counsel? If you have, I believe he must lose his cause. To
fit you for the tender task of advocate in love, -- have you ever been admitted
an honorable member of that court? Have you, with all that solemn wisdom of
which you are master, studied Ovid, as our great laywers study Blackstone? If
you have -- show cause -- why plaintiff has a right to defendant's heart.


Sir Wm. A man of fortune, of family, and of character, ought at least to be
treated with respect, and with honor.


Miss Dor. You mean to say, That A is beloved by B, why should not A be
constrained to return B's love? Counselor for defendant -- Because, moreover,
and besides B who has a claim on defendant's heart, there are also C, D, E, F,
and G; all of whom put in their separate claims -- and what, in this case, can
poor A do? She is willing to part and divide her love, share and share alike;
But B will have all or none: so poor A must remain A by herself A


Sir George. Do you think I would accept of a share of your heart!


Miss Dor. Do you think I could afford to give it you all? "Besides," says
defendant's counselor, I will prove that plaintiff B has no heart to give
defendant in return -- he has, indeed, a pulsation on the left side; but as it
never beat with any thing but suspicion and jealousy; in the laws of love, it
is not termed, admitted, or considered a heart.

( Going.
Sir Geoege. Where are you going?


Miss Dor. To the music-room, to be sure: and if you follow me, it shall be to
see me treat every person there better than yourself -- and Mr. Bronzely, whom
you hate to see me treat him best of all.

( Exit.
Sir George. I must follow you, though to death.

( Exit.
Sir Wm. Fool, -- and yet am not I near^y as weak as he is? Else why do (...)
^inger in this house? Why feed my hopes with some propitious moment to waken
her to repentance? Why (...) anxiously wish to ward off some dreadful fate? --
If she would marry sir George, now -- if she would give me only one proof of
discretion, I think I would endeavor to take her to my heart.


Enter Mr. Bronzely, in great haste. Bronzely. My dear sir, will you do me the
greatest favor in the world? -- You must do it in an instant too. Do, my dear
sir, ask no questions; but lend me your coat for a single moment, and take mine
-- only for a moment -- I cannot explain reasons now, my impatience is so
great; -- but, the instant you have complied, I will inform you of the whole
secret; and you will for ever rejoice that you granted my request.

( Pulling off his coat.
Sir Wm. ( aside, with great scorn.) And this very contemptible fellow is the
favored lover of my daughter! -- I Will -- (after a struggle) -- yes -- I Will
make myself master of his secret -- it may possibly concern her -- my child --
my child's safety may depend upon it.


Bronzely. Dear Mr. Mandred, no time is to be lost!


Sir Wm. This is rather a strange request, Mr. Bronzely. However, your fervency
convinces me you must have some very forcible reason. -- There Is my coat, Sir.

(Gives it him.
Bronzely. Thank you, dear Sir, a thousand times. -- This goodness I shall
forever remember -- This binds me to you forever! -- (putting it on.) Thank
you, Sir, a thousand times!

( Bowing, dressed, and composed.)
Sir Wm. (after putting on the other coat.) And now, Sir, explain the cause of
this metamorphosis -- let me have the satisfaction to know what advantage will
accrue from it; and in what I have to rejoice.


Bronzely. Will you promise me not to reveal the secret, if I trust you with it?


Sir Wm. Would you add conditions after the bargain is made? I must know your
secret instantly.

(Threatening.
Bronzely. Then I will disclose it to you voluntarily; and rely on your honor
to keep it.


Sir Wm. (attentively.) Well, Sir.


Bronzely. Hark! I thought I heard somebody coming!

((...) to go.
Sir Wm. I insist upon the information.

( Laying hold of him.
Bronzely. Well, then, Sir -- well -- you shall -- you shall. -- Then, Sir --
in the small gallery, which separates the music-room from the rest of these
apartments -- in that little gallery, the lamp, unfortunately, is just gone
out. -- I was (as unfortunately) coming along, when the whisking of a woman's
gown made me give a sudden start! -- I found a person was in the gallery with
me, and in the dark.


Sir Wm. Well* Sir!


Bronzely. And so, confidently assuring myself, that it was Miss Dorrillon's
waiting-maid, or Lady Mary's waiting-maid, I most unluckily clasped my arms
around her, and took one kiss.


Sir Wm. Only one?


Bronzely. There might be half a dozen! I will not pretend to swear to one. We'll
say half a dozen, before I knew who she was. My rapidity would not let her
breathe at first, and she was fairly speechless. But the moment she recovered
her breath, she cried, "Villain! whoever you are, you will repent this;" -- and
I found it was the voice of a lady to whom I had just been introduced in the
concert-room, one Lady Priory -- It seems she was stealing to bed at the time
we unhappily met.


Sir Wm. But what has this to do with your coat?


Bronzely. A great deal, sir -- you will find a great deal. -- As I perceived
she did not know me, I carefully held my tongue -- but she, with her prudish
notions, called "Help!" and "Murder!" On which, I flew to the door, to get away
before the lights could be brought -- she flew after me; and, as I went out,
exclaimed -- Don't hope to conceal yourself: I shall know you among the whole
concert-room; for I carry scissors hanging at my side, and I have cut a piece
off your coat. -- [ Sir William looks hastily at his coat -- on which Bronzely
holds up the part cut*] -- and sure enough, so she had!


Sir Wm. ( in anger.) And what, sir, am I to have the disgrace --


Bronzely. Either you or I must.


Sir Wm. And do you dare --


Bronzely. Consider, my dear sir, how much less the ^ault is, if perpetrated by
you, than by me! This is the first offense of the kind which, I dare say, you
have committed this many a year; and it will be overlooked in you. But I have
been suspected of two or three things of the same sort within a very short
time; and I should never be forgiven.


Sir Wm. Nor ought you to be forgiven -- it would be scandalous in me to
connive --


Bronzely. But would it not be more scandalous to reveal the secret of a person
who confided in you? -- who flew to you in distress, as his friend, the partner
of his cares?


Sir Wm. Your impertinence to me, but more your offense to a woman of virtue,
deserves punishment. Yet I think the punishment of death, in the way that a man
of my Lord Priory's temper might inflict it, much too honorable for your
deserts; so I save your life for some less creditable end. I lend you my coat,
to disgrace you by existence; and will go to my chamber, and put on another
m^self. ( Passes Bronzel, in order to retire to his chamber.)


Enter Lord Priory, who meets him. Sir Wm. starts. Bronzely. [ going up to Lord
Priory.) Ah, my Lord! is the concert over? charming music! that solo was divine.


[ Sir Wm. steals to a chair, and sits down to hide his coat.]


Lord Priory [ after looking inquisitively at Bronzely's dress.] It is time the
concert should be over -- it had been better it had never begun; for there have
been some very improper persons admitted. [ In great anger.]


Bronzely. [ affecting surprise.] Indeed!


Lord Priory ( trembling with rage) I am at a loss how to act. ( Draws a chair
with violence, and places himself down by Sir William -- Sir William appears
disconcerted and uneasy.) But if I could find the man to whom this piece of
cloth belongs --


Bronzely. What! this small piece of woolen cloth?


Lord Priory. Yes, then I should know how to act. In the mean time, Mr Mandred,
as I know you are a great admirer of my wife [ Sir William starts], and a grave
prudent man of honor, I come to ask your advice, how I am the most likely to
find out the villain who has dared to insult her; for a gross insult she has
received from one of Mr. Norberry's visitors, wearing a coat of which this is a
part.


Bronzely. The villain, no doubt, stole out of the house immediately.


Lord Priory. I ordered the street door to be guarded that instant -- and you,
Mr. Bronzely, are now the last man whose habit I have examined.


Bronzely. And you see I am perfectly whole. [ turning round.


Lord Priory. I do see -- I do see. [ Sir William moves about on his chair, and
appears greatly embarrassed. Lord Priory starts up in a violent passion -- Sir
William starts up with him.]


Lord Priory. I Will find him out if he is on earth -- I Will find him out if -- My
passion carries me away -- I have not coolness to detect him myself -- I Will
employ another -- I Will send Oliver in search. Oliver! [ calling] Oliver! here,
Oliver! Why don't you answer when you are called, you stupid, dull, idle,
forgetful, blundering, careless, self-sufficient --

[Exit in a fury.
Sir Wm. ( rising with great dignity.) And now, Mr. Bronzely, how do you think
you are to repay me, for having fe^t one transitory moment of shame?
Understand, Sir, that shame is one of the misfortunes to which I have never --


Enter Lady Mary. Bronzely ( Aside to Sir Wm) Sit down, sit down -- sit down --
hold your tongue, and sit down.

[ Sir William reluctantly retires to his chair.
Lady Mary. Well, I do most cordially rejoice, when peevish, suspicious, and
censorious people, meet with humiliation! I could die with laughing at the
incident which has put both my Lord and my Lady Priory into the greatest
terror, grief, and rage.


Sir Wm. ( rising.) I am out of all patience. The malicious depravity of
persons in a certain sphere of life is not to be borne. [ With firmness and
solemnity.] Lady Mary -- Mr. Bronzely --


Bronzely ( in a half whisper to him.) Go away -- don't expose yourself --
steal out of the room -- take my advice, and go to bed -- hide yourself. So
great is my respect for you, I would not have you detected for the world.


Sir Wm. I am going to retire, sir. I would not throw my friend's house into
confusion and broils; therefore I am as well pleased not to be detected as you
can be. ( Goes to the door, then turns.) But before I quit the room, I am
irresistibly impelled to say -- Mr. Bronzely! Lady Mary! while you continue to
ridicule all that is virtuous, estimable, dignified, your vices most assuredly
will plunge you into that very disgrace --


( Enter Oliver, and places the piece of cloth against Sir William's coat.)
Oliver. It Is as exact a match as ever was -- it fits to a thread. Ha, ha, ha!
-- Ha, ha, ha, ha!


Sir Wm. Rascal!


Bronzely. Did not I entreat you to go to-bed!


Lady Mary. Oh! this is the highest gratification I ever knew. My Lord! my
Lord! ( calling.)


Bronzely. Hush, hush! -- hold, for heaven's sake.


Oliver. But mercy and goodness defend us! who would have thought of this grave
gentleman? Ha, ha, ha! -- I can tell you what, sir; my Lord will be in a
terrible passion with you. This house will not ho^d you both; and I am sure I hate
to make mischief. -- Mum -- I Will say nothing about it. ( clapping Sir William
on the shoulder.) And so make yourself eas^.


Bronzely ( on the other side of Sir William.) Yes, make yourself easy.


Oliver* A good servant should sometimes be a peacemaker -- for my part, I have
faults of my own, and so, I dare say, has that gentleman -- and so, I dare say,
has that gentlewoman. But of all the birds in the wood, how came you to make up
to my Lady? Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha!


Bronzely. No jests -- no jests. Mr. Mandred is my best friend. -- and he is
not so much to b^ame as you think, for -- Good night, my dear sir. Heaven bless
you. I thank you a thousand times. Good night. (Shaking hands with Sir William,
and leading him toward the door)


Sir Wm. (with steady composure) Good night. Good night. Lady Mary.

( Exit.
Oliver. Why, he never so much as once said he was obliged to me.


Lady Mary. I am sure, if you do not discover this to your master, I will.


Oliver. Oh! as that old gentleman had not manners to say "thank you for your
kindness," I Will go tell my Lord directly.

(Exit.
Bronzely. (running after him.) No, no, no -- stop Oliver. He is gone!


Lady Mary. What makes you thus anxious and concerned, Bronzely? Now, I wish I
may suffer death, if, ti^l I came into this room, I did not think you were the
offender.


Bronzely. (...) indeed! -- No, if I could have been tempted to offend any
woman in this house in a similar manner, it could have been none but you.

[Bowing
Lady Mary. No, Bronzely, no; I have been too partial to you, to have any
remaining claims -- Hark! don't I hear Lord Priory's voice in a dreadful rage?


Bronzely. Then Oliver has accused him* What shall I do to prevent mischief?
Dear Lady Mary, as it is not proper for me to stay here any ^onger uninvited,
do you run and try to pacify my Lord Priory. Te^^ him Mandred does not sleep
here tonight; and in the morning you are sure he will make an apology.


Lady Mary. I will do as you desire -- but I know Mr. Mandred so well, that I
am sure he will not.

[Exit.
Bronzely. Then I will for him. Early in the morning, I Will wait on Lady Priory,
and beg pardon in his name without his knowing it. Yes, I have got poor Mandred
into a difficulty, and it is my duty to get him out of it. And then, I shall
not only serve him, but have one interview more with that heavenly woman.

[Exit.
ACT III.
SCENE I. An Apartment at Mr. Norberry's.
Enter Mr. Bronzely, followed by a servant. Bronzely (looking at his watch.) I
am early, I know -- but Lady Priory is the only person I wish to see. Is my
Lord with her?


Servant. No, sir, Lord Priory sat up very late, and is in bed yet.


Bronzely. Acquaint Lady Priory a person who comes on urgent business, begs to
speak with her. If she asks my name, you know it. ( Exit Servant.) Pray heaven
she may bless me with her sight: Never was so enchanted b^ a woman in my life
-- and never was played such a trick in my life* I am half inflamed b^ love,
and half by spite, once more to attempt her.


Enter Lady Priory -- he bows most respectfully, she cur^s^es. Bronzely. Lady
Priory, I come -- I come upon rather an a^^ ward, yet a very serious business:
it was my misfortune to be among that company yesterday evening, where an
unworthy member of it had the insolence to offer an aff^^nt to your resplendent
virtue --


Lady Priory. I have some household accounts to arrange, and breakfast to make
for my Lord as soon as he (...) his (...); therefore, if you please, Sir
proceed to the business ^n which you came, without thinking it necessary to
interrupt it by any compliment to me.


Bronzely. I will be concise, Madam. -- In a word* I wait upon you from Mr.
Mandred, with the most humble apology for his late conduct, which he
acknowledges to have been indecorous and unwarrantable: but he trusts, that in
consequence of the concession which I now make for him, the whole matter wi^^,
from this hour, be buried in oblivion.


Lady Priory [ going to the side of the scene, and speaking.] If my Lord is at
leisure, te^l him here is a gentleman would be glad to speak with him. -- To
Bronzely. I am sorry, Sir, you should know so little of the rules of our
family, as to suppose that I could give an answer upon any subject in which my
husband condescends to be concerned.

[Going.
Bronzely. Lady Priory, stop. You can at least use your power to soften Lord
Priory's resentment; and unless this apology is accepted, a challenge must
follow, and possibly he may fall.


Lady Priory. Possibly. [ Sighing.]


Bronzely. You are interested for your husband's life?


Lady Priory. Certainly. But I set equal value on his reputation.

[Going.
Bronzely. Hear me one sentence more -- I cannot part from her. Aside] Oh I
have something of such importance to communicate to you -- and yet -- I know
not how!


Lady Priory. Then te^^ it to my husband.


Bronzely. Hem, hem. Aside]. Oh! Lady Priory, if the insult of last night has
given you offense, should you not wish to be informed of a plan laid for yet
greater violence?

[She starts]
Lady Priory. Good heaven!


Bronzely* This is neither time nor place to disclose what I wish to say -- nor
do I know how to find an opportunity to speak with you alone, free from the
possibility of intrusion; where I could revea^ a secret to you, which is
connected with your happiness, with your future peace,


Lady Priory. You alarm me beyond expression. I am going to my own house about
twelve o'clock, for a couple of hours -- follow me there.


Bronzely. And I shall be admitted?


Lady Priory. Certain^^ -- for you have excited my curiosity, and I am all
impatience to hear what you have to communicate that so much concerns me.


Bronzely. Promise then, no person but yourself shall ^ver know of it. [ She
hesitates.] Unless you promise this, I (...)


Lady Priory. [ after a second hesitation] I do promise -- I promise faithfully.


Bronzely. Your word is sacred, I rely.


Lady Priory. Most sacred.


Bronzely. And you promise that no one but yourself shall know of the
appointment we have now made at your house, nor of the secret which I will then
disclose to you.


Lady Priory. I promise faithfully that no one but myself shall ever know of
either.


Bronzely. Remember then to be there alone, exactly --


Lady Priory. At one o'clock.


Bronzely. And that your servants have orders to show me to you.


Lady Priory. I am too much interested to forget one circumstance.


Bronzely. Go now then to Lord Priory with Mandred's apology -- and arge his
acceptance of it, with all that persuasion by which you are formed to govern,
while you appear to obey.


Lady Priory. I will present the apology as I received it from you; but do not
imagine I dare give my opinion upon it, unless I am desired.


Bronzely. But if you are desired, you will then say --


Lady Priory. Exactly what I think.

[Exit.
Bronzely. I Will do a meritorious act this very day. This poor woman lives in
slavery with her husband. I Will give her an opportunity to run away from him.
When we meet, I Will have a post-chaise waiting a few doors from her house;
boldly tell her that I love her; and -- ( Enter Miss Dorrillon.) -- My dear
Miss Dorrillon, I could not sleep all night, but am come thus early on purpose
to complain of your treatment of me during the whole of yesterday evening. Not
one look did you glance toward me -- and there I sat in miserable solitude up
in one corner the whole time of the concert.


Miss Dor. I protest I did not see you! -- and, stranger still! never thought
of you.


Bronzely. You then like another better than you do me?


Miss Dor. I do.


Bronzely. Do you tell him so?


Miss Dor. No.


Bronzely. You tell him you like me the best.


Miss Dor. Yes.


Bronzely. Then I will believe what you say to him, and not what you say to me.
-- And though you charge me with inconstancy, yet I swear to you, my beloved
Maria, ( taking her hand) that no woman, no woman but yourself --


Enter Sir William, and starts at seeing his Daughter in such close
conversation with Bronzely. Sir William ( aside.) How familiar! -- My eyes
could not be shocked with a sight half so wounding to my heart as this!

Bronzely (apart to Miss Dorrillon)
Hush! you have heard the story; but don't laugh at him now. He is in a
devilish ill humor, and it will all fall on me. Go away. -- It Is a very good
story, but laugh at him another time.


Miss Dor. I don't believe a word of the story; yet, as a received opinion, it
is a charming weapon for an enemy, and I long to use it.


Bronzely. Not now, not now -- because I have some business with him, and
'twill put him out of temper. (He hands her to the door)

( Exit Miss Dor.
Sir Wm ( Looking steadfastly after her.) Poor girl! Poor girl! I am not yet
sufficiently enraged against her, not to compassionate her for her choice! --
Is this the man who is to be, for life, her companion, her protector?


Bronzely. Well, Mr Mandred, I believe I have settled it.


Sir Wm. Settled what? (anxiously)


Bronzely. At least I have done all in my power to serve you; perhaps you don't
know that Mr. Oliver divulged the whole affair. But I have waited on my Lady
Priory, and I do believe I have settled it with her, to manage it so with my
Lord, that every thing shall be hu^hed up. You may expect a few jests among
your female acquaintance, and a few epig^a^^s in the newspapers; but I verily
believe every thing material is safe. -- Is there any farther satisfaction
which you demand from me?


Sir William. Not at present -- a man is easily satisfied who possesses both
courage and strength to do himself right, whenever he feels his wrongs
oppressive. I have as yet found but little inconvenience from the liberties you
have taken with me; and what, just at this time, far more engages my attention
than revenge, is an application to you for intelligence. Without farther
preface, do you pay your addresses to the young lady who lives in this house?


Bronzely. Yes I do, Sir -- I do.


Sir William. You know, I suppose, which of the two ladies I mean?


Bronzely. Which ever you mean Sir 'its all the same; for I pay my addresses to
them both.


Sir William [ starting.] To them both!


Bronzely. I always do.


Sir William. And pray, which of them do you love?


Bronzely. Both, Sir -- upon my word, both -- I assure you, both.


Sir William. But you don't intend to marry both?


Bronzely. I don't intend to marry either: and indeed, the woman whom I love
best in the world, has a husband already. Do you suppose I could con^ine my
affections to Lady Mary or Miss Dorrillon, after Lady Priory appeared? do you
suppose I did not know who it was I met last night in the dark? wherever I
visit, Mr. Mandred, I always make love to every woman in the house: and I
assure you they all expect it -- I assure you, Sir, they all expect it.

[ Sir William walks about in anger.]
Bronzely. Have you any further commands for me?


Sir William. Yes, one word more -- And you really have no regard for this girl
who parted from you as I came in?


Bronzely. Oh yes, pardon me -- I admire, I adore, I love her to distraction:
and if I had not been so long acquainted with my Lady Mary, nor had seen my
Lady Priory last night, I should certainly call Sir George Evelyn to an account
for being so perpetually with her.


Sir William ( anxiously.) Do you think he loves her?


Bronzely. Yes, I dare say, as well as I do.


Sir William. Do you think she likes him?


Bronzely. I think she likes me.


Sir William. But, with your method of affection, she may like him too.


Bronzely. She may, she may -- In short, there is no answering for what she
likes -- all whim and flightiness -- acquainted with every body -- conquetting
with every body -- and in debt with every body. Her mind distracted between the
claims of lovers, and the claims of creditors, -- the anger of Mr. Norberry,
and the want of intelligence from her father!


Sir William. She is in a hopeful way.


Bronzely. Oh, it would be impossible to think of marrying her in her present
state -- for my part, I cannot -- and I question whether Sir George would -- But
if her father come home, and give her the fortune that was once expected, why
then I may pos^^bly marry her myself


Sir William ( firmly.) She will never have any fortune -- I came from India
lately, you know; and you may take my word her father is not coming over, nor
will he ever come.


Bronzely. Are you sure of that?


Sir William. Very sure.


Bronzely. Then keep it a secret -- don't tell her so -- poor thing! it would
break her heart. She is do^tingly fond of her father.


Sir William. Hah! how! -- oh no, she can have no remembrance of him.


Bronzely. Not of his person, perhaps: but he has constantly corresponded with
her; sent her presents, and affectionate letters -- and you know a woman's
heart is easily impressed.


Sir William. I never heard her mention her father.


Bronzely. Not to you -- but to us who are kind to her, she talks of him
continually. She cried bitterly the other day when the last ship came in, and
there was no account of him.


Sir William. Did she? did she? (eagerly.) Aye, I suppose she is alarmed lest
he should be dead, and all his fortune lost.


Bronzely. No, I believe her affection for him is totally unconnected with any
interested view^ I have watched her upon that head, and I believe she loves her
father sincerely.


Sir Wm. (wiping a tear from his eye.) I believe it does not matter whom she
loves!


Bronzely. By the bye, she hates you.


Sir Wm. I thought so.


Bronzely. Yes you may be satisfied of that. Yes, she even quarrelled with me
the other day for speaking in your favor: you had put her in a passion, and
she said "no one that loved (...), ought to have any ^^spect for you."


Sir Wm. I am much obliged to her -- very much obliged to her. Did she say
nothing more?


Bronzely. Only "that you were ill-natured, dogmatic, cruel, and inso ent."
Nothing more. -- And say what she will against you, you know you can be even
with her.


Sir Wm. Yes, I can be even with her, and I will (...) even with her.


Enter Lord Priory, and takes Bronzely on one side. Lord Priory. I have
accepted this man's apology. -- I will not call him to a serious account; but
he shall not escape every kind of resentment. I am resolved to laugh at him; to
turn the whole affair into mirth and good humor; and at the same time to (...)
him to the heart. Good morning, Mr. Mandred -- how do you do this morning, Mr.
Mandred? -- Let me go ( violently to Bronzely) I must joke with him.


Bronzely. But neither your voice nor your looks agree with your words.


Lord Priory. Mr. Mandred, I did not intend to be angry -- but it would give
too respectable an air to a base action -- and so I am come to laugh at you. [
Enter Lady Mary.] And I am sure, you, Lady Mary, will join even me, in laughing
at this man of gallantry.


Lady Mary. Oh, I am absolutely afraid to come near the Tarquin!


Sir Wm. You need not, Lady Mary; for there can be no Tarquin without a
Lucretia.


Lord Priory. However, Mr. Mandred, it is proper I should tell you, I accept
the apology you have made: but at the same time --


Sir Wm [ hastily.] What do you mean, my Lord? I have made no apology.


Bronzely. Yes, yes, you have -- I called and made one for you.


Sir Wm. Made an apology for me! You have just gone one step too far then; and
I insist --


Bronzely [ Drawing Sir William on one side.] I will -- I will set every thing
to rights. It would be base in me if I did not; and I will. ( Turns to Lord
Priory and Lady Mary.) Yes, Mr* Mandred, I will retrieve your character at the
expense of my own. I am more able to contend with the frenzy of a jealous
husband than you are -- ( Enter Miss Dorril on and Sir George Evelyn.) -- I am
happy to see (...) -- you are just come in time to hear me clear the grave,
(...) ^^^pectable character of my friend Mr. Mandred, and (...) ^ise my own. --
My Lord, vent all your anger an^ (...) upon me. It was I [pray believe me, I
beg you will; ^^n't doubt my word], it was I who committed the offense of which
my friend, the man I respect and reverence, stands accused -- It was I who
offended my Lady Priory, and then --


Lord Priory. It cannot be -- I will not believe you.


Lady Mary. But how generous and noble in him to take it upon himself!


Bronzely ( to Sir William.) There! what can I do more? You see they will not
believe me! -- Tell me what I can do more? Can I do any thing more? -- My
feelings are wounded on your account, more than on m^ own, and compel me,
though reluctantly, to quit the room.

( Exit.
Sir George. I am at a ^oss which to admire most, the warmth of Mr. Bronzely's
friendship, or the coldness (...) Mr. Mandred's gratitude!


Lady Mary Oh! if it were not for that happy steadiness of feature, he could
not preach rectitude of conduct as he does.


Lord Priory ( going up to Sir William.) Eloquent admonisher of ^outh!


Miss Dor. ( going to him.) Indeed, my rigid monitor, I cannot but express
admiration, that, under those austere looks, and that sullen brow, there still
should ^urk --


Sir Wm. Have a care -- don't proceed -- stop where you are -- dare not you
complete a sentence that is meant to mock me. -- I have borne the impertinence
of this whole company with patience, with contempt; but dare you to breathe an
accent suspicio^s of my conduct, and I will instantl^ teach you how to respect
me, and to shrink with horror from yourself.

( She stands motionless in surprise.
Lord Priory. What a passion he is in! Compose yourself, Mr. Mandred.


Miss Dor. I protest, Mr. Mandred --


Sir Wm. Silence. ( Raising his voice.) Dare not to address yourself to me.


Lady Mary. Did you ever hear the like? -- And I ^ow she looks awed by him!


Lord Priory. How strange, that a man cannot command his temper!


Sir George. Mr. Mandred, permit me to say, I have ever wish (...) to treat you
with respect -- nor would (...) be rash in laying that wish aside. -- Yet, I
must now take upon me to assure you, that if you think to offend every lady in
this house with imp^^^ity, you are mistaken.


Sir Wm. Sir George, if you mean to frighten me by your threats, I Will laugh at
you -- but if your warmth is really kindled, and by an attachment to that
unworthy object, ( pointing to Miss Dorrillon) I o^^y pity you.


Sir George. Insufferable! -- (going up to him.) -- Instantly make an atonement
for what you have said, or expect the consequence!


Sir Wm. And pray, Sir George, what atonement does your justice demand?


Sir George. Retract your words -- Acknowledge you were grossly deceived when
you said Miss Dorrillon was unworthy.


Sir Wm. Retract m^ words!


Sir George. Were they not unjust? -- Is it a reproach, that, enveloped in the
maze of fashionable life, she has yet preserved her virtue unsuspected? That,
encumbered with the expenses consequent to her connections, she has proudly
disdained even from me the honorable offer of pecuniary aid? that her fond
hope still fixes on the return of an absent parent, whose blessing she
impatiently expects? and that I should have watched her whole conduct with an
eye of scrutinizing jealousy, and yet have only beheld that which makes me
aspire, as the summit of earthly happiness, to become her husband?


Sir Wm. Young man, I admire your warmth ( with great fervor and affection)
There is much compassion, and benevolence, and charity, in sometimes mistaking
the vicious for the virtuous; -- and if in the heat of contention I have said a
word reflecting on your character, I am ready to avow my error; and before this
company to beg your pardon.


Sir George. That is not enough, Sir -- ( taking Miss Dorrillon by the hand,
and leading her forwar^ -- you must ask this lady's pardon.

( Sir William starts, and turns his face away, strongly impressed.)
Sir Wm. Ask her pardon! Though I forgive some insults I will not this. -- Ask
her pardon? --


Miss Dor. Nay, nay, sir George, you have no business with Mr. Mandred's
quarrels and mine -- Reserve your heroic courage for some nobler purpose than a
poor woman*s reputation.


Sir George. Point out a nobler, and I Will give up this.


Lady Mary. There is none so noble? And I wish Sir George you would undertake
to vindicate mine.


Lord Priory. Come, Lady Mary, let us retire, and leave these two irritable men
to themselves.


Lady Mary. Come, Maria, let us leave them alone. He Will teach Mr. Mandred to be
civil for the future.


Miss Dor. ( in great agitation) Dear madam, I would not leave them a one for
the world!


Lady Mary. Then my Lord, you and I will; they have no offensive weapons; so we
may venture to leave them.


Lord Priory. This comes of being too warm in conversation! This comes of being
in a passion!

( Exeunt Lord Priory and Lady Mary.
Sir George. While there is a female present, I have only to say -- good
morning, Mr. Mandred*

( Going.
Miss Dor (catching hold of him*) For once I give up my pride to soften yours.
Come, do not ^ook thus determined? -- I am sure Mr* Mandred did not mean to
offend me; the words he made use of fell from his lips by accident.


Sir Wm. They did not -- I meant them -- I mean them still -- and I repeat them


Miss Dor. (to Sir William) Now how can you be so provoking? -- Nay, hold Sir
George, (he offers to go) you shall not go away with that frowning brow. (She
draws him gently toward Sir William, then takes Sir William's hand) Nor you,
with yours -- Come shake hands for my sak^. -- Now, as I live, Sir George, Mr.
Mandred's hand fee^s warmer and kinder than yours -- he tries to draw it back,
but he has not the heart. ( Sir William snatches it away as by compulsion.) --
Thou art a strange personage! -- thou will not suffer me either to praise or to
dispraise thee -- Come Sir George, make up this difference -- for if you were
to ^ight, and Mr. Mandred was to fall --


Sir Wm. What then?


Miss Dor. Wh^^, "I could better spare a better man."


Sir Wm. How!


Miss Dor. I see you are both sul^en both obstinate, and I have but one
resource -- Sir George, if you aspire to my hand, dare not to ^ift yours
against Mr. Mandred He and I profess to be enemies; but if may judge of his
feelings by my own, we have but passing enmities -- bear him no ma^ice, nor he
me, I dare be sworn* Therefore Sir, li^t but your arm against him, or insult
him with another word, and our intercourse is for ever at an end*

( Exit.
( Sir George and Sir William stand for some time silent) Sir George. Why is it
in the power of one woman to make two men look ridiculously?


Sir Wm. I am at a loss to know, Sir, whether you and I part friends or enemies
-- However, cal^ on me in the way you best like, and you will find me ready to
meet you either as an enemy, or as a friend, ( Exeunt separately.


ACT IV.
SCENE I. A Hall at Lord Priory's.
Two Servants discovered s^itting -- Another enters. First Serve. -- Do you
hear, Mr. Porter, you are to admit no person but Mr. Bronzely.


Second Serve. Mr. Bronzely -- very well -- (a loud rapping) -- and there I
suppose he is.


First Servant, looking through the window. Yes; that I believe is his carriage
-- ( to Third Servant) -- Let my ady know.

( Exit Third Servant.
Enter Bronzely. Bronzely. You are sure lady Priory is at home?


First Serve -- Yes, Sir, and gave orders to admit nobody but you.


Bronzely. Has she been some time at home?


First Serve. -- Yes, Sir; I dare say my lady came from Mr. Norberry's half an
hour ago.


Bronzely. Waiting for me half an hour -- (aside) -- Show me her instantly.

( Exit, following the Serv^nt hastily.)
SCENE II. An Apartment at Lord Priory's.
Enter Bronzely and Lady Priory on opposite sides. Bronzely. My dear lady
Priory, how kind you are not to have forgotten your promise


Lady Priory. How was it possible (...) should? I have been so anxious for the
intelligence ^ou have to communicate, that it was pain to wait till the time
arrived.


Bronzely. Thus invited, encouraged to speak, I will speak boldly -- and I can
heaven to witness, that what I am going to sa^ --


Lady Priory. No, stay a moment ^onger -- don't tell me just yet -- ( listening
toward the side of the scenes) -- for I wish him to hear the very beginning.


Bronzely. Who, hear the very beginning?


Enter Lord Priory -- Bronzely starts. Lord Priory. I have not kept you
waiting, (...) hope. My lawyer stopped me on business, or I should have been here
sooner. My dear Mr. Bronzely (going up to him) (...) thank you a thousand times
for the interest you take in my concerns; and I come prepared with proper
coo^ness and composure to hear the secret with which you are going to entrust us


Bronzely* The secret! -- yes, Sir -- The secret which I was going to disclose
to my lady Priory -- Ha, ha, ha! -- But, my lord, I am afraid it is of too
frivolous a nature for your attention.


Lord Priory. I account nothing frivolous which concerns my wife.


Bronzely. Certainly, my Lord, certainly not.


Lord Priory. Besides, she told me it was of the utmost importance. Did not
you? (angrily.)


Lady Priory. He said so.


Bronzely. And so it was -- it was of importance then -- just at the very time
I was speaking to Lady Priory on the subject.


Lady Priory. You said so but this very moment.


Lord Priory. Come, come, tell it immediately, whatever it is. Come, let us
hear it. -- ( after waiting some time) Why, Sir, you look as if you were
ashamed of it? What can be the meaning of this?


Bronzely. To be plain, my lord, my secret will disclose the folly of a person
for whom I have a sincere regard.


Lord Priory. No matter -- let every fool look like a fool, and every villain
be known for what he is -- Tell your story.


Lady Priory. How can you deprive me of the pleasure you promised? You said it
would prevent every future care.


Lord Priory. Explain, Sir. I begin to feel myself not quite so composed as I
expected. You never, perhaps, saw me in a passion -- she has -- and if you were
once to see me really angry --


Bronzely, Then, my lord, I am apt to be passionate too -- and I boldly tell
you, that what I had to reveal, though perfectly proper, was meant for lady
Priory alone to hear. I entreated your ladyship not to mention to my lord that
I had any thing to communicate, and you gave me a solemn promise you would not.


Lady Priory. Upon my honor, during our whole conversation upon that subject,
you never named my lord Priory's name.


Bronzely. I charged you to keep what I had to tell you a profound secret.


Lady Priory. Yes; but I thought you understood I could have no secrets from my
husband.


Bronzely. You promised no one should know it but yourself.


Lady Priory. He is myself.


Lord Priory. How, Mr. Bronzely, did you suppose she and I were two? Perhaps
you did, and that we wanted a third. Well, I quite forgive you for your si^ly
mistake, and laugh at you, ha, ha, ha, as I did at Mr. Mandred ( seriously --
Did you suppose, sir, we lived like persons of fashion of the modern (...)? Did
you imagine that a woman of her character could have a wish, a desire, even a
thought, a secret from her husband?


Bronzely. It is amazing to find so much fidelity the reward of tyranny!


Lady Priory. Sir -- I speak with humility -- I would not wish to give offense
-- ( timidly) -- But to the best of my observation and understanding, your sex,
in respect to us, are all tyrants. I was born to be the slave of some of you --
I make the choice to obey my husband.


Lord Priory. Yes, Mr. Bronzely; and I believe it is more her happiness to be
my slave, than your friend -- to live in fear of me, than in love with you --
Lady Priory, leave the room.

( Exit Lady Priory.
Lord Priory. Do you see -- did you observe the glow of truth and candor which
testifies that woman's faith? and do you not blush at having attempted it? Call
me a tyrant! Where are the signs? Oh, if every married man would follow my
system in the management of his wife, every impertinent lover would look just
as foolish as you!


Bronzely. This is all boasting, my lord -- you live in continual fear -- for
(without meaning any offense to lady Priory's honor) you know you dare not
trust her one hour alone with any man under sixty.


Lord Priory. I dare trust her at any time with a coxcomb.


Bronzely* That is declaring I am not one -- for I am certain you dare not
trust her alone with me.


Lord Priory ( in a passion) Yes, with fifty such.


Bronzely. But not with one -- and you are right, it might be dangerous.


Lord Priory (angrily) No, it would not.


Bronzely. (significantly) Yes, it would.


Lord Priory. Have not you had a trial?


Bronzely. But you were present. You constantly follow all her steps, watch all
she says and does. But I believe you are right -- wives are not to be trusted.


Lord Priory. Mine is.


Bronzely. No, my dear lord Priory, you must first become gentle, before you
can positively con^ide in her affection -- before you can trust her in a house,
or in any place, (...) one.


Lord Priory (hastily) To prove you are mistaken, I Will instantly go back to my
friend Norberry's, and leave you here to tell her the secret you boasted. Pay
your addresses to her, if that is the secret -- you have my free con^ent.


Bronzely. My dear friend, I Will accept it.


Lord Priory. Ay, I see you have hopes of supplanting me, by calling me your
friend -- But can you conceive now that she will listen to you?


Bronzely. You have given me leave to try, and cannot recall it.


Lord Priory. But depend upon it, you will meet with some terrible humiliation.


Bronzely. Either you or I shall.


Lord Priory. I shall laugh to hear you tumbled down stairs.


Bronzely. You are not to remain on the watch here; you are to return to Mr.
Norberry's.


Lord Priory. Was that the bargain?


Bronzely. Don't you remember? You said so.


Lord Priory. Well, if that will give you any satisfaction --


Bronzely. It will give me great satisfaction.


Lord Priory. Heaven forgive me, but your confidence makes me laugh. Ha, ha, ha!


Bronzely. And yours makes me laugh.


Enter Oliver. Lord Priory. Hah! What brings you here, Oliver? Lady Priory and
I are only come home for a few hours.


Oliver. I know it, my Lord. I thought nevertheless I might be wanted.


Bronzely. And so you are, good Mr. Oliver. Your Lord desires you to conduct me
to your Lady in the next room, and acquaint her it is with his permission I am
come to conclude the conversation which was just now interrupted -- Is not that
right, my Lord? Are not those words exactly corresponding with your kind
promise?


Lord Priory. I believe they are.


Oliver. I am "to take Mr. Bronzely to my Lady, and tell her you sent him"

( Exit Oliver.
Bronzely. Now this is perfect fashion; and while I step to Lady Priory, do you
go and comfort my intended wife, Lady Mary.


Lord Priory. I hate the fashion -- and were I not sure you would now be
received in a very unfashionable manner --


Bronzely. No rough dealings, I hope?


Lord Priory. Oh, you begin to be afraid, do you?


Bronzely. No -- but I have met with an accident or two lately -- and I am not
so well acquainted with ancient usages as to know in what manner a man of my
pursuits would have been treated in former times.


Lord Priory. A man of your pursuits. Mr. Bronzely, is of a very late date; and
to be shamed out of them by a wife like mine.


Bronzely. Then we shall all three be old-fashioned.

(Exit, following Oliver.
Lord Priory (returning and looking anxiously after Bron.) I am passionate -- I
am precipitate -- I have no command over my temper. -- However, if a man cannot
govern himself, yet he will never make any very despicable figure, as long as
he knows how to govern his wife.

( Exit.
SCENE III. Sir Wm.'s Apartment at Mr. Norberry's. -- Several trunks and
travelling-boxes. -- Sir Wm. discovered, packing writings into a port-folio.
Sir Wm. And here is the end of my voyage to England! -- a voyage, which for
years, my mind has dwelt on with delight! -- I pictured to myself my daughter
grown to womanhood, beautiful! and so she is. -- Accomplished! and so she is.
-- Virtuous! and so she is. -- Am I of a discontented nature then, that I am
not satisfied? -- Am I too nice? -- Perhaps I am. -- Soothing thought! -- I
will for a moment cherish it, and dwell with some little gratitude upon her
late anxiety for my safety. [ He walks about in a thoughtful musing manner.

A loud thrusting and rapping is heard at his chamber door.


Enter Miss Dor. hastily and in affright. Miss Dor. Oh Mr. Mandred, I beg your
pardon -- I did not know this was your apartment. But suffer me to lock the
door: [ she locks it] and conceal me for a moment, for heaven's sake.


Sir Wm. What Is the matter? Why have you locked my door?


Miss Dor. [ trembling]. I dare not tell you.


Sir Wm. I insist upon knowing.


Miss Dor. Why then -- I am pursued by a -- I cannot name the horrid name --


Nabson (without.) She went into this room.


Miss Dor. ( to Sir Wm.) Go to the door, and say I did not.


Sir Wm. How!


Nabson [ without.] Please to open the door.


Miss Dor. Threaten to beat him if he will not go away.


Sir Wm. Give me the key, and let me see from whom you want to hide. -- [
commandingly] -- Give me the key.


Miss Dor. [ collecting firmness.] I will not.


Sir Wm. [ starting.] "Will not" -- "Will not", when I desire you!


Miss Dor. No -- since you refuse me protection, I Will protect myself.


Sir Wm. But you had better not have made use of that expression to me -- you
had better not. Reca^l it by giving me the key.


Miss Dor. If I do, will you let me conceal myself behind that book-case, and
say I am not here?


Sir Wm. Utter a falsehood?


Miss Dor. I would for you. [ A hammering at the door.


Sir Wm. They are breaking open the door. -- Give me the key, I command you.


Miss Dor. "Command me!" "command me!" However there it is. [ Gives it him.]
And now, if you are a gentleman, give me up if you dare!


Sir Wm. "If I am a gentleman!" Hem, hem -- "If I am a gentleman!" "Dares" me
too!

[Going slowly toward the door.]
Miss Dor. Yes. I have now thrown myself upon your protection: and if you
deliver me to my enemies --


Sir Wm. What enemies? What business have you with enemies?


Miss Dor. It Is they have business with me.


Sir Wm. [ to them without.] I am coming. The door shall be opened.


Miss Dor. [ follows and lays hold of him.] Oh, for heaven's sake, have pity on
me -- they are merciless creditors -- I shall be d^^gged to a prison. Do not
deliver me up -- I am unfortunate -- I am overwhelmed with misfortune -- have
compassion on me! (She falls on her knees.)


Sir Wm. ( in great agitation) Don't kneel to me! -- I don't mean you to kneel
to me! -- What makes you think of kneeling to me? -- I must do my duty. ( He
unlocks the door.


Enter Nabson -- Miss Dorrillon steals behind the book-case. Sir Wm. What did
you want, Sir?


Nabson. lady, that I have just this minute made my prisoner; but she ran from
me, and ^ocked herself in here.


Sir Wm. [ with surprise.] A^^ested a ^ady!


Nabson. Yes, Sir; and if ^ou mean to deny her being here, I must make bold to
search the room.


Sir Wm. Let me look at your credent^^^s -- ( takes the writ) -- "Elizabeth
Dorrillon for six hundred pounds." Pray sir, is it customary to have female
names on pieces of paper of this denomination?


Nabson. Oh, yes, sir, very customary. There are as many ladies who will run
into tradesmen's books, as there are gentlemen; and when one goes to take the
ladies, they are a thousand times more slippery to catch than the men.


Sir Wm. Abominable* -- Well sir, your present prisoner shall not slip through
your hands, if I can prevent it. I scorn to defend a worth^ess woman, as much
as I should glory in preserving a good one and I give myself joy in being the
instrument of your executing justice -- [ He goes and ^ads Miss Dorrillon from
the place where she was concealed -- she casts down her head] -- What! do you
droop? Do you tremble? You, who at the ball tonight would have danced lightly,
though your poor creditor had been perishing with want! You who never asked
yourself if your extravagance might not send an industrious father of a family
to prison, can you feel on the prospect of going thither yourself?


Miss Dor. For what cause am I the object of your perpetual persecution?


Nabson. Lord! Madam, the gentleman means to bail you after all: I can see it
by his looks.


Sir Wm. How, rascal, dare you suppose, or imagine, or hint, such a thing? [
going up to him in anger.]


Miss Dor. That Is right, beat him out of the house.


Sir Wm. No, Madam, he shall not go out of the house without taking you along
with him. Punishment may effect in your disposition what indulgence has no hope
of producing. -- There Is your prisoner [ handing her over to him] -- and you
may take my word, that she will not be released by me, or by any one: and it
will be only adding to a debt she can never pay, to take her to any place
previous to a prison. ( with the emotion of resentment, yet deep sorrow.)


Nabson. Is that true, my lady?


Miss Dor* (after a pause) Very true. I have but one friend -- but one relation
in the world -- and he is far away.

( Weeps.) ( Sir William wipes his eyes.)
Nabson. More's the pity.


Sir Wm. No, sir, no -- no pity at all -- for if fewer ^ine ladies had friends,
we should have fewer examples of profligacy. ( She walks to the door, then
turns to Sir William.)


Miss Dor. I forgive you.

(Exit, followed by Nabson.
Sir William (looking after her.) And perhaps I could forgive you. But I must
not. No, this is justice -- this is doing my duty -- this is strength of mind
-- this is fortitude -- fortitude -- fortitude. (He walks proudly across the
^^^n, then stops, takes out his handkerchief, throws his head into it, and is
going off.)


Enter Lady Mary -- a man following at a distance. Lady Mary. Mr. Mandred, Mr.
Mandred. (He turns.) Sir -- Mr. Mandred -- Sir -- (in a supp^^cating tone) I
presume -- I presume, sir --


Sir Wm. What, Madam? what?


Lady Mary. I came, sir, to request a favor of you.


Sir Wm. So it should seem, b^ that novel deportment.


Lady Mary. If you would for once consi^^^ with lenity, frailty incidental to a
woman who lives in the gay world -- the


Sir Wm. Well, Madam!


Lady Mary. How much she is led away by the temptation of fine clothes, fine
coaches, and fine things.


Sir Wm. Come to the business.


Lady Mary. You are rich, we all know, though you endeavor to disguise the
truth.


Sir Wm. I cannot stay to hear you, if you don't proceed.


Lady Mary. My request is -- save from the dreadful horrors of a jail, a woman
who has no friend near her -- a woman who may have inadvertent^y offended you,
but who never --


Sir Wm. it is in vain for you to plead on her account -- she knows my
sentiments upon her conduct -- she knows the opinion I have formed of her --
and you cannot prevail on me to change it.


Lady Mary. Do you suppose I come to plead for Miss Dor.


Sir Wm. Certainly.


Lady Mary. No, I am pleading for myself. I am unfortunately involved in
similar circumstances -- I have a similar debt to the self-same tradesman, and
we are both at present in the self-same predicament.


Sir Wm. And upon what pretense did you suppose I would be indulgent to you,
more than to her?


Lady Mary. Because you have always treated me with less severity; and because
(...) overheard o^ just now say, you "should glory in delivering from
difficulty a good woman."


Sir Wm. And so I should


Lady Mary. How unlike the world!


Sir Wm. No -- whatever the discontented may please to say, the world is
affectionate, is generous, to the good; more especially to the good of the
female sex; for it is only an exception to a general rule, when a good woman is
in pecuniary distress.

(Exit Sir Wm.
Enter Lord Priory, humming a tune, but with a very serious face: he pulls out
his watch with evident marks of anxiety -- coughs -- rubs his forehead -- and
gives various other marks of discontent and agitation. -- Lady Mary observes
him with attention, then sidles up to him. Lady Mary. By the good humor you
appear in, my lord, I venture to mention to you my distresses. (...) know the
virtues of lady Priory makes my fai^ings conspicuous; but then consider the
different modes to which we have been habituated -- she excluded from
temptation --.


Lord Priory. No -- she shuns temptation. Has she not in this very house been
compelled to make exertions? Has she not detected and exposed both Mr. Mandred
and Mr. Bron.?


Lady Mary. Bronzely! Bronzely! How! (Aside. Another rival?


Lord Priory. He has not done with him yet, I believe; for to tell the truth,
he is now with her at my house in Parkstreet. He taxed me with being jealous of
my wife -- To prove in what contempt I held the accusation, I left them
together, and bid him make love to her.


Lady Mary. Is that possible.


Lord Priory. I cannot say I would have done so rash an action, had I been
married to some women -- to you, for instance -- but I have not a doubt of Lady
Priory's safety: her mind, I know, is secure, and I have servants in the house
to protect her from persona^ outrage. The only fear is, lest he should have
received one; for it is now near two hours (looking at his watch) since I came
away, and I have neither seen nor heard any thing of either of them! -- But to
your lad^ ship^s concerns*


Lady Mary* I am at this instant, my lord, in the power of an implacable
creditor; and without a friend who will give bond for a certain sum, (...) must
-- I b^ush to name it -- be taken to a prison


Lord Priory. I am not at all surprised at the circumstance, Madam: but it
amazes me that you should apply to me for deliverance. You have a brother in
town; why not send to him?


Lady Mary. He was my friend the very last time a distress of this kind befell
me. (Weeps.


Lord Priory. Ask Mr. Norberry.


Lady Mary. He was my friend the time before.


Lord Priory. Mr. Bronzely, then.


Lady Mary. And Bronzely the time before that.


Enter Oliver. Lord Priory. Ah, Oliver! I am glad to see you, my good fellow.
Ha! what have you done with Mr. Bronzely?


Oliver. Nay, my lord, that I cannot tell. I cannot tell what he has done with
himself.


Lord Priory. How long has he been gone from my house?


Oliver. He is not gone yet as I know of; for none of the servants let him out.


Lord Priory. Not gone! and you cannot tell where he is!


Oliver. No, that we cannot: we have looked in every room for him, and cannot
find him any where.


Lord Priory. Not find him! (recollecting himself) Ho! ho! I thought how it
would be -- I thought he would have some trick played him. Where Is your lady?


Oliver. That I cannot tell neither. We have looked in every room, and cannot
find her.


Lord Priory. How!


Oliver. It Is as sure as I am alive. I and the butler, two footmen, and all the
maids, have been looking in parlours, chambers, and garrets, every crick and
corner, and no where can we find either Mr. Bronzely or my lady; but, wherever
they are, there is no doubt but they are together. Ha, ha!


Lady Mary. Ha, ha, ha! No doubt at all, Mr. Oliver.


Lord Priory. Together! together! and not in my house! You tell a falsehood
I Will go myself and find them.


Oliver. You must look sharp, then.


Lord Priory. How came you to miss them?


Oliver. I chanced to go into the next room, to see if there was a proper ^ire
to get it well aired; I knew I had taken Mr. Bronzely to my Lady in the inner
room, and I had heard them both laughing not a quarter of an hour before; but
now, a^l on a sudden, there was neither laughing nor talking, nor any noise at
all -- every thing was so quiet, you might have heard a pin drop.


Lord Priory ( anxiously.) Well


Oliver. And so I thought to myself, thought I, I Will sit down here; for my ad^^
will be ringing soon: however, there was no ringing for a whole half hour; and
so then I thought I would even rap at the door; but nobody called "Come in." So
then I went in of my own accord; and there I found --


Lord Priory. What?


Oliver. Nobody! not a soul to be seen!


Lord, Priory ( affecting indifference.) Oh! she has been playing Bronzely some
trick! She has been hiding him; and in some miserable place!


Oliver. But why need she hide herself along with him?


Enter Mr. Norberry. Mr. Norberry. My dear friend, my dear lord Priory, let me
speak with you alone. -- I come upon business that --


Lord Priory. You look pale! What is your business? Tell it me at once.


Mr. Norberry. It is of so delicate a nature --


Lord Priory. I know my wife is with Mr. Bronzely -- I left them together. I
know he is a licentious man; but I know she is an innocent woman. -- Now, what
have you to tell me?


Mr. Norberry. What I have just learnt from one of your servants. About a
quarter of an hour after you left them, they stole softly out at the back of
your house, ran to a postchaise and four that was in waiting, and drove off
together full speed.


Lord Priory. Gone! eloped! run away from me! left me! left the tenderest,
kindest, most indulgent husband, that ever woman had!


Lady Mary. That we can all witness.


Lord Priory. I was too fond of her -- my affection ruined her -- women are
ungrateful -- I did not exert a husband's authority -- I was not strict enough
-- I humoured and spoiled her! -- Bless me! what a thick mist is come over my
eyes!


Lady Mary. No, my Lord, it is clearing away.


Lord Priory. Lead me to my room. (He is led off by Mr. Nor. exhausted with
grief and anger.) -- Oliver looks after Lord Priory, then takes out his
handkerchief, and follows him off crying.


Lady Mary. Ha, ha, ha! Oh, how I enjoy this distress* Ha, ha, ha!

The officer who has attended her during the scene, and kept at the farther
part of the stage, now comes forward, and bows to her. She starts on seeing him
-- takes out her handkerchief, and goes crying off at the opposite side.
ACT V.
SCENE I. An Apartment at Bronzely's.
Enter Housekeeper and Footman. House. Dinner enough for twelve, and only two to
sit down to it! Come home without one preparation -- not a bed aired, or the
furniture uncovered.


Foot. This is not the first time he has done so.


House. No; but it is always thus when a woman's in the case. Well, I do say that
my own sex are --


Foot. Hush! here they are. Run away.

( Exeunt.
Enter Lady Priory and Mr. Bronzely. Lady Priory. Only twelve miles from London?


Bronzely. No more, be assured.


Lady Priory. And you avow that I did not come hither by the commands of my
husband, but was deceived into that belief by you.


Bronzely. Still it was by his commands your servant introduced me to you; and,
upon an errand, which I feared to deliver till I arrived at a house of my own.


Lady Priory. What is the errand?


Bronzely. To tell you that -- I love you.


Lady Priory. Do you assert, lord Priory sent you to me for this?


Bronzely. I assert, that, in triumph at your betraying to him our private
appointment, he gave me leave to have a second trial. If, then, you have ever
harbored one wish to revenge, and forsake a churlish ungrateful partner, never
return to him more -- but remain with me.


Lady Priory. And what shall I have gained by the exchange, when you become
churlish, when you become ungrateful? My children's shame! the worlds contempt!
and yours! ( Smiling) Come, come; you are but jesting, Mr. Bronzely! You would
not affront my little share of common sense by making the serious offer of so
bad a bargain. Come own the jest, and take me home immediately.


Bronzely. Is it impossible for me to excite your tenderness?


Lady Priory. Utterly impossible.


Bronzely. I will then rouse your terror.


Lady Priory. Even that I defy.


Bronzely. Lady Priory, you are in a lonely house of mine, where I (...)
master, and all the servants slaves to my will.

(Lady Priory calmly takes out her knitting, draws a chair, and sits down to
knit a pair of ^lockings.)
Bronzely ( aside.) This composure is worse than reproach -- a woman who meant
to yield would be outrageous. -- (Goes to speak to her, then turns away.) By
heaven she looks so respectable in that employment, I am afraid to insult her.
( After a struggle with himself.) Ah! don't you fear me?


Lady Priory. No -- for your fears will protect me -- I have no occasion for my
own.


Bronzely. What have I to fear?


Lady Priory. Your fear to lounge no more at routs, at ba^ls, at operas, in
Bond-street; no more to dance in circles, chat in s^de boxes, or roar at
taverns: for you have observed enough upon the events of life to know -- that
an atrocious offense like violence to a woman, never escapes condign punishment.


Bronzely. Oh! for once, let your mind be feminine as your person -- hear the
vows --

( he seizes her hand -- she rises -- he starts back)
Lady Priory. Ah! did not I tell you, you were afraid? It Is you who are afraid
of me. ( He looks abashed.) Come, you are ashamed, too -- I see you are, and I
pardon you. -- In requital, suffer me to return home immediately. ( He shakes
his head.] -- How! are not you ashamed of yourself?


Bronzely. I was not this moment -- But now you mention it, I think I am.


Lady Priory. Repent your fo^ly then, and take me home. (hastily).


Bronzely. Can you wish to go back to the man who has made this trial of your
fidelity, and not resent his conduct?


Lady Priory. Most assuredly I wish to return. But if you deliver me safe,
perfectly safe from farther insult, it will be impossible for me not to show
resentment to Lord Priory.


Bronzely. Why only in that case?


Lady Priory. Because, only in that case, you will make an impression on m^
heart -- and I will resent his having exposed me to such a temptation.


Bronzely. Oh! I Will take you home directly -- this moment. -- I make an
impression on your heart. William! -- (calling) -- I Will take you home directly.
Here John, Thomas, William -- (calling) But, upon my life, it would be a hard
task -- I cannot do it -- I am afraid -- I am afraid I cannot -- Besides, what
are we to say when we go back? -- No matter what, so you will but think kindly
of me. ( Enter Servant.) -- Order the horses to be put to the chaise; I am
going back to London immediately. Quick! quick! Bid the man not be a moment,
for fear I should change my mind.


Serve. The chaise is ready now, Sir; for the post-boy was going back without
unharnessing his horses.


Bronzely. Then tell him he must perform his journey in half an hour -- If he
is a moment longer, my resolution will stop on the road. (Exit Ser.) I feel my
good designs stealing away a^read^ -- now they are fl^^ing rapidly. (Taking
Lady Priory's hand) -- Please to look another way -- I shall certainly recant
if I see you. ( Going) -- And now should I have the resolution to take you
straight to your husband, you will have made a more contemptible figure of me
by this last trick, than by any one you have played me.

( Exit, leading her off.
Bronzely. ( Without) Tell the post-boy he need not wait -- I have changed my
mind -- I sha^n't go to London tonight.


SCENE II. A Room in a Prison.
Enter Miss Dorril on and Mr. Norberry. Mr. Nor. You ought to have known it was
in vain to send for me. Have not I repeatedly declared, that, till I heard from
your father, you should receive nothing more from me than a bare subsistence?
-- I promise to allow you thus much, even in this miserable place: but do not
indulge a hope that I can release you from it. (She weeps -- he goes to the
door -- then returns.) I forgot to mention, that Mr. Mandred goes on board
tomorrow for India; and, little as you may think of his sensibility, he seems
concerned at the thought of quitting England without just bidding you farewell.
He came with me hither -- shall I send him up?


Miss Dor. Oh! no: for heaven's sake! Deliver me from his asperity, as you
would save me from distraction.


Mr. Nor. Nay, it is for the last time -- you had better see him. You may be
sorry, perhaps, you did not, when he is gone.


Miss Dor. No, no; I shall not be sorry. -- Go and excuse me -- Go, and prevent
his coming. I cannot see him. -- (Exit Mr. Norberry) -- This would be
aggravation of punishment, to shut me in a prison, and (...) not shelter me
from the insults of the world!


Enter Sir William. -- (She starts) Sir Wm. -- I know you have desired not to
be troubled with my visit; and I come with all humility -- I do not come, be
assured, to reproach you.


Miss Dor. Unexpected mercy!


Sir Wm. No; though I have watched your course with anger, yet I do not behold
its end, with triumph.


Miss Dor. It is not to your honor that you think it necessary to give this
statement of your mind.


Sir Wm. May be -- but I never boasted of perfection, though I can boast of
grief that I am so far beneath it. I can boast too, that, though I frequently
give offense to others. I could never part with any one for ever (as I now
shall with you), without endeavoring to make some atonement.


Miss Dor. You acknowledge, then, your cruelty to me?


Sir Wm. I acknowledge I have taken upon me to advise, beyond the liberty
allowed by custom to one who has no apparent interest or authority. -- But, not
to repeat what has passed, I come with the approbation of your friend Mr.
Norberry, to make a proposal to you for the future.

(he draws chairs, and they sit.)
Miss Dor. What proposal? -- What is it? [ eagerly.]


Sir Wm. Mr. Norberry will not give either his money or his word to release you
-- But as I am rich -- have lost my only child -- and wish to do some good with
my fortune, I will instantly lay down the money of which you are in want, upon
certain conditions.


Miss Dor. Do I hear right? Is it possible I can find a friend in you? -- a
friend to relieve me from the depth of misery! Oh Mr. Mandred!


Sir Wm. Before you return thanks, hear the conditions on which I make the
offer.


Miss Dor. Any conditions -- What you please!


Sir Wm. You must promise, never, never to return to your former follies and
extr^^agancies. (She looks down.) Do you hesitate? Do you refuse? -- Will Not you
promise?


Miss Dor. I would, willingly -- but for one reason.


Sir Wm. And what is that?


Miss Dor. The fear, I should not keep my word.


Sir Wm. You will, if your fear be real.


Miss Dor. It is real -- It is even so great, that I have no hope.


Sir Wm. You refuse my offer then, and dismiss me? ( rises.)


Miss Dor. (rising also.) With much reluctance. -- But I cannot, indeed I
cannot make a promise, unless I were to feel my heart wholly subdued; and my
mind entirely convinced that (...) should never break it -- Sir, I am most
sincerely obliged to you for the good which I am sure you designed me; but do
not tempt me with the proposal again -- do not place me in a situation, that
might add to all my other afflictions, the remorse of having deceived you.


Sir Wm. (after a pause.) Well, I will dispense with this condition -- but
there is another I must substitute in its stead. -- Resolve to pass the
remainder of your life, some few ensuing years at least, in the country. (She
starts.) Do you start at that?


Miss Dor. I do not love the country. I am always miserable while I am from
London. Besides, there are no follies or extravagancies in the country. -- Dear
Sir, this is giving me up the first condition, and then forcing me to keep it.


Sir Wm. There, Madam, (taking out his pocketbook) I scorn to hold out hopes,
and then destroy them. There is a thousand pounds free of all conditions (she
takes it) -- extricate yourself from this situation, and be your own mistress
to return to it when you please.

(Going.
Miss Dor. Oh, my benefactor, bid me farewell at parting -- do not leave me in
anger.


Sir Wm. How! will you dictate terms to me, while you reject a^l mine?


Miss Dor. Then only suffer me to express my gratitude --


Sir Wm. I will not hear you.

(going.)
Miss Dor. Then hear me on another subject: a subject of much importance --
indeed it is.


Sir Wm. Well!


Miss Dor. You are going to India immediately -- It is possible that there, or
at some place you will stop at on your way, you may meet with my father.


Sir Wm. Well!


Miss Dor. You have heard that I have expected him home for some time past, and
that I still live in hopes. --


Sir Wm. Well! -- (anxiously)


Miss Dor. If you should see him, and should be in his company -- don't mention
me.


Sir Wm. Not mention you?


Miss Dor. At least, not my indiscretions -- Oh! I should die, if I thought he
would ever know of them.


Sir Wm. Do you think he would not discover them himself, should he ever see
you?


Miss Dor. But he would not discover them all at once -- I should be on my
guard when he first came -- My ill habits would steal on him progressively, and
not be half so shocking, as if you were to vociferate them all in a breath.


Sir Wm. To put you out of apprehension at once -- your father is not coming
home -- nor will he ever return to his own country.


Miss Dor. (starting.) You seem to speak from certain knowledge -- Oh! heavens!
is he not living?


Sir Wm. Yes, living -- but under severe affliction -- fortune has changed, and
all his hopes are blasted.


Miss Dor "Fortune has changed!" -- In povert^? -- my father in poverty? --
(wee^ing) -- Oh* Sir* excuse, what may perhaps appear an ill comp^iment to your
bounty; but to me, the greatest reverence I can pay to it. -- You are going to
that part of the world where he is; take this precious gift back, search out my
father and let him be the object of your beneficence. -- [ Forces it into his
hand.] -- I shall be happy in this prison, indeed (...) shall, so (...) can but
give a momentary relief to my dear, dear father. -- [ Sir William takes out his
handkerchief] -- You weep: -- This present, perhaps, would be but poor
alleviation of his sufferings -- perhaps he is in sickness; or a prisoner: Oh!
if he is release me instantly, and take me with you to the place of his
confinement.


Sir Wm. What! quit the joys of London?


Miss Dor. On such an errand, I would quit them all without a sigh -- And here
I make a solemn promise to you -- (kneeling.)


Sir Wm* Hold, you may wish to break it.


Miss Dor. Never -- exact what vow you will on this occasion, (...) will make,
and keep it. -- [ Enter Mr. Norberry. -- She rises.] -- Oh! Mr Norberry, he has
been telling me such things of my father --


Mr. Nor. Has he? Then kneel again -- call him by that name -- and implore him
not to disown you for his child.


Miss Dor. Good heaven! -- I dare not -- I dare not do as you require. [ She
faints on Norberry.]


Sir Wm. (going to her) My daughter! -- My child! --


Mr. Nor. At those names she revives. -- ( She raises her (...), but expresses
great agitation.) -- Come, let us quit this wretched place -- she will be
better then. My carriage is at the door. You will follow us.

( Exeunt, leading off Miss Dorrillon.
Sir Wm. Follow you! -- Yes -- and I perceive that, in spite of philosophy,
justice, or resolution, I could follow you all the world over.

[Exit.
SCENE III. Another Room in the Prison.
Lady Mary discovered sitting in a dejected posture, at a miserable table. Lady
Mary. Provoking^ not an answer to one of my pathetic letters! -- no^ a creature
to come and condole with me! -- Oh that (...) could but regain my liberty
before my disgrace is announced in the public prints -- I could then boldly
contradict every paragraph that asserted it -- by We have authority to say, no
such event ever took p^ace.


Enter a Man belonging to the prison. Man. One Sir George Eve^yn is here,
Madam; he will not name your name, because it sha'n't be made public; but he
desires you will permit him to come and speak a few words to you, provided ^ou
are the young lady from Grosvenor-street, with whom he has the pleasure of
being acquainted.


Lady Mary. Yes, yes, I am the young lady from Grosvenor-street -- my
compliments to Sir George, I am that lady; intimately acquainted with him; and
entreat he will wa^k up. ( Exit the Man.) This is a most fortunate incident in
my tragedy! Sir George no doubt takes me for Miss Dorrillon; yet I am sure he
is too much the man of gallantry and good breeding to ^eave me in this p^ace,
although he visits me by mistake.

Sir George Evelyn (speaking as he enters)
Sir George. Madam, you are free -- the doors of the prison are open -- my word
is passed for the -- [ He stops -- looks around -- expresses surprise and
confusion.]


Lady Mary. (curtsying very low) Sir George, I am under the most infinite
obligation! -- Words are too poor to convey the sense I have of this act of
friendship -- but (...) trust my gratitude will for ever --


Sir George ( confuse^.) Madam -- really -- I ought to apologize for the
libert^ I have taken.


Lady Mary. No liberty at all, Sir George -- at least no apology is necessary
-- I insist on hearing no excuses. A virtuous action requires no preface, no
prologue, no ceremony -- and surely, if one action be more noble and generous
than another, it must be that one, where an act of benevolence is conferred,
and the object, an object of tota^ indifference to the libera^ benefactor --
Generous man, good evening -- Call me a coach.

[going]
Sir George. Stay, Madam -- I beg leave to say --


Lady Mary. -- Not a word -- I will not hear a word -- my thanks shall drown
whatever you have to say.


Enter the former Man. Sir George. Pray, Sir, did not you tell me, you had a
very young lady under your care?


Man. Yes, Sir, so I had -- but she, it seems, has just been released, and is
gone away with the gentleman who paid the debt


Lady Mary. Do you mean Miss Dorrillon?


Man. I mean the other lady from Grosvenor-street.


Sir George. Who can have released her?


Lady Mary. Some friend of mine, I dare say, by mistake -- Well, if it is so,
she is extremely welcome to the good fortune which was designed for me. For my
part, I could not submit to an obligation from every one -- scarcely from any
one -- and from no one with so little regret as I submit to it from Sir George
Evelyn.

( Exit, curtsying to Sir George.
Sir George. Distraction! the first disappointment is nothing to this second!
to the reflection that Miss Dorrillon has been set at liberty by any man on
earth except myself.

[Exit.
SCENE IV. An Apartment at Mr. Norberry's.
Enter Lord Priory Lord Priory. What a situation is mine! I cannot bear
solitude, and am ashamed to see company! I cannot bear to think on the
ungrateful woman, and yet I can think of nothing else! ^t was her conduct which
I imagined had alone charmed me; but I perceive her power over my heart, though
that conduct is changed!


Enter Mr. Norberry, Sir William, and Miss Dorrillon. Mr. Nor. My dear Lord
Priory, exert ^our spirits to receive and congratulate a friend of mine. Sir
William Dorrillon (presenting him) father to this young woman, whose failings
he has endeavored to correct under the borrowed name of Mandred.


Sir Wm. And with that fictitious name, I hope to disburthen myself of the
imputation of having ever offered an affront to my lord Priory. (He takes Lord
Priory aside, and they talk together.)


Enter Sir George Evelyn. Sir George. Is it possible what (...) have heard is
true? was it Mr. Mandred who has restored Miss Dorrillon to the protection of
Mr. Norberry?


Sir Wm. ( coming forward.) No, Sir George, I have now taken her under my own
protection.


Sir George. By what tit^e, Sir?


Sir Wm. A very tender one -- don't be alarmed -- I am her father.


Sir George. Sir Wm. Dorrillon? ( They talk apart.)


Enter Lady Mary. Lady Mary. Has there been any intelligence of my Lady Priory
yet? ( sees Miss Dorrillon) My dear Dorrillon, a lover of yours has done the
civilest thing by me! -- As I live, here he is. How do you do, Sir George? I
suppose you have all heard the news of Bronzely running away with --


Miss Dor. Hush! -- Lord Priory is here.


Lady Mary. Oh, he knows it -- and it is not improper to remind him of it -- it
will teach him humility.


Lord Priory* I am humble, Lady Mary, and own I have had a better opinion of
your sex than I ought to have had.


Lady Mary. You mean, of your management of us; of your instructions,
restrictions, and corrections.


Enter Servant. Servant. Lady Priory and Mr. Bronzely.


Lady Mary. What of them?


Serve. They are here.


Lord Priory. I said she would preserve her fidelity! Did not I always say so? Have
I wavered once? Did I not always tell you all that she was only making game of
Bronzely? Did I not tell you all so?


Enter Bronzely and Lady Priory. Bronzely. Then, indeed, my Lord, you said
truly; for I return the arrantest blockhead --


Lord Priory. I always said you would! But how is it? Where have you been? What
occasion for a post-chaise? Instantly explain, or I shall forfeit that dignity
of a husband, to which, in those degenerate times, I have almost an exclusive
right.


Bronzely. To rei^state you^ my Lord, in those honors, I accompany Lady
Priory; and beg public pardon for the opinion I once publicly professed, of
your want of influence over her affections.


Lord Priory. Do you hear? Do you all hear? Lady Mary, do you hear?


Bronz^ly. Taking advantage of your permission to call on her, (...) stratagem
I induced her to quit your house, ^^st restraint might there act as my enemy.
But your authority, your prerogative your honor attached to her under my roof.
She has held those rights sacred, and compelled even me to revere them.


Lord Priory. Do you all hear? I was sure it would turn out so!


Lady Mary. This is the first time I ever knew the gallant's word taken for a
woman's honor.


Lord Priory. I will take her own word -- the tongue which for eleven years has
never in the slightest instance deceived me, I will believe upon all occasions.
My dear wife, boldly pronounce before this company that you return to me with
the same affection and respect, and the self-same contempt for this man -- (to
Bron.) -- you ever had.

[a short pause.
Lady Mary. She makes no answer.


Lord Priory. Hush! Hush! She is going to speak. -- (Another pause) -- Why, why
don't you speak?


Lady Priory. Because I am at a loss what to say.


Lady Mary. Hear, hear, hear -- do you all hear?


Lord Priory. Can you be at a loss to declare you hate Mr. Bronzely?


Lady Priory. I do not hate him.


Lady Mary. I was sure it would turn out so.


Lord Priory. Can you be at a loss to say you love me?

( She appears embarrassed.
Lady Mary. She is at a loss.


Lord Priory. How! Don't you fear me?


Lady Priory. Yes.


Lady Mary. She speaks pla^ly to that question.


Lord Priory. You know I love truth -- speak plainly to all their curiosity
requires.


Lady Priory. Since you command it then, my Lord -- I confess that Mr.
Bronzeley's conduct toward me has caused a kind of sentiment in my heart --


Lord Priory. Hah! what?


Lady Mary. You must believe her -- "she has told you truth for eleven years."


Lady Priory. A sensation which --


Lord Priory. Stop -- any truth but this I could have borne -- Reflect on what
you are saying -- Consider what you are doing -- Are these your primitive
manners?


Lady Priory. I should have continued those manners, had I known none but
primitive men. But to preserve ancient austerity, while, by my husband's
consent. I am assailed by modern gallantry, would be the task of a sto^^, and
not of hi^ female slave.


Lady Mary. Do you hear? Do you all hear? My Lord, do you hear?


Lord Priory. I do -- I do -- and though the sound distracts me, I cannot doubt
her word.


Lady Priory. It gives me excessive joy to hear you say so, because you will
not then doubt me when I add -- that gratitude, for his restoring me so soon to
you is the only sentiment he has inspired.


Lord Priory. Then my management of a wife is right after all!


Mr. Norberry. Mr. Bronzely, as your present behavior has in great measure
atoned for your former actions, I will introduce to your acquaintance my friend
Sir William Dorrillon.


Bronzely. Mandred, Sir William Dorrillon!


Sir Wm. And considering, Sir, that upon one or two occasions I have been
honored with your confidence -- you will not be surprised, if the first
command I lay upon my daughter, is -- to take refuge from your pursuits, in the
protection of Sir George Evelyn.


Sir George. And may I hope, Maria?


Miss Dor. No -- I will instantly put an end to all your hopes.


Sir* George. How!


Sir Wm. By raising you to the summit of your wishes. Alarmed at my severity,
she has owned her readiness to become the subject of a milder government.


Sir George. She shall never repin^ at the election she has made.


Lord Priory. But, Sir George, if you are a prudent man, you will fix your eyes
on my little domestic state, and guard against a rebellion.


Lady Priory. Not the rigor of its laws has ever induced me to wish them
abolished.


Bronzely ( to Lady Priory.) Dear Lady, you have made me think with reverence
on the matrimonial compact: and I demand of you, Lady Mary -- if, in
consequence of former overtures, I should establish a ^egal authority over you,
and become your chief magistrate -- would you submit to the same control to
which Lady Priory submits?


Lady Mary. Any control, rather than have no chief magistrate at all.


Sir George [ to Miss Dor.] And what do you say to this?


Miss Dor. Simply one sentence -- A maid of the present day shall become a wife
like those -- of former times.

The scene closes -- She comes forward.
ADDRESS, WRITTEN BY MR. TAILOR; SPOKEN BY MISS WALLIS.
WELL, female critics, what is the sentence, say --
Can you with kindness treat this saucy play,
That gives to ancient dames the wreath of praise
And boldly censures those of modern days?
Bring us good husbands first, and, on my life,
For every one we'll show as good a wife.
Whatever the errors in the nuptial state,
Man sets the example to his passive mate:
While all the virtues the proud sex can claim
From female influence^ caught the generous flame.
Nay, though our gallant rulers of the main
With force resistless ^rush the pride of Spain;
It Is Woman triumphs -- that inspiring charm
With tenfold vigor nerves the hero's arm:
For King and Country though they nobly bleed,
The smile of Beauty is their dearest m^ed.
And valiant tars should still be Beauty's care
Since 'its "the brave alone deserve the fair."
WIVES AS THEY WERE, AND MAIDS AS THEY ARE: A COMEDY,
BY MRS. INCHBALD.
Performed at the London and Dublin Theaters with universal applause -- and at
Greenwich-street, New York.


