BEACON HILL

BOOK I.

BEACON HILL. A Local Poem. HISTORIC AND DESCRIPTIVE. BOOK I.

Published according to Act of Congress.

Boston. Printed by MANNING and LORING for the AUTHOR. 1797.

Dedication.
TO THE CITIZEN-SOLDIERS, WHO FOUGHT, CONQUERED, AND RETIRED, UNDER THE BANNERS
OF WASHINGTON AND FREEDOM, The following POEM is, WITH ALL RESPECT, GRATITUDE
AND ADMIRATION.

Dedicated BY THE AUTHOR.

APOLOGY FOR THE POEM.
I AM aware, it may be objected to the production, which assumes the title of
BEACON HILL, that the appellation is not sufficiently appropriate, and that
twenty other names would equally apply to those conspicuous features, which the
author has attempted to delineate. True -- but

"What Is in a name? that, which we call a rose,
"By any other name would smell as sweet."
If the performance has merit, the name, as it does not imply an absurdity,
will not, it is presumed, create an objection; or if, in concurrence with the
fears of its author, the whole be consigned to hopeless oblivion -- By any
other name the thing would sink as low.

Yet, when it is remembered, that the great events, which form the subject of
the piece, originated within the view of this interesting eminence, the mind,
by the natural association of ideas, will be easily led to contemplate every
succeeding occurrence of the Revolution. -- But enough of Names -- the motives
of my vanity, or the causes of my presumption, in attempting so great a
subject, require a more particular apology.

To gratify a wish, expressed by one, whose injunctions it is my pleasure to
regard, I was prevailed on to attempt a short sketch of the delightful views,
displayed from this commanding summit: when meeting his observation, the
judgment of the critic was lost in the partiality of the friend, and he
earnestly solicited their enlargement by a general allusion to those great
political events, which had their origin, and were essentially matured, in the
vicinity of this celebrated spot. Having been himself, at an early period of
life, actively engaged in those important scenes, he now became so eloquent in
description, and so rich in anecdote, that I could not with indifference listen
to his request, nor fail to partake of his enthusiasm; and, by the assistance
of the best historians of our country, was induced to enlist and enlarge, till
I was terrified at my own temerity.

When the season recalled me to the busy world, my poem was relinquished, and
the appropriate occupations of my sex and station prevented even a thought of
its continuance; till restored to my beloved solitude, the same vigilant
instructor again awakened my attention. In this manner several seasons glided
away, till despair of being able any further to correct its errors, and anxiety
to be freed from the misery of suspense, has impelled me, "with all its
imperfections on its head," and all my apprehensions on my heart, to risk its
appearance at the tribunal of literary investigation; yet neither deprecating
judgment, nor imploring mercy, but patiently waiting the award of impartial
justice.

Impressed with the idea, that an author should be considered of no sex, and
that the individual must be lost in the writer, I solicit unprejudiced
criticism and invite candid censure; for in presuming to meet the public eye, I
am sensible it is necessary to resign all personal considerations, and that
neither my avocations nor my incapacity will be suffered to plead for me: but I
have dared to hope, that my verses alone can receive the general
disapprobation, as no party prejudice, no spirit of contention, has degraded
the exalted theme: to those, whom the annals of their country have mentioned
with honor, the Muse has given glory; yet has not the limits of the poem
permitted the author to bestow on every individual all the applause, which his
own great actions, on the ample page of history, will more gracefully
perpetuate. In situations, where an equality of character was conspicuous, some
brilliant event of superior fortune, not personal prepossession, has induced
the alternative: nor will, it is anxiously hoped, offense be felt, where only
honor was intended.

It has also been the intention of the author tenaciously to preserve a sacred
regard for eventful facts, although in some instances she has ventured to
transpose their period -- and if it has appeared poetically essential to vary
the chronology, in no instance, to her knowledge, has the integrity of history
been violated.

The apprehensive feelings of the author did not permit her at present to offer
more than the first book -- what remain are perhaps not more meritorious, and
if this fail to please, ruin is alike the portion of them all; but should
those, whom I am proud to respect for their judgment, taste and talents,
approve the venturous stranger, the succeeding numbers will instantly appear;
in some of which the author has felt most pleasure in painting the interesting
occurrences of individual memoirs; and the noble enthusiasm of the gallant
FAYETTE, the heroic and impassioned adventures of Lady HARRIOT ACKLAND, the
tragic fate of the unfortunate Miss McCREA, and the pathetic perils of the
young and accomplished ASGIL, etc. will occasionally diversify the scene, and
awaken, at least in the female breast, sympathy and condolence. To the tender
and feeling bosom of that benevolent sex, let me be permitted to offer one
sentence ere I close.

I know, my fair friends, that with many, who do not write, application to
literature in a female is imagined to imply a neglect of appropriate duties. As
this idea has originated rather in misapprehension than malignity, it may not
be improper to observe, that it is only amid the leisure and retirement, to
which the sultry season is devoted, that I permit myself to hold converse with
the Muses; nor does their enchantment ever allure me from one personal
occupation, which my station renders obligatory; but those hours, which might
otherwise be lost in dissipation, or sunk in languor, are alone resigned to the
unoffending charms of Poetry and Science.

ANALYSIS OF BOOK I.
Allusion to the surrounding Prospect -- Invocation to the River and sylvan
Deities -- to the Historic Muse -- Fiction discarded -- Dedication to
WASHINGTON -- The Action opens at the Retreat of the Columbian* from Bunker's
Hill -- General HOW -- The Memory of his Brother -- Death of WARREN --
Personification of Fortune and Fame -- WASHINGTON at Mount Vernon -- called to
the chief Command -- Formation of the Columbian Camp at Cambridge -- Natural,
moral, or political History of the several States -- Their commanding Officers
-- Siege of Boston -- Its Sufferings -- Negotiation for the safe Retreat of the
British Army -- Its Departure -- Appointment of Congress -- DECLARATION OF
INDEPENDENCE -- Character of the Columbian Soldiers -- The Poet's prophetic
Apostrophe to the Progress of Freedom throughout the World.

BEACON HILL.
BOOK I.
FAR from this spot, ye light delusions, fly,
While fixed ATTENTION lifts her boundless eye,
Over Bunker's field each hallowed view explores,
Sees the twin-rivers lave the purple shores,
Where the high soil disdained the trembling flood,
And stained the white wave with Britannia's blood. --
Unwearying change the sacred scene displays,
Pillar'd with hills, that sling the morning rays,
And glass'd with streams, that through the twilight glade
Reflect the reddening skies and broider'd shade;
Here the light scyons' wavy beauties flow,
And seem a plumage on the mountain's brow.
There the proud dome o'erlooks the distant mead,
Where the blue Mystic lifts his sparkling head,
Ceres in smiles her liberal treasure yields,
And waves of gold enrich the floating fields.
Then come, ye Nymphs, by museful poet seen,
With eyes of azure, and with robes of green,
Ye tuneful Naiades of Pieria's tide,
COME, and over Charles's nobler waves preside!
While his smooth banks reflect Apollo's beam,
Bathe your bright ringlets in his silver stream,
The graceful swell of well-turn'd limbs display,
And cleave with snowy arms the watery way,
Or lowly warbling, as he rolls along,
Inspire the listening minstrel's vagrant song: --
And thou, gay Goddess of yon clustering trees,
Whose loose locks flutter in the wavering breeze,
Assist my verse -- and, while with ray divine
Celestial CLIO guides the bold design,
Charmed by her smile, with partial bounty raise
The fairest chaplet of poetic praise,
Full as the wave over Charles's bosom flows,
Sweet as the breathings of your whispering boughs;
Deck the loved lay with all your blending views,
Warmed by the glances of the HISTORIC MUSE,
Whose magic wand restores the trophied plain,
And tunes to energy the lofty strain,
Bids the past scene of glorious deeds return,
And lure oblivion from the warrior's urn.
No more the fabled action claims our care,
The tales of Ilion, and the Latian war,
The length of realms by pious Godfrey trod,(1)
To free the city of the SAVIOR-GOD,
For those their poets wrought the crown of fame,
And all was fiction, save an empty name;
Though the full blaze of epic numbers shed
Its dazzling luster round the storied dead,
From the bright Muse the peerless wonder grew,
Invention reigned, while blushing Truth withdrew.
What though no Genius, with enchanting power,
Charm the coy MUSES from their classic bower,
To wake with graceful art the slumbering line,
And round Columbia's native minstrel twine
One laurel wreath -- yet shall her daring hand
Sketch the bold trait, the living scene command,
Till patriot glory all the strain inspire,
And with the ray of TRUTH the coldest fancy fire:
Then hence vain fiction from the deathless theme,
And hence the rapt bard's visionary dream!
But THOU, Defender of the lengthened coast,
Freedom's first guardian, and her empire's boast,
Who, when thy toils had bid contention cease,
And joyful millions hail returning peace,
When the glad hope of calm retirement rose,
And wearied nature languish'd for repose,
Could scorn each selfish thought -- each bliss resigned,
To civic cares devote that patriot mind,
Till thy protected country's rescued name
Triumphant rose, and reached the heights of fame;
And then with graceful majesty RETIRE,
Quit the high seat -- and bid a world admire. --
In every scene of venturous war renowned,
With every gift of peaceful blessing crowned,
Through the thick shades, thy laureled vale displays,
Encircling Glory pours its brilliant blaze. --
-- Hear the chaste Muse, whose unpolluted charms
No common theme with venal ardor warms,
To the proud verse thy willing ear incline,
Inspired by virtues, and by fame like thine. --
-- While tyrants tremble at approaching fate,
See on thy sway applauding nations wait,
While free Columbia boasts meridian light,
See half creation wrapped in hopeless night,
See Persia's shaded sun inglorious rise,
And see where Turkey's waning crescent lies,
Before thy splendour all their beams decay,
Like planets fading at the birth of day.
What time the Briton's angry mandate spread,
And purple slaughter reared his ghastly head,
Domestic rage the bolts of ruin hurled,
And social discord sired the western world,
Over yon fair scene, by favoring Heaven approved,
Enriched by Commerce, and by Science loved,
The furious blaze its wasteful torrent pours,
Wraps the wide domes, and climbs the ascending towers,(2)
While the red glance of frantic vengeance turns,
Where valor perished, and where victory mourns,
Sees the first chief, Britannia's veterans boast,
Whose willing arm commands her conquering host,
Draw his high lineage from a laureled name,
Once borne with glory through the fields of fame;
A name to Freedom's grateful country dear,
Fixed on her heart, and bathed with many a tear,
Since first the BROTHER-HERO, nobly brave,
Fought in her cause, and found a trophied grave. -- (3)
Now the same blood in fierce defiance flows,
Woes follow wrongs, and wrongs succeed to woes;
Grief sits enthroned with earth-devoted eye,
Rends her dark locks, and heaves the laboring sigh;
While her cold cheeks the tears of anguish shed,
Immortal WARREN bows his patriot head,
Feels from his bleeding heart false hope retire,
And life's last boon with Liberty expire.
Yet the prophetic poet's piercing eyes(4)
Will guard the sod, where wounded valor lies,
Till a victorious country's grateful claim
Shall bear his relics to eternal fame;
And Genius, rising over the rescued bier,(5)
Wake every worth, and hallow every tear,
With all the light, that Eloquence can give,
Shine round his deeds, and bid their glory live.
Spoiled of their chief, descend the routed train,
Gain the far heights, and skim the distant plain,
Demand their leader with desponding prayer,
And curse the false disastrous power of war;
Now, to high Heaven, with plaintive accents turn,
Now chill with fear, and now with vengeance burn; --
When FORTUNE, gliding through the ethereal way,
Restrained her car, whose wealth enriched the day,
Full gem'd with stars its golden crescent shone,
The sweeping center raised a diamond throne,
From whose resplendent height the changling towers,
And smiles alternate on the warring powers;
To young Columbia bends with look benign,
Then bids her glance on haughty Britain shine, --
FORTUNE! -- who erst beneath Hesperian skies
Saw to her name the lustrous temple rise,
While many a votary at the sragrant shrine
Implored her gifts, and hymn'd her charms divine! --
Now at her side the goddess FAME attends,
Here springs the laurel, there the olive bends;
Celestial blessings guard the RADIANT PAIR,
And chase the hovering progeny of care; --
For where the SISTER-DEITIES arise,
Swift through their path the train of sorrow flies,
Frantic Ambition grasps his glittering knife,
And Envy gnaws the quivering nerve of life,
Through the light tract with silent mischief steal,
And cling to FORTUNE'S ever-rolling wheel.
Nor think the Poet means with venturous song
To bear the Pagan deities along,
Since their sweet power enlightened Truth disdains,
And Reason wills them from her patriot plains;
To such alone the timid minstrel bows.
As genius loves, and local faith allows: --
FORTUNE and FAME, whose consecrated power
The varying, wishing, sons of life adore,
Though often regardless, often to merit blind,
Still reign the courted sovereigns of the mind.
From crimson hosts the fickle goddess flies
To where Columbia's routed legion lies;
FAME wafts with swelling lip her notes around,
And all the warrior wakens at the sound; --
The radiant pair the mournful band inspire,
Heal their deep wounds, their freezing spirits fire,
To the raised mind its future hopes unfold,
Sustain the timid, and confirm the bold,
Recall each boon by patriot valor won,
And point the heart to FORTUNE'S FAVORITE SON,
A matchless hero, whose victorious hand
To fields of FAME shall lead the vanquished band.
Where beauteous Vernon blooms in rural pride,
And broad Potomack's shoalless waters glide,
GREAT WASHINGTON, in ease and wealth reclined.
Midst every charm reposed his godlike mind;
Reared in embattled scenes, and born to dare
Each varying danger of the chanceful war, --
The lengthened line to break, -- the height command, --
To force the camp, and free the fettered land, --
His was the first of FORTUNE'S gifts to claim,
And his the triumph of unbounded FAME:
Indulgent Nature, emulously kind,
Gave to his form the graces of his mind;
While his bold stature towers supremely high,
And like his genius claims the lifted eye,
The kindly features peace and truth impart,
Calm as his reason, open as his heart: --
For HIM the bleeding States united call,
On HIM the hopes of varying millions fall,
With grief and praise his melting soul assail,
And breathe a prayer in every gliding gale. --
Touched by the view of dark impending woes,
From scenes of bliss the PATRIOT-CHAMPION rose,
Disdained the meed his peerless perils claim,(6)
His trophy Freedom, and his guerdon Fame;
Could with firm mind luxurious peace despise,
And scorning wealth to every glory rise; --
At night's mid hour to lead his hardy train
Over the bleak height, and through the murky plain,
From the burnt shores, where Carolina glows,
To the deep winter of Canadian snows,
He quits the lap of ease, the bower of love,
The peaceful mansion, and the vocal grove,
Braves the dark scene, where cold misfortune lowers,
And meets the rage of yet unconquered powers;
Powers, that his blooming youth to battle bred,
For whom he triumphed, and with whom he bled,
On those the Chief his patriot falchion turns,
And friendship slumbers, while his country mourns.
On yon fair plains, in peaceful green arrayed,
Where the mild student courts the musing shade, Cambridge.

Where learning's sons their blameless lives repose,
At danger's call the camp of freedom rose;
Columbia's HERO all her cause commands,
And trains to war her new untutored bands. --
-- What bands, what warriors, from what climes they came.
O THOU, whose music fills the harp of Fame,
Bright CLIO, say -- since thy immortal power
Can to new life the dying deed restore,
And call the virtues of the patriot-brave
From deep oblivion's adamantine grave. --
-- As the sweet portrait's mimic charm displays
Each moving feature to the lover's gaze,
Recals the moment of his young desire,
While like a cloud unheeded hours retire,
He hears, he sees, he lives on every grace,
That tuned the voice, and tints the touching face,
Forgets that time, and many a grief, has shed
The leaves of autumn on his drooping head,
Drawn to a span the long, long days appear,
Which marked the anguish of each parted year,
The cheek, the lip, the eye's enchanting roll,
Steals on his sense, and soothes his pensive soul,
Till the soft shade, with many a vow caressed,
Gives the whole charmer to his raptured breast. --
So, heavenly Muse, thy kindling touches give,
And bid the long-departed action live,
With glowing hand the Hero's soul inspire,
Melt his firm heart, and wake its slumbering fire!
Then say, submitted to the PATRIOT'S power,
What mighty chiefs the starry standard bore,
What varying States, in varying numbers, join
The marshaled cohort, and the guarded line. --
And first from whence the younger Albion New England, consisting of
New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Connecticut and Rhode Island.
leads,
Her narrow isthmus The isthmus which joins the peninsula of Boston (the
capital of New England) to the Continent.
to the neighboring meads,
Rich in commercial wealth, prolific smiles,
And gems her ocean with uncounted isles,
The hardy children of the searching east
Bare to her wintry gale their dauntless breast,
And, guardless of her summer's withering ray,
Oppose with eagle-eye the flame of day;
True to the varying year, the storms, that bind
The manly members, nerve their kindred mind,
That arm, which stems the tide's tempestuous roar,
Braves with congenial might the warring shore; --
Sons of the sea, and guardians of the soil,
Nurtured to peril, and inured to toil,
The Patriot's firmness, with the Hero's fire,
Live in the war, and deathless deeds inspire. --
First of the band in merit and in name,
The gallant LINCOLN points the path of Fame. --
-- But where her grainy hills and grassy coasts,
Enriched by streams, the happy Hartford boasts,
Where every Muse resorts with partial love,
Won by the flowery field and shady grove,
A rustic race, to sylvan labors bred,
In snowy age the veteran PUTNAM led,
Who erst on cold Canadia's savage shore,
With martial arm, the conquering banner bore,
His rugged form the active war inspires,
And like the flint calls forth its latent fires. --
Can then the verdure of these blissful plains
Conceal the caves, where penal Rigor reigns!(7)
Where the starved wretch, by suffering folly led
To snatch the feast, whence pampered plenty fed,
Shut from the sunny breeze, and healthful skies,
On the cold dripping stone low-withering lies!
Torn from the clime, that gave his miseries birth,
A palsied member of the vital earth!
-- If the sweet Muse, with Nature's best control,
Can melt to sympathy the reasoning soul,
She bids thee rend those grating bars away,
And over the dungeon beam the break of day;
Give the frail felon, with laborious toil,
To pay the penance of his wrested spoil,
Hear his deep groan, heed his repentant prayer,
And snatch his frenzied spirit from despair;
Nor let those fields, arrayed in heavenly bloom,
Blush over the horrors of a living tomb. --
-- Through curtaining forests and emerging towns,
Queen of the north, the stern HANTONIA frowns;
Vain of the wonders of her bounded line,
Her marble quarries, and her azure mine,
Whose branching veins their rich meanders spread,
Where the White Mountains lift their sparkling head;(8)
Here the red hunter's venerating eyes
Behold the quiver'd shades of heroes rise;
Yet since the ancient tenants of the wood
Gained a dry refuge from the covering flood,
No impious step the hallowed height profanes;
But crowned with gems, unvarying brightness reigns,
With wintry breath the trackless region keeps,
And locks the soil, while frigid NATURE sleeps,
Till, gently waking, on the distant dale
She heaves the sod, and thaws the genial gale,
Prints her green step, expands her fragrant wings,
And pours her fountains from a thousand springs,
Which, swift descending through the peopled shore,
Spread the full mart, and wing the flying oar,
Whence patient labor with unwasted toil
Ploughs the rough wave, and turns the mellow soil; --
While WENTWORTH, patron of his parent clime,(9)
With hand of bounty, and with soul sublime,
Mid the blank forest arched the sumptuous dome,
And dressed the desert with exotic bloom. --
The blue cot rising on the rivulet's side,
The hungry plain with seeding pulse supplied,
The clover'd valley, and the barley'd hid,
The busy flail, the never-resting mill,
Joined with the milk-maid's song, the ploughman's glee,
Were all thy gift, and drew their hope from thee; --
Thee WENTWORTH! born the humblest hut to cheer,
From vexing Want to chase the gathering tear,
Or, round thy brow while civic myrtles twine,
To rule in council, and in courts to shine.
Loved as thou art, a Country's dearer cause
Far from thy side the patriot-soldier draws,
To the fierce field a powerful legion brings,
Which scorns the sway, and braves the strength of kings. --
A chosen Chief, General JOHN SULLIVAN.
not yet in battle tried,
Moves in the van, their comrade and their guide. --
-- Where the mid Ocean's beating bosom flows,
Her blooming brow the fertile NEWPORT shows,
Whence glorious GREEN to Freedom's Chief proceeds,
And with firm step a graceful column leads: --
On this bold shore, ere polished Plenty smiled,
The native warriors of the woody wild
Beneath the sway of fearless Philip shone,(10)
And called the habitable clime their own.
To guard that soil, which birth and being gave,
The tube of fire and cleaving falchion brave,
With naked limbs a mailed host assail,
And blast the beauty of the cottaged vale;
Till, by the arts of craftier foes subdued,
The brave Barbarian drains his wasted blood,
Falls with his country ere his power declines,
Nor his last "HOPE" till closing life resigns.
Now from the central States New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Delaware
form the central States.
a mingling host
Prepares to shield the war-invaded coast;
Even where the rich Batavian's careful hand
Over the new region spread his mild command,
Till grasping Britain snatched the envied spoil,
Reaped the green isle, and ruled its subject soil,
To YORK's imperial House transferred the claim,(11)
Won by his arm, and titled from his name:
Hence with the sovereign sons of Albion join
The thriftier children of the Belgic line,
While from their lips a mingling idiom flows,
Warm in their souls the fire of freedom glows;
A foreign hero fans its fervid flame,
MONTGOMERY, glorious in the list of fame.
-- From fair Ierne's balsam-breathing dales
The veteran-warrior stretched his opening sails,
Left her soft seasons and her pasturing isle,
Lured by the love of freedom's social smile,
From his steeled breast his parent country tore,
And braved her warriors on the hostile shore,
Where western climes, beneath their happier zone,
Receive his vows, and make his worth their own,
With him from Saratoga's mountain groves,
Columbia's son, the generous SCHUYLER moves. --
-- Each flaxen field and undulating stream,
Where bright Cesaria sheds her starry beam,
Rise over the level coast, and proudly claim
Protective strength from STERLING'S noble name. --
-- But where the Schuylkill's erring waters glide,
And wind their blue path to the parent-tide,
The LAND OF BROTHERS, whose benignant plains
No crimes disgrace, no impious murder stains,(12)
Where PENN immortal fixed his pure abode,
The meek disciple of the pitying God,
The guiltless race their threatened fate deplore,
And the war's thunder shakes the quiet shore; --
Then from the balmy bosom of repose,
First of the blameless band, a soldier rose,
MIFFLIN, who, born amid the placid kind,
To peaceful precepts gave his youthful mind;
Yet, while reclined beneath the sylvan grove,
He strung the lute, and tuned the strain to love,
In his full soul heroic ardors shone,
And made the hope of nobler powers his own,
Powers, that disdained his country's wrongs to bear,
Speak in his eye and call the indignant tear,
While his proud heart with kindling courage glows,
Quick from his limbs the simple garb he throws, --
A people's voice, he cries, this cause displays,
THE VOICE IS GOD'S and answering zeal obeys.
To thee, loved leader of the patriot-band,
I come at Nature's, Reason's, Heaven's command;
Though vain the hope to reach thy soaring fame,
Yet shall this breast some kindred glory claim,
Raised by thy worth, I quit the cherished scene,
Where native Virtue rears her temperate mien,
To guard her rights my fearless soul proceeds,
Led by thy will, and tutored by thy deeds. --
Thus the pacific votary firmly draws
The sword of Glory in his country's cause,
At the hard hour, when adverse Fortune reigns,
And bleeding Freedom flies the pillaged plains,
When over Columbia's climes destruction flows,
Great in command, the loved apostate rose: --
Erewhile ST. CLAIR, and thou, triumphant WAYNE,
Intrepid leaders of a warlike train,
With powerful arm and dauntless spirit join
The sacred cause -- and shield the portion'd line. --
ST. CLAIR, in many an arduous conflict tried,
Strength in his mind, and valor at his side,
Though flattering FAME full many a laurel gave,
Yet doomed by Fate less fortunate than brave;
While happier WAYNE from War's victorious hands
For every toil an equal boon commands. --
-- From glebes, by nature rich, by culture fair,
Crowned with thy name, majestic Delaware,
LEE, fiery champion of a people's right,
Invites the war, and seeks the coming fight,
Disdaining fear, impatient of control,
Pride in his port, and passion in his soul;
From Albion's clime he drew his earliest breath,
And Prussia's field had felt his deeds of death,
Now in his wane of years neglected fame
Is all the boon his glorious actions claim;
Stung by revenge, beneath Columbian skies
He seeks that hope his native realm denies,
First of a valiant band, in War's array,
To Freedom's Chief directs his furious way.
And now the patriotic legions rise,
Where parching Auster Virginia, Maryland, North Carolina, South Carolina and
Georgia are distinguished as the southern States.
rules the ruddy skies,
Where the gay charms of bright VIRGINIA shine,
And smooth Potomack waves his azure line,
Sees the high mansion grace his stately side,
And round its green vale leads his wandering tide,
VIRGINIA! blessed beyond each bordering clime,
The noblest plume, that lifts the wing of time! --
Not that luxuriance decks her festive bowers,
While the rich weed its curling fragrance pours;
That fatal weed, with many a blossom fair,
Was nursed by tears, and ripened in despair! --
Not that her ample skirts redundant spread,
And towering mountains crown her princely head;
The wasteful wilderness unheeded lies,
And round those heights the fiend of Slavery hies! --
Yet thou, Virginia, fairest of the fair,
More bright than all thy radiant sisters are,
Shall rise supreme, and every wreath of fame
Twine its rich foliage round thy elder name;(13)
Since to those sovereign skies, that ruling earth,
An infant nation owes its brilliant birth;
Enlightened empires shall thy influence own,
And hail the clime, that bore a WASHINGTON! --
In age, in wisdom, and in glory blessed,
Thou firstborn daughter of the blooming west,
What happier fate can mark thy golden days!
What other hero win the voice of praise!
And yet thy shores two laureled leaders yield,
Brave as the foremost veterans of the field;
GATES, trained to war in Britain's regal band,
Now called to freedom bears her loved command,
While MERCER, by the clans of Scotia bred,
A chosen corpse with equal honor led. --
-- And next, neglectful of each pleasing care,
A young Marcellus General SMALLWOOD.
joins the growing war;
Led by his worth, the sons of Fortune roam
Through dreary wilds, and leave their happy home,
Where the bold Chesapeak, by tempests borne,
Round many an island winds his moony horn,
Sees the rich land display its cultured green,
And grace the name of Britain's exiled Queen, --
Maria, hapless fair! to FORTUNE known
By each extreme, that marks her smile or frown,(14)
When, soaring high, she waves her silver plume,
Or points to earth, the scaffold and the tomb!
-- Could birth, could beauty no protection claim,
Nor even thy glorious father's deathless fame! --
Yet shall the clime, with vernal blushes fair,
That hapless name in proud distinction wear,
And every trophy of her patriot-brave
Recall thy life, and triumph over the grave,
Till the bold race, by hardy valor crowned,
Shall free those fields, and reap that laureled ground. --
-- CHILD OF THE SUN, proud Carolina, rise!
And say what chief thy haughty hand supplies!
Can thou contend for freedom, while yon vale
Pours its deep sorrows on the sultry gale!
Thus rise with patriot heart supremely brave,
Nor heed the scourge, that breaks thy shackled slave! --
What boots the fleecy field, and ricy mead,
If mid their bloom the culturing captive bleed!
Or what avails, that many a sumptuous dome
To every traveller yields a generous home,
If the rich banquet, and the costly cheer,
Are fan'd by sighs, and moistened with a tear! --
Thine is the grace of courts, the polished pride,
That bears no equal at its lordly side,(15)
On the poor artist bends its frowning eye,
And bids discarded commerce shrink and die;
But still the stranger gladdens at the feast,
An ever welcome, ever valued guest,
The robe, the gown, with PEAN'S healing art,
Shine at the board, and share the master's heart. --
When tired with toils of indolence and ease,
Sick at the sun, or shuddering at the breeze,
The listless fair, on silken sofas spread,
Hang the white hand, and droop the graceful head,
While thousand menials loiter in their train,
And speak the despot of a new domain. --
What leader, worthy of this lofty band,
What brave patrician claims the high command!
Thou, MOULTRIE! famed in camps, to glory known,
By deeds more brilliant, than a regal crown, --
Great in thyself, -- most noble in thy fame, --
And rich in all, that worth and valor claim. --
-- While in the south proud Carolina towers,
Famed for her palmy plains, and myrtle bowers,
Without her stately mind, and polished charms,
Her PALLID SISTER lifts her languid arms; -- (16)
When from her woods the regulating band,
Discarded children of their native land,
Urged by insidious power, and cherished hate,
Aimed at her bleeding heart the bolts of fate,
She calls her faithful sons in bold array
To stem the torrent of their wasteful way; --
Raised at her voice, intrepid MOORE appears,
Restores her hopes, and stills her patriot fears;
He guards the culture of her labored fields,
Whose sandy soil a golden vintage yields,
Whose native pine its spiky summit rears,
And pours profusion from its fragrant tears;
While Health, auspicious to their balmy stream,
Fills the loose breeze, and fans the sweltering beam,
Over the wan cheek her vernal lily throws,
But bears to colder climes her ruddy rose. --
-- An ardent youth the sultry race commands,
Where green Savannah folds the level lands,
And Altimaha's sounding waters run
With headlong fury to the vertic sun,
Where the mail'd reptile of Egyptian Nile
From shore to shore directs his floating file.(17)
While, from the cavern of his clashing jaw,
The hands of death an hundred arrows draw,
He crops the verdure of the growing grain,
Or drags the wailing baby from the plain;
Even while the watchful fisher reads the skies,
He feels his leaning bark unconscious rise,
Then whirl impetuous to the plunging wave,
Drink the salt surge, and dash the billowy grave. --
Yet round these shores prolific plenty twines,
Stores the thick field, and swells the clustering vines,
A thousand groves their glossy leaves unfold,
Where the rich orange rolls its ruddy gold,
China's green shrub, divine magnolia's bloom,(18)
With mingling odors fling their high perfume; --
A depth of forest, and a breadth of plain,
Screens the hot soil, and spreads the opening main,
Whence freighted fleets, with many a streamer gay,
To eastern empires bend their wealthy way,
While the blythe sons of jovial commerce stand
Round the high deck, and bless the parting land; --
Land last of Freedom! youngest child of Fame!
Graced with thy great Defender's glorious name,
Bright Georgia, hail! -- Though fiery Summer pours
His fierce electric round thy blasted bowers,
While in black streams the turbid clouds descend,
And peals on peals the flashing concave rend, --
Though many a reptile rear its slimy brood
On the moist bosom of thy breezeless wood, --
Though Afric feel thee on her ravaged plain,(19)
And stay thy step, and stop thy hand in vain, --
Yet Britain claims thee with maternal prayer,
Won by her wealth, and nurtured by her care,
For thee alone her royal riches spread,
Her kindness clothed thee, and her bounty fed, --
While many a charm, and many a courtly wile,
Allure thy love, and woo thy grateful smile,
Columbia moved thee with encircling arms
To dread those wiles, and shun those dangerous charms;
Erewhile thy sons, by social rights inspired,
From Albion's side and regal rule retired;
To aid the nobler cause thy powers expand,
The shield of Freedom guards thy lifted hand,
Brave Mc INTOSH a corpse of warriors leads,
Less famed for numbers, than for glorious deeds.
And now the strong Artillery claims its birth,
Terrific guardian of the trembling earth,
With voice of vengeance, and tremendous breath,
That wake the fiends of ruin, flight and death; --
What daring arm directs its dangerous way!
What Chief beloved, ye brave Columbians, say! --
It Is thine, intrepid KNOX, on glory's car
To shield the ranks, and guide the vollied war,
And thine the clime of Freedom's early boast,
Where the cold isthmus joins the stormy coast: --
What time thy much-enduring country draws
Thy active valor to her suffering cause,
Warmed at her call, in winter's dreary reign
Thy hardy step explored the northern plain; -- (20)
I see thee dauntless tread the trackless way,
Where frowning forests quench the glimmering day,
Through the bleak wild, and up the boreal steeps,
Where, wrapped in frost, the stilled artillery sleeps,
I see that arm its ponderous weight prepare,
And call its thunder to the distant war:
Raised by thy toils, the brazen bulwark stands,
Thy care creates it, and thy voice commands; --
Yet as the truly brave are truly kind,
And mildest manners mark the noblest mind,(21)
So while a country's wrong thy spirit sires,
And patriot ardor every deed inspires,
Not more revered in arms, than loved by fame
For every worth the social virtues claim, --
In war, the terror of the blazing line,
In peace, the soul of gentleness, is thine. --
Thus from the snowy District of the Maine
To where red Georgia spreads her parching plain,
In one fixed union, with one soul inspired,
By their great wrongs, and greater prospects fired,
The blended offspring of each varying clime,
From wintry age to nature's vernal prime,
Brace their bold arms, and with collected might
In the just cause their differing forms unite; --
So with the oak the fair magnolia blows,
And thus the bending thorn supports the rose. --
Even thus the freeborn race indignant rise
Beneath their chosen CHAMPION'S partial eyes;
While HE, with boundless mind and patient care,
Trained the young rustic to the veteran war,
By bold example nerved the feeble hand,
And shone the model of his own command,
Round yon blue shores, where curling billows shine,
The PATRIOT CHIEF contracts his lessening line,
Till close besieged, the sons of Albion lie,
Death waits their stay, and shame forbids to fly; --
And as the truant boy, with venturous pride,
Resolves to stem the river's ruffling tide,
While on the shore his pleading inmates stand,
Spreads his white limbs, and points the distant strand,
Disdains to yield till all his springs decay,
And the mid current sweep his form away;
But then, low-sinking with exhausted powers,
Too late the folly of his fall deplores;
Since, snatched from whelming fate, the scoffing train,
Joy in his grief, and triumph in his pain: --
So, while on war's last verge the Briton lies,
Unyielding still he grasps the flattering prize,
Nor, till the last weak ray of hope declines,
To dark defeat his brilliant fame resigns.
With rapid force the growing dangers press,
And round the sufferers pour their deep distress,
The crowding siege impels the wasted foe,
The loud artillery rolls the peals of woe,
The bursting shells, on wings of lightning thrown,
Fill the blazed air, and rock the tottering town,
Distemper reigns, and threatening famine lowers,
No juicy fruitage yields its cooling powers,
No verdant herbs their grateful aid impart
To thin the tainted stream, that clogs the heart;
Around the snowy neck the nurseling clings --
In vain -- no cry the draught of nectar brings,
For thirsty fever, hunger and dismay,
Had dried the feeding fount of health away;
The chiefs of Britain throng the saddening shore,
Defy their danger, but their fame deplore.
While, led by hope, or borne by fruitless fear,
The groan of sufferance gains the HERO'S ear,
Full many a pang his melting heart assails,
Yet the firm purpose of his mind prevails;
Even while soft pity raised her fond behest,
An injured country nerved his closing breast:
No restless hate his equal soul subdued,
No fever'd vengeance, and no thirst for blood,
Defense, not conquest, was the PATRIOT'S care,
Peace all his effort, Freedom all his prayer.
Now, slowly moving from the rampired town,
The chosen herald For this circumstance, see Ramsay's Hist, of the Revel. Vol.
I.
greets Columbia's SON,
From his raised arm the peaceful flag extends,
And low before the camp of Freedom bends,
Thus to her Chief prefers his firm demand --
We quit the sea-wash'd limits of your land,
If from the breasted borders of the lawn
The cars of death and hostile troops are drawn;
If not -- we rest by time and force subdued,
But sell destruction with our purchased blood,
With us the glories of your cultured coast,
Your wives, your children and your town, are lost. --
Britannia's sons recruited strength prepare,
And to the climes of summer bend the war,
The faithful Hanoverian, long allied,
Leads his bold bands on Albion's sovereign side,
The hardy Hesse, a fierce undaunted train,
Climb the high bark, and plough the furrowed main,
Inured to danger, and unawed by fear,
Aim the blue tube, and point the polished spear,
On southern plains their numerous ranks display,
And veil with spreading shades the breast of day;
Columbia's bravest warriors there may claim
The wreath of glory in the field of fame. --
The herald ceased -- While in his prudent breast
The CIVIC HERO weighs the bold behest --
If on the foe his closing lines proceed,
What countless woes await the desperate deed!
The starting infant's shriek! -- The parent's sigh! --
The frighted female's supplicating cry! --
If heedless ruin wrap the shattered wall,
On their own sons the crackling mansions fall! --
Columbia's native race condemned to wait
The victor's vengeance, or the captive's fate! --
Touched at the thought, the PATRIOT CHIEF restrains
His ardent warriors from the forceful plains,
Then yields accordant to the stern desire,
And bids the unmolested foe retire.
While bending east the winged vessels fly,
And on the site of wintry Scotia lie,
The freeborn millions of the stretching shores,
Where young Columbia's rising eagle soars,
In full assemblage meet -- And firmly joined,
With one great purpose, one determined mind,
From the first wisdom of each peopled town,
Graced by the martial helm or civic gown,
They cull with jealous eye a peerless band,
Deputed sovereigns of the guideless land,
To bid the laws resume their sacred reign,
Defend the weak, the ruffian arm restrain,
Till the maternal realm, pacific grown,
Shall heal their wounds, and make their wrongs her own.
And now the delegated rulers shine
A CONSTELLATION, formed by power divine,
That, with reflected force and blended rays,
Each sovereign right, and patriot worth, displays.
But when, at calm debate's enlightened hour,
The wrongs of rapine, and the wounds of power,
Which spread their horrors round the filial coast,
Till the hard parent in the foe is lost,
Crowd on their view, -- and every pang reveal,
Which tyrants urge, and subject wretches feel,
With equal force that breadth of empire rose,
Which all Columbia's varying world bestows,
Where lavish nature's proudest gifts appear,
Ranged on the brow of either hemisphere.
Balanced on hope and doubt -- through every state
The GUIDING POWERS proclaim their firm debate. --
And what, they cry, can this transcendent land
From distant sway and parent care demand!
Why suppliant still! nor daring to be free,
Like feeble infants bend the filial knee!
Forget that manhood swells each branching vein,
And drag with willing step a foreign chain! --
When the fell mother, with uplifted knife,
Thirsts for the stream, that seeds her children's life,
Far from her rage the self-defenders fly,
And wounded nature breaks the kindred tie. --
Then, while your fields with fierce invaders flow,
And civil discord aids an impious foe,
Be to yourselves, to unborn millions, true;
No wrongs can injure, and no force subdue.
Assert your rights, which self-supported rise,
Free as the air, and boundless as the skies: --
If now, disdainful of those early bands,
That bound in triple chains your nerveless hands,
Ye greatly dare, and INDEPENDENT claim
A free Republic, and an empire's name,
Soon to your cause will distant realms afford
The willing largess, and the valiant sword;
Along your seas will allied navies bend,
While your own sons their native shores defend;
Even now your stripling bands, in firm array,
Through veteran armies force their fearless way,
While at their head, in war's unrivaled pride,
Your Patriot-Hero, Champion, Friend and Guide,
Bends his bold course, -- and, foremost of his train,
Meets every danger of the bleeding plain:
Too long this subjugated land has borne
The lust of rapine, and the slight of scorn,
Too long has seen oppressive power prevail,
Usurp your laws, your native rights assail! --
Then know yourselves, and feel how wronged ye are,
Nor deign from kindred claims such chains to wear;
To Britain's realm your purposed will disclose, --
In PEACE, their friends -- in WAR, their desperate foes. --
It Is Freedom's cause, and outraged Nature cries,
Wronged as ye are, disclaim your filial ties.
SOON as the delegated powers decree
Their rising empire from subjection free,
Dispersed by FAME, the sovereign mandate flies,
Till with one soul assenting millions rise, --
To the full field their patriot troops repair,
Inspired by hope, united by despair,
Before the CHIEF with sworn allegiance kneel,
And to high Heaven prefer the great appeal. The emphatical motto of "Appeal to
Heaven," was early in the Revolution affixed to the American Standard. GORDON.

Nor were these bands, what lordly Europe brings,
The vagrant vassals of her feudal kings;
But the bold peasant, whose unfettered arm
Defends his own hereditary farm,
The shepherd-soldier, who indignant bears
His country's wrong, and all her glory shares.
THUS SUNG THE MINSTREL, by the theme inspired,
With truth, with freedom, with ambition fired; --
What though her brow no laurel wreath displays,
To lure attention by the power of praise;
Though the cold clime subdue the Muse's flame,
And colder bosoms blast the hope of fame,
Some bard more blessed may the high strain prolong,
Till free Columbia feel the sway of song,
Till, as the streams of epic music roll,
Past scenes of glory fill the patriot's soul,
The torpid heart of dull indifference charm,
To pity waken, and to virtue warm,
Of deathless deeds the treasured meed proclaim,
And round the Hero's twine the Poet's name,
Who, with prophetic voice, and votive lyre,
Breathes what the Muses and THE GOD inspire. --
-- In this bright hour, when opening truth appears,
And over the mind her starry scepter rears,
When waning empires own her powerful sway,
And rend the fetters of their youth away,
THOU, pure instructress of the searching thought,
Whose chastening ray the wanton nations caught,
Thou, blessed Columbia, shall with cloudless fame
Spread the mild luster of thy temperate flame,
And still abhorrent from the blast retire,
That wraps the realms in extirpating fire; --
While from its rage insulted FREEDOM flies,
And on thy virtues rests her wearied eyes,
A patriot muse the mystic mandate bears,
That wills the triumph of her future years,
When, led by THEE, she wings her rapid flight,
And through the dark earth spreads her mental light,
From the hard bosom of the ice-clad seas,
To the hot sorehead of the austral breeze,
From where the morning wakes her infant beam,
And golden Ganges slopes his amber stream,
To where the West a crimson robe extends,
And over La Plata's spreading mirror bends, --
Till the full ray of EQUAL FREEDOM shine,
And like the sun this genial globe entwine.
NOTES.
NOTE FIRST. PAGE 13.
The length of realms by pious Godfrey trod.
THE author does not pretend to deny the military character of Godfrede, in his
mad expedition of the Crusades, but would only refuse her assent to the
supernatural aid, etc. that the fabling poet has attributed to him. -- The
exploits of the goddess-born Achilles, mowing down whole armies with
impenetrable armor -- the amor of AEneas with Dido, who lived two centuries
before his era, -- and the achievements ascribed to him in the death of
Mezentius, from whom according to tradition he met his fate, -- require no
comment. -- As the author makes no claims to poetic excellence, she would
recommend her performance by its historical accuracy.

NOTE SECOND. PAGE 16.
Wraps the wide domes, and climbs the ascending towers.
CHARLESTOWN was burnt by the British troops during the battle of Bunker Hill.

NOTE THIRD. PAGE 16.
Fought in her cause, and found a trophied grave.
LORD How, who fell in the Canadian war, -- and in commemoration of whose
valor and virtues, the American People caused an emblematic monument to be
erected in Westminster Abbey.

NOTE FOURTH. PAGE 17.
Yet the prophetic poet's piercing eyes.
IT may possibly be asked, Why the most conspicuous action within the limits of
the surrounding prospect should be so transiently noticed? but the author,
being well assured the battle of Bunker Hill is is already made the subject of
a manuscript poem by James Allen, Esquire. she has not presumed to invade that
consecrated ground; but begins to sketch her historic outlines, where, she is
informed, he has left his action completely delineated.

NOTE FIFTH. PAGE 17.
And Genius, rising over the rescued bier.
SEE the oration delivered by P. MORTON, Esquire. over the remains of General
Warren, at their re-interment by public authority, after the royal army were
compelled to evacuate the town of Boston.

NOTE SIXTH. PAGE 21.
Disdained the meed his peerless perils claim.
GENERAL Washington's disinterested rejection of all pecuniary compensation for
his inestimable services, though it form but a small feature in the portrait of
his life, would in the character of any other hero be considered an
unparalleled trait of magnanimity and virtue.

NOTE SEVENTH. PAGE 24.
Conceal the caves, where penal rigor reigns!
THE Mines at Simsbury. In which, according to our best information, criminals
of every description are, or were, confined; for we hope and trust this
terrible instrument of penal tyranny is no longer recognized by the laws of the
enlightened legislature of Connecticut.

NOTE EIGHTH. PAGE 25.
Where the White Mountains lift their sparkling head.
THE White Mountains, called by the native Indians Agi^^ochook, are believed by
them to have afforded a refuge to Powow, an Indian chief, and his wife, who,
foreseeing the flood, resorted to their highest pinnacle for security, and
afterward re-peopled the desolated country -- since which period the
Aborigines or Red People have never ventured to ascend the summit, which they
suppose inhabited by spirits of departed warriors, and covered with precious
gems that appear luminous in the night. -- The fact is, the shining appearance
proceeds from the snow and ice, which render the upper region of the mountains
inaccessible, while the zone beneath is overspread with vegetation. -- See
these mountains minutely and philosophically described in the 3d. Vol. of
Belknap's Hist. of New Hampshire.

NOTE NINTH. PAGE 26.
While WENTWORTH, patron of his parent clime.
SIR John Wentworth, baronet, the last governor of the province of
New Hampshire under the regal administration, whose generous and enlightened
virtues are still remembered and revered by the grateful inhabitants.

NOTE TENTH. PAGE 27.
Beneath the sway of fearless Philip shone.
THE great Indian Sachem, called King Philip, after performing prodigies of
personal valor, about the close of the last century, was finally subdued and
slain by the hands of Col. Church (whom I am inclined to think the greatest
barbarian of the two) when his domains, and royal residence of (...) Hope were
(...) to the conquerors.

NOTE ELEVENTH. PAGE 28.
To YORK'S imperial House transferred the claim.
THE Island of New York, formerly called the New Netherlands, was peopled
originally from the Batavian and Belgic provinces; -- Charles II. under
pretense of its having been discovered by Henry Hudson, and Englishman, granted
the whole province to the Duke of York, under whose command it was conquered;
but finally, it was confirmed to the English by purchase or compromise with the
Dutch.

LENDRUM. NOTE TWELFTH. PAGE 29.
No crimes disgrace, no impious murder stains.
IT may be considered worthy observation, that no Pennsylvanian of the Society
of Friends has ever been convicted of those atrocious offenses, to which the
laws of their country affix an ignominious punishment.

NOTE THIRTEENTH. PAGE 33.
Twine its rich foliage round thy elder name.
VIRGINIA was the first province settled by the English. It was colonized by
the influence of Sir Walter Raleigh under the reign of the Virgin Queen,
Elizabeth, from whom it derived its name. -- The first motion for Independence
was made by Richard Henry Lee, member from that State, which is the largest in
the Union.

LENDRUM. NOTE FOURTEENTH. PAGE 34.
By each extreme, that marks her smile or frown.
MARYLAND was named in honor of Henrietta Maria, wife of Charles I. of England,
and daughter of Henry the Great, of France. A corpse of young men of the first
fortune and distinction under General Smallwood joined the war from this State,
and unhappily were nearly all cut off at the battle of Long Island.

See LENDRUM' s Selection. NOTE FIFTEENTH. PAGE 35.
That bears no equal at its lordly side.
THE original constitution of Carolina was framed by the celebrated Mr. Lock,
of an aristocratical form, establishing orders of Nobility. Lend. Vol. I. And
although now its principles are those of a democratic Republic, there is no
State in the Union, in which the distinction of rank and situation is so
tenaciously observed: The planter disdains to associate with the mechanic, and
even the merchant; yet their characteristic, though haughty, is hospitable,
generous and enlightened.

NOTE SIXTEENTH. PAGE 36.
Her PALLID SISTER lifts her languid arms.
THE outlawed inhabitants of the west part of North Carolina, who had formerly
denominated themselves Regulators, and under that character attempted to change
the government of the colony, from a principle of revenge against the other
citizens, who had opposed them in the field, were easily persuaded to join the
royal standard at the beginning of the Revolution, when they were totally
defeated by General Moore, and their brave commander, McDonald, was taken.

LENDRUM. NOTE SEVENTEENTH. PAGE 37.
From shore to shore directs his floating file.
THE alligators or crocodiles of Georgia proceed through the lakes or rivers in
large companies, like a file of soldiers, ranged under one chief, who is the
largest and most ferocious of the party. The clashing jaws of these reptiles
may be heard at a great distance.

See Bartram's Travels through the interior Parts of America. NOTE EIGHTEENTH.
PAGE 38.
China's green shrub, divine magnolia's bloom.
THE Tea-Plant was introduced into Georgia by Mr. Samuel Bowen, about the year
1770.

LENDRUM. NOTE NINETEENTH. PAGE 39.
Though Afric feel thee on her ravaged plain.
GEORGIA for a long time after its first settlement opposed the importation of
African slaves; but finally, influenced by the bad example of the neighboring
colonies, she fell into the pernicious traffic, and the lands are now generally
cultivated by that unhappy people. Georgia is the only colony that derived its
entire settlement and support from the crown, and was the last to consent to
Union and Independence.

LENDRUM. NOTE TWENTIETH. PAGE 40.
Thy hardy step explored the northern plain.
GENERAL Knox, by permission of the commander-in-chief, marched to Ticonderoga
in the depth of winter, and from thence removed the heavy ordnance through a
mountainous and woody country, and planted it in the fortifications before
Boston.

NOTE TWENTY-FIRST. PAGE 40.
And mildest manners mark the noblest mind.
AN intended allusion to the characteristic of the most amiable hero of
antiquity,

-- "In whom the Gods had joined
The mildest manners with the bravest mind."

