FRONTISPIECE.



NIGHTINGALE OF LIBERTY: OR Delights of Harmony. A CHOICE COLLECTION OF
Patriotic, Masonic, and Entertaining SONGS. TO WHICH ARE ADDED TOASTS AND
SENTIMENTS, MORAL, HUMOROUS, AND REPUBLICAN.

Thou sweetest songster of the feathered tribe,
Carol, with notes harmonious, songs to LIBERTY.
NEW YORK: PRINTED BY JOHN HARRISSON, And sold at his Book-Store, no. 3
Peck-Slip. 1797.

Books and Stationary, Of every kind, For sale at the Book Store of JOHN
HARRISSON, No. 3, Peck-Slip. Cargo Memorandum Books, ALSO, Dutch Memorandum
Books, The Practical Navigator, and The Seaman's New Daily Assistant, Seaman's
Journals, Blank Books of all Kinds, And a great Assortment of the newest Song
Books.

THE GALLY SLAVE.
OH, think on my fate! once I Freedom enjoyed,
Was as happy as happy could be --
But pleasure is fled! -- even hope is destroyed!
A captive, alas! on the sea!
I was taken by the foe -- it was the fiat of fate
To tear mef rom her I adore;
When thot brings to mind my once happy estate,
I figh! -- while I tug at the oar.
Hard, hard is my fate! -- Oh how galling my chain!
My life's steered by Misery's chart --
And tho against my tyrants I scorn to complain,
Tears gush forth to ease my sad heard:
I disdain even to shrink tho I feel the sharp lash;
Yet my breast bleeds for her I adore:
While around me the unfeeling billows will dash,
I sigh! -- and still tug at the oar.
How Fortune deceives! -- I had pleasure in tow,
The port where she dwelt we'd in view,
But the wished nuptial morn was o'erclouded with woe,
And, dear ANNA! I was hurried from you.
Our vessel was boarded, and I borne away
To behold my dear ANNA no more!
But despair wastes my spirits, my form feels deeny --
He sighed, and expired at the our!
FREEDOM.
UNFOLD, father Time, thy long records unfold,
Of noble achievements, accomplished of old,
When men, by the spirit of LIBERTY led,
(...) conquered, or cheerfully bled.
But now, midst the triumphs these moments reveals.
(...) glories all fade, and their luster turns pale,
(...) rises up and proclaims the decree
(...) off their chains and bids MILLIONS be FREE.
As Spring to the fields, and as dew to the flowers,
To the earth parched with heat as the soft dropping showers,
As health to the wretch that lies languid and wan,
So cheering, so grateful is FREEDOM to MAN.
Where FREEDOM the light of her countenance gives,
There only he triumphs, there only he lives.
Then seize the glad moment anp hail the decree,
That tears off their chains and bids MILLIONS be FREE.
Too long had oppression and terror entwined,
Those tyrant-form'd chains that enslave the FREE mind;
While dark superstition, with nature at strife,
For age has locked up the fountains of life:
But the demon has fled, the delusion is past,
And Reason and Virtue have triumphed at last --
Then seize the glad moment, and hail the decree
That tears off their chains, and bids MILLIONS be FREE.
FRANCE! thy glorious triumph the American soul fills,
While the Genius of LIBERTY bounds over thine hills.
Redundant henceforth may the purple juice flow,
Prouder wave chy green woods and thine olive trees grow,
While the hands of Philosophy long shall entwine
-- Blessed emblem -- the Laurel, the Myrtle, the Vine,
And Heaven, through all eyes, confirmed the decree,
That tears off their chains, and bids MILLIONS be FREE.
INDEPENDENCE!
HAIL, lovely maid! -- Hail, power divine! --
Hail, INDEPENDENCE! at whose shrine
The just do tribute pay:
May thy bright rays each Patriot fire.
May earth born souls to thee aspire,
And hail the Auspicious Day.
On Europe's mystic shore enchain'd,
By despots' mandates there restrained,
By superstition bound;
COLUMBUS, like the orient morn,
Arose, dispelled the black'ning storm,
And leaped the gulf profund.
'The Curlew scream'd, the Tritons blew,
While cross the Atlantic swift they flew
To reach this western clime;
The sea-gods-rose from ocean's bed,
The Patriot band in safety led,
The radient maid divine.
The Dryads hail their heaven-born guest,
And FREEDOM reared his fulgent crest,
And hailed the auspicious rite;
The clarions loud from state to state.
Fair INDEPENDENCE verberate,
When first she saw the light.
The mandates of great Jove obeyed,
The wood-nymphs seize the infant maid,
Like wisdom's fair she stands;
As rolling years matur'd her age,
With bold oppression she engaged,
And burst despotic bands.
This DAY, this blessed propitious day,
The rolls of light she did display.
Asserted FREEDOM's cause,
She broke tyrannic Albion's chain,
And drove him from fair Truth's domain,
Where Nature's God forms laws.
Then, Patriots, join the festive throng,
And hail this day with mirth and song,
And harmony and glee;
With shouts of joy from state to state,
Let Heavens bright spheres reverberate
IMMORTAL LIBERTY.
THE GREAT REPUBLIC.
HAIL, great Republic of the world!
The rising empire of the west;
Where famed Columbus, with mighty mind inspired
Gave tortured Europe scenes of rest.
Be thou forever, forever Great and Free,
The land of Love and LIEERTY.
Beneath thy spreading mantling vine,
Beside thy flowery grove and springs;
And on thy lofty, thy mountain's brow,
May all thy sons and fair one's sing.
Be thou forever, etc.
From thee may rudest natioes learn
To prize the cause thy sons began;
From thee may future, may future tyrants know
That sacred are the Rights of Man.
Be thou, etc.
From thee may hated discord fly,
With all her dark, her gloomy train;
And over thy fertile, thy fertile wide domain,
May everlasting Friendship reign,
Be thou, etc.
Of thee may lisping infancy
The pleasing wondrous story tell;
And Patriot sages in venerable mood,
Instruct the world to govern well.
Be thou, etc.
Ye guardian angels watch around,
From harms protect the new born state;
And all ye friendly, ye friendly nations join
And thus salute the child of fate.
Be thou forever, forever great and Free,
The land of Love and LIBERTY.
BATTLE OF THE KEGS.
GALLANTS attend, and hear a friend,
Trill forth harmonious ditty:
Strange things I Will tell, which late befell
In Philadelphia city.
'Twas early day, as poets say,
Just when the sun was rising,
A sodier stood, on log of wood,
And saw a fight surprising.
As in a maze, he stood to gaze,
The truth cannot be denied, sir,
He spied a score -- of kegs or more,
Come floating down the tide sir.
A sailor too, in jerkin blue,
The strange appearance viewing,
First damned his eyes, in great surprise,
Then said -- some mischief's brewing.
These KEGS now hold the rebels bold,
Packed up like pickled herring:
And they are come down t'attack the town,
In this new way of ferrying.
The soldier flew, the sailor too,
And, scared almost to death, sir.
Wore out their shoes, to spread the news,
And ran till out of breath, sir.
Now up and down, through all the town,
Most frantic scenes were acted;
And girls and boys, with hedious noise.
Ran through the town half naked.
Sir Wm. How,
Sir William he, snug as a flea,
Lay all his time a snoring,
Nor dreamt of harm, us he lay warm
In bed with Mrs. L -- g.
Now in a fright, he starts upright,
Awaked by such a clatter:
He rubs both eyes, and boldly cries,
"For God's sake what is the matter?
At his bed side, he then espied
Sir Erskine Sir W. Erskine.
at command, sir,
Upon one foot, he had one boot,
And the other in his hand, sir.
Arise! Arise! Sir Erskine cries:
The rebels -- more's the pity --
Without a boat, are all on float,
And ranged before the city.
The motly crew, in vessels new,
With Satan for their guide, sir,
Packed up in bags, or wooden KEGS,
Come driving down the tide, sirs.
Therefore prepare for bloody war;
These KEGS must all be routed:
Or surely we despised shall be;
And British courage doubted.
The royal band now ready stand,
All ranged in dread array, sir,
With stomach stout, to see it out,
And make a bloody day, fir.
The cannons roar, from shore to shore:
The small arms make a rattle:
Since wars began, I Am sure no man
Ever saw so strange a battle.
The rebel The British officers were so fond of the word rebel, that they often
applied it most absurdly.
vales, the rebel dales,
With rebel trees surrounded,
The distant woods, the hills, and floods,
With rebel echos sounded,
The fish below swam to and fro
Attacked from every quarter:
Why sure, thought they, the dev'l's to pay,
Amongst folks above the water.
The KEGS, it is said, tho strongly made,
Of rebel staves and hoops, sir,
Could not oppose their powerful foes,
The conquering British toops, sir,
From morn to night, these men of might
Displayed amazing courage;
And when the sun was fairly down,
Retired to sup their porridge.
An hundred men, with each a pen,
Or more, upon my word, sir,
It is most true, would be too low
Their valor to record, sir.
Such feats did they perform that day
Upon these wicked KEGS, sir,
That years to come, if they get-home,
They Will make their boasts and brags, sir.
INTEREST.
A SONG, a song is the cry of mankind,
All know what to singing belongs;
It Is interest governs us all you will find,
And governs the pitch of our songs.
The miser, with riches, who is never content,
Can tell what is right or is wrong,
For he joins in the chorus of twenty per cent,
And owns it a very good song.
Behold the merchant the federal lad,
Who hopes that the union is strong,
But says it is (...) makes the heart glad,
And (...) away with a song.
The merchant is punctual -- to see himself paid,
And wishes for (...) long.
Yet strike up the ditty of commerce and trade,
How quickly he joins in the song.
The lawyer and parson do know very well,
The things to singing belong,
One finger's the sea, ere a word he can tell,
One "turns of his flock with a song."
And WASHINGTON too, the hero and sage,
To heaven he carols his song:
"The blessings which thou to COLUMBIA gave,
I pray thee in mercy prolong."
FOURTH OF JULY.
HAIL, ever-memorable Day!
When Sons of Freedom bore the sway
Unawed by all the world:
When Patriots signed the wise decree,
That fair Columbia should be free,
Or else in ruins hurled.
How awful was the new dawn scene,
When Liberty, transcendant queen,
In glorious pomp arrayed,
With her Columbia's boasted Son,
The great. the warlike WASHINGTON,
Led forth the smiling maid.
By his example all inspired,
Each bosom with like ardor fired:
Behold the shining band!
A thirst for Freedom, homes forsook,
Defiance louring on each look,
They all collected stand.
Huzza for Freedom! they all cried,
Freedom the echoing hills replied;
Then dauntless rushing on,
Lords, Dukes, and Earls before them flew,
With all the trembling, servile crew,
Huzza for WASHINGTON.
All hereditary honors he
Contended for sweet Liberty,
He did the sword unsheath:
From hence these lasting honors now,
From off Cornwallis' haughty brow,
He plucked the laurel wreath.
Thus by immortal deeds of same,
We triumph in Columbia's name,
And her immortal Son.
While moon and stars and sun endured
While billows foam on Ocean's shore;
Revere great WASHINGTON.
WASHINGTON.
NO peerage we covet, no sceptres desire,
Nor gew gaws that garnish a throne;
Yet Liberty loves on her own native lyre
To celebrate sons of her own.
And always with rapture his virtue she sings,
And exults on the morn of his birth,
Who shakes every throne of despotical kings,
And gives a new lesson to earth.
O, widely defuse it, ye winds as ye blow!
O waft it ye waves that they fan!
For the choicest of gifts that the gods can bestow
Is the blessing of FREEDOM to MAN.
O WASHINGTON, hail! whom the breath of pure Fame
With praises more sweet shall perfume,
Than ever embalmed or exalted a name
In Macedon, Ateens, or Rome.
For Freedom say what did that foe of the Greek,
Alexander, that he to admired
Let the foes, or the friend whom he massacred speak;
Or the beautiful city he fired!
Ye unfettered Freemen examine each deed
That made him renowned and adored;
Then mention what race by his valor was freed,
Or blessed by his scepter or sword!
Did conquering Caesar Rome's senate obey?
Did the legions disperse at a word?
Did he halt or retire from a summit of sway
That saving his country conferred?
Then, WASHINGTON, hail! whom the breath of pure Fame
With praises more sweet shall perfume,
Than ever embalmed or exalted a name,
In Macedon, Athens or Rome.
Did Athens, did Sparta one hero produce
TO extinguish their feuds by his mind,
Or prove to the free the pre-eminent use
Of union to them and mankind?
Ah, no! if wise Greece but one patriot adept,
One leader like ours had enjoyed,
No lover of Freedom or Science had wept
For Science and Freedom destroyed.
Then, WASHINGTON, hail! whom the breath of pure Fame
With praises more sweet shall perfume
Than ever embalmed or exalted a name
In Macedon, Athens, or Rome.
LIBERTY TREE.
Written at the commencement of the American war.

IN a chariot of light, from the regions of day,
The Goddess of Liberty came,
Ten thousand celestials directed her way,
And hither conducted the dame:
The fair budding branch from the gardens above,
Where millions with millions agree,
She brought in her hand, as a pledge of her love,
And the plant she named Liberty Tree.
The celelestial exotic sunk deep in the ground,
Like a native he flourished and bore,
The fame of its fruit drew the nations around
For to seek out this peaceable shore.
Unmindful of name or distinction they came,
Like freemen and brothers agree,
With one spirit endu'd they one friendship pursued,
And their temple was Liberty Tree.
Beneath this fair branch, like the patriots of old,
Our bread in contentment we eat,
Unperplex'd with thots of silver or gold,
The cares of the wealthy or great.
With timber and tar we old England supplied,
Supported her power on the sea;
Her battles we fought without gaining a groat,
For the safety of Liberty Tree.
But list, O ye swains! it is a tale most profane,
That all these tyranical powers,
Kings, Commons, and Lords, all unite in a name,
To cut down this garden of ours.
From the east to the west blow the trumpet to arms,
Through the land let the sound of it flee,
Let the far and the near all unite in god cheer,
In defense of our Liberty Tree.
AMERICA.
HAIL, America! hail! unrivaled in fame,
Thy foes in confusion turn pale at thy name,
On the rock-rooted harbor firmly seated sublime,
Below thee break, harmless, the billows of time.
Thy striped flag wave still, and glory ensue,
And FREEDOM find ever a guardian in you.
Huzza, huzza, huzza!
Ye brave Americans, whom Freedom secures;
For the high car of crest-blazing glory is yours.
Our bosoms enraptured beat high at thy name;
Thy health is our transport, thy trumpet our fame;
Like our sires, with our swords we'll support their renown,
What they bought with their blood we'll defend with our own.
Smile, ye guardians of Freedom, while your brave sons implore
That America may flourish when time is no more.
Huzza, Huzza, huzza!
Ye brave Americans, whom Freedom secures;
For the blessings of Virtue and Plenty are yours.
Let Spain boast the treasures that grow in her mines,
While France spends her blood in exalted designs;
In bright sparkling jewels let India prevail,
And thy odors, Arabia distuse in each gale:
Columbia and Gallia are blessed with a soil
Where the fair fruits of Virtue and Liberty smile.
Huzza, etc.
With rapture and love our beauties we prize,
With their rose-blooming cheeks and their languishing eyes:
Haste, ye Graces, and Venus to Columbia repair,
Fit consorts for heroes -- the first of the fair:
For to whom shall the blessings of Freedom descend
But the sons of those fires who dared Freedom defend?
Huzza, etc,
Not ambitious of keeping the world in a flame,
May Friendship and Peace be forever our aim --
Immortal in virtue, immortal in prime,
May Liberty flourish and honor our clime;
Oppression be kept at a distance from hence --
No tyrants and thrones at the people's expense.
Huzza, huzza, huzza!
Ye brave Americans, whom Freedom secures,
For the blessings of Virtue and Plenty are yours.
THE MARSEILLES MARCH.
Sung by the MARSEILLOIS going to battle.

YE sons of FRANCE awake to glory,
Hark! hark! what myriads bid you rise!
Your children, wives, and grandsires hoary;
Behold their tears and hear their cries!
Shall hateful tyrants, mischief breeding,
With hireling hosts, a ruffian band,
Affright and desolate the land,
While Peace and Liberty lie bleeding!
To arms, to arms, ye brave,
The avenging sword unsheath,
March on, march on, all hearts resolved
On victory or death.
Now, now the dangerous storm is rolling,
Which treacherous Kings, confed'rate raise;
The dogs of war let loose are howling,
And lo! our fields and cities blaze;
And shall we basely view the ruin,
While lawless force with guilty stride,
Spreads dissolations far and wide,
With crimes and blood his hand imbruing?
To arms, etc.
With luxury and pride surrounded,
The vile insatiate despots dare,
Their thirst of power and gold unbounded,
To mete and vend the light and air;
Like beasts of burden would they load us,
Like gods, would bid their slaves adore;
But man is man, and who is more?
Then shall they longer lash and goad us?
To arms, etc.
O LIBERTY! can man resign thee,
Once having felt thy generous flame!
Can dungeons, bolts, and bars confine thee?
Or whips thy noble spirit tame?
Too long the world has wept, bewailing
That Falshood's dagger tyrants wield;
But FREEDOM is our sword and shield.
And all their arts are unavailing.
To arms, to arms, ye brave,
The avenging sword unsheath,
March on, march on, all hearts resolved
On victory or death.
THE BIRTH DAY OF FREEDOM.
LET the poets of England write odes on their King
Or their musical notes raise so high,
The BIRTHDAY of FREEDOM we ever will sing
And rejoice on the Fourth of July.
No proud haughty monarch can here bear the sway
Since tyranny now we defy,
Fair Liberty ushers this joyful glad day,
And proclaims it is the Fourth of July.
May Columbians, united, preserve and protect.
The blessings on which they rely,
Nor with shameful indifference ever neglect
To remember the Fourth of July.
This day be it sacred to Freedom and Peace,
Festivity, Friendship, and Joy;
May our land in prosperity ever increase,
And be blessed on the Fourth of July.
COLINET AND PHEBE.
AS Colinet and Phebe sat
Beneath a poplar grove,
With fondest truth the gentle youth
Was telling tales of love.
Dear blooming maid, the shepherd said.
My tender vows believe,
These downcast eyes, and artless sighs
Can never thy faith deceive.
From fair to fair, tho some their are
Delighting wild to rove;
Such change thou never from me can fear,
Thy charms secure my love.
Then Phebe now approve my vow,
By truth, by fondness pressed;
A smile assume, to grace thy bloom,
And make thy shepherd blessed. --
A blush over spread her cheek with red,
Which half she turned aside:
With pleasing woes her bosom rose
While thus the maid replied:
Full well, dear youth, I know thy truth,
And of thine arts to please:
But ah is this a time for bliss,
On things so soft as these?
While all around we hear no sound,
But war's terrific strain:
The drum commands our arming bands,
And chides each tardy swain.
Our country's call arouses all
Who dare be brave and FREE,
My love shall crown the youth alone
Who saves himself and me.
It Is done, he cried, from thy dear side
How quickly I Will be gone;
From love will I to FREEDOM fly,
A slave to thee alone.
And when I come with laurels home,
And all that Freemen crave,
To crown my love, thy smile shall prove
The fair reward the brave.
THE GENIUS OF FRANCE.
THE Genius of France from his, star begem'd throne,
Over his valorous sons bent his fostering eye,
Under war's sanguine power not long shall ye groan,
Fair Freedom he cries smiling shoots from the sky,
Your cause on the records of heaven is placed;
Despots and crowns shall from earth be erac'd.
While the sun more refulgent shall dart his bright ray,
To cheer and illumine this Glorious Day.
With Bastiles my loved land shall no more be disgraced,
Her white banners around ye, humanity waves;
No more shall the image of God be defaced,
Or dark cells be contrived by cruelty's slaves:
The deep groan of anguish is now heard no more;
Your whips and your tortures ye tyrants give over,
And soon shall the world in unison say
Forever be blessed this Glorious Day.
The bright star of Liberty arose in the North,
Over the Atlantic's rough wave her splendors she shed;
For justice and virtue soon hurried her forth,
Over thy realms my loved Gallia her influence spread,
And O may her power your spirits inspire!
And still may you glow with her sacred fire;
While each son of Freedom exulting shall say,
Forever be blessed this Glorious Day.
Let the valor of Washington live in each breast,
And those chiefs who for Liberty drained every vein,
While honored their spirit, flown above, are at rest,
Their memory unfading forever shall reign:
Like their's be your fame undaunted and free,
Firmly rooted the basis of Freedom shall be;
Her fervors around ye brightly shall play,
Adding new glory to this Happy Day.
Thy cause, struggling France, is the cause of the world;
His tyranny over millions shall one man extend:
From their thrones be these monsters by Liberty hurled;
And each man to each prove protector and friend.
The Era arrives, already it is near,
When this sound alone shall be brought to ear:
May Freedom and Friendship emit a joint ray,
To gild and adorn the Glorious Day.
MURTOUGH O'BLANEY'S ESCAPE.
Here Is Murtough O'Blaney, just come from the wars,
My inside all empty, my outside all scars,
Compunction -- I mean a compunction it feels,
So to die like a Christian I took to my heels.
Sing Balinamona, Ora,
I Will fight with the Frenchmen no more O,
I Have got upon LIBERTY's shore, O,
Where fair play's no treason at all.
In Dublin they told me, with money in hand,
That (...) into Paris like heroes we'd land,
So I ^^sted it once to have share of the fun,
By St. Patrick that moment my troubles begun.
Sing Balinamona, Ora.
To the devil I pitch all the corpse, O,
Their blarney I well may deplore, O,
Like crabs we advanced all along.
We had Lords for commanders, and Dukee in the rear
And took every day, sirs, new castles in air,
And something besides too, we took for our pains
Sound knock in abundance to settle our brains.
Sing Balinamona, Ora,
Our sconces the witnesses bore, O,
And this they called paying off score, O,
It gave me a head ach, I vow.
One night on the ground, as I lay in my bed,
Just taking a knap, to myself then I said,
We Are gaining but losses, I Will make my retreat,
Look fast to my guts, and take care of my pate.
Sing Balinamona, Ora,
My clothes and my patience got wore, O,
New quarters I went to exlpore, O,
America now is my home.
May blessing on blessings forever light down,
On the land I now live in, where Freedom's our own,
Where strangers are natives, with brothers all round,
And plenty to eat and to drink I Will be bound,
Sing Balinamona, Ora,
I Will feed upon promise no more, O,
In praise of this country I Will roar, O,
Arrah! who would not join in my song.
THE EAGLE OF FREEDOM.
SINCE the Eagle of Freedom is roused from her nest,
Let us chase her fell fiends on the hills of the west;
In a contest so glorious, we'll rise above pain,
For the soldiers of Freedom shall never complain.
As we march over the mountains that rise 'midst the clouds,
Where the blue mist of heaven the sun beams enshrouds;
Tho we labor over rocks and are deluged with rain,
Yet the soldiers of Freedom shall never complain,
That our ardor is honest, our conduct shall prove,
While we act in support of that order we love;
These feelings of honor we'll ever retain,
And thy soldiers, O Freedom! shall never complain.
Tho the fair we have left may breathe the fond sigh,
And the drop of affection may moisten the eye,
Yet we soon, my brave lads, shall embrave them again,
And the daughters of Freedom shall never complain.
While our Federal Banner unfurls to the gale,
The serpent of faction shall never prevail;
The laws we'll defend them again and again,
And we'll never give our country cause to complain.
TO HEAVEN'S EMPYREAL HEIGHT.
TO heaven's empyreal height
Did ministers of light
Their seats ascend;
A glorious order shone
Around the Almighty throne,
Who thus his will made known;
Angels attend!
Mankind on earth below
Shall more enlightened grow;
Be this our care;
The world shall now be free,
Columbia, first to thee
We give the sacred tree;
Preserve it fair.
He ceased and shook the spheres;
With loud applauding cheers
All nature rung:
Seraphs the concert joined,
And heaven and earth combined,
And with enraptured mind
His praises sung.
To guide us through the war,
Virginia's blazing star
Beamed brighi its rays:
Tyrants behold the sight,
And struck with wild affright,
Like the pale bird of night,
In monring blaze.
Discord abounds no more,
Nor leaves our fields in gore;
She Is broke her chains:
The gentle voice of peace
Bids all commotions cease,
And plenty's rich increase
Adorns our plains.
O! may this fabric stand,
And may its name expand
Till nature dies;
When earth's majestic frame
Shall sink absorbed in flame,
And Washington's bright fame
To heaven shall rise.
TREE OF LIBERTY.
WHILE war's crimson carnage is drenching the plains
Of Europe, and tyrants are forging their chains,
Our brethren to shackle, our song still should be
Success to the growth of the Liberty Tree!
On the blood of their people have tyrants long fed,
While to swell their cursed coffers that blood has shed;
But their teeth, lo! they gnash, while in anguish they see
Nations hailing triumphant the Liberty Tree!
Yes! the time is approaching, and fast rolls along
When air, earth, and ocean shall ring with the song,
And the Great Common Father his children shall see
Over creation expanding the Liberty Tree!
With you, generous Franks, our hearts they do beat,
Sympathize in disteess, and victory greet,
Still wishing the joyful glad area to see,
When the shade's universal of Liberty Tree!
Then go on with the glorious work you have begun
Independency take for your shield and sun;
That despots may tremble with dread while they see
The branches extending of Liberty Tree!
Lo! their slaves now they muster, and think to prevail,
But Freedom's victorious, tho millions assail,
Which hastens the moon, when, in jubilee
Mankind shall rejoice under Liberty Tree!
May Truth, Light, and Virtue descend from above
And fix the fair empire of Reason and Love!
From king-craft and priestcraft mankind they free
And forever entwine round the Liberty Tree!
The plant of Columbia's soil, the produce
Of its fruit how ennobling, and mild is the juice,
Which, the moment they taste it, gives mortals to see
What beauties are centered in Liberty Tree!
No rays of false splendour, reflected from courts,
Can light a desire in Columbian hearts,
Such gew-gaws of pride and ambition to see,
By Reason united to Liberty Tree.
Columbia, while blessed with the fair smiles of peace,
Stands a rival in glory with Rome and with Greece;
Let her sons then forget not "they fought to be Free,"
And in blood that they planted their Liberty Tree.
Having faith, that ever long, the whole world will enjoy
What the shade of ages shall never destroy;
Turks, Africans, Russians, enlightened shall see,
And pluck the fair blossoms of Liberty Tree.
That soon the mild goddess, sweet Peace, with her wings
Shall shelter the globe; and even tyrants and kings.
To citizens chained, with rapture shall see,
The wide spreading glory of Liberty Tree.
That east, west, north and south, shall catch the glad sound,
And loud Hymns of Freedom re-echo around:
While the one universal grang chorus shall be,
May immortality flourish our Liberty Tree!
COLUMBIA
COLUMBIA! Columbia! to glory arise,
The queen of the world, and the child of the (...);
Thy genius commands thee, with raptures behold,
While ages on ages thy splendors unfold:
Thy reign is the last, and the noblest of time,
Most fruitful thy soil, most inviting thy clime:
Let the climes of the east never incrimson thy name,
Be freedom, and science, and vitue thy fame.
To conquest and slaughter, let Europe aspire,
Whelm nations in blood, wrap cities in fire;
Thy heroes the rights of mankind shall defend,
And triumph pursue them, and glory attend;
A would is thy realm, for a world be thy laws,
Enlarged as thy empire, and just as thy cause;
On freedom's broad basis, that empire shall rise.
Extend with the main, and dissolve with the (...).
Sair science her gate to thy sons shall unbar,
And the east see thy morn hide the beams of her star;
New bars and new ages unrivaled shall soar,
To same unextinguish'd, when time is no more:
To the last refuge of virtue's designed,
Shall fly from all nations, the best of mankind;
There, grateful to Heaven, with transport shall bring,
Their incense more flagrant than odors of spring.
Nor less shall the fair ones to glory ascend.
And genius and beauty in harmony blend;
The graces of form shall awake pure desire,
And the charms of the soul still enliven the sire;
Their sweetness unmingled, their manners refined,
And virtue's bright image in stamped on the mind;
With peace and sweet rapture shall teach life to glow,
And light up a smile in the aspect of woe.
Thy fleets to all regions thy power shall display,
The nations admire, and the ocean obey;
Each shore to thy glory its tribute unfold,
And the east and the south yield their spices and gold;
As the day spring unbounded thy splendors shall flow,
And earth's little kingdoms before thee shall bow;
While the ensigns of union in triumph unfurled,
Hush anarchy's sway, and give peace to the world.
Thus as down a lone valley with cedars overspread,
From the noise of the town I pensively strayed,
The gloom from the face fair Heaven retired,
The winds ceased to murmur, the thunders expired;
Perfumes as of Eden, flowed sweetly along,
And a voice, as of angels, enchantingly sung,
Columbia! Columbia! to glory arise,
The queen of the would, and the child of the skies.
THE RAISING.
COME muster, my lads, your mechanical tools,
Your saws and your axes, your hammers and rules.
Bring your mallets and and planes, your lever and line,
And plenty of pins of American pine;
For our roof we will raise, and our song still shall be,
A government firm, and our citizens free.
Come, up with the plates, lay them firm on the wall,
Like the people at large, they are the groundwork of all;
Examine them well, and see that they are sound,
Let no rotten parts in our building be found;
For our roof we will raise, and our song still shall be
Our Government's firm, and our citizens free.
Now hand up the girders, lay each in his place,
Between them the joists must divide all the space;
Like assembly men these shall lie level along,
Like girders our senate prove loyal and strong:
For our roof we will raise, and our song still shall be,
A government firm, and our citizens free.
The rasters now frame -- your king-posts and braces,
And drive you pins home, to keep all in their places;
Let wisdom and strength in the fabric combine,
And your pins be all made of American pine;
For our roof we will raise, and our song still shall be,
A government firm, over citizens free.
Our king posts are judges -- how upright they stand,
Supporting the braces, the laws of the land;
The laws of the land, which divide right from wrong,
And strengthen the weak, by weak'ning the strong
For our roof we will raise, and our long still shall be,
Laws equal and just, for a people that is free.
Lo! up the rafters -- each frame is a state!
How nobly they rise! their span, too, how great!
From the north to the south, over the whole they extend,
And rest on the walls, while the walls they defend!
For our roof we will raise, and our song still shall be,
Combined in strength, yet as citizens free.
Now enter the purlins, and drive your pins through,
And see that your joints are drawn home, and all true;
The purlins will bind all the rafters together,
The strength of the whole shall defy wind and weather;
For our roof we will raise, and our song still shall be,
United as States, but as Citizens Free.
Come, raise up the turret, our glory and pride;
In the center it stands, over the whole to preside;
The sons of Columbia shall view with delight
Its pillars and arches and towering height;
Our roof is now raised, and our song still shall be,
A Federal Head over a people still free.
Huzza! my brave boys, our work is complete,
The world shall admire Columbia's fair seat;
Its strength against tempest and time shall be proof
And thousands shall come to dwell under our roof.
While we drain the deep bowl, our toast still shall be,
Our government firm, and our citizens free.
AMERICA.
TUNE -- "RULE, BRITANNIA."

WHEN America first, at Heaven's command,
Arose to curb old Britain's pride,
Drive Tyranny from out the land,
Fair Freedom echoed far and wide.
Rouse, America, rouse, be Free,
For Nature's God gave LIBERTY,
To thee belongs the peaceful reign;
Thy cities shall with commerce flow;
Thy ships explore the boundless main,
And plenty laugh at every foe,
Hail, America! thou art free,
The universe shall trade with thee.
The nations not so blessed as we
Shall in their turns to tyrants fall,
Whilst thou shall rise triumphantly.
The glory and the joy of all.
Hail, America! thou art free,
The slavish Britons envy thee.
Still more majestic shall thou rise,
Upheld by France's friendly wing,
And view thy commerce -- swift it flies,
As Noptune's car -- old ocean's king.
Hail, America! thou art free,
The sea-gods all are friends to thee.
Each haughty tyrant's sordid yoke,
Their vain attempts to bend thee down,
Shall fall beneath thy manly stroke,
With broken scepter and lost crown!
Hail, America! thou art free,
Thou'st fought and bled for Liberty.
The Muses on seraphic wing,
Shall to thy happy coasts repair,
With laurel clown'd, and chant and sing,
To manly hearts, who guard the free.
Smile, America! thou art free,
The Muses all are friends to thee.
Congratulating bowls go round,
To WASHINGTON, and never cease;
In shouts triumph, with music crowned,
To Safety, Liberty, and Peace,
Smile, America! thou art free,
In spite of George and tyranny.
For FREEDOM! hearts and hands we'll join,
Blessed independence, hope and joy!
The theme how noble, how divine!
Join, join the annual feu-de-joye.
Smile, America! thou art free,
A race of heroes springs from thee.
WHEN OUR FATHERS CAME OVER.
WHEN our fathers came over,
To this wilderness shore,
They all hazards and dangers despised;
For by tyrants oppressed,
They came hither in quest
Of FREEDOM, by the brave ever prized.
It Was with labor and toil,
They improved the soil,
For the wilderness bloomed like the rose;
And with plenty being crowned,
To the nations around
Terms of friendship and peace did propose.
But lo! each savage tribe,
With perfidy allied,
Were strangers to peace, friendship, and truth;
For it is scalps that they prize,
They are deaf to the cries
Of the infant, the aged, or youth.
At length they were quelled,
And by valor compelled,
With submission to sue for a peace;
Thus our fathers renowned,
Were with victory crowned,
And their offspring began to increase.
So with LIBERTY blessed,
They departed to rest,
And the fruits of their toil left their sons;
Whose firm hearts, like their fires,
Love of Freedom inspires,
And the shackles of Slavery shun.
For, behold British pride,
With oppression allied,
Soon disturbed this our envied state:
First, with stamps they oppressed,
Which, tho quickly redressed,
They still cherished foul envy and hate.
But the tale is too long,
It would burden my song,
To relate how they threatened us all;
That unless we'd submit
To the terms they thot fit,
Without mercy they on us would fall.
That such threats were in vain,
Is well known to each swain,
Who roams through the lawn or the grove:
For proud Britons dismayed,
Quickly beat the shamade,
And surrendered to him whom all love.
No more let Britain boast,
Of her powerful host,
Ner her sov'reignty over the main;
For we have taught them to know
That tho numerous our foe,
We can conquer again and again.
Now to him that rules all
Who inhabit this ball,
Our warm gratitude sure will arise;
And in thanks we'll repeat,
The deliverance so great,
And the blessings of Liberty prize.
MASONIC SONGS.
THE PARTING.
ADIEU, a heart fond warm adieu,
Ye brothers of a mystic tie,
Ye favored and enlightened few,
Companions of my social joy.
Tho I to foreign lands must hie,
Pursuing fortune's slippery ball,
With melting heart and brimful eye,
I Will mind you still when far awa --
Often have I met your social band,
To spend a cheerful, festive night;
Often honored with supreme command,
Presided over the sons of light.
And by that hieroglyphic bright
Which naught but craftsmen ever knew,
Strong memory on my heart shall write
Those happy scenes when far awa --
May Freedom, Harmony, and Love
Cement you in the grand design,
Beneath the Omnicient Eye of Jove,
The glorious Architect divine.
That you may keep the unerring rule,
Still guided by the plummet's law,
Till order bright completely shine,
Shall be my prayer, when far awa --
And you, farewell, whose merits claim
Justly that highest badge to wear;
May Heaven bless your noble name,
To Masonry and Friendship dear.
A last request permit me then,
When yearly you're assembled all,
One round, I ask it with a tear,
To him, the friend, that is far awa --
And you, kind hearted sisters fair,
I sing farewell to every charm;
The impression of your pleasing air,
With rapture often my breast did warm;
Alas! the social winter's night
No more returns while breath we draw,
Till sisters, brothers, all unite
In that Grand Lodge that is far awa --
FRIENDSHIP AND LOVE.
All clouds now dissolve; from the east beams the day --
Truth rises in glory and wakens the lay.
The Eagle-ey'd Muse -- sees the light -- fills the grove
With the song of Free Masons, of Friendship and Love!
Inspired with the theme, the Divinity flies;
And throned on a rainbow -- before her arise
Past, Present, and Future -- with splendid array,
In Masonic succession, their treasures display.
She views murdered merit by ruffian hand fall,
And the grave give its dead up, at Fellowship's call!
While the Craft by their badges their innocence prove;
And the song of Free Masons is Friendship and Love!
From those ages remote, see the Muse speeds her way,
To join in the glories the Present display.
In Freedom and Friendship, she sees the true band
With their splendour and virtues illumine the land.
Religion's pure stream breaks the vapors of night,
And from darkness mysterious, the Word gives the light!
While the Lodge here below, as the choirs from above,
Join the song of Free Masons in Friendship and Love.
As she sung through the skies, angels echoed the sound,
And the wind bore the notes to the regions around!
The kind proclamation our song shall retain:
It Was -- "That Masonry long may its luster maintain:
And till time be no more our fraternity prove,
That the objects we aim at, are Friendship and Love!"
MASONRY.
TUNE -- MULBERRY TREE.

BEHOLD a cloud break and Urania descends,
The sky mantled nymph our Convention attends,
It is for the Craft that she sweeps the loud strings,
And Science attunes her sweet notes as she sings.
All the arts informed by me,
Bow to thee, blessed MASONRY,
Creation spreads her charms to thee,
And thou immortal ever shall be.
Elated, all own that thy source is divine,
The Bible thy standard, thy square, and thy line;
That Truth is thy handmaid, and Reason thy soul,
And Justice thy guide to the farthermost pole.
All the arts, etc.
As wide and extensive as Sol's boundless ray,
(...) Spring and as bright as her May.
Sense, Truth, and Good Humor, and Harmony join,
By Masonry warmed, they unite and combine;
To the Bower of Friendship she leads them along,
To taste of her banquits and chorus her song.
Then the arts, etc.
Behold the Free Mason, how noble his plan!
It enlarges the mind, and enobles the man,
It teaches the hand and the heart how to bless,
And melts even the miser to soften distress.
Then the arts, etc.
To Time's latest period the Crast so divine,
As the rays of their art shall diffusedly shine,
Their laws, rules, and orders, all others excel,
And Fame ever stand ready their virtues to tell.
While the arts, etc.
THE MASON'S LIFE.
A Mason's life's the life for me,
With joy we meet each other,
We pass our time with mirth and glee,
And hail each friendly Brother,
In Lodge no party feuds are seen,
But careful we in this agree,
To banish care or spleen.
The Master's call, we one and all,
With pleasure soon obey;
^
But when the glass goes round,
Then mirth and glee abound,
We Are all happy to a man;
We laugh a little, we drink a little,
We work a little, we play a little,
We sing a little, are merry a little,
And swig the flowing can,
And swig, etc.
See in the east the Master stands,
The Wardens south and west, sir,
Both ready to obey command,
Find work or give us rest, sir.
The signal given, we all prepare,
With one accord obey the word,
To work by rule or square:
Or if they please, the ladder raise,
Or plumb the level line.
Thus we employ our time with joy,
Attending every sign;
But when the glass goes round,
Then mirth and glee abound,
We Are all happy to a man;
We laugh a little, and drink a little,
We work a little, and play a little,
We sing a little, are merry a little,
And swig the flowing can.
The Almighty said, "Let there be light;"
Effulgent rays appearing,
Dispelled the gloom, the glory bright
To this new world was cheering:
But unto Masonry alone,
Another light, so clear and bright,
In mystic rays then shone;
From east to west it spread so fast,
And Faith and Hoye unfurled,
And brot us thee, sweet Charity,
Thou darling of the world.
Then while the toast goes round,
Let mirth and glee abound,
Let Us be happy to a man;
We'll laugh a little, and drink a little,
We'll work a little, and play a little,
We'll sing a little, be merry a little,
And swig the flowing can.
THE MASON'S GLORY.
FOR ST. JOHN'S DAY.
TUNE -- WE HAVE NO IDLE PRATING.

I Sing of Mason's glory,
Renowned through history's pages;
Whose mystic light, resplendent bright,
Will shine to latest ages!
Still in amaze,
The world may gaze,
And pore upon our mystery;
They Will never define
The Word nor Sign
Of the Freeborn Sons of Masonry.
We boast each gon'rous virtue,
By which our nature's mended;
The enquiring mind in us will find
The Man and Christian blended!
Hail! Heaven-born art,
That fills the heart
With Faith Divine, and Charity,
We bless the hour
That gave us power
To view the Light of Masonry!
Behold the seat of Wisdom,
Adorned by matchless beauty;
See strength supports, our temples courts,
Whilst steady to our duty,
With hearts sincere,
My brethren dear,
We celebrate our Patron's day;
Whilst Friendship's bands
Unite our hands,
In Peace, in Love, and Harmony!
CHORUS.
Whilst Friendship's bands, etc.
BEHOLD YON DOME.
Addressed to the Craft, on entering a Lodge.
TUNE -- SEE THE CONQUERING HERO COMES.

BEHOLD yon dome uprear'd on high,
Framed by an Architect Divine,
Whose lofty pillars reach the sky,
Where Wisdom, Strength, and Beauty join:
To form a building which shall stand,
In spite of Time's destroying hand.
In it let us to work repair,
While solemn silence reigns around,
Be secrecy each Mason's care,
Lest babblers tread on hallowed ground:
While we practice the mystic art,
TO improve the mind and cheer the heart.
Our noble order ever shall brave
Oppression's scourge and Envy's sting;
Shall feed the hungry, free the slave,
And make the widow's heart to sing;
To no persuasion ever confined,
It deals it blessings to mankind.
WHEN THE SUN FROM THE EAST.
WHEN the Sun from the East first salutes mortal eyes,
And the sky-lark melodiously bids us arise,
With our hearts full of joy we the summons obey,
Strait repair to our work, and to moisten our clay.
In the west stands a column bold noble and grand,
Whose foundation was laid by our Great Master's hand,
Each joint is cemented, and long shall endure,
The ingredients a compound of virtue so pure.
On the tressel behold our Great Architect's plan,
Its symbolic meaning no cowan can scag,
Not a model on earth is so lovely to view,
Each line is so perfect, each angle so true.
Fellow crafts and apprentices lay down your tools,
Withdraw for awhile, show respect to our rules;
We shall call you again, when our Master commands,
For there is none but true workmen this job understands.
To order's the word, come for work let us prepare,
Some handle the level, some handle the square;
When our master commands then obedience we show,
And we never take offense when he gives us a blow.
Here Is a pillar unfinished, come all lend a hand,
To the East let us bring it, for there it must stand;
A mystical term on the same let us indent,
For this is our Grand Master's will and intent.
The shaft of a pillar extend on a line,
Until the pedestal unto it we join;
Then firmly cement it, and raise it again,
Bring it back to the West, and there let it remain.
Five regular angles the same must contain,
Which each true hearted brother alone can explain;
But they say its high twelve, so the curtain I Will draw
For it does not become me to tell all I saw.
YE DELICATE FAIR MAIDS.
YE delicate fair maids, with leave I maintain,
That happiness here you may find,
To yourselves I appeal for felicity's reign,
When you find a fond youth to you mind.
When souls in soft union with fondness unite,
Inexpressive endearments arise,
Those symptoms of pleasure, Hope, Fear, andDelight
Are announc'd by those tell-tales -- the eyes.
Can the sop or the sribble such feelings excite?
Come tell me, ye delicate maids,
Can insipid coxbombs give beauty its right?
No, no -- they are shadows of shades.
Give me leave for to offer a man to your mind,
When delicate pleasures invite,
Accept of a Mason -- try him, and you will find
He can pay beauty's bill upon sight.
His lips without words find the way to your hearts,
When sympathies equal inspire,
Such sweet repetitious of love he imparts,
That heightens the flame of desire.
When beauty is locked in the charm of embrace,
What feelings those pressures excite!
In the arms of a Mason those pleasures you taste,
When he opens the scene of delight.
When fleeting life's stopped, by a kiss of his lips,
Love draws the dark curtain of night,
Such pleasing Da Capo's -- the eyes in eclipse
Confirm the soft scene of delight.
A Mason you will find him both true and sincere,
And worthy to sleep in you arms;
He Is the man that can please you, my delicate fair,
And the man only worthy your charms.
TRUE BLUE.
YE true sons of Freedom attend to my song,
While time unmolested sweet passes along,
No aid I Will invoke from a tea-drinking muse,
Dictated by reason I Will sing of true blues.
Derry down, etc.
Kings, Statesmen, and Patriots illustrious, choose
The slant azure bandage, the badge of true blues;
To Britain's chief knighthood, the garter is due,
And that honored ribband is spotless true blue.
Derry down, etc.
To fully that standard each social disdains,
The royal true blue bids defiance to stains;
On the breast of each brother the ribband we view
Which shows that at heart he is pure and true blue.
Derry down, etc.
Our grand institution then never let us profane,
Let our hearts like the ribband be free from a stain;
Let us love one another like brothers so crew,
Or else we are unworthy of wearing true blue.
Derry down, etc.
Let our actions be guided by compass and square,
Let us not be neglectful respecting the fair,
To us they prove constant, kind, loving, and true,
For the heart of a Mason they know is true blue.
Derry down, etc.
So now to conclude -- all things have their time,
It is time for to drink to relish my rhyme;
Here Is a health to each Mason that is honest and true,
Likewise to the fair maid who loves a true blue,
Derry down, etc.
BACCHUS OPEN ALL THY TREASURE.
BACCHUS open all thy treasure,
Let sweet music charm the ear,
Love cements us all together,
Sons of HIRAM welcome here.
Vulgar, base, and sordid wretches
May despise us -- what care we,
Slander write malignant sketches --
By the fruit we know the tree.
Come, my brothers, love unites us,
Come, let beauty be our toast;
Here Is to her that can delight us,
The charming fair we prize the most.
Let us join our hands together,
May peace and love the cement be;
Charge your glasses, prime together,
Here Is a health to Masons Free.
Thus in pleasure fondly sporting,
What can mortals wish for more,
But when death shall drop the curtain,
Then vale -- the farce is over.
THE MASON PORTRAYED.
CURIOSITY labors and longs for to know
Why Masons are children of Fame;
What makes them respected wherever they go,
Give me leave and the cause I Will explain.
A Mason's unawed by the sound of a name,
He harbors no hate in his breast;
What his betters may do he pretends not to blame,
As he hopes they intend for the best.
He Is upright and just; to his country he is true,
Likewise to his friend and his lass,
Sincerity bids him give merit its due;
Thus happy his moments do pass.
No office he flatters, compounds with no cheat,
But always takes honesty's part,
Beloved and esteemed by the good and the great,
And Charity dwells in his heart.
From his store with a generous hand he bestows
His mite to the indigent poor,
Compassion invites him wherever he goes,
When misery groans at the door.
The widow and orphan oppressed with grief,
When hunger and want on them wait,
His heart symphathising, he sends them relief;
Humanity stands at his gate.
Yes, this is the man, whom the good do revere,
Tho envy may aim to disgrace,
Undaunted he smiles, having nothing to fear,
While innocence beams in his face.
What makes him beloved is his merit you see,
But this to the base is unknown,
In the eye of a Mason the mote they can see,
But discern not the beam in their own.
ASSIST, MY MUSE.
ASSIST, my Muse, thine influence bring,
In praise of MASONRY I sing;
In flowing notes my voice shall raise,
To sing the worthy Mason's praise.
CHORUS.
Whose life is free from Envy's stain.
And while he lives will so remain.
Hail, oriental splendid Light,
And dove-ey'd Peace, with beauty bright,
Thine all-enliv'ning strengthening rays
Does crown our bliss with happy days.
Statesmen and Kings with hand and heart
Support -- adorn our noble art.
With music sweet, sage Tubal Cain,
On the deep organ tuned the strain;
Sweet melody inspired his tongue,
With lofty note he sweetly sung --
Hail, MASONRY! -- from Heaven sent --
In thee alone we find content.
Benevolence, and mutual love,
Sent by our Master from above,
Are pillars of our Royal Art,
Engraved on each Mason's heart.
Those lofty pillars stand secure,
And shall the date of time endure.
Hail, Royal Art! from Heaven revealed,
In Mason's heart thou art concealed;
Cowans may seek and knock in vain,
Our ivory keys their arts disdain.
Each Mason smiles and see, their art,
While prudence guards his faithful heart.
United thus -- my brethren all,
Our noble structure cannot fall;
Let ignorance and envy rail,
Their baneful tongues shall not prevail.
Our ancient rites they cant survey,
For every brother keeps the key.
Thus shall our order long endure,
While founded on a rock secure;
May cowans meet the fatal blow,
Who wish a Mason's overthrow.
Forty-two thousand once were slain,
Because our rights they did profane.
Till worlds are from their center tossed,
And mountains in the ocean lost;
Till time ends its eternal round,
Shall Mason's lofty praise resound.
Each brother raise his voice with me,
And sing -- Long live each Mason Free.
ERE GOD THE UNIVERSE BEGAN.
ERE God the Universe began,
In one rude heap all matter lay,
And wide disorder overran,
Nor knew one glimpse, one glimmering ray,
While confusion over the whole,
And darkness reigned without control
Then God arose, his thunders hurled,
And bade the elements arise;
In air he hung the pendant world,
And round it fixed the azure skies,
Stars in circles caused to run,
And in the center fixed the sun.
Then man he called forth out of dust,
And breathed in him a living soul,
All things committed to his trust,
He made him master over the whole;
But ungrateful unto Heaven
He proved, and was from Eden driven.
From thence proceeded all our woes,
Nor could mankind one comfort share;
Until FREE MASONS great arose,
And formed another Eden here:
Where true pleasure ever reigns,
And native innocence remains.
There streams of comfort gently flow,
There Is naught that is vile dare enter in,
The tree of knowledge there does grow,
Whose fruit we taste yet free from sin,
Sol shines one universal ray,
This we enjoy whilst we obey.
CONVENED WE ARE MET.
CONVENED we are met my jovial souls,
With sparkling wine come fill our bowls,
Let Concord be the toast;
With glass in hand let each agree
To sing in praise of MASONRY,
What mortal more can boast.
Here dove-ey'd Peace, celestial maid,
Stands ready, waiting for to aid,
And guard the sacred door;
Here Is Charity, from Heaven sent
To bridge her freeborn sons content,
And comfort to the poor.
See, in the east, effulgent shine,
Bright Wisdom with his rays divine,
Hark! Hark! the solemn sound:
"While thus we live in mutual love,
We taste what angels do above,
Here happiness is found.
The fruit of Eden's tree we taste,
Its balmy joys are our repast,
Here Freedom cheers the heart;
The indigent oppressed with grief,
Gains from his brother's hand relief,
Each to his wants impart.
Kings, Dukes, and Lords, with us combine
To trace our mysteries divine,
And find the pleasing light;
With pleasure we pursue the plan
While friendship rivets man to man --
How pleasing is the sight!"
United thus our structure stands,
Untouched by sacriligious hands,
A monument of Fame;
Nor envious foes shall ever deface
The virtues that our order grace,
Or blast a Mason's name.
Till Heaven sends her summons forth,
From east to west, from south to north,
Her chosen sons to call;
While time runs his continual round,
Shall Fame with golden trumpet sound,
Masons shall never fall.
ARISE AND SOUND THY TRUMPET FAME.
ARISE and sound thy trumpet Fame,
Free Masonry aloud proclaim,
To realms and worlds unknown;
Tell them it was this great David's son,
The wise, the matchless Solomon,
Prized far above his throne.
Those lofty temples, cloud-cap't towers,
Those stately domes are works of ours,
By us those piles were raised,
Then let mankind with songs advance,
And through the etherial vast expanse
Let Masory be praised.
We help the poor in time of need,
The naked clothe, the hungry feed,
It Is our foundation stone,
We build upon the noblest plan,
While Friendship rivets man to man,
Uniting all in one.
Sweet harmony our order grace,
Here friendship smiles in every face,
Cemented all in love,
Obedient to our Master grand --
Obedience was the first command,
That came from heaven above.
Thy trumpet, Fame, yet louder blow,
And let the distant regions know
Free Masonty is this:
Almighty Wisdom gave it birth,
While Heaven fixed it here on earth,
A type of future bliss.
BEFORE I BECAME A FREE-MASON.
BEFORE I became a Free Mason,
Some said it was a damnable thing,
Some said it was witchcraft and treason,
And swore that the devil reigned king.
I thot to myself I will venture,
And went without further delay
With a firm resolution to enter,
To a Lodge, then, I hasted away.
I met an old friend and relation,
Whom I heard was a mason before,
To him I soon made application,
He carried the news to the door;
He bid me to tarry with patience,
Straitway to the room did repair,
And soon he returned with an answer,
And bid me to come and prepare.
Good Heaven! then how my heart panted,
Expecting to meet with old Nick;
The report I had taken for granted,
My conscience began for to prick;
But I found it a matter more serious,
Tho never a word I yet spoke,
The way that I went was mysterious,
I felt it no humor to joke.
Through dark dismal shades how I blunder'd,
Lord help me! in private I cried,
With a voice, unto me it seemed thunder,
One questioned my friend and my guide,
Saying brother who is this you are leading?
My case unto him he made known;
My guide was my lawyer in pleading,
And carried my cause to the throne.
Then Wisdom he taught me my duty,
He gave me new light to my eyes,
I was struck with such majestic beauty,
Which filled my poor heart with surprise;
He told me that I was his brother,
And that I had nothing to fear,
We love and respect one another,
So come and partake of our cheer.
But what I saw there I cant tell ye,
Tho this I may say without fear,
I found something good for the belly,
And believe me there is no devil there.
And now for to tell you my mind, sir,
But not what was told unto me,
Before I went there I was blind, sir,
But now with both eyes I can see.
THE FREE AND ACCEPTED MASON
WHEN quite a young spark
I was in the dark,
And wanted to alter my station;
I went to a friend,
Who proved, in the end,
A Free and an Accepted Mason.
At a door he then knocked,
Which quickly unlocked,
When he bid me to put a good face on
And not be afraid,
For I should be made
A Free and an Accepted Mason.
My wishes were crowned,
And a Master I found,
Who made a most solemn oration,
Then showed me the light,
And gave me the right
Sign, Token, and Word, of a Mason.
How great my amaze,
When I first saw the blaze!
And how struck with the mystic occasion
Astonished! I found,
Tho free, I was bound
To a Free and an Accepted Mason.
When clothed in white,
I took great delight
In the work of this noble vocation:
And knowledge I gained,
When the Lodge he explained
Of a Free and an Accepted Mason
I was bound; it appears,
For seven long years,
Which to me is of trifling duration:
With freedom I serve,
And strain every nerve
To acquit myself like a good Mason.
A bumper then fill
With an hearty good will,
To our Master pay due veneration;
Who taught us the art
We never will impart,
Unless to an Accepted Mason.
HAIL, MASONRY!
HAIL, MASONRY! thou craft divine!
Glory of earth, from Heaven revealed;
Which do with jewels precious shine,
From all but Masons eyes concealed;
Thy praises due who can rehearse,
In nervous prose, or flowing verse!
As men from brutes distinguished are,
A Mason other men excels;
For what is knowledge choice and rare,
But in his breast securely dwells?
His silent breast, and faithful heart,
Preserve the secrets of the art.
From scorching heat and piercing cold,
From beasts whose roar the Forest rends,
From the assaults of warriors bold,
The Masons art mankind defends:
Be to this art due honor paid,
From which mankind receives such aid.
Ensigns of state that feed our pride,
Distinctions troublesome and vain!
By Masons true are laid aside;
Art's freeborn sons such toys disdain,
Ennobled by the name they bear,
Distinguished by the badge they wear.
Sweet fellowship, from envy free,
Friendly converse of brotherhood,
The Lodge's lasting cement be!
Which has for ages firmly stood,
A Lodge thus built, for ages past
Has lasted, and will ever last.
Then in our songs be justice done,
To those who have enriched the art,
From Adam to great Leven down,
And let each brother bear a part;
Let our Grand-Master's health go round,
His praise in every lodge resound.
MASONIC GLEE.
HAIL, Mysterious glorious science!
Which to discord bids defiance,
Harmony alone reigns here --
Come let us sing to him that raised us,
From the rugged path that mazed us,
To the Light that we revere.
Hail, Mysterious, etc.
ENTERTAINING SONGS.
THE PROPHETS.
IN the first book of Job, which I now mean to quote,
At the fifth and sixth verses you will find it thus wrote;
So Moses invited the Prophets to dine,
And drink a few bottles of gooseberry wine.
Derry Down.
Then Moses was placed in the chair in a trice,
And Aron his crony deputed his vice,
When the glass moving quick, and the wine moving strong,
Moses swore they should'nt stir till they each sang a song.
Derry Down.
Some looked askew, which Moses well saw,
But what Moses said, why you know sir was law,
Nay, he frankly declared, that should any decline,
He Would fine them a bumper of gooseberry wine.
Derry Down.
Little David, it seems, sir, first was the choice,
For they very well knew he would an excellent voice;
He declared he could'nt sing, they swore 'twas a thumper,
And poor little Davy was fined in a bumper.
Derry Down.
Rear admiral Noah, whom much has been said of,
And his jaunt on the water, which we all have read of,
Not liking their gooseberry, called for a dram,
Then gave them this song, which he sang to young Ham.
Derry Down.
"And bearing up to gain the port,
"Some well known object kept in view,
"A beacon-tow'r, or harbor fort,
"Which ever the flood old Noah knew;
"Whilst often the lead young Japhet flung,
"And to his watchful father sung
"By the mark seven!"
Ezekiel rose next, sir, a very great smoaker,
But in lighting his pipe, burnt his nose with the poker;
Being skilful in music, and proud of his voice,
With exquisite fancy this song was his choice.
Derry Down.
"Why Mosy, why Aron, my boys,
"I Am glad I have met with you here,
"For Zeky, as all of you knows,
"Is fond of a drap of good beer;
"If you mean for to pass all the night,
"Why say such our purpose intends,
"And faith we will have a good bout,
"For I loves a full pot with my friends."
Then Solomon rose, sir, all in his glory,
And said he would much rather tell them a story;
But the cry against that was a great deal too strong,
For they would have nothing but Solomon's song.
Derry Down.
"I Have kissed and I Have prattled with fifty fair maids
"And changed them as often as you see,
"But of all the Fair maidens that sport on the green,
"Queen Sheba's the girl for me;
"Queen Sheba's the girl, etc.
Next Habbakuk rose, for they took them in course,
But Habbakuk's cold made Habbakuk hoarse;
He declared he could'nt sing any more than the moon,
But if Moses pleased, he would whistle a tune.
Derry Down.
(LILLABULLEN.)

Jeremiah rose next, sir, at Moses' desire,
(Whom wine, wit, or woman could never inspire)
And in strains that would suit the last conflagration,
He sung then a verse of his own lamentation.
Derry Down.
"I sigh and lament me in vain,
"These walls do but echo my moan,
"Alas! it increases my pain,
"When I think of the days that are gone.
"Through the grate of my prison I see,
"The boys at marbles they play,
"I cry and exclaim out, ah me,
"I once could play better than they."
Then up rose little Jonah, who looked like a jelly,
For he had just come, sir, from the whale's belly,
For three days and three nights, he was left to despair,
But he would sing to Moses what he suffered there.
Derry Down.
"Cease rude Boreas, blustering railer,
"List ye landsmen all to me,
"Messmates hear a brother whaler,
"Sing the dangers of the sea;
"In the horrid belly pent, sir,
"Think on what I suffered there,
"Fore'd to keep a dismal lent, sir,
"And to breathe infectious air,
"Naught but fish to feed upon sir,
"And compelled to eat it raw,
"Every hope was nearly gone, sir,
"Ere I left the monster's maw.!'
Then Sampson rose next, once in prowess so big,
But at that time friend Sampson had just lost his wig;
He lamented most loudly his dire mishap,
How his wife shaved his head as he slept in her lap.
Derry Down.
"O dear! what can the matter be!
"Dear! Dear! what can the matter be!
"Dear oh! what can the mrtter be!
"Sampson has lost all his hair!
"Oh! that I ere should have taken so sound a nap!
"Oh! that I ever should have taken it in her lap!
"Oh! that I had but tied on my red night cap!
"Then Sampson had not lost his hair!"
They next called on Job, as a song was his fort,
And they begged, as 'twas late, his song might be short;
But he sung chevy chase to a dismal psalm tune,
Which the Prophets all thot would have lasted till noon.
Derry Down.
Now Moses, who always very good hours kept,
As they sat a singing, why he sat and slept,
Till waked by the noise of their calling encore,
He bade them get home for they should'nt drink more.
Derry Down.
Well bred Aron, it seems sir, at this took offense,
And said "Want of good manners was want of good sense;"
This caused a dispute, some reflections were cast,
But for decency's sake we'll not mention what past.
Derry Down.
THE SILVER MOON.
THE silver moon that shines so bright,
I swear with reason is my teacher;
And if my minute glass was right,
We Have time to drink another pitcher.
It Is not yet day, it is not yet day,
Then why should we forsake good liquor
Until the sunbeams round us play,
Let Us jocound push about the pitcher.
They say that I must work all day,
And sleep at night to grow much richer;
But what is all the world can say,
Compared to mirth, my friend, and pitcher.
It Is not yet day, etc.
Tho one may boast a handsome wife,
Yet strange vagaries may bewitch her;
Unvex'd I live a cheerful life,
And boldly call for the other pitcher.
It Is not yet day, etc.
I dearly love a hearty man,
(No sneaking milk sop Jemmy Twitche.)
Who loves a lass, and loves a glass,
And boldly calls for the other pitcher.
It Is not yet day, etc.
THE WAY WORN TRAVELLER.
FAINT and wearily the way worn traveller,
Clods uncherily afraid to stop;
Wandering drearily, and fad unraveller
Of the mazes toward the mountains top;
Doubting, fearing, while his course he is steering,
Cottagers appearing as he is like to drop;
O how briskly then the way worn traveller,
Treads the mazes toward the mountain's top.
The so melancholy day is past,
'Twould be folly sure to think on it more,
Blythe and jolly he the can holds fast by,
As he is seated at the goat-herd's door:
Eating, quaffing, at past labors laughing,
Better far by half in spirits than before;
O how merry then the rested traveller,
Sings while seated at the goat-herd's door.
BONNY BET.
NO more I Will court the town-bred fair,
Who shines in artificial beauty,
For native charms, without compare,
Claim all my love, respect, and duty.
CHORUS.
O my bonny, bonny Bet, sweet blossom,
Was I a king so proud to wear thee,
From off the verdant couch I Would bear thee,
To grace thy faithful lover's bosom.
O my bonny, bonny Bet, etc.
Yet ask me where these beauties lie,
I cannot say in smile or dimple,
In blooming cheeks or radient eye,
It Is happy nature wild and simple.
O my bonny, bonny Bet, etc.
Let dainty beaux for ladies pine,
And sigh in numbers trite and common,
Ye gods one darling wish be mine,
And all I ask is lovely woman.
O my bonny, bonny Bet, etc.
Come dearest girl, the rosy bowl,
Like thy bright eye with pleasure dancing,
My heaven art thou, so take my soul,
With rapture every sense entrancing.
O my bonny, bonny Bet, etc.
THE MOMENT AURORA.
THE moment Aurora peeped into my room,
I put on my clothes and I called to my groom;
And my head heavy still, from the fumes of last night,
Took a bumper of brandy to set all things right.
And now we are well saddled Fleet, Dapple, and Gray,
Who seemed longing to hear the glad sound hark away.
Will Whistle by this had uncoupl'd his hounds,
Whose extacy nothing could keep within bounds,
First forward came Jowler, then Scentwell, then Snare,
Three better slauncsh harriers never started a hare;
Then Sweetlips, then Driver, then Staunch, and then Tray,
All ready to open at hark, hark away.
'Twas now by the clock about five in the morn,
And we all galloped off to the sound of the horn;
Jack Gater, Bill Babbler, and Dick at the gun,
And by this time the merry Tom Fairplay made one,
Who, while we were jogging on blithsome and gay,
Sung a song, and the chorus was -- Hark, hark away.
And now Jemmy Lurcher had every bush beat,
And no signs of madam, nor trace of her feet;
Nay, we just had begun our sad fortunes to curse,
When all of a sudden out starts Mrs. Puss;
Men, horses, and dogs, all the glad-call obey,
And the echo was heard to cry -- hark, hark away
The chase was a fine one, she took over the plain,
Which she doubled, and doubled, and doubled again;
'Till at last she to cover returned out of breath,
Where I and Will Whistle were in at the death;
Then in triumph for you I the hare did display,
And cried to the horns, my boys -- hark, hark away.
TOM BOWLING.
HERE, a sheer hulk, lies poor Tom Bowling
The darling of our crew;
No more he will hear the tempest howling,
For death has broached him too.
His form was of the manliest beauty,
His heart was kind and soft;
Faithful below he did his duty,
And now he is gone a loft,
And now he is gone a loft.
Tom never from his word departed,
His virtues were so rare,
His friends were many and true-hearted
His Poll was kind and fair:
And then he would sing so blithe and jolly;
Ah many's the time and often!
But mirth is turned to melancholy,
For Tom is gone a loft.
Yet shall poor Tom find pleasant weather,
When he who all commands,
Shall give, to call life's crew together,
The word to pipe all hands.
Thus death, who kings and tars dispatches,
In vain Tom's life has dost'd;
For, though his body's under hatches,
His soul is gone a loft.
THE GIRL OF MY HEART.
IN the world's crooked path, where I Have been,
There to share in life's gloom my poor heart,
The sunshine that softened the scene
Was -- a smile from the girl of my heart.
Not a swain, when the lark quits her nest,
But to labor with glee will depart,
If at eve he expects to be blessed
With a smile from the girl of his heart.
Come then crosses, and cares as they may,
Let my mind still this maxim impart,
That the comfort of man's fleeting day
Is -- a smile from the girl of his heart.
WHEN FIRST I SLIPPED MY LEADING STRINGS.
WHEN first I slipped my leading strings -- to please my little Poll,
My mother bot me at the fair a pretty waxen doll,
Such sloe black eyes and cherry cheeks, the smiling dear possessed,
How could I kiss it often enough, or hug it to my breast.
No sooner I could prattle it, as forward misses do,
Than how I longed and sighed to hear my dolly prattle too;
I curled her hair in ringlets neat, and dressed her very gay,
And yet the sulky hussy, not a syllable would say.
Provoked that to my questions kind, no answer I could get,
I shook the little hussy well, and whipped her in a pet;
My mother cried, Oh, fie upon it -- pray let your doll alone,
If ever you wish to have a pretty baby of your own.
My head on this I blidled up, and threw the plaything by,
Although my sister snubb'd me for it -- I knew the reason why --
I fancy she would wish to keep the sweethearts all her own,
But that she shall not, depend upon it -- when I Am a woman grown.
THE WEALTHY FOOL.
THE wealthy fool with gold in store,
Will still desire to grow richer;
Give me but these, I ask no more,
My charming girl, my friend and pitcher,
My friend so rare, my girl so fair,
With these what mortal can be richer,
Give me but these, a fig for care,
With my sweet girl, my friend and pitcher.
From morning sun I Would never grieve,
To toil a hedger or ditcher,
If that when I came home at eve
I might enjoy my friend and pitcher.
My friend so rare, etc.
Tho fortune ever shuns my door.
I know not what it is can bewitch her;
With all my heart can I be poor --
With my sweet girl, my friend and pitcher.
My friend so rare, etc.
TALLY HO.
YE sportment draw near, and ye sportswomen too,
Who delight in the joys of the field,
Mankind, tho they blame, are all eager as you,
And no one the contest will yield;
His lordship, his worship, his honor, his grace,
A hunting continually go,
All ranks and degrees are engaged in the chase.
With hark forward, huzza! tally ho.
The lawyer will rise with the first in the morn,
To hunt for a mortgage or deed,
The husband gets up at the sound of the horn,
And rides too the common full speed;
The patriot is thrown in suit of the game,
The poet too often lies low,
Who, mounted on Pegasus flies after Fame,
With hark forward, huzza! tally ho.
While fearless over hills, and over woodland we sweep,
Tho prudes our pastimes may frown,
How often do they decency's bounds o'erleap,
And the fences of of virtue break down?
Thus public, or private, for pension, for place,
For amusement, for passion, for show,
All ranks and degrees are engaged in the chase,
With hark forward, huzza! tally ho.
WITHIN A MILE OF EDINBURGH.
Sung at the THEATERS, New York.

'TWAS within a mile of Edinburgh town,
In the rosy time of the year,
Sweet flowers bloomed, and the grass was down,
And each shepherd woed his dear:
Bonny Jockey, blithe and gay,
Kissed sweet Jenny making hay:,
The lassie blushed, and frowning cried no, no, it will not do;
I cannot, cannot, wonnot, wonnot, mannot buckle too.
Jockey was a wag that never would wed,
Tho long he had followed the lass,
Contented she earned and eat her brown bread,
And merrily turned up the grass:
Bonny Jockey, blithe and free,
Won her heart right merrily,
Yet still she blushed, and frowning cried, no, no, it will not do,
I cannot, cannot, wonnot, wonnot, mannot buckle to.
But when he vowed he would make her his bride,
Tho his slocks and herds were not few,
She gave him her hand, a kiss beside,
And vowed she would forever be true;
Bonny Jockey, blithe and free,
Won her heart right merrily,
At church she no more frowning cried, no, no, it will not do,
I cannot, cannot, wonnot, wonnot, mannot buckle to.
BRIGHT PHOEBUS.
BRIGHT Phoebus has mounted the chariot of day
And the horns and the hounds call each sportsman away;
Through meadows and woods with speed now they bound,
Whilst health, rosy health, is in exercise found,
Hark away is the word to the sound of the horn,
And echo, blithe echo, makes jovial the morn.
Each hill and each valley is lovely to view,
While puss flies the covert and dogs quick pursue;
Behold where she flies over the wide spreading plain,
While the loud opening pack pursues her amain. Hark away, etc.
At length puss is caught, and lies panting for breath,
And the shout of the huntsman's the signal for death,
No joys can delight like the sports of the field,
To hunting all pastime and pleasure must yield.
Hark away, etc.
JOCKEY TO THE FAIR.
IT WAS on the morn of sweet May day,
When nature painted all things gay,
Taught birds to sing, and lambs to play,
And gild the meadows rare:
Young Jockey early in the dawn,
Arose, and tript it over the lawn;
His Sunday's coat the youth put on,
For Jenny had vowed away to run
With Jockey to the fair.
For Jenny had vowed, etc.
The cheerful parish bells had rung,
With eager steps he trudged along,
With flowery garlands round him hung,
Which shepheads used to wear:
He tapt the window -- Haste my dear;
Jenny impatient cried -- Who Is there?
It Is I, my love, and no one near;
Step gently down, you have naught to fear,
With Jockey to the fair.
My dad and mam are fast asleep,
My brother's up, and with the sheep;
And will you still you promise keep
Which I have heard you swear?
And will you ever constant prove?
I will by all the powers above,
And never deceive my charming dove:
Dispel those doubts, and haste, my love,
With Jockey to the fair.
Behold the ring, the shepherd cried,
Will Jenny be my charming bride?
Let Cupid be our happy guide,
And Hymen meet us there --
Then Jockey did his vows renew,
He would be constant, would be true:
His word was pledged -- away she flew,
With cowslips tipped with balmy dew,
With Jockey to the fair.
'TWAS WHEN THE SAES WERE ROARING.
'TWAS when the seas were roaring
With hollow blasts of wind;
A damsel lay deploring,
All on a rock reclined.
Wide over the foaming billows
She cast a wishful look;
Her head was crowned with willows
That trembled over the brook.
Twelve months are gone and over,
And nine long tedious days:
Why did thou, venurous lover,
Why did thou trust the seas!
Cease, cease, thou cruel ocean,
And let my lover rest:
Ah! what is thy troubled motion
To that within my breast!
The merchant, robbed of treasure,
Views tempests in despair;
But what is the loss of treasure
To loosing of my dear!
Should you some coast be laid on,
Where gold and di'monds grow,
You Would find a richer maiden,
But none that loves you so.
How can they say that nature
Has nothing made in vain;
Why then beneath the water
Do hedious rocks remain;
No eyes these rocks discover,
That lurk beneath the deep,
To wreck the wandering lover,
And leave the maid to weep.
All melancholy lying,
Thus wail'd she for her dear;
Repaid each blast with sighing,
Each billow with a tear:
When over the white wave stooping,
His floating corpse she spied:
Then, like a lily, drooping,
She bowed her head, and died.
THE DEATH OF GENERAL WOLF.
IN a mouldring cave, where the wretched retreat,
Britannia sat wested with care;
She wept for her WOLF, then exclaimed against fate;
And gave herself up to despair,
The walls of her cell were insculptur'd around
With the exploits of her favorite sun;
And even the dust as it lay on the ground,
Was engraved with the deeds he had done.
The Sire of the gods, from his chrystiline throne,
Beheld this disconsolate dame;
And moved with her fate he sent Mercury down,
And these were the tidings that came.
Britannia forbear, not a sigh, nor a tear,
For thy Wolf so deser vedly loved,
Your grief shall be changed into triumph of joy,
For thy Wolf is not dead, but removed.
The sons of the earth, the proud giants of old
Have broke from their darksome abodes.
And such is the news as in heaven it is told,
They are marching to war with the gods;
A council was held in the chamber of Jove,
Where they came to this final decree,
That Wolf should be called to the armies above.
And the charge was entrusted to me.
To the plains of Quebec with these orders I flew,
He begged for a moment's delay,
He cried, Oh! forbear, let me victory hear,
And then thy commands I Will obey;
With a dark'ning film I encompassed his eyes,
And conveyed him away in an urn;
Lest the fondness he bore for his own native shore
Should persuade him again to return.
THE INDIAN DEATH SONG.
THE sun sets in night, an the stars shun the day,
But glory remains when their lights fade away;
Begin ye tormentors, your threats are in vain,
For the son of Alknomook shall never complain.
Remember the arrows he shot from his bow;
Remember your chiefs by his hatchet laid low:
Why so flow? -- do you wait till I shrink from my pain?
No -- the son of Alknomook shall never complain.
Remember the wood -- where in ambush welay,
And the scalps which we bore from your nation away:
Now the flame rises fast! you exult in my pain;
But the son of Alknomook shall never complain.
I go to the land where my father is gone;
His ghost will rejoice in the fame of his son:
Death comes like a friend, -- he relieves me from pain;
And the son of Alknomook has scorned to complain.
THE ROSE TREE.
A Rose-tree in full bearing,
Had sweet flowers fair to see --
One rose beyond comparing,
For beauty attracted me.
Tho eager once to win it,
Lovely, blooming, fresh, and gay,
I find a canker in it,
And now throw it far away.
How fine this morning early,
The sun shining clear and bright;
So late I loved you dearly,
Tho lost now each fond delight.
The clouds seem big with showers,
Sunny beams no more are seen, --
Farewell ye happy hours,
Your falsehood has changed the scene.
ANNA'S URN.
ENCOMPASSED in an angel's frame,
An angel's virtues lay;
Too soon did heaven assert its claim,
And called its own away,
My Anna's worth, my Anna's charms,
Can never more return:
What then shall fill these widowed arms,
Ah me! my Anna's urn.
Can I forget that bliss resin'd,
Which, blessed with her, I knew?
Our hearrs, in sacred bonds entwined,
Were bound by love too true.
That rural train which once were used
In festive dance to turn,
So pleased, when Anna they amused,
Now weeping deck her urn.
The soul escaping from its chain,
She clasped me to her breast,
To part with thee is all my pain,
She cried then sunk to rest.
While memory shall her seat retain,
From beauteous Anna torn,
My heart shall breathe its ceaseless strain
Of sorrow over her urn.
There, with the earliest dawn, a dove
Laments her murdered mate;
There Philomela, lost to love,
Tells the pale moon her fate.
With yew and ivy round me spread.
My Anna there I Will mourn;
For all my soul, now she is dead,
Concenters in her urn.
TOASTS AND SENTIMENTS.
Gratitude to our friends, and generosity to our enemies.
May the poor merit esteem, and the rich veneration.
May the volume of beauty never be stained by contaminated fingers.
May the cheerful heart never want an agreeable companion.
May the honey of rectitude sweeten the bitterness of sorrow.
May the heart never covet what the hand has no right to.
May virtue in distress always meet a liberal protector.
May fortune fill the lap where charity guides the hand.
May the voyage of life end in the haven of happiness.
The unity of hearts in the union of hands.
The gate of life -- and may it never be shut against the honest.
The lovers of virtue in the arms of beauty.
The man we prize and the maid we love.
Valor without cruelty, and virtue without hypocricy.
Wit without virulence, wine without excess, and wisdom without affectation.
Warmth to every heart in a good cause.
Prosperity to the liberty of the press in asserting the rights of the people.
May the wreath of victory ever flourish on the brow of LIBERTY.
CONTENTS.
A song, a song is the cry, Page 11 As Colinet and Phebe sat, Page 19 Adieu, a
heart fond warm adieu, Page 37 A Mason's life's the life for me, Page 41
Assist, my muse, thine influence bring, Page 51 Arise and sound thy trumpet
Fame, Page 55 A rose tree in full bearing, Page 79 Behold a cloud break and
Urania deseends, Page 40 Behold you dome upreard on high, Page 44 Bucchus open
all thy treasure, Page 49 Before I became a Free Mason, Page 56 Bright Phoebus
had mounted the ebariot of day, Page 74 Columbia! Columbia! to glory arise,
Page 29 Come muster, my lads, your mechanical tools, Page 31 Curiosity labors
and longs for to know, Page 50 Convened we are met, my jovial souls, Page 54 Ere
God the universe began, Page 53 Encompassed in an angel's form, Page 79 Faint
and wearily the way worn traveller, Page 66 Gallants attend, and hear a friend,
Page 8 Hail, lovely maid! Hail, power divine! Page 5 Hail, great Republic of
the world! Page 6 Hail, ever momorable day! Page 12 Hail, America! hail!
unrivaled in same, Page 16 Here Is Murtough O'Blaney, Page (...) Hail, Masonry!
thou craft divine, Page 59 Hail, mysterious glorious science Page 60 Here, a
sheer hulk, lies poor Tom Bowling Page 69 In a chariot of light from the
regions of day, Page 1^ I sing of Mason's glory Page 43 In the first book of
Job, which I now mean to quote, Page 61 In the world's crooked path, where I Have
been, Page 70 In a mouldering cave, where the wretched retreat, Page 77 Let the
poets of England write odes on their king Page 19 No peerage we covet, no
sceptres desire Page 13 Not the fictions of Greece, nor the dreams of old Rome
Page 38 No more I Will court the town hred fair Page 66 O, think on my fate! once
I Freedom enjoyed Page 3 Since the eagle of Freedom is roused from her nest
Page 24 The genius of France from his star begem'd throne Page 21 To heaven's
empyreal height Page 25 The silver moon that shines so bright Page 65 The
moment Aurora peeped into my room Page 67 The wealthy fool with gold in store
Page 71 It Was when the seas were roaring Page 76 It Was within a mile of Edinguigh
town Page 73 It Was on the morn of sweet May day Page 74 The sun sets in night,
and the stars shun the day Page 78 Toasts and Sentiments, Page 81 Unfold,
father Time! thy long records unfold Page 4 While war's crimson carnage is
drenching the plains Page 27 When America first at heaven's command Page 33
When our fathers came over Page 35 When the sun from the east first salutes
mortal eyes Page 45 When quite a young spark Page 58 When first I slipped my
leading strings Page 70 Ye sons of France, awake to glory Page 17 Ye delicate
fair maids, with leave I maintain Page 46 Ye true sons of Freedom attend to my
song Page 48 Ye sportsmen draw near, and ye sportswomen too Page 72

