CERTIFICATES OF THE EFFICACY OF DOCTOR PERKINS'S Patent Metallic Instruments.

NEWBURYPORT: -- PRINTED BY EDMUND M. BLUNT.

TO THE PUBLIC.
SENSIBLE that every attempt at improvement in any of the useful arts, ever
has, and probably ever will meet with opposition, either from interested or
certain other motives, which in a greater or less degree influence the
generality of mankind, -- the subscriber takes the liberty to cite a few among
very many cases in which his method of removing pains, inflammations, and
spasmodic affections from the human body, has been attended with success. The
novelty and apparent simplicity of this practice, may possibly induce some,
before they have attended with candor to the subject, to treat it with
ridicule. That the public may be more satisfactorily informed as to its utility
and importance, he publishes the following certificates, as received from
several respectable characters.

ELISHA PERKINS
PLAINFIELD, OCTOBER, 1796.
CERTIFICATES, etc.
GENESIS TYLER, AND MR. LORD.
I JOHN TYLER, of Preston, in the country of New London and State of
Connecticut, hereby certify, that on or about the 17th day of June last, I was
confined by a Wound, which I had before that time received, by cutting my right
leg transversely, in which I had taken cold; and at that time the sore was in a
high state of inflammation, and gave me great pain, to such a degree that I had
been obliged to keep my leg in a horizontal position, in a chair, the most of
that day, -- when Doct. Elisha Perkins, of Plainfield, called on me, and having
operated on me a few minutes with his patent metallic instruments, the pain in
my leg wholly ceased, and the redness and inflammation of the wound entirely
disappeared. I was free from pain that night, and indeed the pain and
inflammation both ceased from that operation, and never returned again.

And I further certify, that my wife at that time was sorely afflicted with
rheumatic pains in her hip, which had been upon her a number of years, and had
affected her to such a degree as to render that side shorter than the other,
and to make her unable at that time to raise herself from her chair without the
greatest difficulty, or to walk across the room without learning on her staff,
and with that support, not without the greatest inconvenience; and Doct.
Perkins operated upon her a few minutes, when she declared herself free from
pain, and immediately rose from her chair, without any assistance or apparent
difficulty, and walked several times across the room without her staff, or any
other support, and has continued to this time able to walk in that manner; not
having complained of, or been troubled with pain in the night (of which she had
much complained before;) and has truly been to all appearance, a different
person, as to the use of her limbs, from the time of that operation, from what
she had been for years before.

JOHN TYLER.
Preston, July 29, 1796. I THE subscriber was present at the time of the above
operation, and fully concur in the above statement of facts by Genesis Tyler.

JAMES LORD.



MR. NATHAN GLOVER, and MR. AMOS SIMONS.
I NATHAN GLOVER, of Plainfield, in the county of Windham and state of
Connecticut, certify, that for seven years past, I have been frequently visited
with severe turns of the Quinsey, which (notwithstanding the application of
internal and external means, administered by the most skilful neighboring
physicians) have never lest me within eight or ten days.

About the first of July, 1796, I was again severely attacked by this disease,
and in about twenty-four hours, my throat became very much swelled and
inflamed, and extremely painful. I was at this time visited by Doct. Perkins,
who operated on the diseased part, with his patent metallic instruments.

The pains after two or three operations, wholly left me, and the inflammation
entirely disappeared; the swelling did not maturate and break as it had usually
done, -- but in about twenty-four hours wholly subsided, and my throat became
perfectly well.

The turns of the Quinsey which I have heretofore had, through not more severe
in their first attacks than this, have never left me short of the term of eight
or ten days; whereas this continued but two: And I have no doubt but it would
have no doubt but it would have lasted as long as the others, had not Doct.
Perkins operated with his instruments. I believe the cure to be effected wholly
be his means.

NATHAN GLOVER.
Plainfield, August 9, 1796. I THE subscriber was residing at the house of Mr.
Glover, and was present at the above operation, and perfectly agree with him in
his statement of facts.

AMOS SIMONS.



CAPT. JOSHUA BOTTUM.
I JOSHUA BOTTUM, of Plainfield, in the county of Windham and state of
Connection, certify, that I have been troubled with a rheumatic pain in my arm
for four months, which was often extremely distressing. Having heard much of
the surprising efficacy of Doct. Perkins's patent instruments, but being myself
an unbeliever in this method of removing pains, in consequence of the
suggestions of his enemies, I neglected using his means, until on or about the
15th of July, when I myself operated on my pained arm about six minutes, and to
my utter surprise, the pain entirely ceased, and has never returned. I have
every reason to believe that a radical cure was effected by that one operation.

JOSHUA BOTTUM.
Plainfield, August 5, 1796.
MR. AND MRS. SNOW.
I ELIZABETH SNOW, of Plainfield, in the state of Connecticut, certify that in
the month of June, 1795, I was sorely afflicted with pains in my ancles, which
had settled there after a severe fit of sickness, and had troubled me to such a
degree that I became very weak and emaciated. In this unhappy situation I
continued about three months, until in the month and year abovementioned, I
applied to Doctor Elisha Perkins who visited me and operated on the pained part
of my ancles, with his metallic instruments. Immediately the pain ceased and
has never since returned. I am persuaded a radical cure was at that time
effected.

ELIZABETH SNOW.
Plainfield, August 3, 1796. I THE subscriber fully concur with my wise, in the
above statement of facts.

ABRAHAM SNOW.



MRS. STERNS.
I HERBY certify, that I have been troubled with pain and weakness in my wrist,
for upwards of six years, attended with a swelling which had become hard and
protuberant, about the size of a walnut.

In November last, Doctor Elisha Perkins operated on the part affected, with
his metallic instruments, which give an immediate relief; and I have
experienced no pain there since. The swelling very soon subsided, and my wrist
is in all respects as well as ever.

RACHEL STERNS.
Plainfield, August 2, 1796.
DOCTOR RUFUS JOHNSON, A Member of the Medical Society of the State of
Connecticut.
I CERTIFY, that in the course of my practice, a few months past, I have made
frequent experiments with Doctor Perkins's patent instruments, and have with
but very few exceptions, succeeded to my great astonishment, removing rheumatic
pains, head-achs, agues in the face, cramp-convulsions, and inflamatory
swellings of the throat.

The pains after being once eased, have in but few instances returned; and then
by a repetition of the operation, have been wholly removed.

From my own practice, and from what I know of the practice of others, I esteem
Doctor Perkins's method of removing pains, a very important and useful
improvement in the healing art; and wish that his instruments may be generally
dispersed, that mankind at large may have it in their power by these simple
means, to ease themselves of most of the bodily pains which so many experience.

RUFUS JOHNSON, Physician.
Canterbury, August 10, 1796.
DOCTOR T. BACKUS, Member of the Medical Society, of the State of Connecticut.
I THE subscriber was called on the 4th instant, to attend a patient, by the
name of James Crawson, who for the term of nearly five years, has been
frequently trouble with a species of epileptic fits. -- When I first saw him,
he had experienced in the course of the day, about twelve, each of which
usually held him nearly fifteen minutes. At the commencement of one of them, I
took from him about fourteen ounces of blood; but discovering no happy effect,
I applied Doctor Perkins' patent metallic instruments to his right leg, in
which he usually experienced the first attack of his fits. The whole leg
immediately became limber and free from spsams, and he soon revived without
suffering a general convulsion. About twenty minutes after, I being out of his
room, was informed that the symptoms of another fit appeared, and before I
could operate on him, he was universally convulsed with an entire loss of
reason. I then applied the instrument to his right leg, six or eight strokes,
when the spasms immediately ceased, and he recovered his reason. In a short
time, he was seized with another, which was removed very much in the manner of
the last, the instruments not being applied until a general convulsion had
taken place. I then seated myself on his bed, that I might be enabled to apply
the means more seasonably. Here I very soon discovered the symptoms again, but
by applying the instruments, the symptoms immediately disappeared. Several
others at intervals, commenced with their usual symptoms, by so contracting and
cramping the right leg, that the utmost exertions of two men were scarcely able
to straighten it, each of which were, in less then a minute removed by five or
six strokes of the instruments, before they had extended to the other parts of
the body, the leg almost instantaneously be coming perfectly lax.

By the request of a number of gentlemen, who were then present, when the
symptoms of one appeared, I ceased to operate, that we might determine whether
the above operations had prevented the general convulsions, which before the
applications of the instruments, had always succeeded the first attack in his
leg. Immediately he fell into a severe fit, which appeared in one universal
spasm. In this situation, I suffered him to continue a few minutes, when by
applying the instruments to his leg again, in less than one minute he was
entirely free from any kind of spasm, and immediately recovered his reason. I
still continued by his side, and prevented several other general attacks by
operating with the instruments at the beginning of the symptoms. About one hour
and a half after the first operation, the fits entirely subsided. He became
easy and experienced none of those disagreeable sensations, which he ever had
after former attacks of this kind. He informs that he had usually been
afflicted with these fits except at a few intervals, about twenty four hours
from the time they first commenced, and it is presumed the application of the
metallic instruments, not only shortened the fits, but lessened their number,
as at this time they continued not more than nine or ten hours from their first
commencement, and about an hour and a half after the first application of the
instruments. He further observes, that he has discovered none of that debility
which had universally succeeded his former attacks, and continues to this day
enjoying better health than usual.

THOMAS BACCUS, Physician.
WE the subscribers were present at the above operations and fully agree with
Doctor Bachus, in his statement of facts.

CHARLES MILLER, JOHN LESTER, PHINEHAS KINDAL, JOHN PIKE, RECOMPENSE HALY.

Plainfield, Aug. 9, 1796.


DOCTOR JAREB DYER, Member of the Medical Society of the State of Connecticut,
and Surgeon to the 21st Regiment.
I CERTIFY, that for seven years past. I have been troubled with almost a
constant Rheumatic pain in my left shoulder. For the two last years it has
gradually increased till it became very distressing, and has been attended with
a stiffness, to such a degree that I could not raise my hand to the top of my
head without great difficulty. On or about the 18th June last, I myself
operated on my shoulder when it was in extreme pain, with Doctor Perkins's
patent tractors. -- The pain, to my great surprise, wholly left me within six
minutes, and my shoulder was soon freed from its former stiffness, so that I
could move that arm and shoulder with the same ease, that I could the other. --
The pain has but once returned, and then very lightly, in consequence of severe
exercise: It was immediately removed by applying the tractors.

I further certify, that I have been afflicted with a pain in my head for
twenty years past. It has usually come on in the fore part of the day, and
continued ten or twelve hours. Has often been very distressing. About the time
of the above operation. I applied the instruments to my head, when in severe
pain. I was in a few minutes eased, and the pain has not yet returned. For
three years before this operation, I do not think I have been three weeks at a
time free from this complaint. From what I have experienced, and heard of the
efficacy of Doctor Perkins's instruments, I doubt not but they will prove of
great utility to mankind.

JAREB DYER, Physician.
Canterbury, August 11, 1796.
DOCTOR EBENEZER ROBINSON.
I HEREBY certify, that, I have been acquainted with Doctor Perkins' method of
removing pains and inflammations by pointed metallic instruments, for near a
year: that I have frequently operated myself, and have generally had success in
removing pains and inflammations of various kinds, among which, are pains of the
head, burns, and rheumatisms, that I have full confidence in the efficacy of
the means, and that it is a very valuable discovery.

EBENEZER ROBINSON.
Plainfield, August 10, 1796.
CART. CYRUS SPAULDING.
I CYRUS SPAULDING, of Plainfield, in the state of Connecticut, certify, that
from the month of May, to the month of July, 1795, I was in a feeble,
debilitated state, and was afflicted with almost a constant pain across the
small of my back, which at times was very severe. In the month of July, I
applied to Doctor Elisha Perkins, for physical aid: He proposed removing my
pain with his metallic instrument, without any internal application. As I was
far from having any faith in such apparently simple means, I treated them with
ridicule. However, I consented to his operating on the affected part; when in a
few minutes, to my great astonishment, the pain wholly left me, and has never
since returned.

CYRUS SPAULDING.

REV. JOEL BENEDICT.
I JOET BENEDICT, of Plainfield, certify, that I was present at the time that
Capt. Cyrus Spaulding was eased of pain by Doctor Perkins, as certified above;
and that I have also myself several times removed pains of different kinds by
his patent metallic instruments. Cures performed in this way appear to me as
real, and no more liable to a relapse, than those by any other means. The cure
of an accidental scald, I have myself experienced. The pain was relieved in a
few minutes, and the soreness soon left it and the cure was entire. I am
persuaded that the invention is important, and will be of great benefit to
mankind.

JOEL BENEDICT, Pastor of a church in Plainfield.
August 10, 1796.
REV. WALTER KING.
THIS may certify, that the subscriber has been present, in sundry instances,
where pains have been apparently removed by the application of metallic
instruments, invented and improved by Doctor Elisha Perkins of Plainfield, and
that the use of said instruments appear to me, to promise extensive benefit to
society.

WALTER KING, Pastor of the second Church in Norwich.
Norwich, August 12, 1796.
REV. SOLOMON MORGAN.
I HEREBY certify, whom it may concern, that I have had opportunity of making
use of Dr. Elisha Perkins's tractor, in cases of pain in the head, and burns,
and have succeeded to the relief of the patients; and from what I have heard
from others, I believe that said tractors are useful to the removing of many of
the pains to which we are subject, and think that a more general use of them,
may be for the benefit of mankind.

SOLOMON MORGAN, Pastor of the first church in Canterbury.
Canterbury, August 10, 1796.
REV. ELHANAN WINCHESTER.
I CERTIFY that on the 21st of March, 1796, I saw Doct. Perkins's method of
cure by pointed metallic instruments, tried with success, upon several patients
in the poor-house or bettering-house in Philadelphia; -- especially upon a man
who was unable to lift his right hand to his head, as was tried before hand,
but who after a few minutes operation, was able to remove it at pleasure, and
in my sight, put it with ease on the top of his head and back of his neck, and
in all directions.

Nearly the same effects took place upon a woman; and all that I saw treated
professed that their pains ceased after being treated a short time: And several
came voluntarily, and in my hearing, thanked the Doctor for cures he had
performed on them about eight weeks before, in removing pains from them, which
they declared had not since returned. So that from what I saw with mine own
eyes, and what I have heard, I have great hopes that this method will greatly
tend to alleviate the miseries of mankind.

ELHANAN WINCHESTER.
Philadelphia, April. 4, 1796.
REV. MICAIAH PORTER.
I MICAIAH PORTER, of Voluntown, in the county of Windham and State of
Connecticut, certify, that I have myself made repeated experiments with Doctor
Perkins' metallic instruments, for removing pains and inflammations; that I
have almost invariably succeeded to my own astonishment, in curing headaches,
teeth-aches, rheumatisms and burns: In other complaints, I have not had
opportunity for trial: But I am fully convinced, from my own experiments, and
from what I have known of others, that this method of removing pains and
inflammations from human bodies, is a very important discovery, and that it
must contribute very much to alleviate the distresses and infirmities to which
our frail bodies are so liable.

MICAIAH PORTER. Pastor of the first church in (...)
August, 9, 1796.
Windham County, Aug. 16, 1796.
WE the subscribers certify, that from a variety of cases, which have occured,
not only in our own practice, but in that of our neighboring physicians, we
are fully convinced of the utility of Doctor Perkins's patent metallic
instruments, in removing various pains, spasms and inflammatory affections from
the human body, and that the discovery is of importance to the healing art.

Fellows of the Medical Convention. Doctors Baker, Hall, Lord and Brewster,
with the author of the metallic discovery, are the five representatives from
Windham county to the Connecticut Medical Convention.
JOSEPH BAKER, *JONATHAN HALL, *ELISHA LORD, *JOHN BREWSTER,
Member of the Medical Society, THOMAS HUBBARD.


Extract of a letter from John Vaughan, M. D. State of Delaware.
CHRISTIANA, JULY 14, 1796. DEAR SIR,
I HAVE operated in a few cases only with your instruments, for but few have
offered since I possessed them. -- One case of nervous or hysteric headache --
perfectly cured -- a case of odantalgia relieved. The third a young man, who
had fallen ten or fifteen feet on the edge of an open ended hogshead, and
received a considerable contusion, in the Umbilical Region, with Tumefaction. I
bled him three times to little purpose. -- But after about two minutes
operation, with the instruments, he exclaimed, in ecstasy -- "I am well -- I am
well -- my pain is gone." The pain, however returned in a less degree, but in
thirty or forty minutes went off entirely, and he went to work as usual?"

Your friend and obliged humble servant JOHN VAUGHAN.

DR. ELISHA PERKINS.
CALVIN GODDARD, ESQUIRE.
Plainfield, Sept. 25, 1796. DEAR SIR,
UNTIL of late, I have not been eye witness to many operations, with your
Metallic Points -- one case which appeared to me a little singular, I will
relate -- A rough, hardy labourer had a very bad boil upon the outside of his
ancle -- His leg was swollen to the knee, and his foot, to the toes, looked as
though the skin was ready to burst -- The leg up to the hip, he said, was in
extreme pain, so that he was deprived of sleep the night preceding, and the
foot was in a high state of inflammation -- I drew the instruments repeatedly up
and down the leg, without any visible effect or decrease of pain, so long that
I was almost discouraged -- at length however the patient pulled off his coat
and flung it aside -- (It was one of those cold nights the beginning of this
month) -- Upon observing his leg, it was of a sudden wet, with sweat -- Indeed
the sweat burst instantaneously from all his pores -- The inflammation, upon the
surface of the foot, subsided and the swelling abated -- the man declared
himself free from pain, went to bed and slept well, and I heard no further
complaint -- As I had never known of this sweating effect being produced I
thought the case worth reporting to you. This sweating is not unusual.


With sentiments of respect and esteem, Your friend and very humble Servant,
CALVIN GODDARD.

REV. JOSEPH DANA.
THE following is a transcript of minutes, taken by the Rev. Mr. DANA, of
Ipswich, containing a number (though not the whole) of cases in that town, where
the subjects have received very sensible and immediate relief from Dr.
Perkins's metallic points -- from the 21st to the 24th of Oct. 1796.

Capt. D R. Old rheumatic pain and inflamed eye; Capt. E. K. An inflamed
painful leg; Capt. T. H. Fixed pain in the breast, of long standing; Capt. N.
K. Pain in the back; Miss H. old rheumatic pain; Mr. W. D. Old strain in the
shoulder attended with stiffness and pain; Mr. J. S. Strained hand with pain;
Wise of Capt. A. S. Rheumatism of long standing; Mr. J. S. Violent headache;
Mr. D. The same; Mr. E. Swollen inflamed bruise; Mr. S. Teeth ache; Mr. N. L.
do. Mrs. M. J. Distress at her breast; Miss H. J. Inflamed eye; Mr. J. W. Pain
in the side; Mrs. W. Violent headache; Mr. W. A. Foot bruised and swollen;
Mrs. A. Swelling in the neck; Miss A. B. Pain in the shoulders and breast;
Major C. S.'s Wife, Pains in her limbs, etc. Mr. B. Old rheumatism; Capt. D. G.
Rheumatism, Mrs. T. do.

MR. NATHAN PIERCE, Master of the Almshouse, Newburyport,
Newburyport, Oct. 28, 1796.
THIS certifies that Dr. Perkins visited the Almshouse in this town yesterday,
and performed operations with his metallic instruments on three persons, Viz.
one woman, and two men, who have been grieviously afflicted with the
Rheumatism, and from the best observations, I have been able to make, in so
short a time, they all appear to be much relieved of their complaints.

NATHAN PIERCE. Master of said Almshouse.

REV. LEVI HEART.
THIS may certify, That the subscriber has been witness to the success of the
application of Doctor Perkins Patent Metallic Instruments, in various instances
for the removal of pains of the head and other parts of the human body -- of
rheumatic distress, and of pain occasioned by bruises, where it was exquisite
-- and the cure has been effected in a short time without any other application.

From personal experience, he is fully satisfied of the utility and importance
of the discovery.

LEVI HEART.
Preston, October 10, 1796.
REV. CALEB BRADLEY, and Dr. JAMES GOSS.
WE the subscribers, of Gloucester, in the county of Essex, and State of
Massachusetts certify that we this day saw Doctor Perkins' Patent Metallic
Points applied with success on a child of Mr. James Smith, of fifteen months
old, which had been about an hour before the application very severely scalded,
by falling into boiling fat, with one hand and arm; on which large blisters
were raised. After a few minutes' operation, the redness and fire almost wholly
disappeared, and the child appeared to be eased of pain.

JAMES GOSS, Physician. CALEB BRADLEY, Preacher of the Gospel.

Gloucester, October 19, 1796.
MR. EDWARD HILL.
I EDWARD HILL, of Dorchester, in the county of Norfolk, and State of
Massachusetts, hereby certify, that I had been afflicted with the Rheumatism
and gout at times, for nine years past, and at length to such a degree as to be
unable to walk. But upon application to Doctor Elisha Perkins for the use of
his Patent Metallic Instruments, I was in the course of two days so recovered
as to be able to walk without any pain.

EDWARD HILL.
WE the subscribers were knowing to the facts as above stated.

NATHAN WEBB. RALPH POPE.

Boston, Sept. 23, 1796.


COL. JONATHAN GLOVER.
THIS certifies, That I visited Dr. Elisha Perkins about the 20th September
last, with a violent chronic pain in one of my feet, which the Doctor by
applying his Tractors removed immediately. Upon my return to Marblehead, I felt
a pain as usual, in my other foot, but which on applying the Instruments, which
I purchased of the Doctor, was removed directly.

I also applied them to Capt. Fettyplece's knee and foot, which were sorely
afflicted with pain, and relieved him immediately. Several others I relieved of
pains; particularly a pain in a lady's arm, and the pleurisy in a lady's side.

JONATHAN GLOVER.
Boston, October 5, 1796.
MR. CONSTANT FREEMAN, Master of the Almshouse, Boston.
THIS certifies, that Dr. Elisha Perkins, of Plain field, Connecticut, visited
the Poor House of this Metropolis, about three weeks ago, and performed
operations on several patients, with his celebrated Metallic Points; among whom
he performed his operation on one John Patterson. He had been in this Poor
House for six months with the Rheumatism -- Two months of which he was confined
to his bed -- Four months he had hobbled about with crutches, when Dr. Perkins
performed the operation; since which he has thrown aside his crutches, and
walks only with a staff, which he uses, not for the Rheumatism, for he has
none, but merely for a support, as his thigh bone was then and still remains
dislocated.

Nancy Blake was also cured, by the Doctor, of the Rheumatism in the small of
her back, which had constantly afflicted her for more than three years. It has
not returned yet.

Benjamin Ross I cured myself of the Rheumatism in the small of his back and
hip. This was ten days ago; it has not returned.

Lewis Dumeth, a Frenchman, was operated upon by the Doctor, for the Rheumatism
in his lower extremities, which had confined him to his bed and crutches for
months: but no sooner was he operated upon than he threw aside his crutches --
walked about the house -- has walked about the town since, and has had no
return of the Rheumatism in either leg.

CONSTANT FREEMAN.
Boston, October 5, 1796.
EXTRACTS FROM LETTERS.
MR. JOHN PUNCHARD.
SALEM, Oct. 19, 1796. SIR,
I HAVE operated repeatedly with your Metallic Points, and have succeeded in
removing Rheumatic pains, agues, pains in the head, face, side, and burns, to
my astonishment, and to the astonishment of all present -- I cured a man burnt
with powder, in less than half an hour, with the Points, without any other
application.

JOHN PUNCHARD.

JAMES GLOVER, Esquire -- Norwich, County of Tioga, State of New York, Sept. 19,
1796.
SIR,
HAVING lately purchased a set of your Patent Instruments to keep in my family,
I have used them with great success on a person scalt with boiling lie -- a man
by the name of Welsh, who was at work in my pot ash, when boiling down the lie,
some of it flew into one of his eyes -- which soon became very much inflamed,
and swelled to such a degree, that he could not open it -- and remained in that
situation, for the space of three days, when after a few minutes operating with
your patent instruments, he was able to open it, and with two operations only,
his eye was almost entirely free from pain and inflammation, and in a short
time was perfectly well, although so badly scalt he had almost despaired of its
ever recovering, etc.

JAMES GLOVER.

REV. WALTER KING.
SIR,
THE frame and utility of your Patent Instruments have become subjects of so
much notoriety and speculation, that almost all pained people are desirous of
making trial of them. Their efficacy, within my knowledge appears to be
increasing.

I am more and more confirmed in the benefit of the discovery, and cannot think
but they will continue as long as the pains of the human body shall need them.

From your much obliged and cordial friend and servant, WALTER KING

Dr. Elisha Perkins.
REV. DR. ROBBINS, of Plymouth.
Sept. 24, 1796. DEAR SIR,
'SEVERAL persons, since you left us, have experienced immediate relief, in
various complaints, by the Metallic Points.

I operated day before yesterday on a man's hand, which was prodigiously
swelled, and painful, by a wound he received on the back of it, which he
neglected and got cold in. It was much inflamed -- But was relieved by that
single operation: The swelling subsided, and the inflammation went away, so
that he went directly to work on board his vessel -- He told me the last night
it gave him no trouble.'

CHANDLER ROBBINS.

BEZALEEL WOODWARD, Esquire. Professor of Philosophy and Mathematics, Dartmouth
College.
Hanover, New Hampshire, Sept. 19, 1796. Dr. Elisha Perkins, SIR,
I HAVE made use of your Pointed Metallic Instruments in various disorders; and
besides universally abating and generally removing pain in the head, face,
(...), etc. by application of them, I have found them useful in the salt rheum.
Only one opportunity (...) presented for an effectual trial -- that has cured
the patient by three applications, which being noised abroad, sundry persons
affected with that disorder have been at my house this week to have the
operation performed on them, and the disorder has abated on the first
application, so that the present prospect is, that cures will be effected, for
them, by further use of the instruments. A violent pain proceeding from a
strain in the foot has by a few minutes application of the instruments been
removed so as not to return.

I have the honor to be, Sir, your most obedient and humble servant, BEZALEEL
WOODWARD.

REV. DOCTOR STILLMAN, of Boston.
October 6, 1796. Dear Sir,
'I FEEL myself much obliged to you, for the important service you have
rendered to Mrs. Stillman's eyes after a distressing inflammation of eight
months. If, through too much exercise, or being exposed to very cold air, a
degree of inflammation returns, it is removed in a few minutes again by the
application of your Points.

I have, in my walks among the sick, made use of them repeatedly with success;
and cannot but think that they will be of important benefit to mankind.'

SAMUEL STILLMAN.

To Dr. Elisha Perkins.
PIERPOINT EDWARDS, ESQUIRE. District Attorney for the State of Connecticut.
New Haven, October 7, 1796. DEAR SIR,
I Should have written you last week, had I (...) been able to ascertain
certain facts, the rumor of which I had heard. A Mrs. Beers, a near neighbor
to me. the wife of Eber Beers, and daughter of Capt. Samuel Huggins, of this
town, had been, for fourteen weeks, exceedingly distressed with the Rheumatism,
to such a degree, that for the last fourteen weeks, previous to the 29th of
last month, she had not been able to walk across her room, even with crutches,
save only once, when she made out, with the assistance of crutches, to hobble
part of the way across her room. -- On the 29th of September last she procured
a set of your Metallic Substances, and in less than an hour after she had
begun to use them, in the manner directed by you. she rose from her chair, and
walked about her house, and on the next day she went abroad to her neighbors,
having thrown aside her crutches. I have this day paid her a visit, in company
with her father, Timothy Jones, Esquire, who lives in the street where she resides
and directly opposite to her residence, and with Capt. Abel Burrett, who is her
next neighbor, and lives within eight yards of her door. I requested her to
relate her case over in their presence, which she did; and these gentlemen all,
with one voice, supported, from their own knowledge, her story. It is a duty
which you owe yourself and the world to promulge this event.

I am very respectfully, your obedient servant. PIERPOINT EDWARDS.
N. B. She says her fever has left her, her appetite has returned, and she is
in a fair way to be restored to perfect health.



MANY other certificates and letters might have been inserted relative to the
discussion of biles and fellons, cures of gouts, etc. but it is Presumed that
enough is here exhibited to convince an unprejudiced mind, that the metallic
instruments promise important benefit to mankind.

Measures have been pursued that they may be obtained in various parts of the
United States. The following is a list of the names and places of abode of some
who have the transfers and patent instruments for sale.

DOCTOR Thaddeus M'Cartey, Keen, New Hampshire, Nathan Smith, M. D. Dartmouth
College, do. Rev. John Smith, Dighton, Massachusetts. Doctor Joseph Trumbull,
Petersham, do. Doctor Seth Field, Brookfield, do. Mr. John Ruggles, Berry, do.
Doctor Thomas Babbit, Brookfield, do. Mr. Samuel Satterlee, Williamstown, do.
Rev. Henry White, Bristol, Rhode Island. George Burrill, Esquire. Providence, do.
Doctor John Aldrich, Hopkinton, do. Capt. Ladd. Newport, do. Doctor Daniel
Coit, Norwich, Connecticut. Doctor Jonathan Hall, Pomfret, do. Doctor Thomas
Hubbard, do. do. Doctor Joseph Baker, Brooklyn, do. Doctor Penuel Hutchins,
Killingly, do. Doctor Joseph Coit, Thompson, do. Doctor Asa Spaulding,
Stonington, do. Doctor Samuel Willard, Stafford, do. Doctor Ripley, Norwich,
do. Doctor Thomas Backus, Plainfield, do. Doctor Jareb Dyer, Canterbury, do.
Doctor Rufus Johnson, do. do. Doctor Lee, jun. Windham, do. Doctor John Pierce,
Lebanon, do. Hon. Nathaniel Niles, Esquire. Fairlee, Vermont. Doctor Aaron Kinsman,
Newbury, do. Doctor Joseph Lord, St. Johnsbury, do. Amasa Dingley, M. D. New
York. James Clark, M. D. and Son, do. Doctor Samuel Nesbit, jun. do. Doctors
Wilson and Prentice, do. Elijah Perkins M. D. Philadelphia. James Tilton, M. D.
Wilmington, Delaware.

