Mr. Newton's DISCOURSE, JULY 4th, 1797.

A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED ON THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE, IN
GREENFIELD, ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, 1797.

BY THE REV. ROGER NEWTON.

PRINTED AT GREENFIELD, MASSACHUSETTS, BY THOMAS DICKMAN, AND SOLD AT HIS
BOOKSTORE.

M, DCC, XCVII.

A DISCOURSE.
THAT I MAY SEE THE GOOD OF THY CHOSEN, THAT I MAY REJOICE IN THE GLADNESS OF
THY NATION; THAT I MAY GLORY WITH THINE INHERITANCE.

PSALM CVI.5.
THE nation of Israel, being the chosen people of GOD, this was the primary
reason of that affection toward them, expressed by the Psalmist, in the words
I have now read, and excited that disposition which he felt, to wish their
welfare, and to rejoice with them on every prosperous occasion. He might be
induced also to this, from his relation to that people, and from considering
himself as one of them. So far as the interest he took in the welfare of
Israel, arose from this last consideration, hereby a public spirit and a
national affection is recommended to others, to whatever nation or country they
appertain: Especially to such as are in a situation favorable to liberty, to
virtue, and general happiness.

THE necessity of a civil government, the local situation of mankind, and their
different dispositions and interests, have induced them to form into many
different nations. If that moral rectitude and innocence, with which our first
parents were introduced into the garden of Eden, had remained with them and
their posterity, there would perhaps have been no occasion for civil power; and
though they should have multiplied over the face of the earth, they might all
have been one people, living in a voluntary manner, according to the dictates
of justice, truth, and mercy, and in all respects as they ought to do: But
having become sinners, and by their apostasy lost the higher principles of
virtue, which they originally possessed, hence from the first beginning of the
propagation of our species, there has been occasion for the energy and control
of parental authority, and civil power. Even in the family of Adam, one brother
was wantonly and cruelly murdered by another; and in the course of about
fifteen hundred years, the violence and wickedness in the earth, arose to such
a height, that GOD saw fit to destroy the whole race of mankind, except Noah
and his family, by a flood. After this, though there was a check upon the
corruptions of man, his age being reduced, yet the evil propensities of human
nature, made it necessary as mankind again multiplied, that they should be
formed into political bodies, and placed under the power of civil government;
and GOD is represented as prescribing this mode of subsistence for them: --
Remember the days of old, consider the years of many generations: Ask thy
father, and he will show thee* thy elders, and they will tell thee; when the
most high divided to the nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons
of Adam, he set the bounds of the people according to the number of the
children of Israel. DEUTERONOMY. XXXII.8.
These nations which were soon incorporated after the flood, have from time to
time, been multiplying into other nations, and will thus continue to do, until
the kingdoms of men shall universally become the kingdom of our LORD and
SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST.

THE multiplied nations of men take place under different forms and
circumstances, and like individual persons, are distinguished from one another
in their worldly prosperity, and the members of some of them have a much
greater occasion than others, of attachment to their country and nation: And
what I propose in this discourse, is to notice the particular cause that we
have of affection, toward the nation of which we are a part, of rejoicing when
it is prospered, and of being made glad when it falls under the smiles of
divine providence.

AS it is the will of GOD, that the children of men, who are more immediately
connected, whether by a natural or civil relation, should be under peculiar
attachments, for their mutual benefit and happiness: So in general their nature
dictates them to a cordial affection, not only toward their families, but
their country. Hadad, though he had been long in Egypt, did not loose this
impulse toward Idumea. He said to Pharaoh, let me depart, that I may go to
mine own country. Then Pharaoh said unto him, but what have thou lacked with
me, that, behold, thou seek to go to thine own country? and he answered
nothing: Howbeit let me go in any wise. I. KINGS, XI.22.
Besides the dictates of nature, obligations do arise upon the members of a
community, to be well affected citizens and subjects, from that protection
which is afforded, by the authority they are under, to their lives and
property. On these considerations, it appears incumbent on men in all parts of
the world, to be friendly to the nations to which they respectively belong: But
various things may be thought upon and mentioned, as what, in a special and
peculiar manner, may serve to excite in us a love of the country and people to
which we appertain: as

1st. OUR originating in general from the same stock, and standing toward one
another in a natural kindred relation. Such affinity by blood is endearing.
Abimelech, thought it a good reason, why he should have the esteem of the
people of Sheehem, that he was one of the same lineage -- remember, said he,
that I am your bone and your flesh: And their hearts were inclined to follow
Abimelech; for they said, he is our brother. JUDGES, IX.2.
Paul was willing to do and suffer much for his brethren and kinsmen, according
to the flesh.

THE people of these United States merit our attention and esteem, not only as
kindred, but by reason of the superior descent, which attends us and them
considered collectively. We have not the same occasion with some others, to
say, our mother was an Hittite, and our father an Amorite. EZEKIEL. XVI.45.
We have proceeded from pious and illustrious ancestors, and though we ought
not to be vain in considering ourselves the children of such progenitors, yet
it is a circumstance that gives us respectability, and which ought to endear us
to one another. The example of Paul will support us in this, who after he
became an apostle, exulted in his relation to a certain tribe -- If any other
man thinks that he has whereof he might trust in the flesh, I more; of the
stock of Isreal, of the tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews. PHIL.
III.5.


2d. WE appertain to a nation inhabiting an extensive and fertile country,
happily situated for husbandry and commerce, and all the amusing and profitable
employments of life. Our land, like that into which Joshua led the children of
Israel, is a land of hills and of waters, of health and plenty, affording in
various parts of it, the finest of wheat, and in all the different climates,
some kind of useful produce, in great abundance. A nation of brethren, thus
situated in a good and large land, where they have already made great
improvements, and have room for increase still through many generations, until
their empire shall equal, if not exceed, that of any in the known world; has
reason for the exercise of a particular affection among the members of it,
accompanied with a solicitude for its preservation, through the present and
future ages, entire and undivided.

3d. THE free civil constitution and good government which our nation
possesses, renders it worthy of our particular attachment.

THE situation of a people is materially affected by that form of government,
under which they are placed; and that which has fallen to our lot, is wisely
calculated to be a terror to evil doers, and a praise to them that do well. Our
government in some respects, partakes of a different form from what has ever
before been tried or experienced among men, and being the effect of our own
choice, we ought cheerfully to acquiesce in, and abide by it. We cannot indeed,
pretend to say, that it is a form of government particularly pointed out and
directed to in the scriptures, in perference to all others; for the word of
inspiration does not intermeddle in matters of this kind, any further than to
teach, that civil government is the ordinance of GOD, for good, and that
mankind in the use and administration of it, ought to be influenced by the fear
of GOD, and a steadfast regard to equity and righteousness. GOD has not dealt
so with any nation, as he did with the Jews. To them in the time of Moses, he
gave a certain express form of government, which they were to observe until
SHILOH should come, but after he came, who was CHRIST the LORD, the scepter
departed from Judah, and the lawgiver from between his feet. And as no nation
or kingdom of men, was after this, chosen of GOD, and made a peculiar people
unto himself, as the Jews were: So he gave no law to any nation or kingdom, as
such, but left each one to enjoy the mode of civil government, which they had
already adopted, or to assume any other form, which from their situation and
circumstances they might judge to be best.

UNDER the gospel dispensation, which came by CHRIST, the church of GOD was to
be planted in a progressive manner, among the various nations of the earth. To
this church, scattered in small societies over the world, a sacred constitution
is given, and particular laws and ordinances, by which it ought to be governed
in all religious matters. But to civil and political bodies of men, GOD has
given no civil and political laws, except what are to be taken from that sense
which men have of right and wrong, or from the general instruction of the
scriptures concerning the duty of one man toward another: the form of
government, therefore, that our nation is under, is not to be conceived of as a
form, that is particularly pointed out and prescribed in the word of GOD. Nor
do we know that it is the best form which could possibly be adopted, for men of
the greatest improvement and experience, have in all ages, been divided in
their sentiments upon government, some choosing what is called a monarchy,
others a democracy or aristocracy, and some a mixture of each of these. But we
have reason to be highly satisfied with our government. It is congenial to our
education, to our ideas and national dispositions. It is the fabric, the
collective wisdom of the nation, and the fruit of much study and application,
used by our most able citizens and distinguished patriots, who gave every
evidence in the power of men, of a sincere and zealous concern to do their best
in this important matter, for themselves and their country. Yet supposing that
they might be mistaken, they have made provision for any amendment of the
constitution, which experience may teach to be necessary. We have also to
consider, that our civil officers are so universally elective, and frequently,
that the people can change public characters as they find occasion, and
consequently always have public measures as much under their control as can be
best for them. Further, it is to be considered, that our government has merited
our esteem from experience. It has been attended with great and happy effects
for a number of years, especially from the time of its being completed by the
federal constitution and laws. A spirit of vigor has been given to all kinds
of business. Our husbandry, navigation, commerce, revenue, and population, have
increased beyond all previous calculation. These favors have been sweetened by
the peace and tranquillity which the several States, and the individual
subjects of them, have enjoyed. With such a Government our late chief
executive, in the exercise of his preeminent wisdom and prudence, has given us
reason to say as Turtulus did to Felix, By thee we enjoy great quietness, and
very worthy deeds are done, by thy providence, unto this nation. ACTS XXIV.2.


4th. WE have peculiar reason for attachment to our nation, because herein is
planted the church of GOD, under the full enjoyment of the blessings of the
Gospel; with liberty of conscience, and equal rights given by our authority to
all denominations of professing christians. Our situation in this respect
affords to us the prospect of the merciful interpositions of divine Providence,
for the LORD loves the gates of Zion more than all the dwellings of Jacob.
PSALM. CXXXII, 13.


THE house of Obed-Edom was greatly prospered because of the ark of the LORD,
which for a season was deposited there: So a nation where the people of GOD
dwell may be blessed on their account. If there had been ten righteous persons
in Sodom that city would have been spared. -- For the elects sake the days of
distress were shortened in Jerusalem. The religion of the Gospel being embraced
and upheld among a people, does also afford a favorable prospect in respect to
their morals and manners. The christian religion (as one justly observes DR.
TAPPAN.
) properly stated and enforced, has a peculiar favorable influence upon the
present social state of mankind. -- It inculcates the most extended, the most
active, the most self-denying benevolence: It links us to the great brotherhood
of man; yea, it unites us to the universe, to eternity, and to GOD; the head
and sum of both: It levels all the haughty feelings of superior ranks or
abilities, and places true greatness in humble, condescending, elevated
goodness. By this, as well as by constantly pointing us to those two great
levellers, death and an endless retribution, it introduces a kind of generous
republican equality among the different orders and conditions of society: It
equally regards and secures the interest of all the members of the community,
by that great rule of equity, Whatever ye would that men should do unto you, do
ye even so to them. By presenting the same motives, and rewards of virtue, to
the weak and the strong, and by urging both to the secret acts of goodness,
from a regard to the approving eye and final recompense of the SUPREME JUDGE:
It provides a steady support, a constant opportunity, a universal engagement to
the practice of virtue. We may add, it regulates and refines those important
social connexions and duties, the conjugal, parental and filial, in a manner
highly favorable to the order and happiness of human society. In a word, the
spirit of our religion is uniting and peaceable: It is loyal, patriotic and
free: It is the life and support of good government, and of rational liberty.

THEY among us who believe in this religion, which is of such salutary
consequence, do in some instances fall into different opinions, and modes of
worship and practice, but we are happy in the provision which the constitution
makes for the equal support of all who are inoffensive, as members of state.
Thus religious liberty is enjoyed, a favor which those are destitute of, where
civil establishments of religion take place, even though toleration should be
exercised toward dissenting christians. Dr. Price, with a particular view to
these states, makes the following observations: All men of all religions, ought
to be considered by a state as equally entitled to its protection, as far as
they demean themselves honestly and peaceably. Toleration can take place only
where there is a civil establishment of a particular mode of religion; that is,
when a predominant sect enjoys exclusive advantages, and makes the
encouragement of its own mode of worship, a part of the constitution of the
state; but at the same time, thinks fit to suffer the exercise of other modes
of faith and worship. -- He adds, Thanks be to GOD, the new American states are
at present, strangers to such establishments. In this respect as well as many
others, they have shown in framing their constitutions, a degree of wisdom and
liberality, which is above all praise.

WHEN we thus contemplate the agreeable circumstances of our nation, and the
cause we have of attachment to it: Let us*

1. ACKNOWLEDGE the obligations we are under to ALMIGHTY GOD, and the gracious
interpositions of his providence, for the public blessings which we enjoy.
Promotion comes neither from the East nor the West, nor the South, but GOD is
judge; he sets up one and puts down another.

IF men are instrumental of good to a public community, they are made so by GOD
-- who said of Cyrus, He is my shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure;
even saying to Jerusalem, thou shall be built; and to the temple, thy
foundation shall be laid. It becomes us therefore, to ascribe all our greatness
and prosperity, ultimately unto him. Thine O LORD is the greatness, and the
power, and the glory, and the victory, and the majesty; for all that is in the
heaven and in the earth, is thine; thine is the kingdom, O LORD, and thou art
exalted as head above all.

2. LET the subject, and the joyful occasion of the day, call into our grateful
remembrance, those friends of our country, who have been more especially
instrumental in procuring these privileges, which we enjoy as a free and
independent nation.

SOME of them are sleeping in the dust, and were allowed, like Moses, only a
prospect of the good, into the possession of which they were leading and
conducting the people. Thus it has been with two eminent servants of the
public, introduced, for a time, to the chief seat of government in this
Commonwealth. GOV. BOWDOIN, and GOV. HANCOCK.
Others have retired into the shade of private life, after having acted in a
public sphere long enough, as Caesar said he had done, for nature or for glory.
These characters, which have distinguished themselves in the cabinet and in the
field, together with those who are still conducting the great affairs of this
country, as our political fathers, we ought to arise and call blessed.
Particularly should we thus honor the late President of the United States,
whose vigilant, able, prudent, and benevolent exertions for the people, give us
reason to say concerning him as a patriot, many sons have done virtuously, but
thou excellest them all.

3. LET us consider the danger we are in, of having our public prosperity
interrupted, and the measures, which we ought to pursue, as friends to our
country and nation. -- All human affairs are fluctuating. We, who were born a
nation, as it were, in a day, may suddenly meet with ruin. The kingdom of
heaven, is the only kingdom that is immovable. The great Babylon itself is
fallen* is fallen. The glory of Sparta, the liberty of Athens and of Rome, were
soon lost. The city of Tire, where wealth abounded, and festivity and joy
reigned, was brought into desolation and sorrow -- Howl, ye inhabitants of the
isle -- is this your joyous city? Her own feet shall carry her afar off to
sojourn -- the crowning city, whose merchants are princes, whose traffickers
are the honorable of the earth!

WE are thus admonished, that our national as well as personal prosperity is in
a precarious uncertain situation; and we have a call in a particular manner, to
attend to the danger that arises from the animosities of foreign nations, who
without due regard to our welfare, may wish to engage us in their political
views and interests, and in case of disappointment, treat us with injustice.
Such treatment we have indeed already received, especially of late, from the
republic of France; as we learn by the communications, made by the president to
the congress, now convened, and at present, the diplomatic intercourse between
that nation and ours, is suspended. Such a rupture bodes ill to the American
states. And while we refer the healing of it, to our more public characters, it
becomes us as private citizens, to guard against the warm spirit of parties and
factions among ourselves; particularly to beware of a defection from the
government of the United States, and acting in contrariety to it. With the
apprehension of such a defection, our chief Executive appears to be alarmed, or
rather with the designs of France, to bring it about, and feelingly expresses
the importance it is of to the people, to show themselves the firm and steadfast
friends of their own authority. The speech of the president, says he, i. e. of
the president of the directory of France, discloses sentiments more alarming
than the refusal of a minister, because more dangerous to our independence and
union; and at the same time is studiously marked with indignities toward the
government of the United States: It evinces a disposition to separate the
people of the United States; to persuade them that they have different
affections, principles, and interests, from those of their fellow citizens,
whom they themselves have chosen to manage their common concerns, and thus to
produce divisions fatal to our peace. Such attempts ought to be repelled, with
a decision which shall convince France, and the world, that we are not a
divided, degraded people, regardless of national honor, character, and
interest. The peace of our land, and the prosperity of our nation, we should
also seek, by cultivating a spirit of subordination, in the families and
societies with which we are particularly connected, by training up those under
our care to order and rule, and by giving that education which may inform the
mind, direct the judgment, regulate the passions, and eventually lead to such
behavior as may be of happy effect to the community where they dwell.
Idleness, dissipation, and sensual extravagances of every kind, should be
avoided by us, and a life of industry, temperance, sobriety, and godliness,
carefully and perseveringly pursued. Righteousness exalts a nation, but sin
is the reproach of any people.

4. WHILE we cherish patriotism in our breasts, let us not confine our love to
those of our own country, but extend it to all mankind. The love of our
country, (says an author before cited) is then only a noble passion, when it
engages us to promote the internal happiness of our country, and to defend its
rights and liberties against domestic and foreign invasion; maintaining at the
same time, an equal regard to the rights and liberties of other countries. But
this has not been its common effects; on the contrary, it has in general, been
nothing but a spirit of rivalship between different communities, producing
contention, and a thirst for conquest and dominion. What is his country, to a
Russian, a Turk, a Spaniard, etc. but a spot where he enjoys no rights, and is
disposed of by his owners as if he was a beast? And what is his love to his
country, but an attachment to depredation and slavery? What was the love of
their country amongst the Jews, but a wretched partiality for themselves, and a
proud contempt of other nations? Amongst the Romans also, what was it, however
great in many of its exertions, but a principle holding together a band of
robbers, in their attempt to crush all liberty but their own? Christianity has
wisely omitted to recommend this principle: It has done what is infinitely
better. It has recommended universal benevolence, from which enemies and those
of other nations, are not to be excluded. The language of it is, do good to all
men, if thine enemy hunger feed him, compassionate and help him in trouble, as
the Samaritin did the Jew, who fell among thieves. GO THOU AND DO LIKEWISE.


